Beer
Johnston
DeWolf
Mazurek
MECHANICS
of MATERIALS
Eighth Edition

-- 1 of 897 --

Eighth Edition
Mechanics of Materials
Ferdinand P. Beer
Late of Lehigh University
E. Russell Johnston, Jr.
Late of University of Connecticut
John T. DeWolf
University of Connecticut
David F. Mazurek
United States Coast Guard Academy

-- 2 of 897 --

MECHANICS OF MATERIALS, EIGHTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2020 by McGraw-Hill
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2015, 2012, and
2009. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a
database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not
limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 21 20 19
ISBN 978-1-260-11327-3
MHID 1-260-11327-2
Senior Portfolio Manager: Thomas Scaife, Ph.D.
Product Developer: Heather Ervolino
Marketing Manager: Shannon O’Donnell
Content Project Managers: Sherry Kane/Rachael Hillebrand
Senior Buyer: Laura Fuller
Senior Designer: Matt Backhaus
Content Licensing Specialist: Shawntel Schmitt
Cover Image: Front Cover: ©Acnakelsy/iStock/Getty Images Plus; Back Cover: ©Mapics/Shutterstock
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Beer, Ferdinand P. (Ferdinand Pierre), 1915-2003, author.
Title: Mechanics of materials / Ferdinand P. Beer, Late of Lehigh University,
E. Russell Johnston, Jr., Late of University of Connecticut, John T.
DeWolf, University of Connecticut, David F. Mazurek, United States Coast
Guard Academy.
Description: Eighth edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, 2020. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018026956| ISBN 9781260113273 (alk. paper) | ISBN
1260113272 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Strength of materials—Textbooks.
Classification: LCC TA405 .B39 2020 | DDC 620.1/123—dc23 LC record available
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018026956
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion
of a website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and
McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

-- 3 of 897 --

iii
John T. DeWolf, Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of Connect-
icut, joined the Beer and Johnston team as an author on the second edition of
Mechanics of Materials. John holds a B.S. degree in civil engineering from
the University of Hawaii and M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in structural engineering
from Cornell University. He is a Fellow of the American Society of Civil
Engineers and a member of the Connecticut Academy of Science and Engi-
neering. He is a registered Professional Engineer and a member of the Con-
necticut Board of Professional Engineers. He was selected as a University of
Connecticut Teaching Fellow in 2006. Professional interests include elastic
stability, bridge monitoring, and structural analysis and design.
David F. Mazurek, Professor of Civil Engineering at the United States Coast
Guard Academy, joined the Beer and Johnston team on the eighth edition of
Statics and the fifth edition of Mechanics of Materials. David holds a B.S.
degree in ocean engineering and an M.S. degree in civil engineering from the
Florida Institute of Technology and a Ph.D. degree in civil engineering from
the University of Connecticut. He is a Fellow of the American Society of Civil
Engineers and a member of the Connecticut Academy of Science and
Engineering. He is a registered Professional Engineer and has served on the
American Railway Engineering & Maintenance-of-Way Association’s Com-
mittee 15—Steel Structures since 1991. Among his numerous awards, he was
recognized by the National Society of Professional Engineers as the Coast
Guard Engineer of the Year for 2015. Professional interests include bridge
engineering, structural forensics, and blast-resistant design.
About the Authors

-- 4 of 897 --

iv
*Advanced or specialty topics
Contents
1 Introduction—Concept of Stress 	3
1.1 	Review of The Methods of Statics 	4
1.2 	Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	7
1.3 	Stress on an Oblique Plane Under Axial Loading 	27
1.4 	Stress Under General Loading Conditions;
Components of Stress 	28
1.5 	Design Considerations 	31
Review and Summary 	45
2 Stress and Strain—Axial Loading 	57
2.1 	An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	59
2.2 	Statically Indeterminate Problems 	80
2.3 	Problems Involving Temperature Changes 	84
2.4 	Poisson’s Ratio 	96
2.5 	Multiaxial Loading: Generalized Hooke’s Law 	97
*2.6 	Dilatation and Bulk Modulus 	99
2.7 	Shearing Strain 	101
2.8 	Deformations Under Axial Loading—Relation Between
E, ν, and G 	104
*2.9 	Stress-Strain Relationships for Fiber-Reinforced
Composite Materials 	106
2.10 Stress and Strain Distribution Under Axial Loading:
Saint-Venant’s Principle 	117
2.11 Stress Concentrations 	119
2.12 Plastic Deformations 	121
*2.13 Residual Stresses 	124
Review and Summary 	135
3 Torsion 	149
3.1 	Circular Shafts in Torsion 	152
3.2 	Angle of Twist in the Elastic Range 	168
3.3 	Statically Indeterminate Shafts 	171
3.4 	Design of Transmission Shafts 	186
3.5 	Stress Concentrations in Circular Shafts 	188
*3.6 	Plastic Deformations in Circular Shafts 	196
*3.7 	Circular Shafts Made of an Elastoplastic Material 	197
*3.8 	Residual Stresses in Circular Shafts 	200
*3.9 	Torsion of Noncircular Members 	210
*3.10 Thin-Walled Hollow Shafts 	212
Review and Summary 	224
Preface 	vii
Guided Tour 	xii
List of Symbols 	xiv

-- 5 of 897 --

Contents 	v
4 Pure Bending 	237
4.1 	Symmetric Members in Pure Bending 	240
4.2 	Stresses and Deformations in the Elastic Range 	244
4.3 	Deformations in a Transverse Cross Section 	248
4.4 	Members Made of Composite Materials 	259
4.5 	Stress Concentrations 	263
*4.6 	Plastic Deformations 	273
4.7 	Eccentric Axial Loading in a Plane of Symmetry 	291
4.8 	Unsymmetric Bending Analysis 	303
4.9 	General Case of Eccentric Axial Loading Analysis 	308
*4.10 Curved Members 	320
Review and Summary 	335
5 Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending 	347
5.1 	Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams 	350
5.2 	Relationships Between Load, Shear, and
Bending Moment 	362
5.3 	Design of Prismatic Beams for Bending 	373
*5.4 	Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear
and Bending Moment 	385
*5.5 	Nonprismatic Beams 	398
Review and Summary 	408
6 Shearing Stresses in Beams and
Thin-Walled Members 	417
6.1 	Horizontal Shearing Stress in Beams 	420
*6.2 	Distribution of Stresses in a Narrow Rectangular Beam 	426
6.3 	Longitudinal Shear on a Beam Element
of Arbitrary Shape 	437
6.4 	Shearing Stresses in Thin-Walled Members 	439
*6.5 	Plastic Deformations 	441
*6.6 	Unsymmetric Loading of Thin-Walled Members
and Shear Center 	454
Review and Summary 	467
7 Transformations of Stress and Strain 	477
7.1 	Transformation of Plane Stress 	480
7.2 	Mohr’s Circle for Plane Stress 	492
7.3 	General State of Stress 	503
7.4 	Three-Dimensional Analysis of Stress 	504
*7.5 	Theories of Failure 	507
7.6 	Stresses in Thin-Walled Pressure Vessels 	520
*7.7 	Transformation of Plane Strain 	529
*7.8 	Three-Dimensional Analysis of Strain 	534
*7.9 	Measurements of Strain; Strain Rosette 	538
Review and Summary 	546

-- 6 of 897 --

vi 	Contents
8 Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading 	557
8.1 	Principal Stresses in a Beam 	559
8.2 	Design of Transmission Shafts 	562
8.3 	Stresses Under Combined Loads 	575
Review and Summary 	591
9 Deflection of Beams 	599
9.1 	Deformation Under Transverse Loading 	602
9.2 	Statically Indeterminate Beams 	611
*9.3 	Singularity Functions to Determine Slope and Deflection 623
9.4 	Method of Superposition 	635
*9.5 	Moment-Area Theorems 	649
*9.6 	Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with
Unsymmetric Loadings 	664
Review and Summary 	679
10 Columns 	691
10.1 	Stability of Structures 	692
*10.2 	Eccentric Loading and the Secant Formula 	709
10.3 	Centric Load Design 	722
10.4 	Eccentric Load Design 	739
Review and Summary 	750
11 Energy Methods 	759
11.1 	Strain Energy 	760
11.2 	Elastic Strain Energy 	763
11.3 	Strain Energy for a General State of Stress 	770
11.4 	Impact Loads 	784
11.5 	Single Loads 	788
*11.6 	Work and Energy Under Multiple Loads 	802
*11.7 	Castigliano’s Theorem 	804
*11.8 	Deflections by Castigliano’s Theorem 	806
*11.9 	Statically Indeterminate Structures 	810
Review and Summary 	823
Appendices 	A1
A 	Principal Units Used in Mechanics 	A2
B 	Centroids and Moments of Areas 	A4
C 	Centroids and Moments of Inertia of Common
Geometric Shapes 	A15
D 	Typical Properties of Selected Materials Used in
Engineering 	A17
E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A21
F 	Beam Deflections and Slopes 	A33
G 	Fundamentals of Engineering Examination 	A34
Answers to Problems 	AN1
Index 	I1

-- 7 of 897 --

vii
Objectives
The main objective of a basic mechanics course should be to develop in the
engineering student the ability to analyze a given problem in a simple and
logical manner and to apply to its solution a few fundamental and well-
understood principles. This text is designed for the first course in mechanics
of materials—or strength of materials—offered to engineering students in the
sophomore or junior year. The authors hope that it will help instructors achieve
this goal in that particular course in the same way that their other texts may
have helped them in statics and dynamics.
General Approach
In this text the study of the mechanics of materials is based on the understanding
of a few basic concepts and on the use of simplified models. This approach makes
it possible to develop all the necessary formulas in a rational and logical manner,
and to indicate clearly the conditions under which they can be safely applied to
the analysis and design of actual engineering structures and machine components.
This title is supported by SmartBook, a feature of the LearnSmart adap-
tive learning system that assesses student understanding of course content
through a series of adaptive questions. This platform has provided feedback
from thousands of students, identifying those specific portions of the text that
have resulted in the greatest conceptual difficulty and comprehension among
the students. For this new edition, the entire text was reviewed and revised
based on this LearnSmart student data.
Additionally, over 25% of the assigned problems from the previous edition
have been replaced or revised. Photographic content has also been modified to
provide a more suitable conceptual context to the important principles discussed.
Lab Videos. 	Student understanding of mechanics of materials is greatly
enhanced through experimental study that complements the classroom expe-
rience. Due to resource and curricular constraints, however, very few engi-
neering programs are able to provide such a laboratory component as part
of a mechanics of materials course. To help address this need, this edition
includes videos that show key mechanics of materials experiments being
conducted. For each experiment, data has been generated so that students
can analyze results and write reports. These videos are incorporated into the
Connect digital platform.
Free-body Diagrams Are Used Extensively. 	Throughout the text free-
body diagrams are used to determine external or internal forces. The use of
“picture equations” will also help the students understand the superposition
of loadings and the resulting stresses and deformations.
The SMART Problem-Solving Methodology Is Employed. 	Continuing
in this edition, students are presented with the SMART approach for solving
engineering problems, whose acronym reflects the solution steps of Strategy,
Preface
NEW!

-- 8 of 897 --

viii 	Preface
Modeling, Analysis, and Reflect & Think. This methodology is used in all
Sample Problems, and it is intended that students will apply this approach in
the solution of all assigned problems.
Design Concepts Are Discussed Throughout the Text When
Appropriate. 	A discussion of the application of the factor of safety to
design can be found in Chapter 1, where the concepts of both Allowable Stress
Design and Load and Resistance Factor Design are presented.
A Careful Balance Between SI and U.S. Customary Units Is
Consistently Maintained. 	Because it is essential that students be able to
handle effectively both SI metric units and U.S. customary units, half the
Concept Applications, Sample Problems, and problems to be assigned have
been stated in SI units and half in U.S. customary units. Since a large number
of problems are available, instructors can assign problems using each system
of units in whatever proportion they find desirable for their class.
Optional Sections Offer Advanced or Specialty Topics. 	Topics such
as residual stresses, torsion of noncircular and thin-walled members, bending
of curved beams, shearing stresses in nonsymmetrical members, and failure
criteria have been included in optional sections for use in courses of varying
emphases. To preserve the integrity of the subject, these topics are presented
in the proper sequence, wherever they logically belong. Thus, even when not
covered in the course, these sections are highly visible and can be easily
referred to by the students if needed in a later course or in engineering prac-
tice. For convenience all optional sections have been indicated by asterisks.
Chapter Organization
It is expected that students using this text will have completed a course in
statics. However, Chapter 1 is designed to provide them with an opportunity
to review the concepts learned in that course, while shear and bending-moment
diagrams are covered in detail in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. The properties of
moments and centroids of areas are described in Appendix B; this material
can be used to reinforce the discussion of the determination of normal and
shearing stresses in beams (Chapters 4, 5, and 6).
The first four chapters of the text are devoted to the analysis of the
stresses and of the corresponding deformations in various structural members,
considering successively axial loading, torsion, and pure bending. Each anal-
ysis is based on a few basic concepts: namely, the conditions of equilibrium
of the forces exerted on the member, the relations existing between stress and
strain in the material, and the conditions imposed by the supports and loading
of the member. The study of each type of loading is complemented by a large
number of Concept Applications, Sample Problems, and problems to be
assigned, all designed to strengthen the students’ understanding of the subject.
The concept of stress at a point is introduced in Chapter 1, where it is
shown that an axial load can produce shearing stresses as well as normal
stresses, depending upon the section considered. The fact that stresses depend
upon the orientation of the surface on which they are computed is emphasized
again in Chapters 3 and 4 in the cases of torsion and pure bending. However,
the discussion of computational techniques—such as Mohr’s circle—used for
the transformation of stress at a point is delayed until Chapter 7, after students
have had the opportunity to solve problems involving a combination of the basic
loadings and have discovered for themselves the need for such techniques.

-- 9 of 897 --

Preface 	ix
The discussion in Chapter 2 of the relation between stress and strain in
various materials includes fiber-reinforced composite materials. Also, the
study of beams under transverse loads is covered in two separate chapters.
Chapter 5 is devoted to the determination of the normal stresses in a beam
and to the design of beams based on the allowable normal stress in the mate-
rial used (Section 5.3). The chapter begins with a discussion of the shear and
bending-moment diagrams (Sections 5.1 and 5.2) and includes an optional
section on the use of singularity functions for the determination of the shear
and bending moment in a beam (Section 5.4). The chapter ends with an
optional section on nonprismatic beams (Section 5.5).
Chapter 6 is devoted to the determination of shearing stresses in beams
and thin-walled members under transverse loadings. The formula for the shear
flow, q = VQ∕I, is derived in the traditional way. More advanced aspects of
the design of beams, such as the determination of the principal stresses at the
junction of the flange and web of a W-beam, are considered in Chapter 8, an
optional chapter that may be covered after the transformations of stresses have
been discussed in Chapter 7. The design of transmission shafts is in that
chapter for the same reason, as well as the determination of stresses under
combined loadings that can now include the determination of the principal
stresses, principal planes, and maximum shearing stress at a given point.
Statically indeterminate problems are first discussed in Chapter 2 and
considered throughout the text for the various loading conditions encountered.
Thus students are presented at an early stage with a method of solution that
combines the analysis of deformations with the conventional analysis of forces
used in statics. In this way, they will have become thoroughly familiar with this
fundamental method by the end of the course. In addition, this approach helps
the students realize that stresses themselves are statically indeterminate and can
be computed only by considering the corresponding distribution of strains.
The concept of plastic deformation is introduced in Chapter 2, where it
is applied to the analysis of members under axial loading. Problems involving
the plastic deformation of circular shafts and of prismatic beams are also
considered in optional sections of Chapters 3, 4, and 6. While some of this
material can be omitted at the choice of the instructor, its inclusion in the
body of the text will help students realize the limitations of the assumption
of a linear stress-strain relation and serve to caution them against the inap-
propriate use of the elastic torsion and flexure formulas.
The determination of the deflection of beams is discussed in Chapter 9.
The first part of the chapter is devoted to the integration method and to the
method of superposition, with an optional section (Section 9.3) based on the
use of singularity functions. (This section should be used only if Section 5.4
was covered earlier.) The second part of Chapter 9 is optional. It presents the
moment-area method in two lessons.
Chapter 10, which is devoted to columns, contains material on the design
of steel, aluminum, and wood columns. Chapter 11 covers energy methods,
including Castigliano’s theorem.
Supplemental Resources for Instructors
Included on the website are lecture PowerPoints and an image library. On
the site you’ll also find the Instructor’s Solutions Manual (password-protected
and available to instructors only) that accompanies the eighth edition. The
manual continues the tradition of exceptional accuracy and normally keeps
solutions contained to a single page for easier reference. The manual includes
an in-depth review of the material in each chapter and houses tables designed

-- 10 of 897 --

x 	Preface
to assist instructors in creating a schedule of assignments for their courses.
The various topics covered in the text are listed in Table I, and a suggested
number of periods to be spent on each topic is indicated. Table II provides
a brief description of all groups of problems and a classification of the prob-
lems in each group according to the units used. A Course Organization Guide
providing sample assignment schedules is also found on the website.
McGraw-Hill Connect Engineering provides online
presentation, assignment, and assessment solutions.
It connects your students with the tools and resources
they’ll need to achieve success. With Connect Engineering you can deliver
assignments, quizzes, and tests online. A robust set of questions and activities
are presented and aligned with the textbook’s learning outcomes. As an instructor,
you can edit existing questions and author entirely new problems. Integrate
grade reports easily with Learning Management Systems (LMS), such as
WebCT and Blackboard—and much more. ConnectPlus® Engineering provides
students with all the advantages of Connect Engineering, plus 24/7 online
access to a media-rich eBook, allowing seamless integration of text, media, and
assessments. To learn more, visit www.mcgrawhillconnect.com.
Craft your teaching resources to match the way you teach!
With McGraw-Hill Create, www.mcgrawhillcreate.com,
you can easily rearrange chapters, combine material from other content
sources, and quickly upload your original content, such as a course syllabus
or teaching notes. Arrange your book to fit your teaching style. Create even
allows you to personalize your book’s appearance by selecting the cover
and adding your name, school, and course information. Order a Create book
and you’ll receive a complimentary print review copy in 3–5 business days
or a complimentary electronic review copy (eComp) via email in minutes.
Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.com today and register to experience how
McGraw-Hill Create empowers you to teach your students your way.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the many companies that provided photographs for this
edition. Our special thanks go to Amy Mazurek (B.S. degree in civil engi-
neering from the Florida Institute of Technology, and a M.S. degree in civil
engineering from the University of Connecticut) for her work in the checking
and preparation of the solutions and answers of all the problems in this edi-
tion. Additionally, we would like to express our gratitude to Blair McDonald,
Western Illinois University, for his extensive work on the development of the
videos that accompany this text.
We also gratefully acknowledge the help, comments, and suggestions
offered by the many reviewers and users of previous editions of Mechanics of
Materials.
John T. DeWolf
David F. Mazurek

-- 11 of 897 --

Affordability & Outcomes = Academic Freedom!
You deserve choice, flexibility and control. You know what’s best for your students
and selecting the course materials that will help them succeed should be in your hands.
Thats why providing you with a wide range of options
that lower costs and drive better outcomes is our highest priority.
They’ll thank you for it.
Study resources in Connect help your students be
better prepared in less time. You can transform your
class time from dull definitions to dynamic discussion.
Hear from your peers about the benefits of Connect at
www.mheducation.com/highered/connect
Study anytime, anywhere.
Download the free ReadAnywhere app and access your
online eBook when it’s convenient, even if you’re offline.
And since the app automatically syncs with your eBook in
Connect, all of your notes are available every time you open
it. Find out more at www.mheducation.com/readanywhere
Learning for everyone.
McGraw-Hill works directly with Accessibility Services
Departments and faculty to meet the learning needs of all
students. Please contact your Accessibility Services office
and ask them to email accessibility@mheducation.com, or
visit www.mheducation.com/about/accessibility.html for
more information.
Students—study more efficiently, retain more
and achieve better outcomes. Instructors—focus
on what you love—teaching.
Rent It
Affordable print and digital
rental options through our
partnerships with leading
textbook distributors including
Amazon, Barnes & Noble,
Chegg, Follett, and more.
Go Digital
A full and flexible range of
affordable digital solutions
ranging from Connect,
ALEKS, inclusive access,
mobile apps, OER and more.
Get Print
Students who purchase
digital materials can get
a loose-leaf print version
at a significantly reduced
rate to meet their individual
preferences and budget.
Learn more at: www.mheducation.com/realvalue

-- 12 of 897 --

xii
Chapter Introduction. 	Each chapter begins with an
introductory section that sets up the purpose and goals of
the chapter, describing in simple terms the material that will
be covered and its application to the solution of engineering
problems. Chapter Objectives provide students with a pre-
view of chapter topics.
Chapter Lessons. 	The body of the text is divided into
units, each consisting of one or several theory sections, Con-
cept Applications, one or several Sample Problems, and a
large number of homework problems. The Companion Web-
site contains a Course Organization Guide with suggestions
on each chapter lesson.
Concept Applications. 	Concept Applications are used
extensively within individual theory sections to focus on
specific topics, and they are designed to illustrate specific
material being presented and facilitate its understanding.
Sample Problems. 	The Sample Problems are intended
to show more comprehensive applications of the theory to
the solution of engineering problems, and they employ the
SMART problem-solving methodology that students are
encouraged to use in the solution of their assigned problems.
Since the sample problems have been set up in much the
same form that students will use in solving the assigned
problems, they serve the double purpose of amplifying the
text and demonstrating the type of neat and orderly work that
students should cultivate in their own solutions. In addition,
in-problem references and captions have been added to the
sample problem figures for contextual linkage to the step-
by-step solution.
Homework Problem Sets. 	Over 25% of the nearly
1500 homework problems are new or updated. Most of the
problems are of a practical nature and should appeal to engi-
neering students. They are primarily designed, however, to
illustrate the material presented in the text and to help stu-
dents understand the principles used in mechanics of mate-
rials. The problems are grouped according to the portions of
material they illustrate and are arranged in order of increas-
ing difficulty. Answers to a majority of the problems are
given at the end of the book. Problems for which the answers
are given are set in blue type in the text, while problems for
which no answer is given are set in red italics.
Guided Tour
©Pete Ryan/Getty Images
Introduction—
Concept of Stress
1
Stresses occur in all structures subject to loads. This chapter will
	examine simple states of stress in elements, such as in the two-force
	members, bolts, and pins used in the structure shown.
Objectives	
In this chapter, we will:	
• Review statics needed to determine forces in members of
	simple structures.	
• Introduce the concept of stress.	
• Define different stress types: axial normal stress, shearing
	stress, and bearing stress.	
• Discuss an engineer’s two principal tasks: the analysis and
	design of structures and machines.	
• Develop a problem-solving approach.	
• Discuss the components of stress on different planes and under
	different loading conditions.	
• Discuss the many design considerations that an engineer should
	review before preparing a design.
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 2-3 	8/9/18 3:20 PM
The units associated with stresses are as follows: When SI metric units
are used, P is expressed in newtons (N) and A in square meters (m 2 ), so the
stress σ will be expressed in N/m 2 . This unit is called a pascal (Pa). However,
the pascal is an exceedingly small quantity and often multiples of this unit
must be used: the kilopascal (kPa), the megapascal (MPa), and the gigapas-
cal (GPa):
1 kPa = 103 Pa = 103 N/m2
1 MPa = 106 Pa = 106 N/m2
1 GPa = 109 Pa = 109 N/m2
When U.S. customary units are used, force P is usually expressed in
pounds (lb) or kilopounds (kip), and the cross-sectional area A is given in
square inches (in 2 ). The stress σ then is expressed in pounds per square inch
(psi) or kilopounds per square inch (ksi). †
M	C d
d
(a) 	(b)
P'	P'
P
P
Fig. 1.13 An example of eccentric loading.
†The principal SI and U.S. customary units used in mechanics are listed in Appendix A.
Using the third table, 1 psi is approximately equal to 7 kPa, and 1 ksi is approximately equal
to 7 MPa.
Concept Application 1.1
Considering the structure of Fig. 1.1, assume that rod BC is made of a steel
with a maximum allowable stress σall = 165 MPa. Can rod BC safely support
the load to which it will be subjected? The magnitude of the force FBC in the
rod was 50 kN. Recalling that the diameter of the rod is 20 mm, use Eq. (1.5)
to determine the stress created in the rod by the given loading.
P = F BC = +50 kN = +50 × 103 N
A = πr2 = π(
20 mm
2 )
2
= π(10 × 10−3 m) 2 = 314 × 10−6 m2
σ = P
A = +50 × 103 N
314 × 10−6 m2 = +159 × 106 Pa = +159 MPa
Since σ is smaller than σall of the allowable stress in the steel used, rod BC
can safely support the load.
To be complete, our analysis of the given structure should also include
the compressive stress in boom AB, as well as the stresses produced in the
pins and their bearings. This will be discussed later in this chapter. You should
also determine whether the deformations produced by the given loading are
acceptable. The study of deformations under axial loads will be the subject
of Chap. 2. For members in compression, the stability of the member (i.e., its
ability to support a given load without experiencing a sudden change in con-
figuration) will be discussed in Chap. 10.
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 9
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 9 	7/20/18 9:50 AM
Sample Problem 1.2
The steel tie bar shown is to be designed to carry a tension force of mag-
nitude P = 120 kN when bolted between double brackets at A and B. The
bar will be fabricated from 20-mm-thick plate stock. For the grade of steel
to be used, the maximum allowable stresses are σ = 175 MPa, τ = 100 MPa,
and σ b = 350 MPa. Design the tie bar by determining the required values
of (a) the diameter d of the bolt, (b) the dimension b at each end of the bar,
and (c) the dimension h of the bar.
STRATEGY: Use free-body diagrams to determine the forces needed to
obtain the stresses in terms of the design tension force. Setting these stresses
equal to the allowable stresses provides for the determination of the required
dimensions.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Diameter of the Bolt. Since the bolt is in double shear (Fig. 1),
F1 = 1
2 P = 60 kN.
τ = F1
A = 60 kN
	1
4 π d2 100 MPa = 60 kN
	1
4 π d2 	d = 27.6 mm
Use d = 28 mm ◂
At this point, check the bearing stress between the 20-mm-thick plate (Fig. 2)
and the 28-mm-diameter bolt.
σ b = P
td = 	120 kN
(0.020 m)(0.028 m) = 214 MPa < 350 MPa OK
b. Dimension b at Each End of the Bar. We consider one of the
end portions of the bar in Fig. 3. Recalling that the thickness of the steel
plate is t = 20 mm and that the average tensile stress must not exceed
175 MPa, write
σ =
1
2 P
ta 175 MPa = 60 kN
(0.02 m)a a = 17.14 mm
b = d + 2a = 28 mm + 2(17.14 mm) 	b = 62.3 mm ◂
c. Dimension h of the Bar. We consider a section in the central
portion of the bar (Fig. 4). Recalling that the thickness of the steel plate is
t = 20 mm, we have
σ = P
th 175 MPa = 120 kN
(0.020 m)h h = 34.3 mm
Use h = 35 mm ◂
REFLECT and THINK: We sized d based on bolt shear, and then checked
bearing on the tie bar. Had the maximum allowable bearing stress been exceeded,
we would have had to recalculate d based on the bearing criterion.
A 	B
d
F1 = P
P
F1
F1
1
2	
Fig. 1 Sectioned bolt.
b
h
t = 20 mm
d
Fig. 2 Tie bar geometry.
P
P' = 120 kN	
a
t
a
db
1
2
P1
2
Fig. 3 End section of tie bar.
P = 120 kN
t = 20 mm
h
Fig. 4 Mid-body section of tie bar.
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 19
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 19 	7/20/18 9:50 AM

-- 13 of 897 --

Guided Tour 	xiii
Chapter Review and Summary. 	Each chapter ends
with a review and summary of the material covered in that
chapter. Subtitles are used to help students organize their
review work, and cross-references have been included to
help them find the portions of material requiring their spe-
cial attention.
Review Problems. 	A set of review problems is included
at the end of each chapter. These problems provide students
further opportunity to apply the most important concepts
introduced in the chapter.
Computer Problems. 	Computers make it possible for
engineering students to solve a great number of challenging
problems. A group of six or more problems designed to be
solved with a computer can be found at the end of each
chapter. These problems can be solved using any computer
language that provides a basis for analytical calculations.
Developing the algorithm required to solve a given problem
will benefit the students in two different ways: (1) it will
help them gain a better understanding of the mechanics prin-
ciples involved; (2) it will provide them with an opportunity
to apply the skills acquired in their computer programming
course to the solution of a meaningful engineering problem.
45
This chapter was devoted to the concept of stress and to an introduction to
the methods used for the analysis and design of machines and load-bearing
structures. Emphasis was placed on the use of a free-body diagram to obtain
equilibrium equations that were solved for unknown reactions. Free-body
diagrams were also used to find the internal forces in the various members
of a structure.
Axial Loading: Normal Stress
The concept of stress was first introduced by considering a two-force member
under an axial loading. The normal stress in that member (Fig. 1.41) was
obtained by
σ = P
A 	(1.5)
The value of σ obtained from Eq. (1.5) represents the average stress
over the section rather than the stress at a specific point Q of the section.
Considering a small area ΔA surrounding Q and the magnitude ΔF of the
force exerted on ΔA, the stress at point Q is
σ = lim
ΔA→0
ΔF
ΔA 	(1.6)
In general, the stress σ at point Q in Eq. (1.6) is different from the value
of the average stress given by Eq. (1.5) and is found to vary across the section.
However, this variation is small in any section away from the points of appli-
cation of the loads. Therefore, the distribution of the normal stresses in an
axially loaded member is assumed to be uniform, except in the immediate
vicinity of the points of application of the loads.
For the distribution of stresses to be uniform in a given section, the line
of action of the loads P and P′ must pass through the centroid C. Such a
loading is called a centric axial loading. In the case of an eccentric axial
loading, the distribution of stresses is not uniform.
Transverse Forces and Shearing Stress
When equal and opposite transverse forces P and P′ of magnitude P are
applied to a member AB (Fig. 1.42), shearing stresses τ are created over any
section located between the points of application of the two forces. These
Review and Summary
A
P'
P
Fig. 1.41 Axially loaded
	member with cross section
	normal to member used to
	define normal stress.
A 	C 	B
P
P′
Fig. 1.42 Model of transverse resultant forces on
	either side of C resulting in shearing stress at section C.
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 45 	7/20/18 9:52 AM
48
1.59 In the marine crane shown, link CD is known to have a uniform
cross section of 50 × 150 mm. For the loading shown, determine the
normal stress in the central portion of that link.
A
	D
C
B
3 m	25 m	15 m
35 m
80 Mg
15 m
Fig. P1.59
1.60 Two horizontal 5-kip forces are applied to pin B of the assembly
shown. Knowing that a pin of 0.8-in. diameter is used at each con-
nection, determine the maximum value of the average normal stress
(a) in link AB, (b) in link BC.
B
A
C
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
1.8 in.
1.8 in.
45°
60°
5 kips
	5 kips
Fig. P1.60
1.61 For the assembly and loading of Prob. 1.60, determine (a) the aver-
age shearing stress in the pin at C, (b) the average bearing stress at
C in member BC, (c) the average bearing stress at B in member BC.
Review Problems
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 48 	7/20/18 9:52 AM
52
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
1.C1 A solid steel rod consisting of n cylindrical elements welded together
is subjected to the loading shown. The diameter of element i is
denoted by d i and the load applied to its lower end by Pi, with the
magnitude P i of this load being assumed positive if Pi is directed
downward as shown and negative otherwise. (a) Write a computer
program that can be used with either SI or U.S. customary units to
determine the average stress in each element of the rod. (b) Use this
program to solve Probs. 1.1 and 1.3.
1.C2 A 20-kN load is applied as shown to the horizontal member ABC.
Member ABC has a 10 × 50-mm uniform rectangular cross section
and is supported by four vertical links, each of 8 × 36-mm uniform
rectangular cross section. Each of the four pins at A, B, C, and D
has the same diameter d and is in double shear. (a) Write a com-
puter program to calculate for values of d from 10 to 30 mm, using
1-mm increments, (i) the maximum value of the average normal
stress in the links connecting pins B and D, (ii) the average normal
stress in the links connecting pins C and E, (iii) the average shear-
ing stress in pin B, (iv) the average shearing stress in pin C, (v) the
average bearing stress at B in member ABC, and (vi) the average
bearing stress at C in member ABC. (b) Check your program by
comparing the values obtained for d = 16 mm with the answers
given for Probs. 1.7 and 1.27. (c) Use this program to find the
permissible values of the diameter d of the pins, knowing that the
allowable values of the normal, shearing, and bearing stresses for
the steel used are, respectively, 150 MPa, 90 MPa, and 230 MPa.
(d) Solve part c, assuming that the thickness of member ABC has
been reduced from 10 to 8 mm.
0.2 m
	0.25 m
0.4 m
20 kN
C
B
A
D
E
Fig. P1.C2
Computer Problems
Element n
Element 1
Pn
P1
Fig. P1.C1
bee13272_ch01_002-055.indd 52 	7/20/18 9:52 AM

-- 14 of 897 --

xiv
a 	Constant; distance
A, B, C, . . . 	Forces; reactions
A, B, C, . . . 	Points
A, 𝒶 	Area
b 	Distance; width
c 	Constant; distance; radius
C 	Centroid
C1, C2, . . . 	Constants of integration
CP 	Column stability factor
d 	Distance; diameter; depth
D 	Diameter
e 	Distance; eccentricity; dilatation
E 	Modulus of elasticity
f 	Frequency; function
F 	Force
F.S. 	Factor of safety
G 	Modulus of rigidity; shear modulus
h 	Distance; height
H 	Force
H, J, K 	Points
I, Ix, . . . 	Moment of inertia
Ixy, . . . 	Product of inertia
J 	Polar moment of inertia
k 	Spring constant; shape factor; bulk
modulus; constant
K 	Stress concentration factor; torsional
spring constant
l 	Length; span
L 	Length; span
Le 	Effective length
m 	Mass
M 	Couple
M, Mx, . . . 	Bending moment
MD 	Bending moment, dead load (LRFD)
ML 	Bending moment, live load (LRFD)
MU 	Bending moment, ultimate load (LRFD)
n 	Number; ratio of moduli of elasticity;
normal direction
p 	Pressure
P 	Force; concentrated load
PD 	Dead load (LRFD)
PL 	Live load (LRFD)
PU 	Ultimate load (LRFD)
q 	Shearing force per unit length; shear
flow
Q 	Force
Q 	First moment of area
r 	Radius; radius of gyration
R 	Force; reaction
R 	Radius; modulus of rupture
s 	Length
S 	Elastic section modulus
t 	Thickness; distance; tangential
deviation
T 	Torque
T 	Temperature
u, ν 	Rectangular coordinates
u 	Strain-energy density
U 	Strain energy; work
v 	Velocity
V 	Shearing force
V 	Volume; shear
w 	Width; distance; load per unit length
W, W 	Weight, load
x, y, z 	Rectangular coordinates; distance;
displacements; deflections
x, y, z 	Coordinates of centroid
Z 	Plastic section modulus
α, β, γ 	Angles
α 	Coefficient of thermal expansion;
influence coefficient
γ 	Shearing strain; specific weight
γD 	Load factor, dead load (LRFD)
γL 	Load factor, live load (LRFD)
δ 	Deformation; displacement
ε 	Normal strain
θ 	Angle; slope
λ 	Direction cosine
ν 	Poisson’s ratio
ρ 	Radius of curvature; distance; density
σ 	Normal stress
τ 	Shearing stress
ϕ 	Angle; angle of twist; resistance factor
ω 	Angular velocity
List of Symbols

-- 15 of 897 --

Mechanics of Materials
Eighth Edition

-- 16 of 897 --



-- 17 of 897 --

©Pete Ryan/Getty Images
Introduction—
Concept of Stress
1
Stresses occur in all structures subject to loads. This chapter will
examine simple states of stress in elements, such as in the two-force
members, bolts, and pins used in the structure shown.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Review statics needed to determine forces in members of
simple structures.
• Introduce the concept of stress.
• Define different stress types: axial normal stress, shearing
stress, and bearing stress.
• Discuss an engineer’s two principal tasks: the analysis and
design of structures and machines.
• Develop a problem-solving approach.
• Discuss the components of stress on different planes and under
different loading conditions.
• Discuss the many design considerations that an engineer should
review before preparing a design.

-- 18 of 897 --

4 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
Introduction
The study of mechanics of materials provides future engineers with the means
of analyzing and designing various machines and load-bearing structures
involving the determination of stresses and deformations. This first chapter is
devoted to the concept of stress.
Section 1.1 is a short review of the basic methods of statics and their
application to determine the forces in the members of a simple structure con-
sisting of pin-connected members. The concept of stress in a member of a
structure and how that stress can be determined from the force in the member
will be discussed in Sec. 1.2. You will consider the normal stresses in a
member under axial loading, the shearing stresses caused by the application
of equal and opposite transverse forces, and the bearing stresses created by
bolts and pins in the members they connect.
Section 1.2 ends with a description of the method you should use in
the solution of an assigned problem and a discussion of the numerical accu-
racy. These concepts will be applied in the analysis of the members of the
simple structure considered earlier.
Again, a two-force member under axial loading is observed in Sec. 1.3
where the stresses on an oblique plane include both normal and shearing
stresses, while Sec. 1.4 discusses that six components are required to
describe the state of stress at a point in a body under the most general
loading conditions.
Section 1.5 is devoted to the determination of the ultimate strength from
test specimens and the use of a factor of safety to compute the allowable load
for a structural component made of that material.
1.1 	REVIEW OF THE METHODS
OF STATICS
Consider the structure shown in Fig. 1.1, which was designed to support a
30-kN load. It consists of a boom AB with a 30 × 50-mm rectangular cross
section and a rod BC with a 20-mm-diameter circular cross section. These are
connected by a pin at B and are supported by pins and brackets at A and C,
respectively. First draw a free-body diagram of the structure. This is done by
detaching the structure from its supports at A and C, and then showing the
reactions that these supports exert on the structure (Fig. 1.2). Note that the
sketch of the structure has been simplified by omitting all unnecessary details.
Many of you may have recognized at this point that AB and BC are two-force
members. For those of you who have not, we will pursue our analysis, ignor-
ing that fact and assuming that the directions of the reactions at A and C are
unknown. Each of these reactions are represented by two components: Ax and
Ay at A, and Cx and Cy at C. The three equilibrium equations are.
+⤴ Σ MC = 0: 	Ax(0.6 m) − (30 kN)(0.8 m) = 0
Ax = +40 kN 	(1.1)
+
→ Σ Fx = 0: 	Ax + Cx = 0
Cx = −Ax 	Cx = −40 kN 	(1.2)
+ ↑ Σ Fy = 0: 	Ay + Cy − 30 kN = 0
Ay + Cy = +30 kN 	(1.3)
Introduction
1.1 	REVIEW OF THE
METHODS OF STATICS
1.2 	STRESSES IN THE
MEMBERS OF A
STRUCTURE
1.2A Axial Stress
1.2B Shearing Stress
1.2C Bearing Stress in
Connections
1.2D Application to the Analysis
and Design of Simple
Structures
1.2E Method of Problem Solution
1.3 	STRESS ON AN
OBLIQUE PLANE
UNDER AXIAL LOADING
1.4 	STRESS UNDER
GENERAL LOADING
CONDITIONS;
COMPONENTS OF
STRESS
1.5 	DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS
1.5A Determination of the Ultimate
Strength of a Material
1.5B Allowable Load and
Allowable Stress: Factor of
Safety
1.5C Factor of Safety Selection
1.5D Load and Resistance Factor
Design
Photo 1.1 	Crane booms used to load and
unload ships. ©David R. Frazier/Science Source

-- 19 of 897 --

1.1 Review of The Methods of Statics 	5
We have found two of the four unknowns, but cannot determine the other two
from these equations, and no additional independent equation can be obtained
from the free-body diagram of the structure. We must now dismember the
structure. Considering the free-body diagram of the boom AB (Fig. 1.3), we
write the following equilibrium equation:
+⤴ Σ MB = 0: 	−Ay(0.8 m) = 0 	Ay = 0 	(1.4)
Substituting for Ay from Eq. (1.4) into Eq. (1.3), we obtain Cy = +30 kN.
Expressing the results obtained for the reactions at A and C in vector form,
we have
A = 40 kN→ 	Cx = 40 kN← 	Cy = 30 kN ↑
Fig. 1.1 	Boom used to support a 30-kN load.
800 mm
50 mm
30 kN
600 mm
d = 20 mm
C
A
B
30 kN
0.8 m
0.6 m
B
Cx
Cy
Ay
C
A	Ax
Fig. 1.2 	Free-body diagram of boom
showing applied load and reaction
forces.
30 kN
0.8 m
Ay 	By
A 	B	Ax 	Bx
Fig. 1.3 	Free-body diagram of member
AB freed from structure.

-- 20 of 897 --

6 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
Note that the reaction at A is directed along the axis of the boom AB and
causes compression in that member. Observe that the components Cx and Cy
of the reaction at C are, respectively, proportional to the horizontal and ver-
tical components of the distance from B to C and that the reaction at C is
equal to 50 kN, is directed along the axis of the rod BC, and causes tension
in that member.
These results could have been anticipated by recognizing that AB and
BC are two-force members, i.e., members that are subjected to forces at only
two points, these points being A and B for member AB, and B and C for
member BC. Indeed, for a two-force member the lines of action of the result-
ants of the forces acting at each of the two points are equal and opposite and
pass through both points. Using this property, we could have obtained a sim-
pler solution by considering the free-body diagram of pin B. The forces on
pin B, FAB and FBC, are exerted, respectively, by members AB and BC and the
30-kN load (Fig. 1.4a). Pin B is shown to be in equilibrium by drawing the
corresponding force triangle (Fig. 1.4b).
Since force FBC is directed along member BC, its slope is the same as
that of BC, namely, 3/4. We can, therefore, write the proportion
FAB
4 = FBC
5 = 30 kN
3
from which
F AB = 40 kN 	F BC = 50 kN
Forces F′AB and F′BC exerted by pin B on boom AB and rod BC are equal and
opposite to FAB and FBC (Fig. 1.5).
C
D
B
D
FBC
FBC 	F' BC
F' BC
Fig. 1.6 	Free-body diagrams of sections of rod BC.
Knowing the forces at the ends of each member, we can now deter-
mine the internal forces in these members. Passing a section at some arbi-
trary point D of rod BC, we obtain two portions BD and CD (Fig. 1.6).
Since 50-kN forces must be applied at D to both portions of the rod to
keep them in equilibrium, an internal force of 50 kN is produced in rod
BC when a 30-kN load is applied at B. From the directions of the forces
FBC and F′BC in Fig. 1.6 we see that the rod is in tension. A similar pro-
cedure enables us to determine that the internal force in boom AB is 40 kN
and is in compression.
(a) 	(b)
FBC FBC
FAB 	FAB
30 kN
30 kN
3 5
4
B
Fig. 1.4 	Free-body diagram of boom’s
joint B and associated force triangle.
FAB 	F'AB
FBC
F' BC	B
A 	B
C
Fig. 1.5 	Free-body diagrams of two-force
members AB and BC.

-- 21 of 897 --

1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	7
1.2 	STRESSES IN THE MEMBERS
OF A STRUCTURE
1.2A 	Axial Stress
In the preceding section, we found forces in individual members. This is the
first and necessary step in the analysis of a structure. However it does not tell
us whether the given load can be safely supported. It is necessary to look at
each individual member separately to determine if the structure is safe. Rod
BC of the example considered in the preceding section is a two-force member
and, therefore, the forces FBC and F′BC acting on its ends B and C (Fig. 1.5)
are directed along the axis of the rod. Whether rod BC will break or not under
this loading depends upon the value found for the internal force FBC, the
cross-sectional area of the rod, and the material of which the rod is made.
Actually, the internal force FBC represents the resultant of elementary forces
distributed over the entire area A of the cross section (Fig. 1.7). The average
intensity of these distributed forces is equal to the force per unit area, FBC∕A,
on the section. Whether or not the rod will break under the given loading
depends upon the ability of the material to withstand the corresponding value
FBC∕A of the intensity of the distributed internal forces.
Fig. 1.7 	Axial force represents the
resultant of distributed elementary forces.
A
FBC	FBC 	A
σ =
Using Fig. 1.8, the force per unit area is called the stress and is denoted
by the Greek letter σ (sigma). The stress in a member of cross-sectional area A
subjected to an axial load P is obtained by dividing the magnitude P of the
load by the area A:
σ = P
A (1.5)
A positive sign indicates a tensile stress (member in tension), and a negative
sign indicates a compressive stress (member in compression).
As shown in Fig. 1.8, the section through the rod to determine the
internal force in the rod and the corresponding stress is perpendicular to the
axis of the rod. The corresponding stress is described as a normal stress. Thus,
Eq. (1.5) gives the normal stress in a member under axial loading.
Note that in Eq. (1.5), σ represents the average value of the stress over the
cross section, rather than the stress at a specific point of the cross section. To
define the stress at a given point Q of the cross section, consider a small area
ΔA (Fig. 1.9). Dividing the magnitude of ΔF by ΔA, you obtain the average
value of the stress over ΔA. Letting ΔA approach zero, the stress at point Q is
σ = lim
ΔA→0
ΔF
ΔA (1.6)
Photo 1.2 	This bridge truss consists of
two-force members that may be in tension
or in compression. ©Natalia Bratslavsky/Shutterstock
(a) 	(b)
A
P
A
P' 	P'
P
σ =
Fig. 1.8 	(a) Member with an axial load.
(b) Idealized uniform stress distribution at an
arbitrary section.
P'
Q
ΔA
ΔF
Fig. 1.9 	Small area ΔA, at an arbitrary point
in the cross section, carries ΔF in this axial
member.

-- 22 of 897 --

8 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
In general, the value for the stress σ at a given point Q of the section
is different from that for the average stress given by Eq. (1.5), and σ is
found to vary across the section. In a slender rod subjected to equal and
opposite concentrated loads P and P′ (Fig. 1.10a), this variation is small
in a section away from the points of application of the concentrated loads
(Fig. 1.10c), but it is quite noticeable in the neighborhood of these points
(Fig. 1.10b and d).
It follows from Eq. (1.6) that the magnitude of the resultant of the
distributed internal forces is
∫dF = ∫A
σ dA
But the conditions of equilibrium of each of the portions of rod shown in
Fig. 1.10 require that this magnitude be equal to the magnitude P of the
concentrated loads. Therefore,
P = ∫dF = ∫A
σ dA 	(1.7)
which means that the volume under each of the stress surfaces in Fig. 1.10
must be equal to the magnitude P of the loads. However, this is the only
information derived from statics regarding the distribution of normal stresses
in the various sections of the rod. The actual distribution of stresses in any
given section is statically indeterminate. To learn more about this distribution,
it is necessary to consider the deformations resulting from the particular mode
of application of the loads at the ends of the rod. This will be discussed fur-
ther in Chap. 2.
In practice, it is assumed that the distribution of normal stresses
in an axially loaded member is uniform, except in the immediate vicinity
of the points of application of the loads. The value σ of the stress is then
equal to σave and can be obtained from Eq. (1.5). However, realize that
when we assume a uniform distribution of stresses in the section, it fol-
lows from elementary statics† that the resultant P of the internal forces
must be applied at the centroid C of the section (Fig. 1.11). This means
that a uniform distribution of stress is possible only if the line of action
of the concentrated loads P and P′ passes through the centroid of the
section considered (Fig. 1.12). This type of loading is called centric
loading and will take place in all straight two-force members found in
trusses and pin-connected structures, such as the one considered in Fig. 1.1.
However, if a two-force member is loaded axially, but eccentrically, as
shown in Fig. 1.13a, the conditions of equilibrium of the portion of
member in Fig. 1.13b show that the internal forces in a given section
must be equivalent to a force P applied at the centroid of the section and
a couple M of moment M = Pd. This distribution of forces—the corre-
sponding distribution of stresses—cannot be uniform. Nor can the dis-
tribution of stresses be symmetric. This point will be discussed in detail
in Chap. 4.
†See Ferdinand P. Beer and E. Russell Johnston, Jr., Mechanics for Engineers, 5th ed.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008, or Vector Mechanics for Engineers, 12th ed., McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2019, Sec. 5.1.
(a) 	(b) 	(c) 	(d)
P' 	P' 	P' 	P'
P
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 1.10 	Stress distributions at different
sections along axially loaded member.
C
σ 	P
Fig. 1.11 	Idealized uniform stress distribution
implies the resultant force passes through the
cross section’s center.
C
P
P'
Fig. 1.12 	Centric loading having resultant
forces passing through the centroid of the
section.

-- 23 of 897 --

The units associated with stresses are as follows: When SI metric units
are used, P is expressed in newtons (N) and A in square meters (m2), so the
stress σ will be expressed in N/m2. This unit is called a pascal (Pa). However,
the pascal is an exceedingly small quantity and often multiples of this unit
must be used: the kilopascal (kPa), the megapascal (MPa), and the gigapas-
cal (GPa):
1 kPa = 103 Pa = 103 N/m2
1 MPa = 106 Pa = 106 N/m2
1 GPa = 109 Pa = 109 N/m2
When U.S. customary units are used, force P is usually expressed in
pounds (lb) or kilopounds (kip), and the cross-sectional area A is given in
square inches (in2). The stress σ then is expressed in pounds per square inch
(psi) or kilopounds per square inch (ksi).†
M	C d
d
(a) 	(b)
P'	P'
P
P
Fig. 1.13 	An example of eccentric loading.
†The principal SI and U.S. customary units used in mechanics are listed in Appendix A.
Using the third table, 1 psi is approximately equal to 7 kPa, and 1 ksi is approximately equal
to 7 MPa.
Concept Application 1.1
Considering the structure of Fig. 1.1, assume that rod BC is made of a steel
with a maximum allowable stress σall = 165 MPa. Can rod BC safely support
the load to which it will be subjected? The magnitude of the force FBC in the
rod was 50 kN. Recalling that the diameter of the rod is 20 mm, use Eq. (1.5)
to determine the stress created in the rod by the given loading.
P = F BC = +50 kN = +50 × 103 N
A = πr2 = π(
20 mm
2 	)
2
= π(10 × 10−3 m) 2 = 314 × 10−6 m2
σ = P
A = +50 × 103 N
314 × 10−6 m2 = +159 × 106 Pa = +159 MPa
Since σ is smaller than σall of the allowable stress in the steel used, rod BC
can safely support the load.
To be complete, our analysis of the given structure should also include
the compressive stress in boom AB, as well as the stresses produced in the
pins and their bearings. This will be discussed later in this chapter. You should
also determine whether the deformations produced by the given loading are
acceptable. The study of deformations under axial loads will be the subject
of Chap. 2. For members in compression, the stability of the member (i.e., its
ability to support a given load without experiencing a sudden change in con-
figuration) will be discussed in Chap. 10.
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	9

-- 24 of 897 --

10 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
The engineer’s role is not limited to the analysis of existing structures
and machines subjected to given loading conditions. Of even greater impor-
tance is the design of new structures and machines—that is, the selection of
appropriate components to perform a given task.
Concept Application 1.2
As an example of design, let us return to the structure of Fig. 1.1 and assume
that aluminum with an allowable stress σall = 100 MPa is to be used. Since
the force in rod BC is still P = FBC = 50 kN under the given loading, from
Eq. (1.5), we have
σall = P
A A = P
σall
= 50 × 103 N
100 × 106 Pa = 500 × 10−6 m2
and since A = πr2,
r = √
A
π = √
500 × 10−6 m2
π = 12.62 × 10−3 m = 12.62 mm
d = 2r = 25.2 mm
Therefore, an aluminum rod 26 mm or more in diameter will be adequate.
1.2B 	Shearing Stress
The internal forces and the corresponding stresses discussed in Sec. 1.2A were
normal to the section considered. A very different type of stress is obtained
when transverse forces P and P′ are applied to a member AB (Fig. 1.14).
Passing a section at C between the points of application of the two forces
(Fig. 1.15a), you obtain the diagram of portion AC shown in Fig. 1.15b.
Internal forces must exist in the plane of the section, and their resultant is
equal to P. This resultant is called a shear force. Dividing the shear P by the
A 	B
P'
P
Fig. 1.14 	Opposing
transverse loads creating
shear on member AB.
A 	C
A 	C
B
(a)
(b)
P
P
P'
P'
Fig. 1.15 	The resulting internal shear force
on a section between transverse forces.

-- 25 of 897 --

area A of the cross section, you obtain the average shearing stress in the
section. Denoting the shearing stress by the Greek letter τ (tau), write
τave = P
A (1.8)
The value obtained is an average value of the shearing stress over the
entire section. Contrary to what was said earlier for normal stresses, the dis-
tribution of shearing stresses across the section cannot be assumed to be
uniform. As you will see in Chap. 6, the actual value τ of the shearing stress
varies from zero at the surface of the member to a maximum value τmax that
may be much larger than the average value τave.
Photo 1.3 	Cutaway view of a connection with a
bolt in shear. Courtesy of John DeWolf
Shearing stresses are commonly found in bolts, pins, and rivets used to
connect various structural members and machine components (Photo 1.3). Con-
sider the two plates A and B, which are connected by a bolt CD (Fig. 1.16). If
the plates are subjected to tension forces of magnitude F, stresses will develop
in the section of bolt corresponding to the plane EE′. Drawing the diagrams
of the bolt and of the portion located above the plane EE′ (Fig. 1.17), the
shear P in the section is equal to F. The average shearing stress in the section
is obtained using Eq. (1.8) by dividing the shear P = F by the area A of the
cross section:
τave = P
A = F
A (1.9)
C
D
A F
E'	B
E
F'
Fig. 1.16 	Bolt subject to single shear.
C 	C
D
F
P	E'	E
(a) 	(b)
F
F'
Fig. 1.17 	(a) Diagram of bolt in single shear;
(b) section E-E′ of the bolt. 	K
A	B
L
E 	H
G 	J
C
D
K'
L'
F	F'
Fig. 1.18 	Bolts subject to double shear.
The previous bolt is said to be in single shear. Different loading situa-
tions may arise, however. For example, if splice plates C and D are used to
connect plates A and B (Fig. 1.18), shear will take place in bolt HJ in each
of the two planes KK′ and LL′ (and similarly in bolt EG). The bolts are said
to be in double shear. To determine the average shearing stress in each plane,
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	11

-- 26 of 897 --

12 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
draw free-body diagrams of bolt HJ and of the portion of the bolt located
between the two planes (Fig. 1.19). Observing that the shear P in each of the
sections is P = F∕2, the average shearing stress is
τave = P
A = F∕2
A = F
2A (1.10)
K
L
H
J
K'
L'
F
FC
FD
F
P
P
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 1.19 	(a) Diagram of bolt in double shear;
(b) sections K-K′ and L-L′ of the bolt.
1.2C 	Bearing Stress in Connections
Bolts, pins, and rivets create stresses in the members they connect along the
bearing surface or surface of contact. For example, consider again the two
plates A and B connected by a bolt CD that were discussed in the preceding
section (Fig. 1.16). The bolt exerts on plate A a force P equal and opposite
to the force F exerted by the plate on the bolt (Fig. 1.20). The force P repre-
sents the resultant of elementary forces distributed on the inside surface of a
half-cylinder of diameter d and of length t equal to the thickness of the plate.
Since the distribution of force P—and of the corresponding stresses—is quite
complicated, in practice one uses an average nominal value σb of the stress,
called the bearing stress, which is obtained by dividing the load P by the area
of the rectangle representing the projection of the bolt on the plate section
(Fig. 1.21). Since this area is equal to td, where t is the plate thickness and
d the diameter of the bolt, the bearing stress is defined as
σ b = P
A = P
td (1.11)
A 	d
t
Fig. 1.21 	Dimensions for calculating
bearing stress area.
1.2D 	Application to the Analysis and
Design of Simple Structures
We are now in a position to determine the stresses in the members and con-
nections of two-dimensional structures and use this information to design the
structure. This is illustrated through the following Concept Application.
A
C
D
d
t
F
P
F'
Fig. 1.20 	Equal and opposite forces between
plate and bolt, exerted over bearing surfaces.

-- 27 of 897 --

Concept Application 1.3
Returning to the structure of Fig. 1.1, we will determine the normal stresses,
shearing stresses, and bearing stresses. As shown in Fig. 1.22, the 20-mm-
diameter rod BC has flat ends of 20 × 40-mm rectangular cross section, while
boom AB has a 30 × 50-mm rectangular cross section and is fitted with a
clevis at end B. Both members are connected at B by a pin from which the
30-kN load is suspended by means of a U-shaped bracket. Boom AB is sup-
ported at A by a pin fitted into a double bracket, while rod BC is connected
at C to a single bracket. All pins are 25 mm in diameter.
800 mm
50 mm
Q = 30 kN 	Q = 30 kN
20 mm
20 mm
25 mm
30 mm
25 mm
d = 25 mm
d = 25 mm
d = 20 mm
d = 20 mm
d = 25 mm
40 mm
20 mm
A
A B
B
B
C
C
B
FRONT VIEW
TOP VIEW OF BOOM AB
END VIEW
TOP VIEW OF ROD BC	Flat end
Flat end
600 mm
Fig. 1.22 	Components of boom used to support 30-kN load.
Normal Stress in Boom AB and Rod BC. 	As found in Sec. 1.1A, the
force in rod BC is FBC = 50 kN (tension) and the area of its circular cross
section is A = 314 × 10−6 m2. The corresponding average normal stress is
(continued)
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	13

-- 28 of 897 --

14 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
σBC = +159 MPa. However, the flat parts of the rod are also under tension
and at the narrowest section. Where the hole is located, we have
A = (20 mm)(40 mm − 25 mm) = 300 × 10 −6 m2
The corresponding average value of the stress is
(σ BC) end = P
A = 50 × 103 N
300 × 10−6 m2 = 167.0 MPa
Note that this is an average value. Close to the hole the stress will actually
reach a much larger value, as you will see in Sec. 2.11. Under an increasing
load, the rod will fail near one of the holes rather than in its cylindrical por-
tion; its design could be improved by increasing the width or the thickness of
the flat ends of the rod.
Recall from Sec. 1.1A that the force in boom AB is FAB = 40 kN
(compression). Since the area of the boom’s rectangular cross section is
A = 30 mm × 50 mm = 1.5 × 10−3 m2, the average value of the normal
stress in the main part of the rod between pins A and B is
σ AB = − 40 × 103 N
1.5 × 10−3 m2 = −26.7 × 106 Pa = −26.7 MPa
Note that the sections of minimum area at A and B are not under stress, since
the boom is in compression, and therefore pushes on the pins (instead of
pulling on the pins as rod BC does).
Shearing Stress in Various Connections. 	To determine the shearing
stress in a connection such as a bolt, pin, or rivet, you first show the forces
exerted by the various members it connects. In the case of pin C (Fig. 1.23a),
draw Fig. 1.23b to show the 50-kN force exerted by member BC on the pin,
and the equal and opposite force exerted by the bracket. Drawing the diagram
of the portion of the pin located below the plane DD′ where shearing stresses
occur (Fig. 1.23c), notice that the shear in that plane is P = 50 kN. Since the
cross-sectional area of the pin is
A = πr2 = π(
25 mm
2 	)
2
= π(12.5 × 10−3 m) 2 = 491 × 10−6 m2
the average value of the shearing stress in the pin at C is
τave = P
A = 50 × 103 N
491 × 10−6 m2 = 102.0 MPa
Note that pin A (Fig. 1.24) is in double shear. Drawing the free-body
diagrams of the pin and the portion of pin located between the planes DD′
and EE′ where shearing stresses occur, we see that P = 20 kN and
τave = P
A = 20 kN
491 × 10−6 m2 = 40.7 MPa
Pin B (Fig. 1.25a) can be divided into five portions that are acted upon
by forces exerted by the boom, rod, and bracket. Portions DE (Fig. 1.25b) and
50 kN
(a)
C
50 kN
(c)
P
50 kN
(b)
Fb
D'
D
d = 25 mm
Fig. 1.23 	Diagrams of the
single-shear pin at C.
(a)
40 kN
A
(c)
40 kN
P
P
(b)
40 kN
Fb
Fb
D'
E'
D
E
d = 25 mm
Fig. 1.24 	Free-body diagrams of
the double-shear pin at A. 	(continued)

-- 29 of 897 --

1.2E 	Method of Problem Solution
To solve engineering problems, you should draw on your own experience and
intuition about physical behavior. In doing so, you will find it easier to under-
stand and formulate the problem. Your solution must be based on the funda-
mental principles of statics and on the principles you will learn in this text.
Every step you take in the solution must be justified on this basis, leaving no
room for your intuition or “feeling.” After you have obtained an answer, you
should check it. Here again, you may call upon your common sense and per-
sonal experience. If you are not completely satisfied with the result, you
should carefully check your formulation of the problem, the validity of the
methods used for its solution, and the accuracy of your computations.
In general, you can usually solve problems in several different ways; there
is no one approach that works best for everybody. However, we have found that
students often find it helpful to have a general set of guidelines to use for fram-
ing problems and planning solutions. In the Sample Problems throughout this
text, we use a four-step approach for solving problems, which we refer to as the
SMART methodology: Strategy, Modeling, Analysis, Reflect and Think:
1. Strategy. The statement of a problem should be clear and precise, and
should contain the given data and indicate what information is required.
The first step in solving the problem is to decide what concepts you
DG (Fig. 1.25c) show that the shear in section E is PE = 15 kN and the shear
in section G is PG = 25 kN. Since the loading of the pin is symmetric, the
maximum value of the shear in pin B is PG = 25 kN, and the largest shearing
stresses occur in sections G and H, where
τave = PG
A = 25 kN
491 × 10−6 m2 = 50.9 MPa
Bearing Stresses. 	Use Eq. (1.11) to determine the nominal bearing stress
at A in member AB. From Fig. 1.22, t = 30 mm and d = 25 mm. Recalling
that P = FAB = 40 kN, we have
σb = P
td = 40 kN
(30 mm)(25 mm) = 53.3 MPa
To obtain the bearing stress in the bracket at A, use t = 2(25 mm) = 50 mm
and d = 25 mm:
σb = P
td = 40 kN
(50 mm)(25 mm) = 32.0 MPa
The bearing stresses at B in member AB, at B and C in member BC, and
in the bracket at C are found in a similar way.
(a)
1
2 FAB = 20 kN
FBC = 50 kN
1
2 FAB = 20 kN
1
2 Q = 15 kN
1
2 Q = 15 kN
Pin B
D E G H
J
(b)
1
2 Q = 15 kN
D
E
PE
(c)
1
2 FAB = 20 kN
1
2 Q = 15 kN
D
G 	PG
Fig. 1.25 	Free-body diagrams for
various sections at pin B.
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	15

-- 30 of 897 --

16 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
have learned that apply to the given situation and connect the data to
the required information. It is often useful to work backward from the
information you are trying to find: Ask yourself what quantities you
need to know to obtain the answer, and if some of these quantities are
unknown, how you can find them from the given data.
2. Modeling. The solution of most problems encountered will require that
you first determine the reactions at the supports and internal forces and
couples. It is important to include one or several free-body diagrams to
support these determinations. Draw additional sketches as necessary to
guide the remainder of your solution, such as for stress analyses.
3. Analysis. After you have drawn the appropriate diagrams, use the fun-
damental principles of mechanics to write equilibrium equations. These
equations can be solved for unknown forces and used to compute the
required stresses and deformations.
4. Reflect and Think. After you have obtained the answer, check it care-
fully. Does it make sense in the context of the original problem? You
can often detect mistakes in reasoning by carrying the units through
your computations and checking the units obtained for the answer. For
example, in the design of the rod discussed in Concept Application 1.2,
the required diameter of the rod was expressed in millimeters, which is
the correct unit for a dimension; if you had obtained another unit, you
would know that some mistake had been made.
You can often detect errors in computation by substituting the numeri-
cal answer into an equation that was not used in the solution and verifying
that the equation is satisfied. The importance of correct computations in engi-
neering cannot be overemphasized.
Numerical Accuracy. 	The accuracy of the solution of a problem depends
upon the accuracy of the given data and the accuracy of the computations
performed.
The solution cannot be more accurate than the less accurate of these
two items. For example, if the loading of a beam is known to be 75,000 lb
with a possible error of 100 lb either way, the relative error that measures the
degree of accuracy of the data is
100 lb
75,000 lb = 0.0013 = 0.13%
To compute the reaction at one of the beam supports, it would be meaningless
to record it as 14,322 lb. The accuracy of the solution cannot be greater than
0.13%, no matter how accurate the computations are, and the possible error
in the answer may be as large as (0.13∕100)(14,322 lb) ≈ 20 lb. The answer
should be properly recorded as 14,320 ± 20 lb.
In engineering problems, the data are seldom known with an accuracy
greater than 0.2%. A practical rule is to use four figures to record numbers
beginning with a “1” and three figures in all other cases. Unless otherwise
indicated, the data given are assumed to be known with a comparable degree
of accuracy. A force of 40 lb, for example, should be read 40.0 lb, and a force
of 15 lb should be read 15.00 lb.
The speed and accuracy of calculators and computers make the numerical
computations in the solution of many problems much easier. However, students
should not record more significant figures than can be justified merely because
they are easily obtained. An accuracy greater than 0.2% is seldom necessary or
meaningful in the solution of practical engineering problems.

-- 31 of 897 --

Sample Problem 1.1
In the hanger shown, the upper portion of link ABC is 3
8 in. thick and the
lower portions are each 1
4 in. thick. Epoxy resin is used to bond the upper
and lower portions together at B. The pin at A has a 3
8 -in. diameter, while a
1
4 -in.-diameter pin is used at C. Determine (a) the shearing stress in pin A,
(b) the shearing stress in pin C, (c) the largest normal stress in link ABC,
(d) the average shearing stress on the bonded surfaces at B, and (e) the
bearing stress in the link at C.
STRATEGY: 	Consider the free body of the hanger to determine the internal
force for member AB and then proceed to determine the shearing and bearing
forces applicable to the pins. These forces can then be used to determine the
stresses.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the hanger to determine the
support reactions (Fig. 1). Then draw the diagrams of the various compo-
nents of interest showing the forces needed to determine the desired stresses
(Figs. 2–6).
ANALYSIS:
Free Body: Entire Hanger. 	Since the link ABC is a two-force member
(Fig. 1), the reaction at A is vertical; the reaction at D is represented by its
components Dx and Dy. Thus,
+⤴ ΣMD = 0: 	(500 lb)(15 in.) − F AC(10 in.) = 0
FAC = +750 lb 	FAC = 750 lb 	tension
a. Shearing Stress in Pin A. 	Since this 3
8 -in.-diameter pin is in single
shear (Fig. 2), write
τA = FAC
A = 750 lb
1
4π(0.375 in.)2 	τA = 6790 psi 	◂
b. Shearing Stress in Pin C. 	Since this 1
4 -in.-diameter pin is in double
shear (Fig. 3), write
τ C =
1
2F AC
A = 375 lb
1
4 π (0.25 in.)2 	τC = 7640 psi 	◂
-in. diameter
FAC = 750 lb
1
4
FAC = 375 lb	1
2
FAC = 375 lb	1
2
C
Fig. 3 	Pin C.
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of
hanger.
6 in.
7 in.
1.75 in.
5 in.
1.25 in.
10 in.
500 lb
A
B
C
D
E
5 in.
500 lb
10 in.
A 	D
Dx
FAC 	Dy
E
C
750 lb FAC = 750 lb
-in. diameter	3
8
A
Fig. 2 	Pin A.
(continued)
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	17

-- 32 of 897 --

18 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
c. Largest Normal Stress in Link ABC. 	The largest stress is found
where the area is smallest; this occurs at the cross section at A (Fig. 4) where
the 3
8 -in. hole is located. We have
σ A = FAC
Anet
= 750 lb
( 3
8 in.)(1.25 in. − 0.375 in.) = 750 lb
0.328 in2 	σA = 2290 psi 	◂
d. Average Shearing Stress at B. 	We note that bonding exists on
both sides of the upper portion of the link (Fig. 5) and that the shear force
on each side is F1 = (750 lb)∕2 = 375 lb. The average shearing stress on each
surface is
τB = F1
A = 375 lb
(1.25 in.)(1.75 in.) τB = 171.4 psi 	◂
e. Bearing Stress in Link at C. 	For each portion of the link (Fig. 6),
F1 = 375 lb, and the nominal bearing area is (0.25 in.)(0.25 in.) = 0.0625 in2.
σb = F1
A = 375 lb
0.0625 in2 	σb = 6000 psi 	◂
-in. diameter	3
8
in.
1.25 in.
3
8
FAC
Fig. 4 	Link ABC section at A.
FAC = 750 lb
1.25 in.
1.75 in.
F2 	F1
A
B
F1 = F2 = F AC = 375 lb	1
2
Fig. 5 	Element AB.
375 lb 	F1 = 375 lb
-in. diameter	1
4
1
4 in.
Fig. 6 	Link ABC section at C.
REFLECT and THINK: 	This sample problem demonstrates the need to
draw free-body diagrams of the separate components, carefully considering
the behavior in each one. As an example, based on visual inspection of the
hanger it is apparent that member AC should be in tension for the given load,
and the analysis confirms this. Had a compression result been obtained
instead, a thorough reexamination of the analysis would have been required.

-- 33 of 897 --

Sample Problem 1.2
The steel tie bar shown is to be designed to carry a tension force of mag-
nitude P = 120 kN when bolted between double brackets at A and B. The
bar will be fabricated from 20-mm-thick plate stock. For the grade of steel
to be used, the maximum allowable stresses are σ = 175 MPa, τ = 100 MPa,
and σb = 350 MPa. Design the tie bar by determining the required values
of (a) the diameter d of the bolt, (b) the dimension b at each end of the bar,
and (c) the dimension h of the bar.
STRATEGY: 	Use free-body diagrams to determine the forces needed to
obtain the stresses in terms of the design tension force. Setting these stresses
equal to the allowable stresses provides for the determination of the required
dimensions.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Diameter of the Bolt. 	Since the bolt is in double shear (Fig. 1),
F1 = 1
2 P = 60 kN.
τ = F1
A = 60 kN
1
4 π d2 	100 MPa = 60 kN
1
4 π d2 	d = 27.6 mm
Use 	d = 28 mm 	◂
At this point, check the bearing stress between the 20-mm-thick plate (Fig. 2)
and the 28-mm-diameter bolt.
σ b = P
td = 120 kN
(0.020 m)(0.028 m) = 214 MPa < 350 MPa 	OK
b. Dimension b at Each End of the Bar. 	We consider one of the
end portions of the bar in Fig. 3. Recalling that the thickness of the steel
plate is t = 20 mm and that the average tensile stress must not exceed
175 MPa, write
σ =
1
2 P
ta 175 MPa = 60 kN
(0.02 m)a a = 17.14 mm
b = d + 2a = 28 mm + 2(17.14 mm) 	b = 62.3 mm 	◂
c. Dimension h of the Bar. 	We consider a section in the central
portion of the bar (Fig. 4). Recalling that the thickness of the steel plate is
t = 20 mm, we have
σ = P
th 175 MPa = 120 kN
(0.020 m)h h = 34.3 mm
Use 	h = 35 mm 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	We sized d based on bolt shear, and then checked
bearing on the tie bar. Had the maximum allowable bearing stress been exceeded,
we would have had to recalculate d based on the bearing criterion.
A 	B
d
F1 = 	P
P
F1
F1
1
2
Fig. 1 	Sectioned bolt.
b
h
t = 20 mm
d
Fig. 2 	Tie bar geometry.
P
P' = 120 kN
a
t
a
d	b
1
2
P	1
2
Fig. 3 	End section of tie bar.
P = 120 kN
t = 20 mm
h
Fig. 4 	Mid-body section of tie bar.
1.2 Stresses in the Members of a Structure 	19

-- 34 of 897 --

20
Problems
1.1 Two solid cylindrical rods AB and BC are welded together at B
and loaded as shown. Knowing that d1 = 30 mm and d2 = 50 mm,
find the average normal stress at the midsection of (a) rod AB,
(b) rod BC.
d1
d2
125 kN
125 kN
60 kN
C
A
B
0.9 m 	1.2 m
Fig. P1.1 and P1.2
1.2 Two solid cylindrical rods AB and BC are welded together at B and
loaded as shown. Knowing that the average normal stress must not
exceed 150 MPa in either rod, determine the smallest allowable val-
ues of the diameters d1 and d2.
1.3 Two solid cylindrical rods AB and BC are welded together at B and
loaded as shown. Knowing that P = 10 kips, find the average normal
stress at the midsection of (a) rod AB, (b) rod BC.
0.75 in.
1.25 in.
12 kips
P
B
C
25 in.
30 in.
A
Fig. P1.3 and P1.4
1.4 Two solid cylindrical rods AB and BC are welded together at B and
loaded as shown. Determine the magnitude of the force P for which
the tensile stresses in rods AB and BC are equal.

-- 35 of 897 --

21
1.5 A strain gage located at C on the surface of bone AB indicates that
the average normal stress in the bone is 3.80 MPa when the bone is
subjected to two 1200-N forces as shown. Assuming the cross section
of the bone at C to be annular and knowing that its outer diameter is
25 mm, determine the inner diameter of the bone’s cross section at C.
1.6 Two steel plates are to be held together by means of 16-mm-
diameter high-strength steel bolts fitting snugly inside cylindrical
brass spacers. Knowing that the average normal stress must not
exceed 200 MPa in the bolts and 130 MPa in the spacers, deter-
mine the outer diameter of the spacers that yields the most eco-
nomical and safe design.
Fig. P1.6
1.7 Each of the four vertical links has an 8 × 36-mm uniform rectangu-
lar cross section, and each of the four pins has a 16-mm diameter.
Determine the maximum value of the average normal stress in the
links connecting (a) points B and D, (b) points C and E.
0.2 m
0.25 m
0.4 m
20 kN
C
B
A
D
E
Fig. P1.7
1.8 Link AC has a uniform rectangular cross section 1
8 in. thick and 1 in.
wide. Determine the normal stress in the central portion of the link.
10 in. 	8 in.
2 in.
12 in.
4 in.
30°
120 lb
120 lb
C
A
B
Fig. P1.8
1200 N
1200 N
C
A
B
Fig. P1.5

-- 36 of 897 --

22
1.9 Knowing that the central portion of the link BD has a uniform cross-
sectional area of 800 mm 2 , determine the magnitude of the load
P for which the normal stress in that portion of BD is 50 MPa.
P
1.92 m
0.56 m
A
C
B	30°
D
r = 1.4 m
Fig. P1.9
1.10 Link BD consists of a single bar 1 in. wide and 1
2 in. thick. Knowing
that each pin has a 3
8 -in. diameter, determine the maximum value of
the average normal stress in link BD if (a) θ = 0, (b) θ = 90°.
4 kips
30°
6 in.
12 in.
D
C
B
A
θ
Fig. P1.10
1.11 The rigid bar EFG is supported by the truss system shown. Knowing
that the member CG is a solid circular rod of 0.75-in. diameter,
determine the normal stress in CG.
1.12 The rigid bar EFG is supported by the truss system shown. Deter-
mine the cross-sectional area of member AE for which the normal
stress in the member is 15 ksi.
3600 lb
A 	B 	C
D 	E 	F 	G
3 ft
4 ft 	4 ft 	4 ft
Fig. P1.11 and Fig. P1.12

-- 37 of 897 --

23
1.13 An aircraft tow bar is positioned by means of a single hydraulic
cylinder connected by a 25-mm-diameter steel rod to two identical
arm-and-wheel units DEF. The mass of the entire tow bar is 200 kg,
and its center of gravity is located at G. For the position shown,
determine the normal stress in the rod.
D
B
E
A
Dimensions in mm
100
450
250
850
1150
500 	675 	825
C	G
F
Fig. P1.13
1.14 Two hydraulic cylinders are used to control the position of the
robotic arm ABC. Knowing that the control rods attached at A and
D each have a 20-mm diameter and happen to be parallel in the
position shown, determine the average normal stress in (a) member AE,
(b) member DG.
D
C	A B
E 	F 	G
200 mm	150 mm
150 mm
300 mm
400 mm
600 mm 800 N
Fig. P1.14
1.15 Knowing that a force P of magnitude 50 kN is required to punch a hole
of diameter d = 20 mm in an aluminum sheet of thickness t = 5 mm,
determine the average shearing stress in the aluminum at failure.
1.16 Two wooden planks, each 1
2 in. thick and 9 in. wide, are joined by the
dry mortise joint shown. Knowing that the wood used shears off along
its grain when the average shearing stress reaches 1.20 ksi, determine
the magnitude P of the axial load that will cause the joint to fail.
2 in.
1 in.
P' 	2 in.
1 in. 	9 in. P
in.	5
8
in.	5
8
Fig. P1.16
P
t	d
Fig. P1.15

-- 38 of 897 --

24
1.17 When the force P reached 1600 lb, the wooden specimen shown failed
in shear along the surface indicated by the dashed line. Determine the
average shearing stress along that surface at the time of failure.
0.6 in.
3 in. 	Wood	Steel
P	P'
Fig. P1.17
1.18 A load P is applied to a steel rod supported as shown by an alumi-
num plate into which a 12-mm-diameter hole has been drilled.
Knowing that the shearing stress must not exceed 180 MPa in the
steel rod and 70 MPa in the aluminum plate, determine the largest
load P that can be applied to the rod.
40 mm
8 mm
12 mm
P
10 mm
Fig. P1.18
1.19 The axial force in the column supporting the timber beam shown is
P = 20 kips. Determine the smallest allowable length L of the bear-
ing plate if the bearing stress in the timber is not to exceed 400 psi.
6 in.
L
P
Fig. P1.19
1.20 Three wooden planks are fastened together by a series of bolts to
form a column. The diameter of each bolt is 12 mm and the inner
diameter of each washer is 16 mm, which is slightly larger than the
diameter of the holes in the planks. Determine the smallest allowable
outer diameter d of the washers, knowing that the average normal
stress in the bolts is 36 MPa and that the bearing stress between the
washers and the planks must not exceed 8.5 MPa.
d 	12 mm
Fig. P1.20

-- 39 of 897 --

25
1.21 A 40-kN axial load is applied to a short wooden post that is supported
by a concrete footing resting on undisturbed soil. Determine (a) the
maximum bearing stress on the concrete footing, (b) the size of the
footing for which the average bearing stress in the soil is 145 kPa.
P = 40 kN
b 	b
120 mm 	100 mm
Fig. P1.21
1.22 The axial load P = 240 kips, supported by a W10 × 45 column, is
distributed to a concrete foundation by a square base plate as shown.
Determine the size of the base plate for which the average bearing
stress on the concrete is 750 psi.
1.23 Link AB, of width b = 2 in. and thickness t = 1
4 in., is used to sup-
port the end of a horizontal beam. Knowing that the average normal
stress in the link is −20 ksi and that the average shearing stress in
each of the two pins is 12 ksi determine (a) the diameter d of the
pins, (b) the average bearing stress in the link.
b
d
t
B
A
d
Fig. P1.23
1.24 A 6-mm-diameter pin is used at connection C of the pedal shown.
Knowing that P = 500 N, determine (a) the average shearing stress
in the pin, (b) the nominal bearing stress in the pedal at C, (c) the
nominal bearing stress in each support bracket at C.
1.25 Knowing that a force P of magnitude 750 N is applied to the pedal
shown, determine (a) the diameter of the pin at C for which the
average shearing stress in the pin is 40 MPa, (b) the corresponding
bearing stress in the pedal at C, (c) the corresponding bearing stress
in each support bracket at C.
b	b
P
Fig. P1.22
9 mm
125 mm
75 mm
300 mm
5 mm
A 	B
C C 	D
P
Fig. P1.24 and P1.25

-- 40 of 897 --

26
1.26 The hydraulic cylinder CF, which partially controls the position
of rod DE, has been locked in the position shown. Member BD
is 15 mm thick and is connected at C to the vertical rod by a
9-mm-diameter bolt. Knowing that P = 2 kN and θ = 75°, deter-
mine (a) the average shearing stress in the bolt, (b) the bearing
stress at C in member BD.
45 mm
200 mm
100 mm 	175 mm
D
F
E
A
C
B
P
20°
θ
Fig. P1.26
1.27 For the assembly and loading of Prob. 1.7, determine (a) the average
shearing stress in the pin at B, (b) the average bearing stress at B in
member BD, (c) the average bearing stress at B in member ABC,
knowing that this member has a 10 × 50-mm uniform rectangular
cross section.
1.28 Two identical linkage-and-hydraulic-cylinder systems control
the position of the forks of a fork-lift truck. The load supported
by the one system shown is 1500 lb. Knowing that the thickness
of member BD is 5
8 in., determine (a) the average shearing stress
in the 1
2 -in.-diameter pin at B, (b) the bearing stress at B in
member BD.
A
C
D 	E
B
12 in.
12 in.
15 in.
16 in. 	16 in. 	20 in.
1500 lb
Fig. P1.28

-- 41 of 897 --

1.3 Stress on an Oblique Plane Under Axial Loading 	27
1.3 	STRESS ON AN OBLIQUE
PLANE UNDER AXIAL
LOADING
Previously, axial forces exerted on a two-force member (Fig. 1.26a) caused
normal stresses in that member (Fig. 1.26b), while transverse forces exerted
on bolts and pins (Fig. 1.27a) caused shearing stresses in those connections
(Fig. 1.27b). Relations were observed between axial forces and normal stresses
and transverse forces and shearing stresses, for stresses determined only on
planes perpendicular to the axis of the member or connection. In this section,
we will look at both normal and shearing stresses on planes that are not per-
pendicular to the axis of the member. Similarly, transverse forces exerted on
a bolt or a pin cause both normal and shearing stresses on planes that are not
perpendicular to the axis of the bolt or pin.
P'
P	P
P' 	P'
(a) 	(b)
τ
Fig. 1.27 	(a) Diagram of a bolt from a single-shear joint with a section
plane normal to the bolt. (b) Equivalent force diagram models of the
resultant force acting at the section centroid and the uniform average
shear stress.
Consider the two-force member of Fig. 1.26 that is subjected to axial
forces P and P′. If we pass a section forming an angle θ with a normal plane
(Fig. 1.28a) and draw the free-body diagram of the portion of member located
to the left of that section (Fig. 1.28b), equilibrium requires that the distributed
forces acting on the section must be equivalent to the force P.
Resolving P into components F and V, respectively normal and tangen-
tial to the section (Fig. 1.28c),
F = P cos θ 	V = P sin θ 	(1.12)
Force F represents the resultant of normal forces distributed over the section,
and force V is the resultant of shearing forces (Fig. 1.28d). The average values
of the corresponding normal and shearing stresses are obtained by dividing F
and V by the area Aθ of the section:
σ = F
A θ
τ = V
A θ
(1.13)
Substituting for F and V from Eq. (1.12) into Eq. (1.13), and observing from
Fig. 1.28c that A0 = Aθ cos θ or Aθ = A0∕cos θ, where A0 is the area of a
section perpendicular to the axis of the member, we obtain
σ = P cos θ
A0∕cos θ τ = P sin θ
A0∕cos θ
or
σ = P
A0
cos 2 θ 	τ = P
A0
sin θ cos θ 	(1.14)
(a)
(b)
P
P
P'
P'
P'
σ
Fig. 1.26 	Axial forces on a two-force member.
(a) Section plane perpendicular to member
away from load application. (b) Equivalent force
diagram models of resultant force acting at
centroid and uniform normal stress.
P'
P'
P'
P
A
A0
P
V
F
P'
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
P
θ
θ
θ
σ
τ
Fig. 1.28 	Oblique section through a two-force
member. (a) Section plane made at an angle θ
to the member normal plane. (b) Free-body
diagram of left section with internal resultant
force P. (c) Free-body diagram of resultant force
resolved into components F and V along the
section plane’s normal and tangential directions,
respectively. (d) Free-body diagram with section
forces F and V represented as normal stress, σ,
and shearing stress, τ.

-- 42 of 897 --

28 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
Note from the first of Eqs. (1.14) that the normal stress σ is maximum
when θ = 0 (i.e., the plane of the section is perpendicular to the axis of the
member). It approaches zero as θ approaches 90°. We check that the value of
σ when θ = 0 is
σ m = P
A0
(1.15)
The second of Eqs. (1.14) shows that the shearing stress τ is zero for θ = 0
and θ = 90°. For θ = 45°, it reaches its maximum value
τ m = P
A0
sin 45° cos 45° = P
2A0
(1.16)
The first of Eqs. (1.14) indicates that, when θ = 45°, the normal stress σ′ is
also equal to P∕2A0:
σ′ = P
A0
cos 2 45° = P
2A0
(1.17)
The results obtained in Eqs. (1.15), (1.16), and (1.17) are shown graph-
ically in Fig. 1.29. The same loading may produce either a normal stress
σm = P∕A0 and no shearing stress (Fig. 1.29b) or a normal and a shearing
stress of the same magnitude σ′ = τm = P∕2A0 (Fig. 1.29c and d), depending
upon the orientation of the section.
1.4 	STRESS UNDER GENERAL
LOADING CONDITIONS;
COMPONENTS OF STRESS
The examples of the previous sections were limited to members under axial
loading and connections under transverse loading. Most structural members
and machine components are under more involved loading conditions.
Consider a body subjected to several loads P1, P2, etc. (Fig. 1.30). To
understand the stress condition created by these loads at some point Q within
the body, we shall first pass a section through Q, using a plane parallel to
the yz plane. The portion of the body to the left of the section is subjected
to some of the original loads, and to normal and shearing forces distributed
over the section. We shall denote by ΔFx and ΔVx, respectively, the normal
and the shearing forces acting on a small area ΔA surrounding point Q
(Fig. 1.31a). Note that the superscript x is used to indicate that the forces
ΔFx and ΔVx act on a surface perpendicular to the x axis. While the normal
force ΔFx has a well-defined direction, the shearing force ΔVx may have
any direction in the plane of the section. We therefore resolve ΔVx into two
component forces, ΔVx
y and ΔVx
z, in directions parallel to the y and z axes,
respectively (Fig. 1.31b). Dividing the magnitude of each force by the area
ΔA and letting ΔA approach zero, we define the three stress components
shown in Fig. 1.32:
σ x = lim
ΔA→0
ΔF x
ΔA
τ xy = lim
ΔA→0
ΔVy
x
ΔA τ xz = lim
ΔA→0
ΔV z
x
ΔA
(1.18)
P'
(a) Axial loading
(b) Stresses for 	= 0
m = P/A0
(c) Stresses for 	= 45°
(d) Stresses for 	= –45°
' = P/ 2A0
'= P/ 2A0
m = P/ 2A0
m = P/ 2A0
P
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
θ
θ
θ
Fig. 1.29 	Selected stress results for
axial loading.
Fig. 1.30 	Multiple loads on a
general body.
P1 P4
P3
P2	y
z
x

-- 43 of 897 --

1.4 Stress Under General Loading Conditions; Components of Stress 	29
Note that the first subscript in σx, τxy, and τxz is used to indicate that the
stresses are exerted on a surface perpendicular to the x axis. The second
subscript in τxy and τxz identifies the direction of the component. The normal
stress σx is positive if the corresponding arrow points in the positive x direc-
tion (i.e., if the body is in tension) and negative otherwise. Similarly, the
shearing stress components τxy and τxz are positive if the corresponding arrows
point, respectively, in the positive y and z directions.
This analysis also may be carried out by considering the portion of body
located to the right of the vertical plane through Q (Fig. 1.33). The same
magnitudes, but opposite directions, are obtained for the normal and shearing
forces ΔF x, ΔVy
x, and ΔVz
x. Therefore, the same values are obtained for the
corresponding stress components. However as the section in Fig. 1.33 now
faces the negative x axis, a positive sign for σx indicates that the correspond-
ing arrow points in the negative x direction. Similarly, positive signs for τxy
and τxz indicate that the corresponding arrows point in the negative y and z
directions, as shown in Fig. 1.33.
Passing a section through Q parallel to the zx plane, we define the stress
components, σy, τyz, and τyx. Then, a section through Q parallel to the xy plane
yields the components σz, τzx , and τzy.
The stress condition at point Q can be shown on a small cube of side
a centered at Q, with sides parallel and perpendicular to the coordinate
axes (Fig. 1.34). The stress components shown are σx, σy , and σz. These
stresses represent the normal stress components on faces respectively per-
pendicular to the x, y, and z axes, and the six shearing stress components
τxy , τxz, etc. Recall that τxy represents the y component of the shearing stress
exerted on the face perpendicular to the x axis, while τyx represents the x
component of the shearing stress exerted on the face perpendicular to the
y axis. Note that only three faces of the cube are actually visible in
Fig. 1.34 and that equal and opposite stress components act on the hidden
faces. While the stresses acting on the faces of the cube differ slightly from
the stresses at Q, the error involved is small and vanishes as side a of the
cube approaches zero.
Fx
P2 	P2
P1
y
z
x
y
z
x
P1
A
Fx	Vx
Vx
(a) 	(b)
Q 	Q
z
Vx
y
Δ	Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Fig. 1.31 	(a) Resultant shear and normal forces, ΔVx and ΔFx, acting
on small area ΔA at point Q. (b) Forces on ΔA resolved into forces in
coordinate directions.
y
z
x
x
xy
Q	xz 	σ
τ
τ
Fig. 1.32 	Stress components at point Q on the
body to the left of the plane.
y
z
x
x
xy
xz
Q
σ
τ
τ
Fig. 1.33 	Stress components at point Q on
the body to the right of the plane.
yz yx
xy
xz	zx
zy
y
z
x
a
Q	a
a
z
y
x
τ
τ
τ	τ
τ
τ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 1.34 	Positive stress components at
point Q.

-- 44 of 897 --

30 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
Shearing stress components. 	Consider the free-body diagram of the
small cube centered at point Q (Fig. 1.35). The normal and shearing forces
acting on the various faces of the cube are obtained by multiplying the cor-
responding stress components by the area ΔA of each face. First write the
following three equilibrium equations
ΣF x = 0 	ΣF y = 0 	ΣF z = 0 	(1.19)
xΔA
zΔA
yΔA
Q
z
y
x
zyΔA
yxΔA
yz A
xyΔA
zxΔA 	xzΔA
τ
τ
τ τ
τ
τ
	σ
σ
Δ
σ
Fig. 1.35 	Positive resultant forces on a
small element at point Q resulting from a
state of general stress.
Since forces equal and opposite to the forces actually shown in Fig. 1.35 are
acting on the hidden faces of the cube, Eqs. (1.19) are satisfied. Considering
the moments of the forces about axes x′, y′, and z′ drawn from Q in directions
respectively parallel to the x, y, and z axes, the three additional equations are
ΣMx′ = 0 	ΣM y′ = 0 	ΣM z′ = 0 	(1.20)
Using a projection on the x′y′ plane (Fig. 1.36), note that the only forces with
moments about the z axis different from zero are the shearing forces. These forces
form two couples: a counterclockwise (positive) moment (τxy ΔA)a and a clock-
wise (negative) moment −(τyx ΔA)a. The last of the three Eqs. (1.20) yields
+⤴ΣMz = 0: 	(τxy ΔA)a − (τyx ΔA)a = 0
from which
τ xy = τ yx 	(1.21)
yxΔA
yxΔA
xyΔA
xyΔA 	xΔA
xΔA
yΔA
yΔA
x'
a
z'
y'
τ
τ
τ
τ
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 1.36 	Free-body diagram of small element
at Q viewed on projected plane perpendicular to
z′ axis. Resultant forces on positive and negative
z′ faces (not shown) act through the z′ axis, thus
do not contribute to the moment about that axis.

-- 45 of 897 --

1.5 Design Considerations 	31
This relationship shows that the y component of the shearing stress exerted
on a face perpendicular to the x axis is equal to the x component of the
shearing stress exerted on a face perpendicular to the y axis. From the remain-
ing parts of Eqs. (1.20), we derive.
τ yz = τ zy 	τ zx = τ xz 	(1.22)
We conclude from Eqs. (1.21) and (1.22), only six stress compo-
nents are required to define the condition of stress at a given point Q,
instead of nine as originally assumed. These components are σx, σy , σz ,
τxy , τyz , and τzx. Also note that, at a given point, shear cannot take place
in one plane only; an equal shearing stress must be exerted on another
plane perpendicular to the first one. For example, considering the bolt of
Fig. 1.29 and a small cube at the center Q (Fig. 1.37a), we see that
shearing stresses of equal magnitude must be exerted on the two horizon-
tal faces of the cube and on the two faces perpendicular to the forces P
and P′ (Fig. 1.37b).
Axial loading. 	Let us consider again a member under axial loading. If
we consider a small cube with faces respectively parallel to the faces of
the member and recall the results obtained in Sec. 1.3, the conditions of
stress in the member may be described as shown in Fig. 1.38a; the only
stresses are normal stresses σx exerted on the faces of the cube that are
perpendicular to the x axis. However, if the small cube is rotated by 45°
about the z axis so that its new orientation matches the orientation of the
sections considered in Fig. 1.29c and d, normal and shearing stresses of
equal magnitude are exerted on four faces of the cube (Fig. 1.38b). Thus,
the same loading condition may lead to different interpretations of the
stress situation at a given point, depending upon the orientation of the ele-
ment considered. More will be said about this in Chap. 7: Transformation
of Stress and Strain.
1.5 	DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
In engineering applications, the determination of stresses is seldom an end in
itself. Rather, the knowledge of stresses is used by engineers to assist in their
most important task: the design of structures and machines that will safely
and economically perform a specified function.
1.5A 	Determination of the Ultimate
Strength of a Material
An important element to be considered by a designer is how the material
will behave under a load. This is determined by performing specific tests
on prepared samples of the material. For example, a test specimen of steel
may be prepared and placed in a laboratory testing machine to be subjected
to a known centric axial tensile force, as described in Sec. 2.1B. As the
magnitude of the force is increased, various dimensional changes such as
length and diameter are measured. Eventually, the largest force that may
(a) 	(b)
P
P'
Q
τ
τ
τ
τ
Fig. 1.37 	(a) Single-shear bolt with point Q
chosen at the center. (b) Pure shear stress
element at point Q.
(b)
(a)
m 	m
P
P'
P'
P
P
2A
z
x
y
' 45°
x
x 	P
A
P
2A
'
'
' =
=
=
σ
σ
σ	σ
σ
σ
τ 	τ
Fig. 1.38 	Changing the orientation of the
stress element produces different stress
components for the same state of stress. This
is studied in detail in Chap. 7.

-- 46 of 897 --

32 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
be applied to the specimen is reached, and it either breaks or begins to
carry less load. This largest force is called the ultimate load and is denoted
by PU. Since the applied load is centric, the ultimate load is divided by
the original cross-sectional area of the rod to obtain the ultimate normal
stress of the material. This stress, also known as the ultimate strength in
tension, is
σU = PU
A (1.23)
Several test procedures are available to determine the ultimate shearing
stress or ultimate strength in shear. The one most commonly used involves
the twisting of a circular tube (Sec. 3.2). A more direct, if less accurate,
procedure clamps a rectangular or round bar in a shear tool (Fig. 1.39) and
applies an increasing load P until the ultimate load PU for single shear is
obtained. If the free end of the specimen rests on both of the hardened dies
(Fig. 1.40), the ultimate load for double shear is obtained. In either case, the
ultimate shearing stress τU is
τ U = PU
A (1.24)
In single shear, this area is the cross-sectional area A of the specimen,
while in double shear it is equal to twice the cross-sectional area.
1.5B 	Allowable Load and Allowable Stress:
Factor of Safety
The maximum load that a structural member or a machine component will be
allowed to carry under normal conditions is considerably smaller than the
ultimate load. This smaller load is the allowable load (sometimes called the
working or design load). Thus, only a fraction of the ultimate-load capacity
of the member is used when the allowable load is applied. The remaining
portion of the load-carrying capacity of the member is kept in reserve to
assure its safe performance. The ratio of the ultimate load to the allowable
load is the factor of safety:†
Factor of safety = F.S. = ultimate load
allowable load (1.25)
An alternative definition of the factor of safety is based on the use of stresses:
Factor of safety = F.S. = ultimate stress
allowable stress (1.26)
These two expressions are identical when a linear relationship exists
between the load and the stress. In most engineering applications, however,
P
Fig. 1.39 	Single-shear test.
P
Fig. 1.40 	Double-shear test.
†In some fields of engineering, notably aeronautical engineering, the margin of safety is used
in place of the factor of safety. The margin of safety is defined as the factor of safety minus
one; that is, margin of safety = F.S. − 1.00.

-- 47 of 897 --

this relationship ceases to be linear as the load approaches its ultimate
value, and the factor of safety obtained from Eq. (1.26) does not provide
a true assessment of the safety of a given design. Nevertheless, the
allowable-stress method of design, based on the use of Eq. (1.26), is
widely used.
1.5C 	Factor of Safety Selection
The selection of the factor of safety to be used is one of the most important
engineering tasks. If a factor of safety is too small, the possibility of failure
becomes unacceptably large. On the other hand, if a factor of safety is unnec-
essarily large, the result is an uneconomical or nonfunctional design. The
choice of the factor of safety for a given design application requires engineer-
ing judgment based on many considerations.
1. Variations that may occur in the properties of the member. The com-
position, strength, and dimensions of the member are all subject to
small variations during manufacture. In addition, material properties
may be altered and residual stresses introduced through heating or defor-
mation that may occur during manufacture, storage, transportation, or
construction.
2. The number of loadings expected during the life of the structure or
machine. For most materials, the ultimate stress decreases as the number
of load cycles is increased. This phenomenon is known as fatigue and
can result in sudden failure if ignored (see Sec. 2.1F).
3. The type of loadings planned for in the design or that may occur in the
future. Very few loadings are known with complete accuracy—most
design loadings are engineering estimates. In addition, future alterations
or changes in usage may introduce changes in the actual loading. Larger
factors of safety are also required for dynamic, cyclic, or impulsive
loadings.
4. Type of failure. Brittle materials fail suddenly, usually with no prior
indication that collapse is imminent. However, ductile materials, such
as structural steel, normally undergo a substantial deformation called
yielding before failing, providing a warning that overloading exists.
Most buckling or stability failures are sudden, whether the material is
brittle or not. When the possibility of sudden failure exists, a larger
factor of safety should be used than when failure is preceded by obvious
warning signs.
5. Uncertainty due to methods of analysis. All design methods are based
on certain simplifying assumptions that result in calculated stresses
being approximations of actual stresses.
6. Deterioration that may occur in the future because of poor maintenance
or unpreventable natural causes. A larger factor of safety is necessary
in locations where conditions such as corrosion and decay are difficult
to control or even to discover.
7. The importance of a given member to the integrity of the whole
structure. Bracing and secondary members in many cases can be
designed with a factor of safety lower than that used for primary
members.
In addition to these considerations, there is concern of the risk to life
and property that a failure would produce. Where a failure would produce no
1.5 Design Considerations 	33

-- 48 of 897 --

34 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
risk to life and only minimal risk to property, the use of a smaller factor of
safety can be acceptable. Finally, unless a careful design with a nonexcessive
factor of safety is used, a structure or machine might not perform its design
function. For example, high factors of safety may have an unacceptable effect
on the weight of an aircraft.
For the majority of structural and machine applications, factors of safety
are specified by design specifications or building codes written by committees
of experienced engineers working with professional societies, industries, or
federal, state, or city agencies. Examples of such design specifications and
building codes are
1. Steel: American Institute of Steel Construction, Specification for
Structural Steel Buildings
2. Concrete: American Concrete Institute, Building Code Requirement for
Structural Concrete
3. Timber: American Forest and Paper Association, National Design
Specification for Wood Construction
4. Highway bridges: American Association of State Highway Officials,
Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges
1.5D 	Load and Resistance Factor
Design
The allowable-stress method requires that all the uncertainties associated
with the design of a structure or machine element be grouped into a single
factor of safety. An alternative method of design makes it possible to dis-
tinguish between the uncertainties associated with the strength of the
structure and those associated with the load it is designed to support.
Called Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD), this method allows
the designer to distinguish between uncertainties associated with the live
load, PL (i.e., the active or time-varying load to be supported by the struc-
ture) and the dead load, PD (i.e., the self weight of the structure contrib-
uting to the total load).
Using the LRFD method the ultimate load, PU, of the structure
(i.e., the load at which the structure ceases to be useful) should be deter-
mined. The proposed design is acceptable if the following inequality is
satisfied:
γ D P D + γ L P L ≤ ϕP U 	(1.27)
The coefficient ϕ is the resistance factor, which accounts for the uncer-
tainties associated with the structure itself and will normally be less
than 1. The coefficients γD and γL are the load factors; they account for
the uncertainties associated with the dead and live load and normally will
be greater than 1, with γL generally larger than γD. While a few examples
and assigned problems using LRFD are included in this chapter and in
Chaps. 5 and 10, the allowable-stress method of design is primarily used
in this text.

-- 49 of 897 --

Sample Problem 1.3
Two loads are applied to the bracket BCD as shown. (a) Knowing that the
control rod AB is to be made of a steel having an ultimate normal stress of
600 MPa, determine the diameter of the rod for which the factor of safety
with respect to failure will be 3.3. (b) The pin at C is to be made of a steel
having an ultimate shearing stress of 350 MPa. Determine the diameter of
the pin C for which the factor of safety with respect to shear will also be
3.3. (c) Determine the required thickness of the bracket supports at C, know-
ing that the allowable bearing stress of the steel used is 300 MPa.
STRATEGY: 	Consider the free body of the bracket to determine the force
P and the reaction at C. The resulting forces are then used with the allowable
stresses, determined from the factor of safety, to obtain the required
dimensions.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the hanger (Fig. 1), and the
pin at C (Fig. 2).
ANALYSIS:
Free Body: Entire Bracket. 	Using Fig. 1, the reaction at C is represented
by its components Cx and Cy.
+⤴ΣMC = 0: 	P(0.6 m) − (50 kN)(0.3 m) − (15 kN)(0.6 m) = 0 	P = 40 kN
ΣFx = 0: 	Cx = 40 kN
ΣFy = 0: 	Cy = 65 kN 	C = √C 2
x + C 2
y = 76.3 kN
a. Control Rod AB. 	Since the factor of safety is 3.3, the allowable
stress is
σall = σU
F.S. = 600 MPa
3.3 = 181.8 MPa
For P = 40 kN, the cross-sectional area required is
Areq = P
σall
= 40 kN
181.8 MPa = 220 × 10−6 m2
Areq = π
4 dAB
2 = 220 × 10−6 m2 	dab = 16.74 mm 	◂
b. Shear in Pin C. 	For a factor of safety of 3.3, we have
τall = τU
F.S. = 350 MPa
3.3 = 106.1 MPa
As shown in Fig. 2 the pin is in double shear. We write
Areq = C∕2
τall
= (76.3 kN)∕2
106.1 MPa = 360 mm2
Areq = π
4 dC
2 = 360 mm2 	dC = 21.4 mm 	Use: dC = 22 mm 	◂
t 	t
A
D
B
d AB
C
0.6 m
0.3 m 	0.3 m
50 kN 	15 kN
P
50 kN 	15 kN	0.6 m
0.3 m 	0.3 m
D
B
C
P
Cx
Cy
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of bracket.
C
C
dC
F2
F1
F1 = F2 = 1
2
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram
of pin at point C.
(continued)
1.5 Design Considerations 	35

-- 50 of 897 --

36 	Introduction—Concept of Stress
c. Bearing at C. 	Using d = 22 mm, the nominal bearing area of each
bracket is 22t. From Fig. 3 the force carried by each bracket is C∕2 and the
allowable bearing stress is 300 MPa. We write
Areq = C∕2
σall
= (76.3 kN)∕2
300 MPa = 127.2 mm2
Thus, 22t = 127.2 	t = 5.78 mm 	Use: t = 6 mm 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	It was appropriate to design the pin C first and
then its bracket, as the pin design was geometrically dependent upon diameter
only, while the bracket design involved both the pin diameter and bracket
thickness.
d = 22 mm
t 	C	
1
2
C	
1
2
Fig. 3 	Bearing loads at bracket support
at point C.
Sample Problem 1.4
The rigid beam BCD is attached by bolts to a control rod at B, to a hydraulic
cylinder at C, and to a fixed support at D. The diameters of the bolts used
are: dB = dD = 3
8 in., dC = 1
2 in. Each bolt acts in double shear and is made
from a steel for which the ultimate shearing stress is τU = 40 ksi. The control
rod AB has a diameter dA = 7
16 in. and is made of a steel for which the ultimate
tensile stress is σU = 60 ksi. If the minimum factor of safety is to be 3.0 for
the entire unit, determine the largest upward force that may be applied by the
hydraulic cylinder at C.
STRATEGY: 	The factor of safety with respect to failure must be 3.0 or more
in each of the three bolts and in the control rod. These four independent
criteria need to be considered separately.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the bar (Fig. 1) and the bolts
at B and C (Figs. 2 and 3). Determine the allowable value of the force C
based on the required design criteria for each part.
ANALYSIS:
Free Body: Beam BCD. 	Using Fig. 1, first determine the force at C in
terms of the force at B and in terms of the force at D.
+⤴ΣMD = 0: 	B(14 in.) − C(8 in.) = 0 	C = 1.750B 	(1)
+⤴ΣMB = 0: 	−D(14 in.) + C(6 in.) = 0 	C = 2.33D 	(2)
Control Rod. 	For a factor of safety of 3.0
σall = σU
F.S. = 60 ksi
3.0 = 20 ksi
The allowable force in the control rod is
B = σall (A) = (20 ksi) 1
4π( 7
16 in.) 2 = 3.01 kips
D	C
B
A
6 in.
8 in.
D
D	B
C
B 	C
6 in. 	8 in.
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam BCD.
(continued)

-- 51 of 897 --

Using Eq. (1), the largest permitted value of C is
C = 1.750B = 1.750(3.01 kips) 	C = 5.27 kips 	◂
Bolt at B. 	τall = τU∕F.S. = (40 ksi)∕3 = 13.33 ksi. Since the bolt is in
double shear (Fig. 2), the allowable magnitude of the force B exerted on the
bolt is
B = 2F1 = 2(τall A) = 2(13.33 ksi)( 1
4 π)( 3
8 in.) 2 = 2.94 kips
From Eq. (1), 	C = 1.750B = 1.750(2.94 kips) 	C = 5.15 kips 	◂
F1
F1
B
3
8 in.
B = 2F1
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram
of pin at point B.
Bolt at D. 	Since this bolt is the same as bolt B, the allowable force is
D = B = 2.94 kips. From Eq. (2)
C = 2.33D = 2.33(2.94 kips) 	C = 6.85 kips 	◂
Bolt at C. 	We again have τall = 13.33 ksi. Using Fig. 3, we write
C = 2F2 = 2(τall A) = 2(13.33 ksi)( 1
4 π)( 1
2 in.) 2 	C = 5.23 kips 	◂
C
F2
F2
1
2 in.
C = 2F2
Fig. 3 	Free-body
diagram of pin at point C.
Summary. 	We have found separately four maximum allowable values of the
force C. To satisfy all these criteria, choose the smallest value. 	C = 5.15 kips 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This example illustrates that all parts must satisfy
the appropriate design criteria, and as a result, some parts have more capacity
than needed.
1.5 Design Considerations 	37

-- 52 of 897 --

38
Problems
1.29 Two wooden members of uniform rectangular cross section are
joined by the simple glued scarf splice shown. Knowing that
P = 11 kN, determine the normal and shearing stresses in the
glued splice.
1.30 Two wooden members of uniform rectangular cross section are
joined by the simple glued scarf splice shown. Knowing that the
maximum allowable shearing stress in the glued splice is 620 kPa,
determine (a) the largest load P that can be safely applied, (b) the
corresponding tensile stress in the splice.
1.31 The 1.4-kip load P is supported by two wooden members of uni-
form cross section that are joined by the simple glued scarf splice
shown. Determine the normal and shearing stresses in the glued
splice.
1.32 Two wooden members of uniform cross section are joined by the
simple scarf splice shown. Knowing that the maximum allowable
tensile stress in the glued splice is 75 psi, determine (a) the largest
load P that can be safely supported, (b) the corresponding shearing
stress in the splice.
1.33 A centric load P is applied to the granite block shown. Knowing that
the resulting maximum value of the shearing stress in the block is
2.5 ksi, determine (a) the magnitude of P, (b) the orientation of the
surface on which the maximum shearing stress occurs, (c) the normal
stress exerted on that surface, (d) the maximum value of the normal
stress in the block.
6 in.
6 in.
P
Fig. P1.33 and P1.34
1.34 A 240-kip load P is applied to the granite block shown. Determine
the resulting maximum value of (a) the normal stress, (b) the shear-
ing stress. Specify the orientation of the plane on which each of these
maximum values occurs.
60°
5.0 in.
3.0 in.
P'
P
Fig. P1.31 and P1.32
75 mm
150 mm
45°
P'
P
Fig. P1.29 and P1.30

-- 53 of 897 --

39
1.35 A steel pipe of 400-mm outer diameter is fabricated from 10-mm-thick
plate by welding along a helix that forms an angle of 20° with a plane
perpendicular to the axis of the pipe. Knowing that a 300-kN axial
force P is applied to the pipe, determine the normal and shearing
stresses in directions respectively normal and tangential to the weld.
1.36 A steel pipe of 400-mm outer diameter is fabricated from 10-mm-thick
plate by welding along a helix that forms an angle of 20° with a plane
perpendicular to the axis of the pipe. Knowing that the maximum allow-
able normal and shearing stresses in the directions respectively normal
and tangential to the weld are σ = 60 MPa and τ = 36 MPa, determine
the magnitude P of the largest axial force that can be applied to the pipe.
1.37 The horizontal link BC is 1
4 in. thick, has a width w = 1.25 in., and
is made of a steel with a 65-ksi ultimate strength in tension. What
is the factor of safety if the structure shown is designed to support
a load of P = 10 kips?
P
A
B C
D
6 in.
12 in.
30°
w
Fig. P1.37
1.38 Member ABC, which is supported by a pin and bracket at C and a
cable BD, was designed to support the 16-kN load P as shown.
Knowing that the ultimate load for cable BD is 100 kN, determine
the factor of safety with respect to cable failure.
A
D
B
C
0.4 m
30°
40°
0.8 m
0.6 m
P
Fig. P1.38 and P1.39
1.39 Knowing that the ultimate load for cable BD is 100 kN and that a
factor of safety of 3.2 with respect to cable failure is required, deter-
mine the magnitude of the largest force P that can be safely applied
as shown to member ABC.
20°
P
Weld
10 mm
Fig. P1.35 and P1.36

-- 54 of 897 --

40
1.40 A 20-mm-diameter rod made of the same material as rods AC and
AD in the truss shown was tested to failure and an ultimate load of
130 kN was recorded. Using a factor of safety of 3.0, determine the
required diameter (a) of rod AC, (b) of rod AD.
1.41 In the truss shown, members AC and AD consist of rods made of the
same metal alloy. Knowing that AC is of 25-mm diameter and that
the ultimate load for that rod is 345 kN, determine (a) the factor of
safety for AC, (b) the required diameter of AD if it is desired that
both rods have the same factor of safety.
1.42 Link AB is to be made of a steel for which the ultimate normal stress
is 65 ksi. Determine the cross-sectional area of AB for which the
factor of safety will be 3.20. Assume that the link will be adequately
reinforced around the pins at A and B.
1.4 ft
35°
B
A
C 	D E
1.4 ft 	1.4 ft
600 lb/ft
5 kips
Fig. P1.42
1.43 Two wooden members are joined by plywood splice plates that
are fully glued on the contact surfaces. Knowing that the clear-
ance between the ends of the members is 6 mm and that the
ultimate shearing stress in the glued joint is 2.5 MPa, determine
the length L for which the factor of safety is 2.75 for the loading
shown.
16 kN
L
125 mm
6 mm
16 kN
Fig. P1.43
1.44 For the joint and loading of Prob. 1.43, determine the factor of safety
when L = 180 mm.
48 kN 	48 kN
3 m 	3 m
1.5 m
A
B 	C
D
Fig. P1.40 and P1.41

-- 55 of 897 --

41
1.45 Two plates, each 1
8 in. thick, are used to splice a plastic strip as
shown. Knowing that the ultimate shearing stress of the bonding
between the surfaces is 130 psi, determine the factor of safety with
respect to shear when P = 325 lb.
P'
P
in.	5
8 	in.	3
4
in.	1
4
in.	2 1
4
Fig. P1.45 and P1.46
1.46 Three steel bolts are to be used to attach the steel plate shown to a
wooden beam. Knowing that the plate will support a load P = 28
kips, that the ultimate shearing stress for the steel used is 52 ksi, and
that a factor of safety of 3.25 is desired, determine the required
diameter of the bolts.
1.47 A load P is supported as shown by a steel pin that has been
inserted in a short wooden member hanging from the ceiling.
The ultimate strength of the wood used is 60 MPa in tension
and 7.5 MPa in shear, while the ultimate strength of the steel is
145 MPa in shear. Knowing that b = 40 mm, c = 55 mm, and
d = 12 mm, determine the load P if an overall factor of safety
of 3.2 is desired.
1
2
40 mm
d
c
b
P
1
2 P
Fig. P1.47
1.48 For the support of Prob. 1.47, knowing that the diameter of the pin
is d = 16 mm and that the magnitude of the load is P = 20 kN,
determine (a) the factor of safety for the pin, (b) the required values
of b and c if the factor of safety for the wooden member is the same
as that found in part a for the pin.

-- 56 of 897 --

42
1.49 A steel plate 1
4 in. thick is embedded in a concrete wall to anchor a
high-strength cable as shown. The diameter of the hole in the plate
is 3
4 in., the ultimate strength of the steel used is 36 ksi and the
ultimate bonding stress between plate and concrete is 300 psi. Know-
ing that a factor of safety of 3.60 is desired when P = 2.5 kips,
determine (a) the required width a of the plate, (b) the minimum
depth b to which a plate of that width should be embedded in the
concrete slab. (Neglect the normal stresses between the concrete and
the end of the plate.)
a
b
P
3
4 in.
1
4 in.
Fig. P1.49
1.50 Determine the factor of safety for the cable anchor in Prob. 1.49
when P = 2.5 kips, knowing that a = 2 in. and b = 6 in.
1.51 Link AC is made of a steel with a 65-ksi ultimate normal stress
and has a 1
4 × 1
2 -in. uniform rectangular cross section. It is con-
nected to a support at A and to member BCD at C by 3
8 -in.-diameter
pins, while member BCD is connected to its support at B by a
5
16 -in.-diameter pin. All of the pins are made of a steel with a 25-ksi
ultimate shearing stress and are in single shear. Knowing that a
factor of safety of 3.25 is desired, determine the largest load P that
can be applied at D. Note that link AC is not reinforced around the
pin holes.
P
6 in.
8 in.
4 in.
1
2 in.
A
B 	C 	D
Fig. P1.51
1.52 Solve Prob. 1.51, assuming that the structure has been redesigned to
use 5
16 -in.-diameter pins at A and C as well as at B and that no other
changes have been made.

-- 57 of 897 --

43
1.53 In the steel structure shown, a 6-mm-diameter pin is used at C and
10-mm-diameter pins are used at B and D. The ultimate shearing
stress is 150 MPa at all connections, and the ultimate normal stress
is 400 MPa in link BD. Knowing that a factor of safety of 3.0 is
desired, determine the largest load P that can be applied at A. Note
that link BD is not reinforced around the pin holes.
18 mm
Top view
Side view
Front view
160 mm 	120 mm
6 mm
A
A
B C
B
D
C
B
D
P
Fig. P1.53
1.54 Solve Prob. 1.53, assuming that the structure has been redesigned to use
12-mm-diameter pins at B and D and no other change has been made.
1.55 In the structure shown, an 8-mm-diameter pin is used at A, and 12-mm-
diameter pins are used at B and D. Knowing that the ultimate shearing
stress is 100 MPa at all connections and that the ultimate normal stress
is 250 MPa in each of the two links joining B and D, determine the
allowable load P if an overall factor of safety of 3.0 is desired.
180 mm	200 mm
Top view
Side view
Front view
8 mm
20 mm 8 mm
8 mm
12 mm
12 mm
B 	C
B
D 	D
A
B 	C	A
P
Fig. P1.55
1.56 In an alternative design for the structure of Prob. 1.55, a pin of
10-mm diameter is to be used at A. Assuming that all other specifi-
cations remain unchanged, determine the allowable load P if an over-
all factor of safety of 3.0 is desired.

-- 58 of 897 --

44
*1.57 A 40-kg platform is attached to the end B of a 50-kg wooden beam
AB, which is supported as shown by a pin at A and by a slender steel
rod BC with a 12-kN ultimate load. (a) Using the Load and Resis-
tance Factor Design method with a resistance factor ϕ = 0.90 and
load factors γD = 1.25 and γL = 1.6, determine the largest load that
can be safely placed on the platform. (b) What is the corresponding
conventional factor of safety for rod BC?
1.8 m
2.4 m
A 	B
C
Fig. P1.57
*1.58 The Load and Resistance Factor Design method is to be used to
select the two cables that will raise and lower a platform support-
ing two window washers. The platform weighs 160 lb and each
of the window washers is assumed to weigh 195 lb with equip-
ment. Since these workers are free to move on the platform, 75%
of their total weight and the weight of their equipment will be
used as the design live load of each cable. (a) Assuming a resis-
tance factor ϕ = 0.85 and load factors γD = 1.2 and γL = 1.5,
determine the required minimum ultimate load of one cable. (b) What
is the corresponding conventional factor of safety for the selected
cables?
P 	P
Fig. P1.58

-- 59 of 897 --

45
This chapter was devoted to the concept of stress and to an introduction to
the methods used for the analysis and design of machines and load-bearing
structures. Emphasis was placed on the use of a free-body diagram to obtain
equilibrium equations that were solved for unknown reactions. Free-body
diagrams were also used to find the internal forces in the various members
of a structure.
Axial Loading: Normal Stress
The concept of stress was first introduced by considering a two-force member
under an axial loading. The normal stress in that member (Fig. 1.41) was
obtained by
σ = P
A (1.5)
The value of σ obtained from Eq. (1.5) represents the average stress
over the section rather than the stress at a specific point Q of the section.
Considering a small area ΔA surrounding Q and the magnitude ΔF of the
force exerted on ΔA, the stress at point Q is
σ = lim
ΔA→0
ΔF
ΔA (1.6)
In general, the stress σ at point Q in Eq. (1.6) is different from the value
of the average stress given by Eq. (1.5) and is found to vary across the section.
However, this variation is small in any section away from the points of appli-
cation of the loads. Therefore, the distribution of the normal stresses in an
axially loaded member is assumed to be uniform, except in the immediate
vicinity of the points of application of the loads.
For the distribution of stresses to be uniform in a given section, the line
of action of the loads P and P′ must pass through the centroid C. Such a
loading is called a centric axial loading. In the case of an eccentric axial
loading, the distribution of stresses is not uniform.
Transverse Forces and Shearing Stress
When equal and opposite transverse forces P and P′ of magnitude P are
applied to a member AB (Fig. 1.42), shearing stresses τ are created over any
section located between the points of application of the two forces. These
Review and Summary
A
P'
P
Fig. 1.41 	Axially loaded
member with cross section
normal to member used to
define normal stress.
A 	C 	B
P
P′
Fig. 1.42 	Model of transverse resultant forces on
either side of C resulting in shearing stress at section C.

-- 60 of 897 --

46
stresses vary greatly across the section and their distribution cannot be
assumed to be uniform. However, dividing the magnitude P—referred to as
the shear in the section—by the cross-sectional area A, the average shearing
stress is
τave = P
A (1.8)
Single and Double Shear
Shearing stresses are found in bolts, pins, or rivets connecting two structural
members or machine components. For example, the shearing stress of bolt CD
(Fig. 1.43), which is in single shear, is written as
τave = P
A = F
A (1.9)
C
D
A F
E'	B
E
F'
Fig. 1.43 	Diagram of a single-shear joint.
The shearing stresses on bolts EG and HJ (Fig. 1.44), which are both in
double shear, are written as
τave = P
A = F∕2
A = F
2A (1.10)
Bearing Stress
Bolts, pins, and rivets also create stresses in the members they connect
along the bearing surface or surface of contact. Bolt CD of Fig. 1.43
creates stresses on the semicylindrical surface of plate A with which it is
in contact (Fig. 1.45). Since the distribution of these stresses is quite com-
plicated, one uses an average nominal value σb of the stress, called bearing
stress.
σ b = P
A = P
td (1.11)
A
C
D
d
t
F
P
F'
Fig. 1.45 	Bearing stress from force P and the
single-shear bolt associated with it.
K
A	B
L
E 	H
G 	J
C
D
K'
L'
F	F'
Fig. 1.44 	Free-body diagram of a double-
shear joint.

-- 61 of 897 --

47
Method of Solution
Your solution should begin with a clear and precise statement of the problem.
Then draw one or several free-body diagrams that will be used to write equi-
librium equations. These equations will be solved for unknown forces, from
which the required stresses and deformations can be computed. Once the
answer has been obtained, it should be carefully checked.
These guidelines are embodied by the SMART problem-solving meth-
odology, where the steps of Strategy, Modeling, Analysis, Reflect and Think
are used. You are encouraged to apply this SMART methodology in the solu-
tion of all problems assigned from this text.
Stresses on an Oblique Section
When stresses are created on an oblique section in a two-force member under
axial loading, both normal and shearing stresses occur. Denoting by θ the
angle formed by the section with a normal plane (Fig. 1.46) and by A0 the
area of a section perpendicular to the axis of the member, the normal stress
σ and the shearing stress τ on the oblique section are
σ = P
A0
cos 2 θ 	τ = P
A0
sin θ cos θ 	(1.14)
We observed from these formulas that the normal stress is maximum and
equal to σm = P/A0 for θ = 0, while the shearing stress is maximum and
equal to τm = P/2A0 for θ = 45°. We also noted that τ = 0 when θ = 0,
while σ = P/2A0 when θ = 45°.
Stress Under General Loading
Considering a small cube centered at Q (Fig. 1.47), σx is the normal stress
exerted on a face of the cube perpendicular to the x axis, and τxy and τxz are
the y and z components of the shearing stress exerted on the same face of the
cube. Repeating this procedure for the other two faces of the cube and observ-
ing that τxy = τyx, τyz = τzy, and τzx = τxz, it was determined that six stress
components are required to define the state of stress at a given point Q, being
σx, σy, σz, τxy, τyz, and τzx.
Factor of Safety
The ultimate load of a given structural member or machine component is
the load at which the member or component is expected to fail. This is
computed from the ultimate stress or ultimate strength of the material used.
The ultimate load should be considerably larger than the allowable load (i.e.,
the load that the member or component will be allowed to carry under
normal conditions). The ratio of the ultimate load to the allowable load is
the factor of safety:
Factor of safety = F.S. = ultimate load
allowable load (1.25)
Load and Resistance Factor Design
Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) allows the engineer to distinguish
between the uncertainties associated with the structure and those associated
with the load.
P' 	P
θ
Fig. 1.46 	Axially loaded member with
oblique section plane.
Fig. 1.47 	Positive stress components
at point Q.
yz yx
xy
xz	zx
zy
y
z
x
a
Q	a
a
z
y
x
τ τ
τ	τ
τ
τ
σ
σ
σ

-- 62 of 897 --

48
1.59 In the marine crane shown, link CD is known to have a uniform
cross section of 50 × 150 mm. For the loading shown, determine the
normal stress in the central portion of that link.
A
D
C
B
3 m	25 m	15 m
35 m
80 Mg
15 m
Fig. P1.59
1.60 Two horizontal 5-kip forces are applied to pin B of the assembly
shown. Knowing that a pin of 0.8-in. diameter is used at each con-
nection, determine the maximum value of the average normal stress
(a) in link AB, (b) in link BC.
B
A
C
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
1.8 in.
1.8 in.
45°
60°
5 kips
5 kips
Fig. P1.60
1.61 For the assembly and loading of Prob. 1.60, determine (a) the aver-
age shearing stress in the pin at C, (b) the average bearing stress at
C in member BC, (c) the average bearing stress at B in member BC.
Review Problems

-- 63 of 897 --

49
1.62 Two brass rods AB and BC, each of uniform diameter, will be brazed
together at B to form a nonuniform rod of total length 100 m that
will be suspended from a support at A as shown. Knowing that the
density of brass is 8470 kg/m3, determine (a) the length of rod AB
for which the maximum normal stress in ABC is minimum, (b) the
corresponding value of the maximum normal stress.
1.63 A couple M of magnitude 1500 N · m is applied to the crank of an
engine. For the position shown, determine (a) the force P required
to hold the engine system in equilibrium, (b) the average normal
stress in the connecting rod BC, which has a 450-mm2 uniform cross
section.
200 mm
80 mm	
M
60 mm
B
A
C
P
Fig. P1.63
1.64 The 2000-lb load may be moved along the beam BD to any position
between stops at E and F. Knowing that σall = 6 ksi for the steel
used in rods AB and CD, determine where the stops should be placed
if the permitted motion of the load is to be as large as possible.
diameter	diameter
x
B
E 	F
D
C	A
x E
xF
60 in.
-in.	5
8
	-in.	1
2
2000 lb
Fig. P1.64
100 m
15 mm
10 mm
b
a
B
C
A
Fig. P1.62

-- 64 of 897 --

50
1.65 A steel loop ABCD of length 5 ft and of 3
8 -in. diameter is placed as
shown around a 1-in.-diameter aluminum rod AC. Cables BE and
DF, each of 1
2 -in. diameter, are used to apply the load Q. Knowing
that the ultimate strength of the steel used for the loop and the cables
is 70 ksi, and that the ultimate strength of the aluminum used for
the rod is 38 ksi, determine the largest load Q that can be applied
if an overall factor of safety of 3 is desired.
12 in.
9 in. 	1 in.
C
D
Q
A
9 in.
12 in.
F
Q'
B
E
in.	1
2
in.	3
8
Fig. P1.65
1.66 Three forces, each of magnitude P = 4 kN, are applied to the mecha-
nism shown. Determine the cross-sectional area of the uniform portion
of rod BE for which the normal stress in that portion is +100 MPa.
0.100 m
0.150 m 	0.300 m 	0.250 m
P 	P 	P
E
A 	B 	C
D
Fig. P1.66
1.67 Link BC is 6 mm thick and is made of a steel with a 450-MPa ultimate
strength in tension. What should be its width w if the structure shown is
being designed to support a 20-kN load P with a factor of safety of 3?
A 	B
C
D
480 mm
600 mm
90°
w
P
Fig. P1.67

-- 65 of 897 --

51
1.68 A force P is applied as shown to a steel reinforcing bar that has been
embedded in a block of concrete. Determine the smallest length L
for which the full allowable normal stress in the bar can be devel-
oped. Express the result in terms of the diameter d of the bar, the
allowable normal stress σall in the steel, and the average allowable
bond stress τall between the concrete and the cylindrical surface of
the bar. (Neglect the normal stresses between the concrete and the
end of the bar.)
P
L 	d
Fig. P1.68
1.69 The two portions of member AB are glued together along a plane
forming an angle θ with the horizontal. Knowing that the ulti-
mate stress for the glued joint is 2.5 ksi in tension and 1.3 ksi
in shear, determine (a) the value of θ for which the factor of
safety of the member is maximum, (b) the corresponding value
of the factor of safety. (Hint: Equate the expressions obtained for
the factors of safety with respect to the normal and shearing
stresses.)
A
1.25 in.
2.4 kips
2.0 in.
B
θ
Fig. P1.69 and P1.70
1.70 The two portions of member AB are glued together along a plane
forming an angle θ with the horizontal. Knowing that the ultimate
stress for the glued joint is 2.5 ksi in tension and 1.3 ksi in shear,
determine the range of values of θ for which the factor of safety of
the members is at least 3.0.

-- 66 of 897 --

52
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
1.C1 A solid steel rod consisting of n cylindrical elements welded together
is subjected to the loading shown. The diameter of element i is
denoted by di and the load applied to its lower end by Pi, with the
magnitude Pi of this load being assumed positive if Pi is directed
downward as shown and negative otherwise. (a) Write a computer
program that can be used with either SI or U.S. customary units to
determine the average stress in each element of the rod. (b) Use this
program to solve Probs. 1.1 and 1.3.
1.C2 A 20-kN load is applied as shown to the horizontal member ABC.
Member ABC has a 10 × 50-mm uniform rectangular cross section
and is supported by four vertical links, each of 8 × 36-mm uniform
rectangular cross section. Each of the four pins at A, B, C, and D
has the same diameter d and is in double shear. (a) Write a com-
puter program to calculate for values of d from 10 to 30 mm, using
1-mm increments, (i) the maximum value of the average normal
stress in the links connecting pins B and D, (ii) the average normal
stress in the links connecting pins C and E, (iii) the average shear-
ing stress in pin B, (iv) the average shearing stress in pin C, (v) the
average bearing stress at B in member ABC, and (vi) the average
bearing stress at C in member ABC. (b) Check your program by
comparing the values obtained for d = 16 mm with the answers
given for Probs. 1.7 and 1.27. (c) Use this program to find the
permissible values of the diameter d of the pins, knowing that the
allowable values of the normal, shearing, and bearing stresses for
the steel used are, respectively, 150 MPa, 90 MPa, and 230 MPa.
(d) Solve part c, assuming that the thickness of member ABC has
been reduced from 10 to 8 mm.
0.2 m
0.25 m
0.4 m
20 kN
C
B
A
D
E
Fig. P1.C2
Computer Problems
Element n
Element 1
Pn
P1
Fig. P1.C1

-- 67 of 897 --

53
1.C3 Two horizontal 5-kip forces are applied to pin B of the assembly
shown. Each of the three pins at A, B, and C has the same diam-
eter d and is in double shear. (a) Write a computer program to
calculate for values of d from 0.50 to 1.50 in., using 0.05-in. incre-
ments, (i) the maximum value of the average normal stress in mem-
ber AB, (ii) the average normal stress in member BC, (iii) the
average shearing stress in pin A, (iv) the average shearing stress in
pin C, (v) the average bearing stress at A in member AB, (vi) the
average bearing stress at C in member BC, and (vii) the average
bearing stress at B in member BC. (b) Check your program by
comparing the values obtained for d = 0.8 in. with the answers
given for Probs. 1.60 and 1.61. (c) Use this program to find the
permissible values of the diameter d of the pins, knowing that the
allowable values of the normal, shearing, and bearing stresses for
the steel used are, respectively, 22 ksi, 13 ksi, and 36 ksi. (d) Solve
part c, assuming that a new design is being investigated in which
the thickness and width of the two members are changed, respec-
tively, from 0.5 to 0.3 in. and from 1.8 to 2.4 in.
B
A
C
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
1.8 in.
1.8 in.
45°
60°
5 kips
5 kips
Fig. P1.C3
1.C4 A 4-kip force P forming an angle α with the vertical is applied as
shown to member ABC, which is supported by a pin and bracket
at C and by a cable BD forming an angle β with the horizontal.
(a) Knowing that the ultimate load of the cable is 25 kips, write a
computer program to construct a table of the values of the factor
of safety of the cable for values of α and β from 0 to 45°, using
increments in α and β corresponding to 0.1 increments in tan α and
tan β. (b) Check that for any given value of α, the maximum value
of the factor of safety is obtained for β = 38.66° and explain why.
(c) Determine the smallest possible value of the factor of safety for
β = 38.66°, as well as the corresponding value of α, and explain
the result obtained.
A
D
B
C
12 in.	18 in.
15 in.
P	α
β
Fig. P1.C4

-- 68 of 897 --

54
1.C5 A load P is supported as shown by two wooden members of uniform
rectangular cross section that are joined by a simple glued scarf
splice. (a) Denoting by σU and τU, respectively, the ultimate strength
of the joint in tension and in shear, write a computer program which,
for given values of a, b, P, σU, and τU, expressed in either SI or U.S.
customary units, and for values of α from 5 to 85° at 5° intervals,
can calculate (i) the normal stress in the joint, (ii) the shearing stress
in the joint, (iii) the factor of safety relative to failure in tension,
(iv) the factor of safety relative to failure in shear, and (v) the over-
all factor of safety for the glued joint. (b) Apply this program, using
the dimensions and loading of the members of Probs. 1.29 and 1.31,
knowing that σU = 150 psi and τU = 214 psi for the glue used in
Prob. 1.29 and that σU = 1.26 MPa and τU = 1.50 MPa for the glue
used in Prob. 1.31. (c) Verify in each of these two cases that the
shearing stress is maximum for α = 45°.
1.C6 Member ABC is supported by a pin and bracket at A, and by two
links that are pin-connected to the member at B and to a fixed sup-
port at D. (a) Write a computer program to calculate the allowable
load Pall for any given values of (i) the diameter d1 of the pin at A,
(ii) the common diameter d2 of the pins at B and D, (iii) the ultimate
normal stress σU in each of the two links, (iv) the ultimate shearing
stress τU in each of the three pins, and (v) the desired overall factor
of safety F.S. (b) Your program should also indicate which of the
following three stresses is critical: the normal stress in the links, the
shearing stress in the pin at A, or the shearing stress in the pins at
B and D. (c) Check your program by using the data of Probs. 1.55
and 1.56, respectively, and comparing the answers obtained for Pall
with those given in the text. (d) Use your program to determine the
allowable load Pall, as well as which of the stresses is critical, when
d1 = d2 = 15 mm, σU = 110 MPa for aluminum links, τU = 100 MPa
for steel pins, and F.S. = 3.2.
180 mm	200 mm
Top view
Side view
Front view
8 mm
20 mm 8 mm
8 mm
12 mm
12 mm
B 	C
B
D 	D
A
B 	C	A
P
Fig. P1.C6
P a
b
P'
α
Fig. P1.C5

-- 69 of 897 --



-- 70 of 897 --



-- 71 of 897 --

Stress and Strain—
Axial Loading
2
This chapter considers deformations occurring in structural
components subjected to axial loading. The change in length of the
diagonal stays was carefully accounted for in the design of this
cable-stayed bridge.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Introduce students to the concept of strain.
• Discuss the relationship between stress and strain in different
materials.
• Determine the deformation of structural components under axial
loading.
• Introduce Hooke’s law and the modulus of elasticity.
• Discuss the concept of lateral strain and Poisson’s ratio.
• Use axial deformations to solve indeterminate problems.
• Define Saint-Venant’s principle and the distribution of stresses.
• Review stress concentrations and how they are included in
design.
• Define the difference between elastic and plastic behavior
through a discussion of conditions such as elastic limit, plastic
deformation, and residual stresses.
• Look at specific topics related to fiber-reinforced composite
materials, fatigue, and multiaxial loading.
©Sylvain Grandadam/age fotostock

-- 72 of 897 --

58 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Introduction
2.1 	AN INTRODUCTION TO
STRESS AND STRAIN
2.1A Normal Strain Under Axial
Loading
2.1B Stress-Strain Diagram
*2.1C True Stress and True Strain
2.1D Hooke’s Law; Modulus of
Elasticity
2.1E Elastic Versus Plastic
Behavior of a Material
2.1F Repeated Loadings and
Fatigue
2.1G Deformations of Members
Under Axial Loading
2.2 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE
PROBLEMS
2.3 	PROBLEMS INVOLVING
TEMPERATURE
CHANGES
2.4 	POISSON’S RATIO
2.5 	MULTIAXIAL LOADING:
GENERALIZED
HOOKE’S LAW
*2.6 	DILATATION AND BULK
MODULUS
2.7 	SHEARING STRAIN
2.8 	DEFORMATIONS
UNDER AXIAL
LOADING—RELATION
BETWEEN E, ν, AND G
*2.9 	STRESS-STRAIN
RELATIONSHIPS FOR
FIBER-REINFORCED
COMPOSITE
MATERIALS
2.10 STRESS AND STRAIN
DISTRIBUTION UNDER
AXIAL LOADING:
SAINT-VENANT’S
PRINCIPLE
2.11 STRESS
CONCENTRATIONS
2.12 PLASTIC
DEFORMATIONS
*2.13 RESIDUAL STRESSES
Introduction
An important aspect of the analysis and design of structures relates to the defor-
mations caused by the loads applied to a structure. It is important to avoid
deformations so large that they may prevent the structure from fulfilling the
purpose for which it was intended. But the analysis of deformations also helps
us to determine stresses. Indeed, it is not always possible to determine the forces
in the members of a structure by applying only the principles of statics. This is
because statics is based on the assumption of undeformable, rigid structures. By
considering engineering structures as deformable and analyzing the deforma-
tions in their various members, it will be possible for us to compute forces that
are statically indeterminate. The distribution of stresses in a given member is
statically indeterminate, even when the force in that member is known.
In this chapter, you will consider the deformations of a structural mem-
ber such as a rod, bar, or plate under axial loading. First, the normal strain
ε in a member is defined as the deformation of the member per unit length.
Plotting the stress σ versus the strain ε as the load applied to the member is
increased produces a stress-strain diagram for the material used. From this
diagram, some important properties of the material, such as its modulus of
elasticity and whether the material is ductile or brittle, can be determined.
While the behavior of most materials is independent of the direction of the
load application, you will see that the response of fiber-reinforced composite
materials depends upon the direction of the load.
From the stress-strain diagram, you also can determine whether the
strains in the specimen will disappear after the load has been removed—when
the material is said to behave elastically—or whether a permanent set or
plastic deformation will result.
You will examine the phenomenon of fatigue, which causes structural
or machine components to fail after a very large number of repeated loadings,
even though the stresses remain in the elastic range.
Sections 2.2 and 2.3 discuss statically indeterminate problems in which
the reactions and the internal forces cannot be determined from statics alone.
Here the equilibrium equations derived from the free-body diagram of the
member must be complemented by relationships involving deformations that
are obtained from the geometry of the problem.
Additional constants associated with isotropic materials—i.e., materials
with mechanical characteristics independent of direction—are introduced in
Secs. 2.4 through 2.8. They include Poisson’s ratio, relating lateral and axial
strain; the bulk modulus, characterizing the change in volume of a material
under hydrostatic pressure; and the modulus of rigidity, concerning the com-
ponents of the shearing stress and shearing strain. Stress-strain relationships
for an isotropic material under a multiaxial loading also are determined.
Stress-strain relationships involving modulus of elasticity, Poisson’s
ratio, and the modulus of rigidity are developed for fiber-reinforced compos-
ite materials under a multiaxial loading. While these materials are not iso-
tropic, they usually display special orthotropic properties.
In Chap. 1, stresses were assumed uniformly distributed in any given
cross section; they were also assumed to remain within the elastic range. The
first assumption is discussed in Sec. 2.10, while stress concentrations near
circular holes and fillets in flat bars are considered in Sec. 2.11. Sections 2.12
and 2.13 discuss stresses and deformations in members made of a ductile
material when the yield point of the material is exceeded, resulting in perma-
nent plastic deformations and residual stresses.

-- 73 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	59
2.1 	AN INTRODUCTION TO
STRESS AND STRAIN
2.1A 	Normal Strain Under Axial Loading
Consider a rod BC of length L and uniform cross-sectional area A, which is
suspended from B (Fig. 2.1a). If you apply a load P to end C, the rod elon-
gates (Fig. 2.1b). Plotting the magnitude P of the load against the deforma-
tion δ (Greek letter delta), you obtain a load-deformation diagram (Fig. 2.2).
While this diagram contains information useful to the analysis of the rod
under consideration, it cannot be used to predict the deformation of a rod
of the same material but with different dimensions. Indeed, if a deformation
δ is produced in rod BC by a load P, a load 2P is required to cause the
same deformation in rod B′C′ of the same length L but cross-sectional area
2A (Fig. 2.3). Note that in both cases the value of the stress is the same:
σ = P∕A. On the other hand, when load P is applied to a rod B″C″ of the
same cross-sectional area A but of length 2L, a deformation 2δ occurs in
that rod (Fig. 2.4). This is a deformation twice as large as the deformation
δ produced in rod BC. In both cases, the ratio of the deformation over the
length of the rod is the same at δ∕L. This introduces the concept of strain.
We define the normal strain in a rod under axial loading as the deformation
per unit length of that rod, or the change in length of the rod divided by its
original length. The normal strain, ε (Greek letter epsilon), is
ε = δ
L (2.1)
Plotting the stress σ = P∕A against the strain ε = δ∕L results in a
curve that is characteristic of the properties of the material but does not
depend upon the dimensions of the specimen used. This curve is called a
stress-strain diagram.
B 	B
C
C
L
A
P
δ
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 2.1 	Undeformed and deformed
axially loaded rod.
P
δ
Fig. 2.2 	Load-deformation diagram.
2P
B'	B'
C'
C'
L
2A
δ
Fig. 2.3 	Twice the load is
required to obtain the same
deformation δ when the cross-
sectional area is doubled.
P
B" 	B"
C"
C"
2L
A
2δ
Fig. 2.4 	The deformation is doubled when
the rod length is doubled while keeping the
load P and cross-sectional area A the same.

-- 74 of 897 --

60 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Since rod BC in Fig. 2.1 has a uniform cross section of area A, the
normal stress σ is assumed to have a constant value P∕A throughout the rod.
The strain ε is the ratio of the total deformation δ over the total length L of
the rod. It too is consistent throughout the rod. However, for a member of
variable cross-sectional area A, the normal stress σ = P∕A varies along the
member, and it is necessary to define the strain at a given point Q by consid-
ering a small element of undeformed length Δx (Fig. 2.5). Denoting the defor-
mation of the element under the given loading by Δδ, the normal strain at
point Q is defined as
ε = lim
Δx→0
Δδ
Δx = dδ
dx (2.2)
Δ	x+ 	x +
Q
Q
Δ
δ
x	x
Δδ
P
Fig. 2.5 	Deformation of axially loaded
member of variable cross-sectional area.
Since deformation and length are expressed in the same units, the nor-
mal strain ε obtained by dividing δ by L (or dδ by dx) is a dimensionless
quantity. Thus the same value is obtained for the normal strain, whether SI
metric units or U.S. customary units are used. For instance, consider a bar of
length L = 0.600 m and uniform cross section that undergoes a deformation
δ = 150 × 10−6 m. The corresponding strain is
ε = δ
L = 150 × 10−6 m
0.600 m = 250 × 10−6 m/m = 250 × 10−6
Note that the deformation also can be expressed in micrometers: δ = 150 μm
and the answer written in micros (μ):
ε = δ
L = 150 μm
0.600 m = 250 μm/m = 250 μ
When U.S. customary units are used, the length and deformation of the same
bar are L = 23.6 in. and δ = 5.91 × 10−3 in. The corresponding strain is
ε = δ
L = 5.91 × 10−3 in.
23.6 in. = 250 × 10−6 in./in.
which is the same value found using SI units. However, when lengths and
deformations are expressed in inches or microinches (μin.), keep the original
units obtained for the strain. Thus, in the previous example, the strain would
be recorded as either ε = 250 × 10−6 in./in. or ε = 250 μin./in.

-- 75 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	61
2.1B 	Stress-Strain Diagram
Tensile Test. 	To obtain the stress-strain diagram of a material, a tensile
test is conducted on a specimen of the material. One type of specimen is
shown in Photo 2.1. The cross-sectional area of the cylindrical central portion
of the specimen is accurately determined and two gage marks are inscribed
on that portion at a distance L0 from each other. The distance L0 is known as
the gage length of the specimen.
The test specimen is then placed in a testing machine (Photo 2.2), which
is used to apply a centric load P. As load P increases, the distance L between
the two gage marks also increases (Photo 2.3). The distance L is measured
with a dial gage, and the elongation δ = L − L0 is recorded for each value of P.
A second dial gage is often used simultaneously to measure and record the
change in diameter of the specimen. From each pair of readings P and δ, the
engineering stress σ is
σ = P
A0
(2.3)
and the engineering strain ε is
ε = δ
L0
(2.4)
The stress-strain diagram can be obtained by plotting ε as an abscissa and σ
as an ordinate.
Photo 2.1 	Typical tensile-test specimen.
Undeformed gage length is L0.
Courtesy of John DeWolf
P
P'
Photo 2.2 	Universal test machine used to test tensile specimens. Courtesy of Tinius
Olsen Testing Machine Co., Inc.
Photo 2.3 	Elongated tensile test specimen
having load P and deformed length L > L0.
Courtesy of John DeWolf

-- 76 of 897 --

62 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Stress-strain diagrams of materials vary widely, and different tensile
tests conducted on the same material may yield different results, depending
upon the temperature of the specimen and the speed of loading. However,
some common characteristics can be distinguished from stress-strain diagrams
to divide materials into two broad categories: ductile and brittle materials.
Ductile materials, including structural steel and many alloys of other
materials, are characterized by their ability to yield at normal temperatures.
As the specimen is subjected to an increasing load, its length first increases
linearly with the load and at a very slow rate. Thus the initial portion of the
stress-strain diagram is a straight line with a steep slope (Fig. 2.6). However,
after a critical value σY of the stress has been reached, the specimen under-
goes a large deformation with a relatively small increase in the applied load.
This deformation is caused by slippage along oblique surfaces and is due
primarily to shearing stresses. After a maximum value of the load has been
reached, the diameter of a portion of the specimen begins to decrease, due
to local instability (Photo 2.4a). This phenomenon is known as necking. After
necking has begun, lower loads are sufficient for the specimen to elongate
further, until it finally ruptures (Photo 2.4b). Note that rupture occurs along
a cone-shaped surface that forms an angle of approximately 45° with the
original surface of the specimen. This indicates that shear is primarily
responsible for the failure of ductile materials, confirming the fact that shear-
ing stresses under an axial load are largest on surfaces forming an angle of
45° with the load (see Sec. 1.3). Note from Fig. 2.6 that the elongation of a
ductile specimen after it has ruptured can be 200 times as large as its defor-
mation at yield. The stress σY at which yield is initiated is called the yield
strength of the material. The stress σU corresponding to the maximum load
applied is known as the ultimate strength. The stress σB corresponding to
rupture is called the breaking strength.
Brittle materials, comprising of cast iron, glass, and stone rupture with-
out any noticeable prior change in the rate of elongation (Fig. 2.7). Thus for
brittle materials, there is no difference between the ultimate strength and the
breaking strength. Also, the strain at the time of rupture is much smaller for
brittle than for ductile materials. Note the absence of any necking of the
specimen in the brittle material of Photo 2.5 and observe that rupture occurs
0.02
(a) Low-carbon steel
0.0012
0.2 	0.25
Yield 	Strain-hardening 	Necking
60
40
20
Y
(ksi)
U 	Rupture
B
Rupture
(b) Aluminum alloy
0.004
0.2
60
40
20
Y	
(ksi)
U
B
σ
σ
σ 	σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
ε 	ε
Fig. 2.6 	Stress-strain diagrams of two typical ductile materials.
Photo 2.4 	Ductile material tested specimens:
(a) with cross-section necking, (b) ruptured.
Courtesy of John DeWolf
Tensile Test

-- 77 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	63
along a surface perpendicular to the load. Thus normal stresses are primarily
responsible for the failure of brittle materials.†
The stress-strain diagrams of Fig. 2.6 show that while structural steel
and aluminum are both ductile, they have different yield characteristics. For
structural steel (Fig. 2.6a), the stress remains constant over a large range of
the strain after the onset of yield. Later, the stress must be increased to keep
elongating the specimen until the maximum value σU has been reached. This
is due to a property of the material known as strain-hardening. The yield
strength of structural steel is determined during the tensile test by watching
the load shown on the display of the testing machine. After increasing stead-
ily, the load will suddenly drop to a slightly lower value, which is maintained
for a certain period as the specimen keeps elongating. In a very carefully
conducted test, one may be able to distinguish between the upper yield point,
which corresponds to the load reached just before yield starts, and the lower
yield point, which corresponds to the load required to maintain yield. Since
the upper yield point is transient, the lower yield point is used to determine
the yield strength of the material.
For aluminum (Fig. 2.6b) and many other ductile materials, the stress
keeps increasing—although not linearly—until the ultimate strength is
reached. Necking then begins and eventually ruptures. For such materials,
the yield strength σY can be determined using the offset method. For exam-
ple the yield strength at 0.2% offset is obtained by drawing through the
point of the horizontal axis of abscissa ε = 0.2% (or ε = 0.002), which is
a line parallel to the initial straight-line portion of the stress-strain diagram
(Fig. 2.8). The stress σY corresponding to the point Y is defined as the yield
strength at 0.2% offset.
A standard measure of the ductility of a material is its percent
elongation:
Percent elongation = 100 LB − L0
L0
where L0 and LB are the initial length of the tensile test specimen and its
final length at rupture, respectively. The specified minimum elongation for
†The tensile tests described in this section were assumed to be conducted at normal temper-
atures. However, a material that is ductile at normal temperatures may display the charac-
teristics of a brittle material at very low temperatures, while a normally brittle material may
behave in a ductile fashion at very high temperatures. At temperatures other than normal,
therefore, one should refer to a material in a ductile state or to a material in a brittle state,
rather than to a ductile or brittle material.
Rupture
B	U =
σ
σ	σ
ε
Fig. 2.7 	Stress-strain diagram for a typical
brittle material.
Photo 2.5 	Ruptured brittle material specimen.
Courtesy of John DeWolf
Fig. 2.8 	Determination of yield
strength by 0.2% offset method.
Rupture
0.2% offset
Y
Y
σ
σ
ε

-- 78 of 897 --

64 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
a 2-in. gage length for commonly used steels with yield strengths up to
50 ksi is 21%. This means that the average strain at rupture should be at
least 0.21 in./in.
Another measure of ductility that is sometimes used is the percent
reduction in area:
Percent reduction in area = 100 A0 − AB
A0
where A0 and AB are the initial cross-sectional area of the specimen and its
minimum cross-sectional area at rupture, respectively. For structural steel,
percent reductions in area of 60% to 70% are common.
Compression Test. 	If a specimen made of a ductile material is loaded in
compression instead of tension, the stress-strain curve is essentially the same
through its initial straight-line portion and through the beginning of the por-
tion corresponding to yield and strain-hardening. Particularly noteworthy is
the fact that for a given steel, the yield strength is the same in both tension
and compression. For larger values of the strain, the tension and compression
stress-strain curves diverge, and necking does not occur in compression. For
most brittle materials, the ultimate strength in compression is much larger than
in tension. This is due to the presence of flaws, such as microscopic cracks
or cavities that tend to weaken the material in tension, while not appreciably
affecting its resistance to compressive failure.
An example of brittle material with different properties in tension and
compression is provided by concrete, whose stress-strain diagram is shown in
Fig. 2.9. On the tension side of the diagram, we first observe a linear elastic
range in which the strain is proportional to the stress. After the yield point
has been reached, the strain increases faster than the stress until rupture
occurs. The behavior of the material in compression is different. First, the
linear elastic range is significantly larger. Second, rupture does not occur as
the stress reaches its maximum value. Instead, the stress decreases in magni-
tude while the strain keeps increasing until rupture occurs. Note that the mod-
ulus of elasticity, which is represented by the slope of the stress-strain curve
in its linear portion, is the same in tension and compression. This is true of
most brittle materials.
Linear elastic range
Rupture, compression
Rupture, tension	U, tension
U, compression
σ
σ
σ
ε
Fig. 2.9 	Stress-strain diagram for concrete shows difference in
tensile and compression response.

-- 79 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	65
*2.1C 	True Stress and True Strain
Recall that the stress plotted in Figs. 2.6 and 2.7 was obtained by dividing
the load P by the cross-sectional area A0 of the specimen measured before
any deformation had taken place. Since the cross-sectional area of the speci-
men decreases as P increases, the stress plotted in these diagrams does not
represent the actual stress in the specimen, as the true stress would be the
load P divided by the actual cross-sectional area measured after P is applied.
The difference between the engineering stress σ = P∕A0 and the true stress
σt = P∕A becomes apparent in ductile materials after yield has started. While
the engineering stress σ, which is directly proportional to the load P, decreases
with P during the necking phase, the true stress σt, which is proportional to
P but also inversely proportional to A, keeps increasing until rupture of the
specimen occurs.
For engineering strain ε = δ∕L0, instead of using the total elongation δ
and the original value L0 of the gage length, many scientists use all of the
values of L that they have recorded. Dividing each increment ΔL of the dis-
tance between the gage marks by the corresponding value of L, the elementary
strain Δε = ΔL∕L. Adding the successive values of Δε, the true strain εt is
ε t = ΣΔε = Σ(ΔL∕L)
With the summation replaced by an integral, the true strain can be
expressed as:
ε t = ∫L
L0
dL
L = ln L
L0
(2.5)
Plotting true stress versus true strain (Fig. 2.10) more accurately reflects
the behavior of the material. As already noted, there is no decrease in true stress
during the necking phase. Also, the results obtained from either tensile or com-
pressive tests yield essentially the same plot when true stress and true strain are
used. This is not the case for large values of the strain when the engineering
stress is plotted versus the engineering strain. However, to determine whether a
load P will produce an acceptable stress and an acceptable deformation in a
given member, engineers will use a diagram based on Eqs. (2.3) and (2.4) since
these involve the cross-sectional area A0 and the length L0 of the member in its
undeformed state, which are easily available.
2.1D 	Hooke’s Law; Modulus of Elasticity
Modulus of Elasticity. 	Most engineering structures are designed to
undergo relatively small deformations, involving only the straight-line portion
of the corresponding stress-strain diagram. For that initial portion of the
diagram (e.g., ε = 0 to 0.0012 for the material shown in Fig. 2.6), the stress
σ is directly proportional to the strain ε:
σ = Eε 	(2.6)
This is known as Hooke’s law, after Robert Hooke (1635–1703), an English
scientist and one of the early founders of applied mechanics. The coefficient
E of the material is the modulus of elasticity or Young’s modulus, after the
English scientist Thomas Young (1773–1829). Since the strain ε is a dimen-
sionless quantity, E is expressed in the same units as stress σ—in pascals or
one of its multiples for SI units and in psi or ksi for U.S. customary units.
Yield
Rupture	
σt
εt
Fig. 2.10 	True stress versus true strain for a
typical ductile material.

-- 80 of 897 --

66 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
The largest value of stress for which Hooke’s law can be used for a
given material is the proportional limit of that material. For ductile materials
possessing a well-defined yield point, as in Fig. 2.6a, the proportional limit
almost coincides with the yield point. For other materials, the proportional
limit cannot be determined as easily, since it is difficult to accurately deter-
mine the stress σ for which the relation between σ and ε ceases to be linear.
For such materials, however, using Hooke’s law for values of the stress slightly
larger than the actual proportional limit will not result in any significant error.
Some physical properties of structural metals, such as strength, ductility,
and corrosion resistance, can be greatly affected by alloying, heat treatment,
and the manufacturing process used. For example, the stress-strain diagrams
of pure iron and three different grades of steel (Fig. 2.11) show that large
variations in the yield strength, ultimate strength, and final strain (ductility)
exist. All of these metals possess the same modulus of elasticity—their “stiff-
ness,” or ability to resist a deformation within the linear range is the same.
Therefore, if a high-strength steel is substituted for a lower-strength steel and
if all dimensions are kept the same, the structure will have an increased
load-carrying capacity but its stiffness will remain unchanged.
For the materials considered so far, the relationship between normal
stress and normal strain, σ = Eε, is independent of the direction of loading.
This is because the mechanical properties of each material, including its mod-
ulus of elasticity E, are independent of the direction considered. Such mate-
rials are said to be isotropic. Materials whose properties depend upon the
direction considered are said to be anisotropic.
Fiber-Reinforced Composite Materials. 	An important class of aniso-
tropic materials consists of fiber-reinforced composite materials. These are
obtained by embedding fibers of a strong, stiff material into a weaker, softer
material, called a matrix. Typical materials used as fibers are graphite, glass,
and polymers, while various types of resins are used as a matrix. Figure 2.12
shows a layer, or lamina, of a composite material consisting of a large number
of parallel fibers embedded in a matrix. An axial load applied to the lamina
along the x axis (in a direction parallel to the fibers) will create a normal stress
σx in the lamina and a corresponding normal strain εx, satisfying Hooke’s law
as the load is increased and as long as the elastic limit of the lamina is not
exceeded. Similarly, an axial load applied along the y axis (in a direction per-
pendicular to the lamina) will create a normal stress σy and a normal strain εy,
and an axial load applied along the z axis will create a normal stress σz and a
normal strain εz; and all satisfy Hooke’s law. However, the moduli of elasticity
Ex, Ey, and Ez corresponding to each of these loadings will be different. Because
the fibers are parallel to the x axis, the lamina will offer a much stronger
resistance to a load directed along the x axis than to one directed along the y
or z axis, and Ex will be much larger than either Ey or Ez.
A flat laminate is obtained by superposing a number of layers or lam-
inas. If the laminate is subjected only to an axial load causing tension, the
fibers in all layers should have the same orientation as the load, to obtain the
greatest possible strength. But if the laminate is in compression, the matrix
material may not be strong enough to prevent the fibers from kinking or
buckling. The lateral stability of the laminate can be increased by positioning
some of the layers so that their fibers are perpendicular to the load. Position-
ing some layers so that their fibers are oriented at 30°, 45°, or 60° to the load
also can be used to increase the resistance of the laminate to in-plane shear.
Fiber-reinforced composite materials will be further discussed in Sec. 2.9,
where their behavior under multiaxial loadings will be considered.
Quenched, tempered
alloy steel (A709)
High-strength, low-alloy
steel (A992)
Carbon steel (A36)
Pure iron
σ
ε
Fig. 2.11 	Stress-strain diagrams for iron and
different grades of steel.
Layer of
material
Fibers
y
z
x
Fig. 2.12 	Layer of fiber-reinforced composite
material.

-- 81 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	67
2.1E 	Elastic Versus Plastic Behavior
of a Material
Material behaves elastically if the strains in a test specimen from a given
load disappear when the load is removed. In other words, the specimen
returns to its original undeformed shape upon removal of all load. The larg-
est value of stress causing this elastic behavior is called the elastic limit of
the material.
If the material has a well-defined yield point as in Fig. 2.6a, the
elastic limit, the proportional limit, and the yield point are essentially
equal. In other words, the material behaves elastically and linearly as long
as the stress is kept below the yield point. However, if the yield point is
reached, yield takes place as described in Sec. 2.1B. When the load is
removed, the stress and strain decrease in a linear fashion along a line CD
parallel to the straight-line portion AB of the loading curve (Fig. 2.13).
The fact that ε does not return to zero after the load has been removed
indicates that a permanent set or plastic deformation of the material has
taken place. For most materials, the plastic deformation depends upon both
the maximum value reached by the stress and the time elapsed before the
load is removed. The stress-dependent part of the plastic deformation is called
slip, and the time-dependent part—also influenced by the temperature—
is creep.
When a material does not possess a well-defined yield point, the
elastic limit cannot be determined with precision. However, assuming
the elastic limit to be equal to the yield strength using the offset method
(Sec. 2.1B) results in only a small error. Referring to Fig. 2.8, note that
the straight line used to determine point Y also represents the unloading
curve after a maximum stress σY has been reached. While the material does
not behave truly elastically, the resulting plastic strain is as small as the
selected offset.
If, after being loaded and unloaded (Fig. 2.14), the test specimen is
loaded again, the new loading curve will follow the earlier unloading curve
until it almost reaches point C. Then it will bend to the right and connect
with the curved portion of the original stress-strain diagram. This straight-
line portion of the new loading curve is longer than the corresponding
portion of the initial one. Thus the proportional limit and the elastic limit
have increased as a result of the strain-hardening that occurred during the
C
A 	D
Rupture
B
σ
ε
Fig. 2.13 	Stress-strain response of
ductile material loaded beyond yield
and unloaded.
C
A 	D
Rupture
B
σ
ε
Fig. 2.14 	Stress-strain response of ductile
material reloaded after prior yielding and
unloading.

-- 82 of 897 --

68 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
earlier loading. However, since the point of rupture R remains unchanged,
the ductility of the specimen, which should now be measured from point D,
has decreased.
In previous discussions the specimen was loaded twice in the same
direction (i.e., both loads were tensile loads). Now consider that the second
load is applied in a direction opposite to that of the first one. Assume the
material is mild steel where the yield strength is the same in tension and in
compression. The initial load is tensile and is applied until point C is reached
on the stress-strain diagram (Fig. 2.15). After unloading (point D), a compres-
sive load is applied, causing the material to reach point H, where the stress
is equal to −σY. Note that portion DH of the stress-strain diagram is curved
and does not show any clearly defined yield point. This is referred to as the
Bauschinger effect. As the compressive load is maintained, the material yields
along line HJ.
If the load is removed after point J has been reached, the stress returns
to zero along line JK, and the slope of JK is equal to the modulus of elastic-
ity E. The resulting permanent set AK may be positive, negative, or zero,
depending upon the lengths of the segments BC and HJ. If a tensile load is
applied again to the test specimen, the portion of the stress-strain diagram
beginning at K (dashed line) will curve up and to the right until the yield
stress σY has been reached.
If the initial loading is large enough to cause strain-hardening of the
material (point C′), unloading takes place along line C′D′. As the reverse load
is applied, the stress becomes compressive, reaching its maximum value at H′
and maintaining it as the material yields along line H′J′. While the maximum
value of the compressive stress is less than σY, the total change in stress
between C′ and H′ is still equal to 2σY.
If point K or K′ coincides with the origin A of the diagram, the per-
manent set is equal to zero, and the specimen may appear to have returned
to its original condition. However, internal changes will have taken place
and the specimen will rupture without warning after relatively few repeti-
tions of the loading sequence. Thus the excessive plastic deformations to
which the specimen was subjected caused a radical change in the character-
istics of the material. Therefore reverse loadings into the plastic range are
seldom allowed, being permitted only under carefully controlled conditions
such as in the straightening of damaged material and the final alignment of
a structure or machine.
K 	A 	D 	K' 	D'
2
C'
H'	J'
J 	H
B 	C
Y
– Y
Y
σ
σ
σ
σ
ε
Fig. 2.15 	Stress-strain response for mild steel subjected to two
cases of reverse loading.

-- 83 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	69
2.1F 	Repeated Loadings and Fatigue
You might think that a given load may be repeated many times, provided that
the stresses remain in the elastic range. Such a conclusion is correct for load-
ings repeated a few dozen or even a few hundred times. However, it is not
correct when loadings are repeated thousands or millions of times. In such
cases, rupture can occur at a stress much lower than the ordinary static break-
ing strength; this phenomenon is known as fatigue. A fatigue failure is of a
brittle nature, even for materials that are normally ductile.
Fatigue must be considered in the design of all structural and machine
components subjected to repeated or fluctuating loads. The number of loading
cycles expected during the useful life of a component varies greatly. For exam-
ple, a beam supporting an industrial crane can be loaded as many as 2 million
times in 25 years (about 300 loadings per working day), an automobile crank-
shaft is loaded about 0.5 billion times if the automobile is driven 200,000
miles, and an individual turbine blade can be loaded several hundred billion
times during its lifetime.
Some loadings are of a fluctuating nature. For example, the passage of
traffic over a bridge will cause stress levels that will fluctuate about the stress
level due to the weight of the bridge. A more severe condition occurs when
a complete reversal of the load occurs during the loading cycle. The stresses
in the axle of a railroad car, for example, are completely reversed after each
half-revolution of the wheel.
The number of loading cycles required to cause the failure of a speci-
men through repeated loadings and reverse loadings can be determined exper-
imentally for any given maximum stress level. If a series of tests is conducted
using different maximum stress levels, the resulting data are plotted as a σ-n
curve. For each test, the maximum stress σ is plotted as an ordinate and the
number of cycles n as an abscissa. Because of the large number of cycles
required for rupture, the cycles n are plotted on a logarithmic scale.
A typical σ-n curve for steel is shown in Fig. 2.16. If the applied max-
imum stress is high, relatively few cycles are required to cause rupture. As
the magnitude of the maximum stress is reduced, the number of cycles
required to cause rupture increases, until the endurance limit is reached. The
endurance limit is the stress for which failure does not occur, even for an
indefinitely large number of loading cycles. For a low-carbon steel, such as
structural steel, the endurance limit is about one-half of the ultimate strength
of the steel.
For nonferrous metals, such as aluminum and copper, a typical σ-n
curve (Fig. 2.16) shows that the stress at failure continues to decrease as
the number of loading cycles is increased. For such metals, the fatigue
limit is the stress corresponding to failure after a specified number of
loading cycles.
Examination of test specimens, shafts, springs, and other components
that have failed in fatigue shows that the failure initiated at a microscopic
crack or some similar imperfection. At each loading, the crack was very
slightly enlarged. During successive loading cycles, the crack propagated
through the material until the amount of undamaged material was insufficient
to carry the maximum load, and an abrupt, brittle failure occurred. For exam-
ple, Photo 2.6 shows a progressive fatigue crack in a highway bridge girder
that initiated at the irregularity associated with the weld of a cover plate and
then propagated through the flange and into the web. Because fatigue failure
can be initiated at any crack or imperfection, the surface condition of a spec-
imen has an important effect on the endurance limit obtained in testing. The
Number of completely reversed cycles
Aluminum (2024)
Steel (1020HR)
10 3
10
20
30
40
50
Stress (ksi)
104 	105 	106 	107 	108 	109
Fig. 2.16 	Typical σ-n curves.
Photo 2.6 	Fatigue crack in a steel girder of
the Yellow Mill Pond Bridge, Connecticut, prior
to repairs. Courtesy of John W. Fisher

-- 84 of 897 --

70 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
endurance limit for machined and polished specimens is higher than for rolled
or forged components or for components that are corroded. In applications in
or near seawater or in other applications where corrosion is expected, a reduc-
tion of up to 50% in the endurance limit can be expected.
2.1G 	Deformations of Members Under
Axial Loading
Consider a homogeneous rod BC of length L and uniform cross section of
area A subjected to a centric axial load P (Fig. 2.17). If the resulting axial
stress σ = P∕A does not exceed the proportional limit of the material, Hooke’s
law applies and
σ = Eε 	(2.6)
from which
ε = σ
E = P
AE (2.7)
Recalling that the strain ε in Sec. 2.1A is ε = δ∕L
δ = εL 	(2.8)
and substituting for ε from Eq. (2.7) into Eq. (2.8):
δ = PL
AE (2.9)
Equation (2.9) can be used only if the rod is homogeneous (constant E),
has a uniform cross section of area A, and is loaded at its ends. If the
rod is loaded at other points, or consists of several portions of various
cross sections and possibly of different materials, it must be divided into
component parts that satisfy the required conditions for the application of
Eq. (2.9). Using the internal force Pi, length Li, cross-sectional area Ai,
and modulus of elasticity Ei, corresponding to part i, the deformation of
the entire rod is
δ = ∑
i
PiL i
A iE i
(2.10)
In the case of a member of variable cross section (Fig. 2.18), the strain
ε depends upon the position of the point Q, where it is computed as ε = dδ∕dx
(Sec. 2.1A). Solving for dδ and substituting for ε from Eq. (2.7), the defor-
mation of an element of length dx is
dδ = ε dx = P dx
AE
The total deformation δ of the member is obtained by integrating this expres-
sion over the length L of the member:
δ = ∫L
0
P dx
AE (2.11)
L
C
C
A
B 	B
P
δ
Fig. 2.17 	Undeformed and deformed axially
loaded rod.
Δ	x+ 	x +
Q
Q
Δx	x
Δ
P
δ	δ
Fig. 2.18 	Deformation of axially loaded
member of variable cross-sectional area.

-- 85 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	71
Equation (2.11) should be used in place of Eq. (2.9) when the cross-sectional
area A is a function of x or when the internal force P depends upon x, as is
the case for a rod hanging under its own weight.
Concept Application 2.1
Determine the deformation of the steel rod shown in Fig. 2.19a under the
given loads (E = 29 × 106 psi).
The rod is divided into three component parts in Fig. 2.19b, so
L1 = L2 = 12 in. 	L3 = 16 in.
A1 = A2 = 0.9 in2 	A3 = 0.3 in2
To find the internal forces P1, P2, and P3, pass sections through each of the
component parts, drawing each time the free-body diagram of the portion of
rod located to the right of the section (Fig. 2.19c). Each of the free bodies is
in equilibrium; thus
P1 = 60 kips = 60 × 103 lb
P2 = −15 kips = −15 × 103 lb
P3 = 30 kips = 30 × 103 lb
Using Eq. (2.10)
δ = ∑
i
P iL i
A iE i
= 1
E (
P1L1
A1
+ P2L2
A2
+ P3L3
A3 )
= 1
29 × 106[
(60 × 103 )(12)
0.9
+ (−15 × 103 )(12)
0.9 + (30 × 103 )(16)
0.3 	]
δ = 2.20 × 106
29 × 106 = 75.9 × 10−3 in.
Rod BC of Fig. 2.17, used to derive Eq. (2.9), and rod AD of
Fig. 2.19 have one end attached to a fixed support. In each case, the
deformation δ of the rod was equal to the displacement of its free end.
When both ends of a rod move, however, the deformation of the rod is
measured by the relative displacement of one end of the rod with respect
to the other. Consider the assembly shown in Fig. 2.20a, which consists
of three elastic bars of length L connected by a rigid pin at A. If a load
P is applied at B (Fig. 2.20b), each of the three bars will deform. Since
the bars AC and AC′ are attached to fixed supports at C and C′, their
common deformation is measured by the displacement δA of point A.
On the other hand, since both ends of bar AB move, the deformation of
AB is measured by the difference between the displacements δA and δB
of points A and B (i.e., by the relative displacement of B with respect
to A). Denoting this relative displacement by δB∕A,
δB∕A = δB − δA = PL
AE (2.12)
where A is the cross-sectional area of AB and E is its modulus of elasticity.
C 	D
30 kips
12 in. 	12 in. 16 in.
75 kips 	45 kips
A
A = 0.9 in 2 	A = 0.3 in2
B
(a)
(b)
(c)
C D
C D
30 kips
30 kips
30 kips
30 kips
75 kips 	45 kips
45 kips
A
P3
P2
P1
B
C D
B
75 kips 	45 kips
3
	2	1
Fig. 2.19 	(a) Axially loaded rod. (b) Rod
divided into three sections. (c) Three sectioned
free-body diagrams with internal resultant
forces P1, P2, and P3.
A
A
B
B
P
C' 	C	C
L
C'
(a) 	(b)
δA
δB
Fig. 2.20 	Example of relative end displacement,
as exhibited by the middle bar. (a) Unloaded.
(b) Loaded, with deformation.

-- 86 of 897 --

72 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Sample Problem 2.1
The rigid bar BDE is supported by two links AB and CD. Link AB is made
of aluminum (E = 70 GPa) and has a cross-sectional area of 500 mm2. Link
CD is made of steel (E = 200 GPa) and has a cross-sectional area of 600 mm2.
For the 30-kN force shown, determine the deflection (a) of B, (b) of D,
(c) of E.
STRATEGY: 	Consider the free body of the rigid bar to determine the inter-
nal force of each link. Knowing these forces and the properties of the links,
their deformations can be evaluated. You can then use simple geometry to
determine the deflection of E.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagrams of the rigid bar (Fig. 1) and the
two links (Figs. 2 and 3).
ANALYSIS:
Free Body: Bar BDE (Fig. 1).
+⤴Σ MB = 0: 	−(30 kN)(0.6 m) + F CD(0.2 m) = 0
F CD = +90 kN 	F CD = 90 kN 	tension
+⤴Σ MD = 0: 	−(30 kN)(0.4 m) − F AB(0.2 m) = 0
F AB = −60 kN 	F AB = 60 kN 	compression
a. Deflection of B. 	Since the internal force in link AB is compressive
(Fig. 2), P = −60 kN and
δB = PL
AE = (−60 × 103 N)(0.3 m)
(500 × 10−6 m2 )(70 × 109 Pa) = −514 × 10−6 m
The negative sign indicates a contraction of member AB. Thus the
deflection of end B is upward:
δB = 0.514 mm ↑ 	◂
30 kN
0.2 m 0.4 m
B 	D
FAB 	FCD
E
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of rigid
bar BDE.
30 kN	0.4 m
0.3 m
0.2 m 0.4 m
C
A
B 	D 	E
0.3 m
A
B
F'AB = 60 kN
FAB = 60 kN
A = 500 mm2
E = 70 GPa
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram
of two-force member AB.
0.4 m
C
D
F'CD = 90 kN
FCD = 90 kN
A = 600 mm2
E = 200 GPa
Fig. 3 	Free-body diagram
of two-force member CD.
(continued)

-- 87 of 897 --

2.1 An Introduction to Stress and Strain 	73
b. Deflection of D. 	Since in rod CD (Fig. 3), P = 90 kN, write
δD = PL
AE = (90 × 103 N)(0.4 m)
(600 × 10−6 m2 )(200 × 109 Pa)
= 300 × 10−6 m 	δD = 0.300 mm ↓ 	◂
c. Deflection of E. 	Referring to Fig. 4, we denote by B′ and D′ the
displaced positions of points B and D. Since the bar BDE is rigid, points B′,
D′, and E′ lie in a straight line. Therefore,
BB′
DD′ = BH
HD
0.514 mm
0.300 mm = (200 mm) − x
x x = 73.7 mm
EE′
DD′ = HE
HD
δE
0.300 mm = (400 mm) + (73.7 mm)
73.7 mm
δE = 1.928 mm ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Comparing the relative magnitude and direction of
the resulting deflections, you can see that the answers obtained are consistent
with the loading and the deflection diagram of Fig. 4.
Sample Problem 2.2
The rigid castings A and B are connected by two 3
4 -in.-diameter steel bolts CD
and GH and are in contact with the ends of a 1.5-in.-diameter aluminum rod
EF. Each bolt is single-threaded with a pitch of 0.1 in., and after being snugly
fitted, the nuts at D and H are both tightened one-quarter of a turn. Knowing
that E is 29 × 106 psi for steel and 10.6 × 106 psi for aluminum, determine
the normal stress in the rod.
STRATEGY: 	The tightening of the nuts causes a displacement of the ends
of the bolts relative to the rigid casting that is equal to the difference in dis-
placements between the bolts and the rod. This will give a relation between
the internal forces of the bolts and the rod that, when combined with a free-
body analysis of the rigid casting, will enable you to solve for these forces
and determine the corresponding normal stress in the rod.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagrams of the bolts and rod (Fig. 1)
and the rigid casting (Fig. 2).
ANALYSIS:
Deformations.
a. Bolts CD and GH. 	Tightening the nuts causes tension in the bolts
(Fig. 1). Because of symmetry, both are subjected to the same internal force
Pb and undergo the same deformation δb. Therefore,
δb = + Pb L b
A b E b
= + Pb(18 in.)
1
4 π(0.75 in.)2 (29 × 106 psi) = +1.405 × 10−6 P b 	(1)
400 mm
(200 mm – x)
200 mm
B'
E'
D'
B
H D 	E
x
δB = 0.514 mm
δD = 0.300 mm
δ E
Fig. 4 	Deflections at B and D of rigid
bar are used to find δE.
(continued)
C
G
D
H
18 in.
E
A 	B
F
12 in.
C
E 	F
G
D
P'b
P'r	Pr
P'b
Pb
Pb
H
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of bolts and
aluminum bar.

-- 88 of 897 --

74 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
b. Rod EF. 	The rod is in compression (Fig. 1), where the magnitude of
the force is Pr and the deformation δr:
δr = − PrL r
A rE r
= − Pr(12 in.)
1
4 π(1.5 in.)2 (10.6 × 106 psi) = −0.6406 × 10−6 P r 	(2)
c. Displacement of D Relative to B. 	Tightening the nuts one-quarter
turn causes ends D and H of the bolts to undergo a displacement of 1
4 (0.1 in.)
relative to casting B. Considering end D,
δD∕B = 1
4 (0.1 in.) = 0.025 in. 	(3)
But δD∕B = δD − δB, where δD and δB represent the displacements of D and B.
If casting A is held in a fixed position while the nuts at D and H are being
tightened, these displacements are equal to the deformations of the bolts and
of the rod, respectively. Therefore,
δD∕B = δb − δr 	(4)
Substituting from Eqs. (1), (2), and (3) into Eq. (4),
0.025 in. = 1.405 × 10−6 P b + 0.6406 × 10−6 P r 	(5)
Free Body: Casting B (Fig. 2).
+
→ ΣF = 0: 	P r − 2P b = 0 	P r = 2P b 	(6)
Pb
Pb
B	Pr
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram
of rigid casting.
Forces in Bolts and Rod. 	Substituting for Pr from Eq. (6) into Eq. (5),
we have
0.025 in. = 1.405 × 10−6 P b + 0.6406 × 10−6 (2P b)
P b = 9.307 × 103 lb = 9.307 kips
P r = 2P b = 2(9.307 kips) = 18.61 kips
Stress in Rod.
σr = Pr
A r
= 18.61 kips
1
4 π(1.5 in.)2 	σr = 10.53 ksi 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This is an example of a statically indeterminate
problem, where the determination of the member forces could not be found
by equilibrium alone. By considering the relative displacement characteris-
tics of the members, you can obtain additional equations necessary to solve
such problems. Situations like this will be examined in more detail in the
following section.

-- 89 of 897 --

75
Problems
2.1 A 2.2-m-long steel rod must not stretch more than 1.2 mm when it
is subjected to an 8.5-kN tension force. Knowing that E = 200 GPa,
determine (a) the smallest diameter rod that should be used, (b) the
corresponding normal stress in the rod.
2.2 A control rod made of yellow brass must not stretch more than 1
8 in.
when the tension in the wire is 800 lb. Knowing that E = 15 × 106 psi
and that the maximum allowable normal stress is 32 ksi, determine
(a) the smallest diameter rod that should be used, (b) the correspond-
ing maximum length of the rod.
2.3 A 9-m length of 6-mm-diameter steel wire is to be used in a hanger.
It is observed that the wire stretches 18 mm when a tensile force P
is applied. Knowing that E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the magnitude
of the force P, (b) the corresponding normal stress in the wire.
2.4 A cast-iron tube is used to support a compressive load. Knowing that
E = 69 GPa and that the maximum allowable change in length is
0.025%, determine (a) the maximum normal stress in the tube, (b) the
minimum wall thickness for a load of 7.2 kN if the outside diameter
of the tube is 50 mm.
2.5 An aluminum pipe must not stretch more than 0.05 in. when it is
subjected to a tensile load. Knowing that E = 10.1 × 106 psi and
that the maximum allowable normal stress is 14 ksi, determine
(a) the maximum allowable length of the pipe, (b) the required area
of the pipe if the tensile load is 127.5 kips.
2.6 A 60-m-long steel wire is subjected to a 6-kN tensile load. Knowing
that E = 200 GPa and that the length of the rod increases by 48 mm,
determine (a) the smallest diameter that can be selected for the wire,
(b) the corresponding normal stress.
2.7 A nylon thread is subjected to a 2-lb tension force. Knowing that
E = 0.5 × 106 psi and that the maximum allowable normal stress is
6 ksi, determine (a) the required diameter of the thread, (b) the
corresponding percent increase in the length of the thread.
2.8 Two gage marks are placed exactly 10 in. apart on a 1
2 -in.-diameter
aluminum rod with E = 10.1 × 106 psi and an ultimate strength of
16 ksi. Knowing that the distance between the gage marks is 10.009 in.
after a load is applied, determine (a) the stress in the rod, (b) the
factor of safety.
2.9 A 9-kN tensile load will be applied to a 50-m length of steel wire
with E = 200 GPa. Determine the smallest diameter wire that can
be used, knowing that the normal stress must not exceed 150 MPa
and that the increase in length of the wire must not exceed 25 mm.

-- 90 of 897 --

76
2.10 A 1.5-m-long aluminum rod must not stretch more than 1 mm and
the normal stress must not exceed 40 MPa when the rod is subjected
to a 3-kN axial load. Knowing that E = 70 GPa, determine the
required diameter of the rod.
2.11 A nylon thread is to be subjected to a 2.5-lb tension. Knowing that
E = 0.5 × 106 psi, that the maximum allowable normal stress is
6 ksi, and that the length of the thread must not increase by more
than 1%, determine the required diameter of the thread.
2.12 A block of 250-mm length and 50 × 40-mm cross section is to support
a centric compressive load P. The material to be used is a bronze for
which E = 95 GPa. Determine the largest load that can be applied, know-
ing that the normal stress must not exceed 80 MPa and that the decrease
in length of the block should be at most 0.12% of its original length.
2.13 Rod BD is made of steel (E = 29 × 106 psi) and is used to brace
the axially compressed member ABC. The maximum force that can
be developed in member BD is 0.02P. If the stress must not exceed
18 ksi and the maximum change in length of BD must not exceed
0.001 times the length of ABC, determine the smallest-diameter rod
that can be used for member BD.
2.14 The 4-mm-diameter cable BC is made of a steel with E = 200 GPa.
Knowing that the maximum stress in the cable must not exceed
190 MPa and that the elongation of the cable must not exceed 6 mm,
find the maximum load P that can be applied as shown.
2.15 A single axial load of magnitude P = 15 kips is applied at end C of the
steel rod ABC. Knowing that E = 30 × 106 psi, determine the diameter
d of portion BC for which the deflection of point C will be 0.05 in.
P
1.25-in. diameter
4 ft
3 ft
d
A
B
C
Fig. P2.15
2.16 The rod ABCD is made of an aluminum for which E = 70 GPa. For
the loading shown, determine the deflection of (a) point B, (b) point D.
Area = 800 mm2
Area = 500 mm2
100 kN
75 kN
50 kN
1.75 m
1.25 m
1.5 m
A
C
B
D
Fig. P2.16
72 in.
54 in.
72 in.
B
A
C
D
P = 130 kips
Fig. P2.13
3.5 m
4.0 m
2.5 m
B
A 	C
P
Fig. P2.14

-- 91 of 897 --

77
2.17 The specimen shown has been cut from a 5-mm-thick sheet of vinyl
(E = 3.10 GPa) and is subjected to a 1.5-kN tensile load. Determine
(a) the total deformation of the specimen, (b) the deformation of its
central portion BC.
Dimensions in mm
40 	40
25	25
A 	B 	10 	C 	D
50
P' = 1.5 kN 	P = 1.5 kN
Fig. P2.17
2.18 The brass tube AB (E = 15 × 106 psi) has a cross-sectional area of
0.22 in2 and is fitted with a plug at A. The tube is attached at B to
a rigid plate that is itself attached at C to the bottom of an aluminum
cylinder (E = 10.4 × 106 psi) with a cross-sectional area of 0.40 in2.
The cylinder is then hung from a support at D. To close the cylinder,
the plug must move down through 3
64 in. Determine the force P that
must be applied to the cylinder.
2.19 Both portions of the rod ABC are made of an aluminum for which
E = 70 GPa. Knowing that the magnitude of P is 4 kN, determine
(a) the value of Q so that the deflection at A is zero, (b) the cor-
responding deflection of B.
0.4 m
0.5 m
P
Q
20-mm diameter
60-mm diameter
A
B
C
Fig. P2.19 and P2.20
2.20 The rod ABC is made of an aluminum for which E = 70 GPa. Know-
ing that P = 6 kN and Q = 42 kN, determine the deflection of
(a) point A, (b) point B.
2.21 For the steel truss (E = 29 × 106 psi) and loading shown, determine
the deformations of members AB and AD, knowing that their cross-
sectional areas are 4.0 in2 and 2.8 in2, respectively.
15.0 in.
in.
C
D 	A
B
P
3
64
Fig. P2.18
13 ft 	13 ft
8 ft
D 	C	A
B
50 kips
Fig. P2.21

-- 92 of 897 --

78
2.22 For the steel truss (E = 29 × 106 psi) and loading shown, determine
the deformations of members BD and DE, knowing that their cross-
sectional areas are 2 in2 and 3 in2, respectively.
15 ft
8 ft
8 ft
8 ft
D
C
F
E
G
A
B
30 kips
30 kips
30 kips
Fig. P2.22
2.23 Members AB and BE of the truss shown consist of 25-mm-diameter
steel rods (E = 200 GPa). For the loading shown, determine the
elongation of (a) rod AB, (b) rod BE.
1.2 m 	1.2 m
C 	D E
A 	B
75 kN
150 kN
0.9 m
Fig. P2.23
2.24 The steel frame (E = 200 GPa) shown has a diagonal brace BD with
an area of 1920 mm2. Determine the largest allowable load P if the
change in length of member BD is not to exceed 1.6 mm.
2.25 Link BD is made of brass (E = 105 GPa) and has a cross-sectional
area of 240 mm2. Link CE is made of aluminum (E = 72 GPa) and
has a cross-sectional area of 300 mm2. Knowing that they support rigid
member ABC, determine the maximum force P that can be applied
vertically at point A if the deflection of A is not to exceed 0.35 mm.
P
125 mm 225 mm
225 mm
150 mm
E
D
A 	B
C
Fig. P2.25
6 m
5 m
C
D	A
B
P
Fig. P2.24

-- 93 of 897 --

79
2.26 Members ABC and DEF are joined with steel links (E = 200 GPa).
Each of the links is made of a pair of 25 × 35-mm plates. Determine
the change in length of (a) member BE, (b) member CF.
2.27 Each of the links AB and CD is made of steel (E = 29 × 106 psi) and
has a uniform rectangular cross section of 1
4 × 1 in. Knowing that they
support rigid member BCE, determine the largest load that can be
suspended from point E if the deflection of E is not to exceed 0.01 in.
10 in. 	15 in.
8 in.
8 in.
E
D
A
B
C
Fig. P2.27
2.28 The length of the 3
32 -in.-diameter steel wire CD has been adjusted
so that with no load applied, a gap of 1
16 in. exists between the
end B of the rigid beam ACB and a contact point E. Knowing that
E = 29 × 106 psi, determine where a 50-lb block should be placed
on the beam to cause contact between B and E.
2.29 A homogenous cable of length L and uniform cross section is sus-
pended from one end. (a) Denoting by ρ the density (mass per unit
volume) of the cable and by E its modulus of elasticity, determine
the elongation of the cable due to its own weight. (b) Show that the
same elongation would be obtained if the cable were horizontal and
if a force equal to half of its weight were applied at each end.
2.30 The vertical load P is applied at the center A of the upper section
of a homogeneous frustum of a circular cone of height h, minimum
radius a, and maximum radius b. Denoting by E the modulus of
elasticity of the material and neglecting the effect of its weight,
determine the deflection of point A.
h
A a
b
P
Fig. P2.30
2.31 Denoting by ε the “engineering strain” in a tensile specimen, show
that the true strain is εt = ln(1 + ε).
2.32 The volume of a tensile specimen is essentially constant while plas-
tic deformation occurs. If the initial diameter of the specimen is d1,
show that when the diameter is d, the true strain is εt = 2 ln(d1∕d).
260 mm
18 kN 	18 kN	240 mm
180 mm
C
D
E
F
A
B
Fig. P2.26
12.5 in.
D
C
A
x
B	50 lb
16 in.
4 in.
E 1
16 in.
Fig. P2.28

-- 94 of 897 --

80 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
2.2 	STATICALLY INDETERMINATE
PROBLEMS
In the problems considered in the preceding section, we could always use
free-body diagrams and equilibrium equations to determine the internal forces
produced in the various portions of a member under given loading conditions.
There are many problems, however, where the internal forces cannot be deter-
mined from statics alone. Oftentimes, even the reactions themselves—the
external forces—cannot be determined by simply drawing a free-body dia-
gram of the member and writing the corresponding equilibrium equations,
because the number of constraints involved exceeds the minimum number
required to maintain static equilibrium. In such cases, the equilibrium equa-
tions must be complemented by relationships involving deformations obtained
by considering the geometry of the problem. Because statics is not sufficient
to determine either the reactions or the internal forces, problems of this type
are called statically indeterminate. The following concept applications show
how to handle this type of problem.
Concept Application 2.2
A rod of length L, cross-sectional area A1, and modulus of elasticity
E1, has been placed inside a tube of the same length L, but of cross-
sectional area A2 and modulus of elasticity E2 (Fig. 2.21a). What is the
deformation of the rod and tube when a force P is exerted on a rigid
end plate as shown?
The axial forces in the rod and in the tube are P1 and P2, respectively.
Draw free-body diagrams of all three elements (Fig. 2.21b, c, d). Only
Fig. 2.21d yields any significant information, as:
P1 + P2 = P 	(1)
Clearly, one equation is not sufficient to determine the two unknown internal
forces P1 and P2. The problem is statically indeterminate.
However, the geometry of the problem shows that the deformations
δ1 and δ2 of the rod and tube must be equal. Recalling Eq. (2.9), write
δ1 = P1L
A1E1
δ2 = P2L
A2E2
(2)
Equating the deformations δ1 and δ2,
P1
A1E1
= P2
A2E2
(3)
Equations (1) and (3) can be solved simultaneously for P1 and P2:
P1 = A1E1P
A1E1 + A2E2
P2 = A2E2P
A1E1 + A2E2
Either of Eqs. (2) can be used to determine the common deformation of
the rod and tube.
P
P1 	P'1
Tube (A2 , E2 )
Rod (A1 , E1 )
End
plate
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
L
P'2	P2
P
P1
P2
Fig. 2.21 	(a) Concentric rod and tube,
loaded by force P. (b) Free-body diagram
of rod. (c) Free-body diagram of tube.
(d ) Free-body diagram of end plate.

-- 95 of 897 --

2.2 Statically Indeterminate Problems 	81
Concept Application 2.3
A bar AB of length L and uniform cross section is attached to rigid supports
at A and B before being loaded. What are the stresses in portions AC and BC
due to the application of a load P at point C (Fig. 2.22a)?
Drawing the free-body diagram of the bar (Fig. 2.22b), the equilibrium
equation is
R A + R B = P 	(1)
Since this equation is not sufficient to determine the two unknown reactions
RA and RB, the problem is statically indeterminate.
However, the reactions can be determined if observed from the geometry
that the total elongation δ of the bar must be zero. The elongations of the
portions AC and BC are respectively δ1 and δ2, so
δ = δ1 + δ2 = 0
Using Eq. (2.9), δ1 and δ2 can be expressed in terms of the corresponding
internal forces P1 and P2,
δ = P1L1
AE + P2L2
AE = 0 	(2)
Note from the free-body diagrams shown in parts b and c of Fig. 2.22c that
P1 = RA and P2 = −RB. Carrying these values into Eq. (2),
R A L1 − R B L2 = 0 	(3)
Equations (1) and (3) can be solved simultaneously for RA and RB, as
RA = PL2∕L and RB = PL1∕L. The desired stresses σ1 in AC and σ2 in BC
are obtained by dividing P1 = RA and P2 = −RB by the cross-sectional area
of the bar:
σ1 = PL2
AL σ2 = − PL1
AL
Fig. 2.22 	(a) Restrained bar with
axial load. (b) Free-body diagram of
bar. (c) Free-body diagrams of sections
above and below point C used to
determine internal forces P1 and P2.
P
L1
L2
RA
RB
(a) 	(b)
L
A
B
A
B
C 	C
P
RA
P
RA
RB 	RB
A
B
C 	P1
P2
(c)
Superposition Method. 	A structure is statically indeterminate whenever
it is held by more supports than are required to maintain its equilibrium. This
results in more unknown reactions than available equilibrium equations. It is
often convenient to designate one of the reactions as redundant and to elimi-
nate the corresponding support. Since the stated conditions of the problem
cannot be changed, the redundant reaction must be maintained in the solution.
It will be treated as an unknown load that, together with the other loads, must
produce deformations compatible with the original constraints. The actual
solution of the problem proceeds by considering separately the deformations
caused by the given loads and those caused by the redundant reaction, and
then adding—or superposing—the results obtained. The general conditions
under which the combined effect of several loads can be obtained in this way
are discussed in Sec. 2.5.

-- 96 of 897 --

82 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Concept Application 2.4
Determine the reactions at A and B for the steel bar and loading
shown in Fig. 2.23a, assuming a close fit at both supports before
the loads are applied.
We consider the reaction at B as redundant and release the bar
from that support. The reaction RB is considered to be an unknown
load and is determined from the condition that the deformation δ of
the bar equals zero.
The solution is carried out by considering the deformation δL
caused by the given loads and the deformation δR due to the redun-
dant reaction RB (Fig. 2.23b).
The deformation δL is obtained from Eq. (2.10) after the bar has
been divided into four portions, as shown in Fig. 2.23c. Follow the
same procedure as in Concept Application 2.1:
P1 = 0 	P2 = P3 = 600 × 103 N 	P4 = 900 × 103 N
A1 = A2 = 400 × 10−6 m2 	A3 = A4 = 250 × 10−6 m2
L1 = L2 = L3 = L4 = 0.150 m
Substituting these values into Eq. (2.10),
δL = ∑
4
i=1
P iL i
A iE = (0 + 600 × 103 N
400 × 10−6 m2
+ 600 × 103 N
250 × 10−6 m2 + 900 × 103 N
250 × 10−6 m2)
0.150 m
E
δL = 1.125 × 109
E (1)
Considering now the deformation δR due to the redundant reaction
RB, the bar is divided into two portions, as shown in Fig. 2.23d:
P1 = P2 = −R B
A1 = 400 × 10 −6 m2 	A2 = 250 × 10 −6 m2
L1 = L2 = 0.300 m
Substituting these values into Eq. (2.10),
δR = P1L1
A1E + P2L2
A2E = − (1.95 × 103 )R B
E (2)
Express the total deformation δ of the bar as zero:
δ = δL + δR = 0 	(3)
and, substituting for δL and δR from Eqs. (1) and (2) into Eq. (3),
δ = 1.125 × 109
E − (1.95 × 103 )R B
E = 0
(continued)
C
A
D
K
B
A = 250 mm2
A = 400 mm2
300 kN
600 kN 	150 mm
150 mm
150 mm
150 mm
(a)
A
300 kN
600 kN
A
300 kN
600 kN
A
RB 	RB
(b)
δ = 0 	δL 	δR
C
K
D
3
4
2
1
A
B
300 kN
600 kN
(c)
150 mm
150 mm
150 mm
150 mm
C
1
2
A
B
RB
300 mm
300 mm
(d)
Fig. 2.23 	(a) Restrained axially loaded
bar. (b) Reactions will be found by
releasing constraint at point B and adding
compressive force at point B to enforce
zero deformation at point B. (c) Diagram
of released structure. (d) Diagram of
added reaction force at point B to enforce
zero deformation at point B.

-- 97 of 897 --

2.2 Statically Indeterminate Problems 	83
Solving for RB,
R B = 577 × 103 N = 577 kN
The reaction RA at the upper support is obtained from the free-body
diagram of the bar (Fig. 2.23e),
+ ↑ Σ F y = 0: 	R A − 300 kN − 600 kN + RB = 0
R A = 900 kN − R B = 900 kN − 577 kN = 323 kN
Once the reactions have been determined, the stresses and strains in the
bar can easily be obtained. Note that, while the total deformation of the bar
is zero, each of its component parts does deform under the given loading and
restraining conditions.
C
A
300 kN
600 kN
B
RB
RA
(e)
Fig. 2.23 	(cont.) (e) Complete
free-body diagram of ACB.
Concept Application 2.5
Determine the reactions at A and B for the steel bar and loading of
Concept Application 2.4, assuming now that a 4.5-mm clearance
exists between the bar and the ground before the loads are applied
(Fig. 2.24). Assume E = 200 GPa.
Considering the reaction at B to be redundant, compute the defor-
mations δL and δR caused by the given loads and the redundant reaction
RB. However, in this case, the total deformation is δ = 4.5 mm.
Therefore,
δ = δL + δR = 4.5 × 10 −3 m 	(1)
Substituting for δL and δR into (Eq. 1), and recalling that E = 200 GPa =
200 × 109 Pa,
δ = 1.125 × 109
200 × 109 − (1.95 × 103 )R B
200 × 109 	= 4.5 × 10−3 m
Solving for RB,
R B = 115.4 × 103 N = 115.4 kN
The reaction at A is obtained from the free-body diagram of
the bar (Fig. 2.23e):
+ ↑ Σ Fy = 0: 	R A − 300 kN − 600 kN + RB = 0
R A = 900 kN − R B = 900 kN − 115.4 kN = 785 kN
C	C
A	A
B 	B
300 kN
600 kN
300 mm
4.5 mm
300 mm
A = 250 mm 2
A = 400 mm 2
δ
Fig. 2.24 	Multisection bar of Concept
Application 2.4 with initial 4.5-mm gap at point B.
Loading brings bar into contact with constraint.

-- 98 of 897 --

84 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
2.3 	PROBLEMS INVOLVING
TEMPERATURE CHANGES
Solid bodies subjected to increases in temperature will expand, while those
experiencing a reduction in temperature will contract. For example, consider
a homogeneous rod AB of uniform cross section that rests freely on a smooth
horizontal surface (Fig. 2.25a). If the temperature of the rod is raised by ΔT,
the rod elongates by an amount δT. This elongation is proportional to both the
temperature change ΔT and the length L of the rod (Fig. 2.25b). Here
δT = α(ΔT)L 	(2.13)
where α is a constant characteristic of the material called the coefficient
of thermal expansion. Since δT and L are both expressed in units of length,
α represents a quantity per degree C or per degree F, depending whether the
temperature change is expressed in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit.
A
L
L
B
B
(b)
A
(a)
δ T
Fig. 2.25 	Elongation of an
unconstrained rod due to temperature
increase.
Associated with deformation δT must be a strain εT = δT∕L. Recalling
Eq. (2.13),
ε T = αΔT 	(2.14)
The strain εT is called a thermal strain, as it is caused by the change in
temperature of the rod. However, there is no stress associated with the
strain εT.
Assume the same rod AB of length L is placed between two fixed
supports at a distance L from each other (Fig. 2.26a). Again, there is neither
stress nor strain in this initial condition. If we raise the temperature by ΔT,
the rod cannot elongate because of the restraints imposed on its ends; the
elongation δT of the rod is zero. Since the rod is homogeneous and of uni-
form cross section, the strain εT at any point is εT = δT∕L and thus is also
zero. However, the supports will exert equal and opposite forces P and P′
on the rod after the temperature has been raised, to keep it from elongating
(Fig. 2.26b). It follows that a state of stress (with no corresponding strain)
is created in the rod.
The problem created by the temperature change ΔT is statically inde-
terminate. Therefore, the magnitude P of the reactions at the supports is
determined from the condition that the elongation of the rod is zero. Using
L
(b)
A 	B
A 	B
P' 	P
(a)
Fig. 2.26 	Force P develops when the
temperature of the rod increases while
ends A and B are restrained.

-- 99 of 897 --

2.3 Problems Involving Temperature Changes 	85
the superposition method described in Sec. 2.2, the rod is detached from
its support B (Fig. 2.27a) and elongates freely as it undergoes the temper-
ature change ΔT (Fig. 2.27b). According to Eq. (2.13), the corresponding
elongation is
δT = α(ΔT)L
Applying now to end B the force P representing the redundant reaction, and
recalling Eq. (2.9), a second deformation (Fig. 2.27c) is
δP = PL
AE
Expressing that the total deformation δ must be zero,
δ = δT + δP = α(ΔT)L + PL
AE = 0
from which
P = −AEα(ΔT)
The stress in the rod due to the temperature change ΔT is
σ = P
A = −Eα(ΔT) 	(2.15)
The absence of any strain in the rod applies only in the case of a
homogeneous rod of uniform cross section. Any other problem involving a
restrained structure undergoing a change in temperature must be analyzed
on its own merits. However, the same general approach can be used by
considering the deformation due to the temperature change and the defor-
mation due to the redundant reaction separately and superposing the two
solutions obtained.
L
(b)
(c)
L
A
A 	B
B
P
(a)
A 	B
δ T
δ P
Fig. 2.27 	Superposition method to find force at point
B of restrained rod AB undergoing thermal expansion.
(a) Initial rod length; (b) thermally expanded rod length;
(c) force P pushes point B back to zero deformation.

-- 100 of 897 --

86 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Concept Application 2.6
Determine the values of the stress in portions AC and CB of the steel
bar shown (Fig. 2.28a) when the temperature of the bar is −50°F, know-
ing that a close fit exists at both of the rigid supports when the tempera-
ture is +75°F. Use the values E = 29 × 106 psi and α = 6.5 × 10–6∕°F
for steel.
Determine the reactions at the supports. Since the problem is statically
indeterminate, detach the bar from its support at B and let it undergo the
temperature change
ΔT = (−50°F) − (75°F) = −125°F
The corresponding deformation (Fig. 2.28c) is
δT = α(ΔT)L = (6.5 × 10−6 ∕°F)(−125°F)(24 in.)
= −19.50 × 10−3 in.
Applying the unknown force RB at end B (Fig. 2.28d), use Eq. (2.10) to
express the corresponding deformation δR. Substituting
L1 = L2 = 12 in.
A1 = 0.6 in2 	A2 = 1.2 in2
P1 = P2 = R B 	E = 29 × 106 psi
into Eq. (2.10), write
δR = P1L1
A1E + P2L2
A2E
= RB
29 × 106 psi (
12 in.
0.6 in2 + 12 in.
1.2 in2)
= (1.0345 × 10−6 in./lb)R B
Expressing that the total deformation of the bar must be zero as a result of
the imposed constraints, write
δ = δT + δR = 0
= −19.50 × 10−3 in. + (1.0345 × 10−6 in./lb)R B = 0
from which
R B = 18.85 × 103 lb = 18.85 kips
The reaction at A is equal and opposite.
Noting that the forces in the two portions of the bar are P1 = P2 =
18.85 kips, obtain the following values of the stress in portions AC and CB
of the bar:
C
A
A = 0.6 in2 	A = 1.2 in 2
12 in.	12 in.
B
(a)
(c)
(d)
RB
(b)
C
A B
C
L1 	L2
A B
C
1 	2
1 	2
A B
δ T
δ R
Fig. 2.28 	(a) Restrained bar. (b) Bar at
+75°F temperature. (c) Bar at lower
temperature. (d) Force RB needed to
enforce zero deformation at point B.
(continued)

-- 101 of 897 --

2.3 Problems Involving Temperature Changes 	87
σ1 = P1
A1
= 18.85 kips
0.6 in2 	= +31.42 ksi
σ2 = P2
A2
= 18.85 kips
1.2 in2 	= +15.71 ksi
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that, while the total deformation
of the bar must be zero, the deformations of the portions AC and CB are
not zero. A solution of the problem based on the assumption that these
deformations are zero would therefore be wrong. Neither can the values
of the strain in AC or CB be assumed equal to zero. To amplify this point,
determine the strain εAC in portion AC of the bar. The strain εAC can be
divided into two component parts; one is the thermal strain εT produced
in the unrestrained bar by the temperature change ΔT (Fig. 2.28c). From
Eq. (2.14),
ε T = α ΔT = (6.5 × 10−6 /°F)(−125°F)
= −812.5 × 10−6 in./in.
The other component of εAC is associated with the stress σ1 due to the force
RB applied to the bar (Fig. 2.28d). From Hooke’s law, express this component
of the strain as
σ1
E = +31.42 × 103 psi
29 × 106 psi = +1083.4 × 10−6 in./in.
Add the two components of the strain in AC to obtain
εAC = ε T + σ1
E = −812.5 × 10−6 + 1083.4 × 10−6
= +271 × 10−6 in./in.
A similar computation yields the strain in portion CB of the bar:
ε CB = ε T + σ2
E = −812.5 × 10−6 + 541.7 × 10−6
= −271 × 10−6 in./in.
The deformations δAC and δCB of the two portions of the bar are
δAC = ε AC(AC) = (+271 × 10−6 )(12 in.)
= +3.25 × 10−3 in.
δCB = ε CB(CB) = (−271 × 10−6 )(12 in.)
= −3.25 × 10−3 in.
Thus, while the sum δ = δAC + δCB of the two deformations is zero, neither
of the deformations is zero.

-- 102 of 897 --

88 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Sample Problem 2.3
The 1
2 -in.-diameter rod CE and the 3
4 -in.-diameter rod DF are attached to the
rigid bar ABCD as shown. Knowing that the rods are made of aluminum and
using E = 10.6 × 106 psi, determine (a) the force in each rod caused by the
loading shown, and (b) the corresponding deflection of point A.
STRATEGY: 	To solve this statically indeterminate problem, you must sup-
plement static equilibrium with a relative deflection analysis of the two rods.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the bar (Fig. 1).
ANALYSIS:
Statics. 	Considering the free body of bar ABCD in Fig. 1, note that the
reaction at B and the forces exerted by the rods are indeterminate. However,
using statics,
+⤴ΣMB = 0: 	(10 kips)(18 in.) − F CE (12 in.) − F DF (20 in.) = 0
12F CE + 20F DF = 180 	(1)
Geometry. 	After application of the 10-kip load, the position of the bar is
A′BC′D′ (Fig. 2). From the similar triangles BAA′, BCC′, and BDD′,
δC
12 in. = δD
20 in. δC = 0.6δD 	(2)
δA
18 in. = δD
20 in. δA = 0.9δD 	(3)
Deformations. 	Using Eq. (2.9), and the data shown in Fig. 3, write
δC = FCE L CE
A CE E δD = FDF L DF
A DF E
Substituting for δC and δD into Eq. (2), write
δC = 0.6δD
F CE L CE
A CE E = 0.6 FDF L DF
A DF E
F CE = 0.6 L DF
L CE
A CE
A DF
F DF = 0.6 (
30 in.
24 in.)[
1
4 ( 1
2 in.) 2
1
4π( 3
4 in.) 2 ] F DF 	F CE = 0.333F DF
Force in Each Rod. 	Substituting for FCE into Eq. (1) and recalling that all
forces have been expressed in kips,
12(0.333FDF) + 20F DF = 180 	F DF = 7.50 kips 	◂
F CE = 0.333F DF = 0.333(7.50 kips) 	F CE = 2.50 kips 	◂
Deflections. 	The deflection of point D is
δD = F DF L DF
A DF E = (7.50 × 103 lb)(30 in.)
1
4π(3
4 in.) 2 (10.6 × 106 psi) δD = 48.0 × 10−3 in.
Using Eq. (3),
δA = 0.9δD = 0.9(48.0 × 10−3 in.) 	δA = 43.2 × 10−3 in. 	◂
18 in. 12 in. 8 in.
FCE
By
Bx
FDF	10 kips
B C 	D	A
18 in. 12 in.
30 in.
24 in.
8 in.
10 kips
B
E
F
C 	D	A
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of rigid
bar ABCD.
18 in. 12 in. 	8 in.
B C' 	D'
C 	D
A
A' δA δC
δD
Fig. 2 	Linearly proportional
displacements along rigid bar
ABCD.
30 in.
24 in.
C 	D
E
F
in.
	1
2
in.
	3
4
FCE FDF
δC 	δD
Fig. 3 	Forces and deformations
in CE and DF.
(continued)

-- 103 of 897 --

2.3 Problems Involving Temperature Changes 	89
REFLECT and THINK: 	You should note that as the rigid bar rotates about B,
the deflections at C and D are proportional to their distance from the pivot
point B, but the forces exerted by the rods at these points are not. Being
statically indeterminate, these forces depend upon the deflection attributes
of the rods as well as the equilibrium of the rigid bar.
Sample Problem 2.4
The rigid bar CDE is attached to a pin support at E and rests on the 30-mm-
diameter brass cylinder BD. A 22-mm-diameter steel rod AC passes through a
hole in the bar and is secured by a nut that is snugly fitted when the temperature
of the entire assembly is 20°C. The temperature of the brass cylinder is then raised
to 50°C, while the steel rod remains at 20°C. Assuming that no stresses were
present before the temperature change, determine the stress in the cylinder.
Rod AC: 	Steel 	Cylinder BD: 	Brass
E = 200 GPa 	E = 105 GPa
α = 11.7 × 10−6 ∕°C 	α = 20.9 × 10−6 ∕°C
STRATEGY: 	You can use the method of superposition, considering RB as
redundant. With the support at B removed, the temperature rise of the cylinder
causes point B to move down through δT. The reaction RB must cause a deflec-
tion δ1, equal to δT so that the final deflection of B will be zero (Fig. 2).
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the entire assembly (Fig. 1).
ANALYSIS:
Statics. 	Considering the free body of the entire assembly, write
+⤴ΣME = 0: 	R A(0.75 m) − R B(0.3 m) = 0 	R A = 0.4R B 	(1)
C
A
B	0.9 m
0.3 m
0.45 m 	0.3 m
D
E
C
A
B
0.3 m	
0.45 m
D 	E
RA
RB
Ey
Ex
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of bolt, cylinder, and bar.
(continued)

-- 104 of 897 --

90 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Deflection δT. 	Because of a temperature rise of 50° − 20° = 30°C,
the length of the brass cylinder increases by δT (Fig. 2a).
δ T = L(ΔT)α = (0.3 m)(30°C)(20.9 × 10−6 ∕°C) = 188.1 × 10−6 m ↓
Deflection δ1. 	From Fig. 2b, note that δD = 0.4δC and δ1 = δD + δB∕D.
δC = RA L
AE = RA(0.9 m)
1
4 π(0.022 m)2 (200 GPa) = 11.84 × 10−9R A ↑
δD = 0.40δC = 0.4(11.84 × 10−9R A) = 4.74 × 10−9R A↑
δB∕D = RB L
AE = RB(0.3 m)
1
4π(0.03 m)2 (105 GPa) = 4.04 × 10−9R B ↑
Recall from Eq. (1) that RA = 0.4RB, so
δ1 = δD + δB∕D = [4.74(0.4R B) + 4.04R B]10−9 = 5.94 × 10−9R B ↑
But δT = δ1 : 	188.1 × 10−6 m = 5.94 × 10−9R B 	R B = 31.7 kN
Stress in Cylinder. 	σ B = RB
A = 31.7 kN
1
4 π(0.03 m) 2 	σ B = 44.8 MPa 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This example illustrates the large stresses that can
develop in statically indeterminate systems due to even modest temperature
changes. Note that if this assembly was statically determinate (i.e., the steel
rod was removed), no stress at all would develop in the cylinder due to the
temperature change.
(a) 	(b)
0.3
0.75
(c)
C
C 	C
D D	D
E 	E
A 	A	A
B B 	B
RB
RA
δT
δC 	δC
δ1
δD = 	δC = 0.4δC
Fig. 2 	Superposition of thermal and restraint force deformations. (a) Support at B removed.
(b) Reaction at B applied. (c) Final position.

-- 105 of 897 --

91
2.33 An axial centric force of magnitude P = 450 kN is applied to the
composite block shown by means of a rigid end plate. Knowing
that h = 10 mm, determine the normal stress in (a) the brass core,
(b) the aluminum plates.
40 mm
60 mm
Aluminum plates
(E = 70 GPa)
300 mm
Brass core
(E = 105 GPa) 	Rigid
end plate	P
h
h
Fig. P2.33
2.34 For the composite block shown in Prob. 2.33, determine (a) the value
of h if the portion of the load carried by the aluminum plates is half
the portion of the load carried by the brass core, (b) the total load
if the stress in the brass is 80 MPa.
2.35 The 5-ft concrete post is reinforced with six steel bars, each with a
7
8-in. diameter. Knowing that Es = 29 × 106 psi and Ec = 3.6 × 106 psi,
determine the normal stresses in the steel and in the concrete when a
200-kip axial centric force is applied to the post.
2.36 For the post in Prob. 2.35, determine the maximum centric force that
can be applied if the allowable normal stress is 15 ksi in the steel
and 1.6 ksi in the concrete.
2.37 An axial force of 60 kN is applied to the assembly shown by means
of rigid end plates. Determine (a) the normal stress in the brass shell,
(b) the corresponding deformation of the assembly.
2.38 The length of the assembly shown decreases by 0.15 mm when
an axial force is applied by means of rigid end plates. Determine
(a) the magnitude of the applied force, (b) the corresponding
stress in the steel core.
Problems
5 ft
10 in.
10 in.
Fig. P2.35
250 mm
Steel core
E = 200 GPa
Brass shell
E = 105 GPa
5 mm 	5 mm
5 mm 	5 mm
20 mm 	20 mm
Fig. P2.37 and P2.38

-- 106 of 897 --

92
2.39 Two cylindrical rods, AC made of aluminum and CD made of
steel, are joined at C and restrained by rigid supports at A and D.
For the loading shown and knowing that Ea = 10.4 × 106 psi and
Es = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the reactions at A and D, (b) the
deflection of point C.
2.40 Three steel rods (E = 200 GPa) support a 36-kN load P. Each of
the rods AB and CD has a 200-mm2 cross-sectional area, and rod EF
has a 625-mm2 cross-sectional area. Neglecting the deformation of
bar BED, determine (a) the change in length of rod EF, (b) the stress
in each rod.
2.41 A brass bolt (Eb = 15 × 106 psi) of 3
8 -in. diameter is fitted inside a
steel tube (Es = 29 × 106 psi) of 7
8 -in. outer diameter and 1
8 -in. wall
thickness. After the nut has been fit snugly, it is tightened a one-
quarter full turn. Knowing that the bolt is single-threaded with a
0.1-in. pitch, determine the normal stress in (a) the bolt, (b) the tube.
2.42 A steel tube (E = 200 GPa) with a 32-mm outer diameter and a
4-mm wall thickness is placed in a vise, which is adjusted so that
its jaws just touch the ends of the tube without exerting pressure on
them. The two forces shown are then applied to the tube. After these
forces are applied, the vise is adjusted to decrease the distance
between its jaws by 0.2 mm. Determine (a) the forces exerted by the
vise on the tube at A and D, (b) the change in length of portion BC
of the tube.
80 mm
A 	D
B 	C
80 mm 	80 mm
42 kN 	30 kN
Fig. P2.42
2.43 Each of the rods BD and CE is made of brass (E = 105 GPa) and
has a cross-sectional area of 200 mm2. Determine the deflection of
end A of the rigid member ABC caused by the 2-kN load.
Fig. P2.43
A B
D 	E
F
C
550 mm
75 mm 	100 mm
225 mm	2 kN
C	A
D	B
500 mm
400 mm
E
F
P
Fig. P2.40
A 	C 	D
18 kips 	14 kips
8 in. 	10 in. 	10 in.
B
-in. diameter	1 1
8 	-in. diameter	1 5
8
Fig. P2.39
12 in.
Fig. P2.41

-- 107 of 897 --

93
2.44 The rigid bar AD is supported by two steel wires of 1
16 -in. diameter
(E = 29 × 106 psi) and a pin and bracket at A. Knowing that the
wires were initially taut, determine (a) the additional tension in each
wire when a 220-lb load P is applied at D, (b) the corresponding
deflection of point D.
P
F
C
D
B	A
E
12 in.	12 in.	12 in.
8 in.
10 in.
Fig. P2.44
2.45 The rigid bar ABC is suspended from three wires of the same mate-
rial. The cross-sectional area of the wire at B is equal to half of the
cross-sectional area of the wires at A and C. Determine the tension
in each wire caused by the load P shown.
P
A D 	B
L 	L
C
L	3
4
Fig. P2.45
2.46 The rigid bar AD is supported by two steel wires of 1
16 -in. diameter
(E = 29 × 106 psi) and a pin and bracket at D. Knowing that the
wires were initially taut, determine (a) the additional tension in each
wire when a 120-lb load P is applied at B, (b) the corresponding
deflection of point B.
2.47 The assembly shown consists of an aluminum shell (Ea = 70 GPa,
αa = 23.6 × 10−6∕°C) fully bonded to a steel core (Es = 200 GPa,
αs = 11.7 × 10−6∕°C) and the assembly is unstressed at a temperature
of 20°C. Considering only axial deformations, determine the stress
in the aluminum when the temperature reaches 180°C.
200 mm
Aluminum shell
50 mm
Steel
core
20 mm
Fig. P2.47
D
P
B 	C
E
15 in.
8 in.	8 in.	8 in.
F
A
8 in.
Fig. P2.46

-- 108 of 897 --

94
2.48 The brass shell (αb = 20.9 × 10−6∕°C) is fully bonded to the steel
core (αs = 11.7 × 10−6∕°C). Determine the largest allowable increase
in temperature if the stress in the steel core is not to exceed 55 MPa.
2.49 The aluminum shell is fully bonded to the brass core, and the assem-
bly is unstressed at a temperature of 78°F. Considering only axial
deformations, determine the stress when the temperature reaches
180°F in (a) the brass core, (b) the aluminum shell.
Brass core
E = 15 × 106 psi
= 11.6 × 10 –6/°F
Aluminum shell
E = 10.6 × 106 psi
= 12.9 × 10–6/°F
1 in.
2.5 in.
α
α
Fig. P2.49
2.50 The concrete post (Ec = 3.6 × 106 psi and αc = 5.5 × 10−6∕°F) is
reinforced with six steel bars, each of 7
8-in. diameter (Es = 29 × 106 psi
and αs = 6.5 × 10−6∕°F). Determine the normal stresses induced in
the steel and in the concrete by a temperature rise of 65°F.
2.51 A rod consisting of two cylindrical portions AB and BC is restrained
at both ends. Portion AB is made of steel (Es = 200 GPa, αs = 11.7 ×
10−6∕°C) and portion BC is made of brass (Eb = 105 GPa, αb = 20.9
× 10−6∕°C). Knowing that the rod is initially unstressed, determine
the compressive force induced in ABC when there is a temperature
rise of 50°C.
B
C
250 mm
300 mm
A
50-mm diameter
30-mm diameter
Fig. P2.51
2.52 A rod consisting of two cylindrical portions AB and BC is restrained at
both ends. Portion AB is made of steel (Es = 29 × 106 psi, αs = 6.5 ×
10−6∕°F) and portion BC is made of aluminum (Ea = 10.4 × 106 psi,
αa = 13.3 × 10−6∕°F). Knowing that the rod is initially unstressed,
determine (a) the normal stresses induced in portions AB and BC by a
temperature rise of 70°F, (b) the corresponding deflection of point B.
2.53 Solve Prob. 2.52, assuming that portion AB of the composite rod is
made of aluminum and portion BC is made of steel.
250 mm
5 mm	5 mm
5 mm	5 mm 20 mm
20 mm
Steel core
E = 200 GPa
Brass shell
E = 105 GPa
Fig. P2.48
6 ft
10 in.
10 in.
Fig. P2.50
A 	B 	C
1 -in. diameter	1
2
24 in. 	32 in.
2 -in. diameter	1
4
Fig. P2.52

-- 109 of 897 --

95
2.54 The steel rails of a railroad track (Es = 200 GPa, αs = 11.7 ×
10−6∕°C) were laid at a temperature of 6°C. Determine the normal
stress in the rails when the temperature reaches 48°C, assuming that
the rails (a) are welded to form a continuous track, (b) are 10 m long
with 3-mm gaps between them.
2.55 Two steel bars (Es = 200 GPa and αs = 11.7 × 10−6∕°C) are used
to reinforce a brass bar (Eb = 105 GPa, αb = 20.9 × 10−6∕°C) that
is subjected to a load P = 25 kN. When the steel bars were fabri-
cated, the distance between the centers of the holes that were to fit
on the pins was made 0.5 mm smaller than the 2 m needed. The
steel bars were then placed in an oven to increase their length so
that they would just fit on the pins. Following fabrication, the tem-
perature in the steel bars dropped back to room temperature. Deter-
mine (a) the increase in temperature that was required to fit the
steel bars on the pins, (b) the stress in the brass bar after the load
is applied to it.
2.56 Determine the maximum load P that can be applied to the brass bar
of Prob. 2.55 if the allowable stress in the steel bars is 30 MPa and
the allowable stress in the brass bar is 25 MPa.
2.57 An aluminum rod (Ea = 70 GPa, αa = 23.6 × 10−6∕°C) and a steel
link (Es = 200 GPa, αs = 11.7 × 10−6∕°C) have the dimensions
shown at a temperature of 20°C. The steel link is heated until the
aluminum rod can be fitted freely into the link. The temperature of
the whole assembly is then raised to 150°C. Determine the final
normal stress in (a) the rod, (b) the link.
2.58 Knowing that a 0.02-in. gap exists when the temperature is 75°F,
determine (a) the temperature at which the normal stress in the alu-
minum bar will be equal to −11 ksi, (b) the corresponding exact
length of the aluminum bar.
Bronze
A = 2.4 in2
E = 15 × 106 psi
α = 12 × 10 –6/°F
0.02 in.
14 in. 	18 in.
Aluminum
A = 2.8 in 2
E = 10.6 × 10 6 psi
α = 12.9 × 10 –6/°F
Fig. P2.58 and P2.59
2.59 Determine (a) the compressive force in the bars shown after a tem-
perature rise of 180°F, (b) the corresponding change in length of the
bronze bar.
2.60 At room temperature (20°C) a 0.5-mm gap exists between the ends
of the rods shown. At a later time when the temperature has reached
140°C, determine (a) the normal stress in the aluminum rod, (b) the
change in length of the aluminum rod.
15 mm
40 mm
2 m
5 mm
Steel
Brass
Steel
P'
P
Fig. P2.55
20
20 	20 200
0.15
Dimensions in mm
30
A 	A
Section A-A
Fig. P2.57
Aluminum
A = 2000 mm2
E = 75 GPa
= 23 × 10–6/°C
A 	B
300 mm 	250 mm
0.5 mm
Stainless steel
A = 800 mm2
E = 190 GPa
= 17.3 × 10–6/°C	α 	α
Fig. P2.60

-- 110 of 897 --

96 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
2.4 	POISSON’S RATIO
When a homogeneous slender bar is axially loaded, the resulting stress
and strain satisfy Hooke’s law, as long as the elastic limit of the material
is not exceeded. Assuming that the load P is directed along the x axis
(Fig. 2.29a), σx = P∕A, where A is the cross-sectional area of the bar, and
from Hooke’s law,
ε x = σ x/E 	(2.16)
where E is the modulus of elasticity of the material.
Also, the normal stresses on faces perpendicular to the y and z axes
are zero: σy = σz = 0 (Fig. 2.29b). It would be tempting to conclude that
the corresponding strains εy and εz are also zero. This is not the case. In all
engineering materials, the elongation produced by an axial tensile force P
in the direction of the force is accompanied by a contraction in any trans-
verse direction (Fig. 2.30).† In this section and the following sections, all
materials are assumed to be both homogeneous and isotropic (i.e., their
mechanical properties are independent of both position and direction). It
follows that the strain must have the same value for any transverse direction.
Therefore, the loading shown in Fig. 2.29 must have εy = εz. This common
value is the lateral strain. An important constant that relates this lateral
strain to the axial strain for a given material is its Poisson’s ratio, named
after the French mathematician Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840) and
denoted by the Greek letter ν (nu).
ν = − lateral strain
axial strain (2.17)
or
ν = − εy
ε x
= − εz
ε x
(2.18)
for the loading condition represented in Fig. 2.29. Note the use of a minus
sign in these equations to obtain a positive value for ν, as the axial and lateral
strains have opposite signs for all engineering materials.‡ Solving Eq. (2.18)
for εy and εz, and recalling Eq. (2.16), write the following relationships, which
fully describe the condition of strain under an axial load applied in a direction
parallel to the x axis:
ε x = σx
E ε y = ε z = − νσx
E (2.19)
†It also would be tempting, but equally wrong, to assume that the volume of the rod remains
unchanged as a result of the combined effect of the axial elongation and transverse contrac-
tion (see Sec. 2.6).
‡However, some experimental materials, such as polymer foams, expand laterally when
stretched. Since the axial and lateral strains have then the same sign, Poisson’s ratio of these
materials is negative. (See Roderic Lakes, “Foam Structures with a Negative Poisson’s
Ratio,” Science, 27 February 1987, Volume 235, pp. 1038–1040.)
z
y
x
(a)
(b)
P
A	=
0	=
0	=
P
A
σy
σz
σx
Fig. 2.29 	A bar in uniaxial tension and
a representative stress element.
P
P'
Fig. 2.30 	Materials undergo transverse
contraction when elongated under axial load.
Poisson’s Ratio

-- 111 of 897 --

2.5 Multiaxial Loading: Generalized Hooke’s Law 	97
Concept Application 2.7
A 500-mm-long, 16-mm-diameter rod made of a homogenous, isotropic mate-
rial is observed to increase in length by 300 μm, and to decrease in diameter
by 2.4 μm when subjected to an axial 12-kN load. Determine the modulus of
elasticity and Poisson’s ratio of the material.
The cross-sectional area of the rod is
A = πr2 = π(8 × 10−3 m) 2 = 201 × 10−6 m2
Choosing the x axis along the axis of the rod (Fig. 2.31), write
σ x = P
A = 12 × 103 N
201 × 10−6 m2 = 59.7 MPa
ε x = δx
L = 300 μm
500 mm = 600 × 10−6
ε y = δy
d = −2.4 μm
16 mm = −150 × 10−6
From Hooke’s law, σx = Eεx,
E = σx
ε x
= 59.7 MPa
600 × 10−6 = 99.5 GPa
and from Eq. (2.18),
ν = − εy
ε x
= − −150 × 10−6
600 × 10−6 = 0.25
12 kN
L = 500 mm
d = 16 mm
y = – 2.4 μm
x = 300 μm
z
y
x
δ
δ
Fig. 2.31 	Axially loaded rod.
2.5 	MULTIAXIAL LOADING:
GENERALIZED HOOKE’S LAW
All the examples considered so far in this chapter have dealt with slender
members subjected to axial loads, i.e., to forces directed along a single axis.
Consider now the more general case of structural elements that are subjected
to loads acting in all three directions of the coordinate axes and producing
normal stresses σx, σy, and σz that are all different from zero (Fig. 2.32). This
x
y
y
x 	z
z 	σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 2.32 	State of stress for
multiaxial loading.

-- 112 of 897 --

98 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
condition is a multiaxial loading. Note that this is not the general stress con-
dition described in Sec. 1.3, since no shearing stresses are included among
the stresses shown in Fig. 2.32.
Consider an element of an isotropic material in the shape of a cube
(Fig. 2.33a). Assume the side of the cube to be equal to unity, since it is
always possible to select the side of the cube as a unit of length. Under
the given multiaxial loading, the element will deform into a rectangular
parallelepiped of sides equal to 1 + εx, 1 + εy, and 1 + εz, where εx, εy,
and εz denote the values of the normal strain in the directions of the three
coordinate axes (Fig. 2.33b). Note that, as a result of the deformations of
the other elements of the material, the element under consideration could
also undergo a translation, but the concern here is with the actual defor-
mation of the element, not with any possible superimposed rigid-body
displacement.
To express the strain components εx, εy, εz in terms of the stress com-
ponents σx, σy, σz, consider the effect of each stress component and combine
the results. This approach will be used repeatedly in this text, and is based on
the principle of superposition. This principle states that the effect of a given
combined loading on a structure can be obtained by determining the effects
of the various loads separately and combining the results, provided that the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. Each effect is linearly related to the load that produces it.
2. The deformation resulting from any given load is small and does not
affect the conditions of application of the other loads.
For multiaxial loading, the first condition is satisfied if the stresses do
not exceed the proportional limit of the material, and the second condition is
also satisfied if the stress on any given face does not cause deformations of
the other faces that are large enough to affect the computation of the stresses
on those faces.
Considering the effect of the stress component σx, recall from Sec. 2.4
that σx causes a strain equal to σx∕E in the x direction and strains equal to
−νσx∕E in each of the y and z directions. Similarly, the stress component σy,
if applied separately, will cause a strain σy∕E in the y direction and strains
−νσy∕E in the other two directions. Finally, the stress component σz causes a
strain σz∕E in the z direction and strains −νσz∕E in the x and y directions.
Combining the results, the components of strain corresponding to the given
multiaxial loading are
ε x = + σx
E − νσy
E − νσz
E
ε y = − νσx
E + σ y
E − νσz
E (2.20)
ε z = − νσx
E − νσ y
E + σz
E
Equations (2.20) are the generalized Hooke’s law for the multiaxial
loading of a homogeneous isotropic material. As indicated earlier, these
results are valid only as long as the stresses do not exceed the proportional
limit and the deformations involved remain small. Also, a positive value for
a stress component signifies tension and a negative value compression. Sim-
ilarly, a positive value for a strain component indicates expansion in the cor-
responding direction and a negative value contraction.
x
(a)
y
z
1
1
1
(b)
1 +
1 +
1 +
z
y
x
z
y
x
σ
σ
σ
ε x
ε y
ε z
Fig. 2.33 	Deformation of unit cube under
multiaxial loading: (a) unloaded; (b) deformed.

-- 113 of 897 --

*2.6 Dilatation and Bulk Modulus 	99
*2.6 	DILATATION AND BULK
MODULUS
This section examines the effect of the normal stresses σx, σy, and σz on
the volume of an element of isotropic material. Consider the element
shown in Fig. 2.33. In its unstressed state, it is in the shape of a cube of
unit volume. Under the stresses σx, σy, σz, it deforms into a rectangular
parallelepiped of volume
v = (1 + ε x)(1 + ε y)(1 + ε z)
Since the strains εx, εy, εz are much smaller than unity, their products can be
omitted in the expansion of the product. Therefore,
v = 1 + εx + ε y + ε z
The change in volume e of the element is
e = v − 1 = 1 + εx + ε y + ε z − 1
Concept Application 2.8
The steel block shown (Fig. 2.34) is subjected to a uniform pressure on
all its faces. Knowing that the change in length of edge AB is −1.2 × 10−3 in.,
determine (a) the change in length of the other two edges and (b) the
pressure p applied to the faces of the block. Assume E = 29 × 106 psi and
ν = 0.29.
a. Change in Length of Other Edges. 	Substituting σx = σy = σz = −p
into Eqs. (2.20), the three strain components have the common value
εx = ε y = ε z = − p
E (1 − 2ν) 	(1)
Since
ε x = δx∕AB = (−1.2 × 10−3 in.)∕(4 in.)
= −300 × 10−6 in.∕in.
obtain
ε y = ε z = ε x = −300 × 10−6 in./in.
from which
δy = ε y(BC) = (−300 × 10−6 )(2 in.) = −600 × 10−6 in.
δz = ε z(BD) = (−300 × 10−6 )(3 in.) = −900 × 10−6 in.
b. Pressure. 	Solving Eq. (1) for p,
p = − Eε x
1 − 2ν = − (29 × 106 psi)(−300 × 10−6 )
1 − 0.58
= 20.7 ksi
2 in.
3 in.	4 in.
z
y
A
B
D
C
x
Fig. 2.34 	Steel block under uniform
pressure p.

-- 114 of 897 --

100 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
or
e = εx + ε y + ε z 	(2.21)
Since the element originally had a unit volume and Eq. (2.21) gives the change
of this volume, e represents the change in volume per unit volume and is called
the dilatation of the material. Substituting for εx, εy, and εz from Eqs. (2.20)
into (2.21), the change is
e = σx + σ y + σ z
E − 2ν(σx + σ y + σ z)
E
e = 1 − 2ν
E (σ x + σ y + σ z) 	(2.22)†
When a body is subjected to a uniform hydrostatic pressure p, each of
the stress components is equal to −p and Eq. (2.22) yields
e = − 3(1 − 2ν)
E p 	(2.23)
Introducing the constant
k = E
3(1 − 2ν) (2.24)
Eq. (2.23) is given in the form
e = − p
k (2.25)
The constant k is known as the bulk modulus or modulus of compression of
the material, because it is a measure of the material’s resistance to volumetric
change due to the application of a hydrostatic pressure. It is expressed in
pascals or in psi.
Because a stable material subjected to a hydrostatic pressure can only
decrease in volume, the dilatation e in Eq. (2.25) is negative, and the bulk
modulus k is a positive quantity. Referring to Eq. (2.24), 1 − 2ν > 0 or ν < 1
2 .
Recall from Sec. 2.4 that ν is positive for all engineering materials. Thus, for
any engineering material,
0 < ν < 1
2 	(2.26)
Note that an ideal material having ν equal to zero can be stretched in one
direction without any lateral contraction. On the other hand, an ideal material
for which ν = 1
2 and k = ∞ is perfectly incompressible (e = 0). Referring to
Eq. (2.22) and noting that since ν < 1
2 in the elastic range, stretching an
engineering material in one direction, for example in the x direction (σx > 0,
σy = σz = 0), results in an increase of its volume (e > 0).‡
†Since the dilatation e represents a change in volume, it must be independent of the orientation
of the element considered. It then follows from Eqs. (2.21) and (2.22) that the quantities
εx + εy + εz and σx + σy + σz are also independent of the orientation of the element. This
property will be verified in Chap. 7.
‡However, in the plastic range, the volume of the material remains nearly constant.

-- 115 of 897 --

2.7 Shearing Strain 	101
2.7 	SHEARING STRAIN
When we derived in Sec. 2.5 the relations Eqs. (2.20) between normal stresses
and normal strains in a homogeneous isotropic material, we assumed that no
shearing stresses were involved. In the more general stress situation repre-
sented in Fig. 2.35, shearing stresses τxy, τyz, and τzx are present (as well as
the corresponding shearing stresses τyx, τzy, and τxz). These stresses have no
direct effect on the normal strains and, as long as all the deformations involved
remain small, they will not affect the derivation nor the validity of Eqs. (2.20).
The shearing stresses, however, tend to deform a cubic element of material
into an oblique parallelepiped.
Concept Application 2.9
Determine the change in volume ΔV of the steel block shown in Fig. 2.34,
when it is subjected to the hydrostatic pressure p = 180 MPa. Use E = 200 GPa
and ν = 0.29.
From Eq. (2.24), the bulk modulus of steel is
k = E
3(1 − 2ν) = 200 GPa
3(1 − 0.58) = 158.7 GPa
and from Eq. (2.25), the dilatation is
e = − p
k = − 180 MPa
158.7 GPa = −1.134 × 10−3
Since the volume V of the block in its unstressed state is
V = (80 mm)(40 mm)(60 mm) = 192 × 103 mm3
and e represents the change in volume per unit volume, e = ΔV∕V,
ΔV = eV = (−1.134 × 10 −3 )(192 × 103 mm3 )
ΔV = −218 mm3
zy
yz yx
zx	z 	x
y
z
y
x
xy
xz
Q
τ	τ
τ
τ τ
τ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 2.35 	Positive stress components
at point Q for a general state of stress.

-- 116 of 897 --

102 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Consider a cubic element (Fig. 2.36) subjected to only the shearing
stresses τxy and τyx applied to faces of the element respectively perpendicular
to the x and y axes. (Recall from Sec. 1.4 that τxy = τyx.) The cube is observed
to deform into a rhomboid of sides equal to one (Fig. 2.37). Two of the angles
formed by the four faces under stress are reduced from π
2 to π
2 − γ xy, while the
other two are increased from π
2 to π
2 + γxy. The small angle γxy (expressed in
radians) reflects the deformation of the cube into a rhomboid and defines the
shearing strain corresponding to the x and y directions. When the deformation
involves a reduction of the angle formed by the two faces oriented toward the
positive x and y axes (as shown in Fig. 2.37), the shearing strain γxy is positive;
otherwise, it is negative.
As a result of the deformations of the other elements of the material,
the element under consideration also undergoes an overall rotation. The con-
cern here is with the actual deformation of the element, not with any possible
superimposed rigid-body displacement.†
Plotting successive values of τxy against the corresponding values of γxy,
the shearing stress-strain diagram is obtained for the material. (This can be
accomplished by carrying out a torsion test, as you will see in Chap. 3.) This
diagram is similar to the normal stress-strain diagram from the tensile test
described earlier; however, the values for the yield strength, ultimate strength,
etc., are about half as large in shear as they are in tension. As it is for the
normal stress-strain diagram, the initial portion of the shearing stress-strain
diagram is a straight line. For values of the shearing stress in this straight-line
portion (i.e., that do not exceed the proportional limit in shear), it can be
written for any homogeneous isotropic material that
τxy = Gγ xy 	(2.27)
This relationship is Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain, and the con-
stant G is called the modulus of rigidity or shear modulus of the material.
yx
yx
z
y
x
xy 	xy
1
1
1
τ
τ
τ
τ
Fig. 2.36 	Unit cubic element subjected
to shearing stress.
1
1
z
y
x
yx
xy
xy	2 +
xy	2 –	π
π
γ
γ
τ
τ
Fig. 2.37 	Deformation of unit cubic
element due to shearing stress.
†In defining the strain γxy, some authors arbitrarily assume that the actual deformation of the
element is accompanied by a rigid-body rotation where the horizontal faces of the element do
not rotate. The strain γxy is then represented by the angle through which the other two faces
have rotated (Fig. 2.38). Others assume a rigid-body rotates where the horizontal faces rotate
through 1
2 γxy counterclockwise and the vertical faces through 1
2 γxy clockwise (Fig. 2.39). Since
both assumptions are unnecessary and may lead to confusion, in this text you will associate
the shearing strain γxy with the change in the angle formed by the two faces, rather than with
the rotation of a given face under restrictive conditions.
y
x
xy	2 –
xy
π 	γ
γ
Fig. 2.38 	Cubic element as viewed
in xy plane after rigid rotation.
y
x
xy	2 –
xy	2
1
xy	2
1
π
γ
γ
γ
Fig. 2.39 	Cubic element as viewed
in xy plane with equal rotation of x and
y faces.

-- 117 of 897 --

2.7 Shearing Strain 	103
Since the strain γxy is defined as an angle in radians, it is dimensionless, and
the modulus G is expressed in the same units as τxy in pascals or in psi. The
modulus of rigidity G of any given material is less than one-half, but more
than one-third of the modulus of elasticity E of that material.†
Now consider a small element of material subjected to shearing
stresses τyz and τzy (Fig. 2.40a), where the shearing strain γyz is the change
in the angle formed by the faces under stress. The shearing strain γzx is found
in a similar way by considering an element subjected to shearing stresses
τzx and τxz (Fig. 2.40b). For values of the stress that do not exceed the pro-
portional limit, you can write two additional relationships:
τyz = Gγ yz 	τ zx = Gγ zx 	(2.28)
where the constant G is the same as in Eq. (2.27).
For the general stress condition represented in Fig. 2.35, and as long as
none of the stresses involved exceeds the corresponding proportional limit,
you can apply the principle of superposition and combine the results. The
generalized Hooke’s law for a homogeneous isotropic material under the most
general stress condition is
ε x = + σx
E − νσy
E − νσz
E
ε y = − νσx
E + σy
E − νσz
E
ε z = − νσx
E − νσ y
E + σ z
E (2.29)
γxy = τ xy
G γ yz = τ yz
G γ zx = τzx
G
An examination of Eqs. (2.29) leads us to three distinct constants,
E, ν, and G, which are used to predict the deformations caused in a given
material by an arbitrary combination of stresses. Only two of these con-
stants need be determined experimentally for any given material. The next
section explains that the third constant can be obtained through a very
simple computation.
†See Prob. 2.90.
yz
z
y
x
zy
(a)
z
y
x
zx 	xz
(b)
τ
τ
τ	τ
x
(a)
z
y
x
zx 	xz
(b)
τ	τ
Fig. 2.40 	States of pure shear in: (a) yz plane; (b) xz plane.

-- 118 of 897 --

104 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Concept Application 2.10
A rectangular block of a material with a modulus of rigidity G = 90 ksi is
bonded to two rigid horizontal plates. The lower plate is fixed, while the
upper plate is subjected to a horizontal force P (Fig. 2.41a). Knowing that
the upper plate moves through 0.04 in. under the action of the force, deter-
mine (a) the average shearing strain in the material and (b) the force P
exerted on the upper plate.
a. Shearing Strain. 	The coordinate axes are centered at the midpoint C
of edge AB and directed as shown (Fig. 2.41b). The shearing strain γxy is equal
to the angle formed by the vertical and the line CF joining the midpoints of
edges AB and DE. Noting that this is a very small angle and recalling that it
should be expressed in radians, write
γ xy ≈ tan γ xy = 0.04 in.
2 in. γ xy = 0.020 rad
b. Force Exerted on Upper Plate. 	Determine the shearing stress τxy in
the material. Using Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain,
τxy = Gγ xy = (90 × 103 psi)(0.020 rad) = 1800 psi
The force exerted on the upper plate is
P = τ xy A = (1800 psi)(8 in.)(2.5 in.) = 36.0 × 103 lb
= 36.0 kips
P
2.5 in.
2 in.
8 in.
(a)
P
2 in.
0.04 in.
A
F
E
C
B
D
z
y
x
xy
(b)
γ
Fig. 2.41 	(a) Rectangular block loaded
in shear. (b) Deformed block showing the
shearing strain.
2.8 	DEFORMATIONS UNDER
AXIAL LOADING—RELATION
BETWEEN E, ν, AND G
Section 2.4 showed that a slender bar subjected to an axial tensile load P
directed along the x axis will elongate in the x direction and contract in both
of the transverse y and z directions. If εx denotes the axial strain, the lateral
strain is expressed as εy = εz = −νεx, where ν is Poisson’s ratio. Thus an
element in the shape of a cube of side equal to one and oriented as shown
in Fig. 2.42a will deform into a rectangular parallelepiped of sides 1 + εx,
1 − νεx, and 1 − νεx. (Note that only one face of the element is shown in the
figure.) On the other hand, if the element is oriented at 45° to the axis of the
load (Fig. 2.42b), the face shown deforms into a rhombus. Therefore, the axial
load P causes a shearing strain γ′ equal to the amount by which each of the
angles shown in Fig. 2.42b increases or decreases.†
The fact that shearing strains, as well as normal strains, result from an
axial loading is not a surprise, since it was observed at the end of Sec. 1.4
that an axial load P causes normal and shearing stresses of equal magnitude
on four of the faces of an element oriented at 45° to the axis of the member.
This was illustrated in Fig. 1.38, which has been repeated here. It was also
†Note that the load P also produces normal strains in the element shown in Fig. 2.42b (see
Prob. 2.72).
Fig. 2.42 	Representations of strain in an
axially loaded bar: (a) cubic strain element
faces aligned with coordinate axes; (b) cubic
strain element faces rotated 45° about z axis.
y
x	1
1
1 +
1 –
(a)
P
(b)
2	2 	'	' 	–	+
P	P'
P'
π	π 	γ	γ
νε x
ε x

-- 119 of 897 --

2.8 Deformations Under Axial Loading—Relation Between E, ν, and G 	105
shown in Sec. 1.3 that the shearing stress is maximum on a plane forming an
angle of 45° with the axis of the load. It follows from Hooke’s law for shear-
ing stress and strain that the shearing strain γ′ associated with the element of
Fig. 2.42b is also maximum: γ′ = γm.
While a more detailed study of the transformations of strain is cov-
ered in Chap. 7, this section provides a relationship between the maximum
shearing strain γ′ = γm associated with the element of Fig. 2.42b and the
normal strain εx in the direction of the load. Consider the prismatic element
obtained by intersecting the cubic element of Fig. 2.42a by a diagonal plane
(Fig. 2.43a and b). Referring to Fig. 2.42a, this new element will deform
into that shown in Fig. 2.43c, which has horizontal and vertical sides equal
to 1 + εx and 1 − νεx. But the angle formed by the oblique and horizontal
faces of Fig. 2.43b is precisely half of one of the right angles of the cubic
element in Fig. 2.42b. The angle β into which this angle deforms must be
equal to half of π∕2 − γm. Therefore,
β = π
4 − γm
2
Applying the formula for the tangent of the difference of two angles,
tan β =
tan π
4 − tan γm
2
1 + tan π
4 tan γ m
2
=
1 − tan γm
2
1 + tan γ m
2
or since γm∕2 is a very small angle,
tan β =
1 − γm
2
1 + γ m
2
(2.30)
From Fig. 2.43c, observe that
tan β = 1 − νεx
1 + ε x
(2.31)
Equating the right-hand members of Eqs. (2.30) and (2.31) and solving for
γm, results in
γm = (1 + ν)εx
1 + 1 − ν
2 ε x
Since ε x ≪ 1, the denominator in the expression obtained can be assumed
equal to one. Therefore,
γ m = (1 + v)ε x 	(2.32)
which is the desired relation between the maximum shearing strain γm and the
axial strain εx.
To obtain a relation among the constants E, ν, and G, we recall that, by
Hooke’s law, γm = τm∕G, and for an axial loading, εx = σx∕E. Equation (2.32)
can be written as
τm
G = (1 + ν)σx
E
(b)
(a)
m 	m
P
P'
P'
P
P
2A
z
x
y
' 45°
x
x 	P
A
P
2A
'
'
' =
=
=
σ
σ
σ	σ
σ
σ
τ 	τ
Fig. 1.38 	(repeated)
1	1
1 	1
4
1
(a) 	(b)
π
1	1	1
1 	1
– 	x
1 + x
4
1
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
β
π ν ε
ε
1	1	1
1 	1
– 	x
1 + x
4
1
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
β
π ν ε
ε
Fig. 2.43 	(a) Cubic strain unit element,
to be sectioned on a diagonal plane.
(b) Undeformed section of unit element.
(c) Deformed section of unit element.

-- 120 of 897 --

106 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
or
E
G = (1 + ν) σx
τ m
(2.33)
Recall from Fig. 1.38 that σx = P∕A and τm = P∕2A, where A is the cross-
sectional area of the member. Thus, σx∕τm = 2. Substituting this value into
Eq. (2.33) and dividing both members by 2, the relationship is
E
2G = 1 + ν 	(2.34)
which can be used to determine one of the constants E, ν, or G from the other
two. For example, solving Eq. (2.34) for G,
G = E
2(1 + ν) (2.35)
*2.9 	STRESS-STRAIN
RELATIONSHIPS FOR
FIBER-REINFORCED
COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Fiber-reinforced composite materials are fabricated by embedding fibers of a
strong, stiff material into a weaker, softer material called a matrix. Unlike the
homogeneous isotropic materials we have considered up to this point, the
relationship between the normal stress and the corresponding normal strain
created in a lamina or layer of a composite material depends upon the direc-
tion in which the load is applied. Different moduli of elasticity, Ex, Ey, and
Ez, are required to describe the relationship between normal stress and normal
strain, according to whether the load is applied parallel to the fibers, perpen-
dicular to the layer, or in a transverse direction.
Consider again the layer of composite material discussed in Sec. 2.1D
and subject it to a uniaxial tensile load parallel to its fibers (Fig. 2.44a). It is
assumed that the properties of the fibers and of the matrix have been com-
bined or “smeared” into a fictitious, equivalent homogeneous material pos-
sessing these combined properties. In a small element of that layer of smeared
material (Fig. 2.44b), the corresponding normal stress is σx and σy = σz = 0.
As indicated in Sec. 2.1D, the corresponding normal strain in the x direction
is εx = σx∕Ex, where Ex is the modulus of elasticity of the composite material
in the x direction. As for isotropic materials, the elongation of the material in
the x direction is accompanied by contractions in the y and z directions. These
contractions depend upon the placement of the fibers in the matrix and gen-
erally will be different. Therefore, the lateral strains εy and εz also will be
different, and the corresponding Poisson’s ratios are
ν xy = − εy
ε x
and 	νxz = − εz
ε x
(2.36)
Note that the first subscript in each of the Poisson’s ratios νxy and νxz in
Eqs. (2.36) refers to the direction of the load and the second to the direction
of the contraction.
Layer of
material
Fibers
Load
Load
y
z
x
(a)
y'
z' x
x'
(b)
x
σ
σ
Fig. 2.44 	Orthotropic fiber-reinforced
composite material under uniaxial tensile load.

-- 121 of 897 --

*2.9 Stress-Strain Relationships for Fiber-Reinforced Composite Materials 	107
In the case of the multiaxial loading of a layer of a composite mate-
rial, equations similar to Eqs. (2.20) of Sec. 2.5 can be used to describe
the stress-strain relationship. In this case, three different values of the mod-
ulus of elasticity and six different values of Poisson’s ratio are involved.
We write
εx = σx
E x
− νyx σ y
E y
− νzx σ z
E z
εy = − νxy σ x
E x
+ σy
E y
− νzy σ z
E z
(2.37)
ε z = − νxzσ x
E x
− νyzσ y
E y
+ σz
E z
Equations (2.37) can be considered as defining the transformation of
stress into strain for the given layer. It follows from a general property
of such transformations that the coefficients of the stress components are
symmetric:
νxy
E x
= νyx
E y
νyz
E y
= νzy
E z
νzx
E z
= νxz
E x
(2.38)
While different, these equations show that Poisson’s ratios νxy and νyx are not
independent; either of them can be obtained from the other if the correspond-
ing values of the modulus of elasticity are known. The same is true of νyz and
νzy, and of νzx and νxz.
Consider now the effect of shearing stresses on the faces of a small
element of smeared layer. As discussed in Sec. 2.7 for isotropic materials,
these stresses come in pairs of equal and opposite vectors applied to opposite
sides of the given element and have no effect on the normal strains. Thus,
Eqs. (2.37) remain valid. The shearing stresses, however, create shearing
strains that are defined by equations similar to the last three of Eqs. (2.29) of
Sec. 2.7, except that three different values of the modulus of rigidity, Gxy, Gyz,
and Gzx, must be used:
γxy = τxy
Gxy
γ yz = τyz
Gyz
γzx = τzx
Gzx
(2.39)
The fact that the three components of strain εx, εy, and εz can be
expressed in terms of the normal stresses only and do not depend upon any
shearing stresses characterizes orthotropic materials and distinguishes them
from other anisotropic materials.
As in Sec. 2.1D, a flat laminate is obtained by superposing a number
of layers or laminas. If the fibers in all layers are given the same orientation
to withstand an axial tensile load, the laminate itself will be orthotropic. If
the lateral stability of the laminate is increased by positioning some of its
layers so that their fibers are at a right angle to the fibers of the other layers,
the resulting laminate also will be orthotropic. On the other hand, if any of
the layers of a laminate are positioned so that their fibers are neither parallel
nor perpendicular to the fibers of other layers, the lamina generally will not
be orthotropic.†
†For more information on fiber-reinforced composite materials, see Hyer, M. W., Stress
Analysis of Fiber-Reinforced Composite Materials, DEStech Publications, Inc., Lancaster,
PA, 2009.

-- 122 of 897 --

108 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Concept Application 2.11
A 60-mm cube is made from layers of graphite epoxy with fibers aligned in
the x direction. The cube is subjected to a compressive load of 140 kN in the
x direction. The properties of the composite material are Ex = 155.0 GPa,
Ey = 12.10 GPa, Ez = 12.10 GPa, νxy = 0.248, νxz = 0.248, and νyz = 0.458.
Determine the changes in the cube dimensions, knowing that (a) the cube is
free to expand in the y and z directions (Fig. 2.45a); and (b) the cube is free
to expand in the z direction, but is restrained from expanding in the y direction
by two fixed frictionless plates (Fig. 2.45b).
y
z
140 kN
60 mm
60 mm
60 mm
140 kN
x
(a)
y
z
140 kN
60 mm
60 mm
Fixed
frictionless
plates
60 mm
140 kN
x
(b)
Fig. 2.45 	Graphite-epoxy cube undergoing compression loading along the fiber
direction; (a) unrestrained cube; (b) cube restrained in y direction.
a. Free in y and z Directions. 	Determine the stress σx in the direction
of loading.
σx = P
A = −140 × 103 N
(0.060 m)(0.060 m) = −38.89 MPa
Since the cube is not loaded or restrained in the y and z directions, we have
σy = σz = 0. Thus, the right-hand members of Eqs. (2.37) reduce to their first
terms. Substituting the given data into these equations,
εx = σx
E x
= −38.89 MPa
155.0 GPa = −250.9 × 10−6
εy = − νxy σ x
E x
= − (0.248)(−38.89 MPa)
155.0 GPa = +62.22 × 10−6
ε z = − νxzσ x
E x
= − (0.248)(−38.69 MPa)
155.0 GPa = +62.22 × 10−6
The changes in the cube dimensions are obtained by multiplying the corre-
sponding strains by the length L = 0.060 m of the side of the cube:
δx = ε x L = (−250.9 × 10−6 )(0.060 m) = −15.05 μm
δy = ε y L = (+62.2 × 10−6 )(0.060 m) = +3.73 μm
δz = ε zL = (+62.2 × 10−6 )(0.060 m) = +3.73 μm
(continued)

-- 123 of 897 --

*2.9 Stress-Strain Relationships for Fiber-Reinforced Composite Materials 	109
b. Free in z Direction, Restrained in y Direction. 	The stress in the
x direction is the same as in part a, namely, σx = 38.89 MPa. Since the
cube is free to expand in the z direction as in part a, σz = 0. But since
the cube is now restrained in the y direction, the stress σy is not zero. On
the other hand, since the cube cannot expand in the y direction, δy = 0.
Thus, εy = δy∕L = 0. Set σz = 0 and εy = 0 in the second of Eqs. (2.37)
and solve that equation for σy:
σy = (
Ey
E x) ν xy σ x = (
12.10
155.0)(0.248)(−38.89 MPa)
= −752.9 kPa
Now that the three components of stress have been determined, use the first
and last of Eqs. (2.37) to compute the strain components εx and εz. But the
first of these equations contains Poisson’s ratio νyx, and as you saw earlier this
ratio is not equal to the ratio νxy that was among the given data. To find νyx,
use the first of Eqs. (2.38) and write
νyx = (
Ey
E x) ν xy = (
12.10
155.0)(0.248) = 0.01936
Now set σz = 0 in the first and third of Eqs. (2.37) and substitute the given
values of Ex, Ey, νxz, and νyz, as well as the values obtained for σx, σy, and νyx,
resulting in
εx = σx
E x
− νyx σ y
E y
= −38.89 MPa
155.0 GPa − (0.01936)(−752.9 kPa)
12.10 GPa
= −249.7 × 10−6
ε z = − νxzσ x
E x
− νyzσ y
E y
= − (0.248)(−38.89 MPa)
155.0 GPa − (0.458)(−752.9 kPa)
12.10 GPa
= +90.72 × 10−6
The changes in the cube dimensions are obtained by multiplying the corre-
sponding strains by the length L = 0.060 m of the side of the cube:
δx = ε x L = (−249.7 × 10−6 )(0.060 m) = −14.98 μm
δy = ε y L = (0)(0.060 m) = 0
δz = ε zL = (+90.72 × 10−6 )(0.060 m) = +5.44 μm
Comparing the results of parts a and b, note that the difference between
the values for the deformation δx in the direction of the fibers is negligi-
ble. However, the difference between the values for the lateral deforma-
tion δz is not negligible when the cube is restrained from deforming in
the y direction.

-- 124 of 897 --

110 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Sample Problem 2.5
A circle of diameter d = 9 in. is scribed on an unstressed aluminum plate
of thickness t = 3
4 in. Forces acting in the plane of the plate later cause
normal stresses σx = 12 ksi and σz = 20 ksi. For E = 10 × 106 psi and ν = 1
3 ,
determine the change in (a) the length of diameter AB, (b) the length of
diameter CD, (c) the thickness of the plate, and (d) the volume of the plate.
STRATEGY: 	You can use the generalized Hooke’s law to determine the
components of strain. These strains can then be used to evaluate the various
dimensional changes to the plate, and through the dilatation, also assess
the volume change.
ANALYSIS:
Hooke’s Law. 	Note that σy = 0. Using Eqs. (2.20), find the strain in
each of the coordinate directions.
εx = + σx
E − νσy
E − νσz
E
= 1
10 × 106 psi[(12 ksi) − 0 − 1
3(20 ksi)] = +0.533 × 10−3 in./in.
εy = − νσx
E + σ y
E − νσz
E
= 1
10 × 106 psi[− 1
3(12 ksi) + 0 − 1
3 (20 ksi)] = −1.067 × 10−3 in./in.
εz = − νσx
E − νσy
E + σz
E
= 1
10 × 106 psi[− 1
3 (12 ksi) − 0 + (20 ksi)] = +1.600 × 10−3 in./in.
a. Diameter AB. 	The change in length is δB∕A = εx d.
δB∕A = ε x d = (+0.533 × 10−3 in./in.)(9 in.)
δB∕A = +4.8 × 10 −3 in. 	◂
b. Diameter CD.
δC∕D = ε zd = (+1.600 × 10−3 in./in.)(9 in.)
δC∕D = +14.4 × 10 −3 in. 	◂
c. Thickness. 	Recalling that t = 3
4 in.,
δt = ε y t = (−1.067 × 10−3 in./in.)( 3
4 in.)
δt = −0.800 × 10 −3 in. 	◂
d. Volume of the Plate. 	Using Eq. (2.21),
e = ε x + ε y + ε z = (+0.533 − 1.067 + 1.600)10−3 = +1.067 × 10−3
ΔV = eV = +1.067 × 10−3 [(15 in.)(15 in.)( 3
4 in.)]
ΔV = +0.180 in3 	◂
15 in.
15 in.
z
y
x
A
B
C
D
σxσz

-- 125 of 897 --

111
2.61 In a standard tensile test, a steel rod of 7
8-in. diameter is subjected to a
tension force of 17 kips. Knowing that ν = 0.30 and E = 29 × 106 psi,
determine (a) the elongation of the rod in an 8-in. gage length, (b) the
change in diameter of the rod.
2.62 A 2-m length of an aluminum pipe of 240-mm outer diameter and
10-mm wall thickness is used as a short column to carry a 640-kN
centric axial load. Knowing that E = 73 GPa and ν = 0.33, determine
(a) the change in length of the pipe, (b) the change in its outer
diameter, (c) the change in its wall thickness.
640 kN
2 m
Fig. P2.62
2.63 The change in diameter of a large steel bolt is carefully measured as
the nut is tightened. Knowing that E = 200 GPa and ν = 0.30,
determine the internal force in the bolt if the diameter is observed
to decrease by 13 μm.
2.64 A 2.75-kN tensile load is applied to a test coupon made from 1.6-mm
flat steel plate (E = 200 GPa, ν = 0.30). Determine the resulting
change in (a) the 50-mm gage length, (b) the width of portion AB
of the test coupon, (c) the thickness of portion AB, (d) the cross-
sectional area of portion AB.
2.75 kN	2.75 kN
50 mm
A 	B
12 mm
Fig. P2.64
Problems
8 in.
17 kips 	17 kips
-in. diameter	7
8
Fig. P2.61
60 mm
Fig. P2.63

-- 126 of 897 --

112
2.65 In a standard tensile test, an aluminum rod of 20-mm diameter is
subjected to a tension force of P = 30 kN. Knowing that ν = 0.35
and E = 70 GPa, determine (a) the elongation of the rod in a 150-mm
gage length, (b) the change in diameter of the rod.
2.66 A line of slope 4:10 has been scribed on a cold-rolled yellow-brass
plate, 6 in. wide and 1
4 in. thick. Knowing that E = 15 × 106 psi and
ν = 0.34, determine the slope of the line when the plate is subjected
to a 45-kip centric axial load as shown.
10
8 in.
6 in.	4
45 kips 	45 kips
Fig. P2.66
2.67 The brass rod AD is fitted with a jacket that is used to apply a hydro-
static pressure of 48 MPa to the 240-mm portion BC of the rod. Know-
ing that E = 105 GPa and ν = 0.33, determine (a) the change in the
total length AD, (b) the change in diameter at the middle of the rod.
2.68 A fabric used in air-inflated structures is subjected to a biaxial load-
ing that results in normal stresses σx = 18 ksi and σz = 24 ksi.
Knowing that the properties of the fabric can be approximated as E
= 12.6 × 106 psi and ν = 0.34, determine the change in length of
(a) side AB, (b) side BC, (c) diagonal AC.
3 in.
4 in.
z
y
x
A
B
C
D
σx	σ z
Fig. P2.68
2.69 A 1-in. square was scribed on the side of a large steel pressure ves-
sel. After pressurization the biaxial stress condition at the square is
as shown. Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi and ν = 0.30, determine
the change in length of (a) side AB, (b) side BC, (c) diagonal AC.
1 in.
A 	B
C	D
1 in.
σx = 12 ksi
σy = 6 ksi
Fig. P2.69
20-mm diameter
150 mm
P'
P
Fig. P2.65
240 mm 600 mm
C
D
A
B
50 mm
Fig. P2.67

-- 127 of 897 --

113
2.70 The block shown is made of a magnesium alloy for which E = 45 GPa
and ν = 0.35. Knowing that σx = −180 MPa, determine (a) the
magnitude of σy for which the change in the height of the block will
be zero, (b) the corresponding change in the area of the face ABCD,
(c) the corresponding change in the volume of the block.
40 mm
100 mm 	x	z
y
C
B	D
G
F
A
E
25 mm
σ x
σy
Fig. P2.70
2.71 The homogeneous plate ABCD is subjected to a biaxial loading as
shown. It is known that σz = σ0 and that the change in length of the
plate in the x direction must be zero, that is, εx = 0. Denoting by E
the modulus of elasticity and by ν Poisson’s ratio, determine (a) the
required magnitude of σx, (b) the ratio σ0∕εz·
z
y
x
A
B
C
D
σx	σ z
Fig. P2.71
2.72 For a member under axial loading, express the normal strain ε′ in a
direction forming an angle of 45° with the axis of the load in terms
of the axial strain εx by (a) comparing the hypotenuses of the triangles
shown in Fig. 2.43, which represent respectively an element before
and after deformation, (b) using the values of the corresponding
stresses σ′ and σx shown in Fig. 1.38, and the generalized Hooke’s law.
2.73 In many situations it is known that the normal stress in a given
direction is zero. For example, σz = 0 in the case of the thin plate
shown. For this case, which is known as plane stress, show that if
the strains εx and εy have been determined experimentally, we can
express σx, σy, and εz as follows:
σ x = E εx + νε y
1 − ν2
σ y = E εy + νε x
1 − ν2
ε z = − ν
1 − ν (ε x + ε y)
σx
σy
Fig. P2.73

-- 128 of 897 --

114
2.74 In many situations physical constraints prevent strain from occurring
in a given direction. For example, εz = 0 in the case shown, where
longitudinal movement of the long prism is prevented at every point.
Plane sections perpendicular to the longitudinal axis remain plane
and the same distance apart. Show that for this situation, which is
known as plane strain, we can express σz, εx, and εy as follows:
σ z = ν(σ x + σ y)
εx = 1
E [(1 − ν2 )σ x − ν(1 + ν)σy]
εy = 1
E [(1 − ν2 )σ y − ν(1 + ν)σx]
y
x
z 	(a) 	(b)
σx
σy
σ z
Fig. P2.74
2.75 The plastic block shown is bonded to a rigid support and to a verti-
cal plate to which a 55-kip load P is applied. Knowing that for the
plastic used G = 150 ksi, determine the deflection of the plate.
2.76 What load P should be applied to the plate of Prob. 2.75 to produce
a 1
16 -in. deflection?
2.77 Two blocks of rubber with a modulus of rigidity G = 12 MPa are
bonded to rigid supports and to a plate AB. Knowing that c = 100 mm
and P = 45 kN, determine the smallest allowable dimensions
a and b of the blocks if the shearing stress in the rubber is not to
exceed 1.4 MPa and the deflection of the plate is to be at least 5 mm.
a 	a
c
b
A
B
P
Fig. P2.77 and P2.78
2.78 Two blocks of rubber with a modulus of rigidity G = 10 MPa are
bonded to rigid supports and to a plate AB. Knowing that b = 200 mm
and c = 125 mm, determine the largest allowable load P and the
smallest allowable thickness a of the blocks if the shearing stress in
the rubber is not to exceed 1.5 MPa and the deflection of the plate
is to be at least 6 mm.
4.8 in.
3.2 in.
2 in. 	P
Fig. P2.75

-- 129 of 897 --

115
2.79 An elastomeric bearing (G = 130 psi) is used to support a bridge
girder as shown to provide flexibility during earthquakes. The beam
must not displace more than 3
8 in. when a 5-kip lateral load is applied
as shown. Knowing that the maximum allowable shearing stress is
60 psi, determine (a) the smallest allowable dimension b, (b) the
smallest required thickness a.
8 in.
b
a
P
Fig. P2.79
2.80 For the elastomeric bearing in Prob. 2.79 with b = 10 in. and
a = 1 in., determine the shearing modulus G and the shear stress
τ for a maximum lateral load P = 5 kips and a maximum dis-
placement δ = 0.4 in.
2.81 Two blocks of rubber, each of width w = 60 mm, are bonded to rigid
supports and to the movable plate AB. Knowing that a force of mag-
nitude P = 19 kN causes a deflection δ = 3 mm of plate AB, deter-
mine the modulus of rigidity of the rubber used.
180 mm
35 mm A
B
ω
35 mm
P
δ
Fig. P2.81 and P2.82
2.82 Two blocks of rubber with a modulus of rigidity G = 7.5 MPa are
bonded to rigid supports and to the movable plate AB. Denoting
by P the magnitude of the force applied to the plate and by δ the
corresponding deflection, and knowing that the width of each block
is w = 80 mm, determine the effective spring constant, k = P∕δ,
of the system.

-- 130 of 897 --

116
*2.83 A 6-in.-diameter solid steel sphere is lowered into the ocean to a
point where the pressure is 7.1 ksi (about 3 miles below the surface).
Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi and ν = 0.30, determine (a) the
decrease in diameter of the sphere, (b) the decrease in volume of the
sphere, (c) the percent increase in the density of the sphere.
*2.84 (a) For the axial loading shown, determine the change in height
and the change in volume of the brass cylinder shown. (b) Solve
part a, assuming that the loading is hydrostatic with σx = σy = σz =
−70 MPa.
*2.85 Determine the dilatation e and the change in volume of the 8-in.
length of the rod shown if (a) the rod is made of steel with E =
29 × 106 psi and ν = 0.30, (b) the rod is made of aluminum with
E = 10.6 × 106 psi and ν = 0.35.
*2.86 Determine the change in volume of the 50-mm gage length seg-
ment AB in Prob. 2.64 (a) by computing the dilatation of the
material, (b) by subtracting the original volume of portion AB
from its final volume.
*2.87 A vibration isolation support consists of a rod A of radius R1 = 10 mm
and a tube B of inner radius R2 = 25 mm bonded to an 80-mm-long
hollow rubber cylinder with a modulus of rigidity G = 12 MPa.
Determine the largest allowable force P that can be applied to rod A
if its deflection is not to exceed 2.50 mm.
*2.88 A vibration isolation support consists of a rod A of radius R1 and a
tube B of inner radius R2 bonded to an 80-mm-long hollow rubber
cylinder with a modulus of rigidity G = 10.93 MPa. Determine the
required value of the ratio R2∕R1 if a 10-kN force P is to cause a
2-mm deflection of rod A.
*2.89 The material constants E, G, k, and ν are related by Eqs. (2.24)
and (2.34). Show that any one of the constants may be expressed
in terms of any other two constants. For example, show that
(a) k = GE∕(9G − 3E) and (b) ν = (3k − 2G)∕(6k + 2G).
*2.90 Show that for any given material, the ratio G∕E of the modulus of
rigidity over the modulus of elasticity is always less than 1
2 but more
than 1
3 . [Hint: Refer to Eq. (2.34) and to Sec. 2.6.]
*2.91 A composite cube with 40-mm sides and the properties shown is
made with glass polymer fibers aligned in the x direction. The
cube is constrained against deformations in the y and z directions
and is subjected to a tensile load of 65 kN in the x direction.
Determine (a) the change in the length of the cube in the x direc-
tion and (b) the stresses σx, σy, and σz.
*2.92 The composite cube of Prob. 2.91 is constrained against defor-
mation in the z direction and elongated in the x direction by
0.035 mm due to a tensile load in the x direction. Determine
(a) the stresses σx, σy, and σz and (b) the change in the dimen-
sion in the y direction.
E = 105 GPa
ν = 0.33
135 mm
85 mm
σ y = – 58 MPa
Fig. P2.84
11 kips	11 kips
8 in.
1 in. diameter
Fig. P2.85
A
B
R1
80 mm
R2
P
Fig. P2.87 and P2.88
y
z
x
νxz = 0.254	Ex = 50 GPa
E z = 15.2 GPa
E y = 15.2 GPa 	νxy = 0.254
νzy = 0.428
Fig. P2.91

-- 131 of 897 --

2.10 Stress and Strain Distribution Under Axial Loading: Saint-Venant’s Principle 	117
2.10 	STRESS AND STRAIN
DISTRIBUTION UNDER
AXIAL LOADING: SAINT-
VENANT’S PRINCIPLE
We have assumed so far that, in an axially loaded member, the normal stresses
are uniformly distributed in any section perpendicular to the axis of the mem-
ber. As we saw in Sec. 1.2A, such an assumption may be quite in error in the
immediate vicinity of the points of application of the loads. However, the
determination of the actual stresses in a given section of the member requires
the solution of a statically indeterminate problem.
In Sec. 2.2, you saw that statically indeterminate problems involving
the determination of forces can be solved by considering the deformations
caused by these forces. It is thus reasonable to conclude that the determi-
nation of the stresses in a member requires the analysis of the strains
produced by the stresses in the member. This is essentially the approach
found in advanced textbooks, where the mathematical theory of elasticity
is used to determine the distribution of stresses corresponding to various
modes of application of the loads at the ends of the member. Given the
more limited mathematical means at our disposal, our analysis of stresses
will be restricted to the particular case when two rigid plates are used to
transmit the loads to a member made of a homogeneous isotropic material
(Fig. 2.46).
If the loads are applied at the center of each plate,† the plates will move
toward each other without rotating, causing the member to get shorter, while
increasing in width and thickness. It is assumed that the member will remain
straight, plane sections will remain plane, and all elements of the member will
deform in the same way, since this assumption is compatible with the given end
conditions. Figure 2.47 shows a rubber model before and after loading.‡ Now,
†More precisely, the common line of action of the loads should pass through the centroid of
the cross section (cf. Sec. 1.2A).
‡Note that for long, slender members, another configuration is possible and will prevail if
the load is sufficiently large; the member buckles and assumes a curved shape. This will be
discussed in Chap. 10.
P
P'
Fig. 2.46 	Axial load applied by rigid plates.
(a) 	(b)
P
P'
Fig. 2.47 	Axial load applied by
rigid plates to rubber model.

-- 132 of 897 --

118 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
if all elements deform in the same way, the distribution of strains throughout the
member must be uniform. In other words, the axial strain εy and the lateral strain
εx = −νεy are constant. But, if the stresses do not exceed the proportional limit,
Hooke’s law applies, and σy = Eεy, so the normal stress σy is also constant. Thus
the distribution of stresses is uniform throughout the member, and at any point,
σ y = (σ y) ave = P
A
If the loads are concentrated, as in Fig. 2.48, the elements in the imme-
diate vicinity of the points of application of the loads are subjected to very
large stresses, while other elements near the ends of the member are unaf-
fected by the loading. This results in large deformations, strains, and stresses
near the points of application of the loads, while no deformation takes place
at the corners. Considering elements farther and farther from the ends, a
progressive equalization of the deformations and a more uniform distribution
of the strains and stresses are seen across a section of the member. Using the
mathematical theory of elasticity found in advanced textbooks, Fig. 2.49
P
P'
Fig. 2.48 	Concentrated axial load applied
to rubber model.
b 	b b	
1
2
b	
1
4 min
ave
max
P
A	
=
min = 0.973σave
max = 1.027σave
min = 0.668σave
max = 1.387σave
min = 0.198σave
max = 2.575σave
P	P	P	P
P'
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 2.49 	Stress distributions in a plate under concentrated axial loads.
shows the resulting distribution of stresses across various sections of a thin
rectangular plate subjected to concentrated loads. Note that at a distance b
from either end, where b is the width of the plate, the stress distribution is
nearly uniform across the section, and the value of the stress σy at any point
of that section can be assumed to be equal to the average value P∕A. Thus at
a distance equal to or greater than the width of the member, the distribution
of stresses across a section is the same, whether the member is loaded as
shown in Fig. 2.46 or Fig. 2.48. In other words, except in the immediate
vicinity of the points of application of the loads, the stress distribution is
assumed independent of the actual mode of application of the loads. This
statement, which applies to axial loadings and to practically any type of load,
is known as Saint-Venant’s principle, after the French mathematician and
engineer Adhémar Barré de Saint-Venant (1797–1886).
While Saint-Venant’s principle makes it possible to replace a given load-
ing by a simpler one to compute the stresses in a structural member, keep in
mind two important points when applying this principle:
1. The actual loading and the loading used to compute the stresses must
be statically equivalent.
2. Stresses cannot be computed in this manner in the immediate vicinity of the
points of application of the loads. Advanced theoretical or experimental
methods must be used to determine the distribution of stresses in these areas.

-- 133 of 897 --

2.11 Stress Concentrations 	119
You should also observe that the plates used to obtain a uniform stress
distribution in the member of Fig. 2.47 must allow the member to freely
expand laterally. Thus the plates cannot be rigidly attached to the member;
assume them to be just in contact with the member and smooth enough not
to impede lateral expansion. While such end conditions can be achieved for a
member in compression, they cannot be physically realized in the case of a
member in tension. It does not matter, whether or not an actual fixture can
be realized and used to load a member so that the distribution of stresses in
the member is uniform. The important thing is to imagine a model that will
allow such a distribution of stresses and to keep this model in mind so that
it can be compared with the actual loading conditions.
2.11 	STRESS CONCENTRATIONS
As you saw in the preceding section, the stresses near the points of appli-
cation of concentrated loads can reach values much larger than the average
value of the stress in the member. When a structural member contains a
discontinuity, such as a hole or a sudden change in cross section, high
localized stresses can occur. Figures 2.50 and 2.51 show the distribution of
stresses in critical sections corresponding to two situations. Figure 2.50
shows a flat bar with a circular hole and shows the stress distribution in a
section passing through the center of the hole. Figure 2.51 shows a flat bar
consisting of two portions of different widths connected by fillets; here the
stress distribution is in the narrowest part of the connection, where the
highest stresses occur.
These results were obtained experimentally through the use of a photo-
elastic method. Fortunately for the engineer, these results are independent of
the size of the member and of the material used; they depend only upon the
ratios of the geometric parameters involved (i.e., the ratio 2r∕D for a circular
hole, and the ratios r∕d and D∕d for fillets). Furthermore, the designer is more
interested in the maximum value of the stress in a given section than the actual
distribution of stresses. The main concern is to determine whether the allow-
able stress will be exceeded under a given loading, not where this value will
be exceeded. Thus the ratio
K = σmax
σave
(2.40)
is computed in the critical (narrowest) section of the discontinuity—that
is, the section of the member that contains the maximum stress. This
ratio is the stress-concentration factor of the discontinuity, and relates
the maximum stress to the average stress in the critical section. Stress-
concentration factors can be computed in terms of the ratios of the geometric
parameters involved, and the results can be expressed in tables or graphs,
as shown in Fig. 2.52. To determine the maximum stress occurring near
a discontinuity in a given member subjected to a given axial load P, the
designer needs to compute the average stress σave = P∕A in the critical
section and multiply the result obtained by the appropriate value of the
stress-concentration factor K. Note that this procedure is valid only as long
as σmax does not exceed the proportional limit of the material, since the
values of K plotted in Fig. 2.52 were obtained by assuming a linear rela-
tion between stress and strain.
P	P'
P'
r D
d	
1
2
d	
1
2
max
ave	σ
σ
Fig. 2.50 	Stress distribution near circular
hole in flat bar under axial loading.
P	P'
P'
max
ave
d	D
r
σ
σ
Fig. 2.51 	Stress distribution near fillets in
flat bar under axial loading.

-- 134 of 897 --

120 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
P' 	P
3.0
3.2
3.4
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
K
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0 0 	0.1
(a) Flat bars with holes
0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.5 	0.6 	0.7
2r/D
1
2 d
D
1
2 d
r 	P' 	P
3.0
3.2
3.4
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
K
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 	0.18	0.16 	0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30
d
r
D
D/d = 2
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.1
r/d
(b) Flat bars with fillets
Fig. 2.52 	Stress concentration factors for flat bars under axial loading. Note that the average stress must be computed across the
narrowest section: σave = P∕td, where t is the thickness of the bar. (Source: W. D. Pilkey and D.F. Pilkey, Peterson’s Stress Concentration
Factors, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008.)
Concept Application 2.12
Determine the largest axial load P that can be safely supported by a flat
steel bar consisting of two portions, both 10 mm thick and, respectively,
40 and 60 mm wide, connected by fillets of radius r = 8 mm. Assume an
allowable normal stress of 165 MPa.
First compute the ratios
D
d = 60 mm
40 mm = 1.50 r
d = 8 mm
40 mm = 0.20
Using the curve in Fig. 2.52b corresponding to D∕d = 1.50, the value of the
stress-concentration factor corresponding to r∕d = 0.20 is
K = 1.82
Then carrying this value into Eq. (2.40) and solving for σave,
σave = σmax
1.82
But σmax cannot exceed the allowable stress σall = 165 MPa. Substituting this
value for σmax, the average stress in the narrower portion (d = 40 mm) of the
bar should not exceed the value
σave = 165 MPa
1.82 = 90.7 MPa
Recalling that σave = P∕A,
P = Aσave = (40 mm)(10 mm)(90.7 MPa) = 36.3 × 103 N
= 36.3 kN

-- 135 of 897 --

2.12 Plastic Deformations 	121
2.12 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
The results in the preceding sections were based on the assumption of a linear
stress-strain relationship, where the proportional limit of the material was never
exceeded. This is a reasonable assumption in the case of brittle materials, which
rupture without yielding. For ductile materials, however, this implies that the yield
strength of the material is not exceeded. The deformations will remain within the
elastic range and the structural member will regain its original shape after all
loads have been removed. However, if the stresses in any part of the member
exceed the yield strength of the material, plastic deformations occur and most of
the results obtained in earlier sections cease to be valid. Then a more involved
analysis, based on a nonlinear stress-strain relationship, must be carried out.
While an analysis taking into account the actual stress-strain relationship
(such as that illustrated in Fig. 2.6 for ductile materials) is beyond the scope of
this text, we gain considerable insight into plastic behavior by considering an
idealized elastoplastic material for which the stress-strain diagram consists of
the two straight-line segments shown in Fig. 2.53. Note that the stress-strain
diagram for mild steel (e.g., Fig. 2.6) in the elastic and plastic ranges (but before
the onset of strain-hardening) is similar to this idealization. As long as the stress
σ is less than the yield strength σY, the material behaves elastically and obeys
Hooke’s law, σ = Eε. When σ reaches the value σY, the material starts yielding
and keeps deforming plastically under a constant load. If the load is removed,
unloading takes place along a straight-line segment CD parallel to the initial
portion AY of the loading curve. The segment AD of the horizontal axis repre-
sents the strain corresponding to the permanent set or plastic deformation result-
ing from the loading and unloading of the specimen. While no actual material
behaves exactly as shown in Fig. 2.53, this stress-strain diagram will prove use-
ful in discussing the plastic deformations of ductile materials such as mild steel.
D	A
C Rupture
Y
Y
σ
σ
ε
Fig. 2.53 	Stress-strain diagram for an
idealized elastoplastic material.
Concept Application 2.13
A rod of length L = 500 mm and cross-sectional area A = 60 mm2 is made
of an elastoplastic material having a modulus of elasticity E = 200 GPa in its
elastic range and a yield point σY = 300 MPa. The rod is subjected to an axial
load until it is stretched 7 mm and the load is then removed. What is the
resulting permanent set?
Referring to the diagram of Fig. 2.53, the maximum strain represented
by the abscissa of point C is
εC = δC
L = 7 mm
500 mm = 14 × 10−3
However, the yield strain, represented by the abscissa of point Y, is
ε Y = σY
E = 300 × 106 Pa
200 × 109 Pa = 1.5 × 10−3
The strain after unloading is represented by the abscissa εD of point D. Note
from Fig. 2.53 that
ε D = AD = YC = ε C − ε Y
= 14 × 10−3 − 1.5 × 10−3 = 12.5 × 10−3
The permanent set is the deformation δD corresponding to the strain εD.
δD = ε D L = (12.5 × 10−3 )(500 mm) = 6.25 mm

-- 136 of 897 --

122 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Concept Application 2.14
A 30-in.-long cylindrical rod of cross-sectional area Ar = 0.075 in2
is placed inside a tube of the same length and of cross-sectional
area At = 0.100 in2. The ends of the rod and tube are attached
to a rigid support on one side and to a rigid plate on the other,
as shown in the longitudinal section of Fig. 2.54a. The rod
and tube are both assumed to be elastoplastic, with moduli of
elasticity Er = 30 × 106 psi and Et = 15 × 106 psi, and yield
strengths (σr)Y = 36 ksi and (σt)Y = 45 ksi. Draw the load-deflection
diagram of the rod-tube assembly when a load P is applied to the
plate as shown.
Determine the internal force and the elongation of the rod as it
begins to yield
(P r)Y = (σ r)YA r = (36 ksi)(0.075 in2 ) = 2.7 kips
(δr)Y = (ε r)YL = (σ r)Y
E r
L = 36 × 103 psi
30 × 106 psi (30 in.)
= 36 × 10−3 in.
Since the material is elastoplastic, the force-elongation diagram of
the rod alone consists of oblique and horizontal straight lines, as
shown in Fig. 2.54b. Following the same procedure for the tube,
(P t)Y = (σ t)YA t = (45 ksi)(0.100 in2 ) = 4.5 kips
(δt)Y = (ε t)YL = (σ t)Y
E t
L = 45 × 103 psi
15 × 106 psi (30 in.)
= 90 × 10−3 in.
The load-deflection diagram of the tube alone is shown in Fig. 2.54c.
Observing that the load and deflection of the rod-tube combination
are
P = P r + P t 	δ = δr = δt
we draw the required load-deflection diagram by adding the ordinates
of the diagrams obtained for both the rod and the tube (Fig. 2.54d).
Points Yr and Yt correspond to the onset of yield.
Tube
Plate
30 in.
Rod P
(a)
Pr (kips)
2.7
0 	36
Yr
r (10–3 in.)
(b)
Pt (kips)
1.8
4.5
0 	36 	90 t (10 –3 in.)
(c)
P (kips)
4.5
7.2
0 	36 	90
Yr
Yt
Yt
(10 –3 in.)
(d)
δ
δ
δ
Fig. 2.54 	(a) Concentric rod-tube assembly
axially loaded by rigid plate. (b) Load-deflection
response of the rod. (c) Load-deflection
response of the tube. (d) Combined load-
deflection response of the rod-tube assembly.

-- 137 of 897 --

2.12 Plastic Deformations 	123
Concept Application 2.15
If the load P applied to the rod-tube assembly of Concept Application 2.14
is increased from zero to 5.7 kips and decreased back to zero, determine
(a) the maximum elongation of the assembly and (b) the permanent set
after the load has been removed.
a. Maximum Elongation. 	Referring to Fig. 2.54d, the load
Pmax = 5.7 kips corresponds to a point located on the segment YrYt of
the load-deflection diagram of the assembly. Thus the rod has reached
the plastic range with Pr = (Pr)Y = 2.7 kips and σr = (σr)Y = 36 ksi.
However, the tube is still in the elastic range with
P t = P − P r = 5.7 kips − 2.7 kips = 3.0 kips
σ t = Pt
A t
= 3.0 kips
0.1 in2 = 30 ksi
δt = ε tL = σ t
E t
L = 30 × 103 psi
15 × 106 psi (30 in.) = 60 × 10−3 in.
The maximum elongation of the assembly is
δmax = δt = 60 × 10 −3 in.
b. Permanent Set. 	As the load P decreases from 5.7 kips to zero,
the internal forces Pr and Pt both decrease along a straight line, as shown
in Fig. 2.55a and b. The force Pr decreases along line CD parallel to the
initial portion of the loading curve, while the force Pt decreases along
the original loading curve, since the yield stress was not exceeded in the
tube. Their sum P will decrease along a line CE parallel to the portion
0Yr of the load-deflection curve of the assembly (Fig. 2.55c). Referring
to Fig. 2.55c, the slope of 0Yr (and thus of CE) is
m = 4.5 kips
36 × 10−3 in. = 125 kips/in.
The segment of line FE in Fig. 2.55c represents the deformation δ′ of the
assembly during the unloading phase, and the segment 0E is the permanent
set δp after the load P has been removed. From triangle CEF,
δ′ = − Pmax
m = − 5.7 kips
125 kips/in. = −45.6 × 10−3 in.
The permanent set is
δP = δmax + δ′ = 60 × 10 −3 − 45.6 × 10−3
= 14.4 × 10−3 in.
Pr (kips)
2.7
0 	60
Yr 	C
D
r (10–3 in.)
(a)
Pt (kips)
3.0
0 	60
Yt
C
C
F	E
t (10 –3 in.)
0
= 60 × 10–3 in.
(10–3 in.)
(b)
P (kips)
4.5
5.7
Yr
Yt
(c)
'	p
Pmax
max
δ
δ
δ
δ	δ
δ
Fig. 2.55 	(a) Rod load-deflection response
with elastic unloading (red dashed line).
(b) Tube load-deflection response; note that
the given loading does not yield the tube, so
unloading is along the original elastic loading
line. (c) Combined rod-tube assembly load-
deflection response with elastic unloading
(red dashed line).

-- 138 of 897 --

124 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Stress Concentrations. 	Recall that the discussion of stress concentra-
tions of Sec. 2.11 was carried out under the assumption of a linear stress-
strain relationship. The stress distributions shown in Figs. 2.50 and 2.51
and the stress-concentration factors plotted in Fig. 2.52 cannot be used
when plastic deformations take place, i.e., when σmax exceeds the yield
strength σY.
Consider again the flat bar with a circular hole of Fig. 2.50, and let
us assume that the material is elastoplastic, i.e., that its stress-strain diagram
is as shown in Fig. 2.53. As long as no plastic deformation takes place, the
distribution of stresses is as indicated in Sec. 2.11 (Fig. 2.50a). The area
under the stress-distribution curve represents the integral ∫σ dA, which is
equal to the load P. Thus this area and the value of σmax must increase as
the load P increases. As long as σmax ≤ σY, all of the stress distributions
obtained as P increases will have the shape shown in Fig. 2.50 and repeated
in Fig. 2.56a. However, as P is increased beyond PY corresponding to
σmax = σY (Fig. 2.56b), the stress-distribution curve must flatten in the vicin-
ity of the hole (Fig. 2.56c), since the stress cannot exceed the value σY. This
indicates that the material is yielding in the vicinity of the hole. As the load
P is increased, the plastic zone where yield takes place keeps expanding
until it reaches the edges of the plate (Fig. 2.56d). At that point, the distri-
bution of stresses across the plate is uniform, σ = σY, and the corresponding
value P = PU of the load is the largest that can be applied to the bar with-
out causing rupture.
It is interesting to compare the maximum value PY of the load that can
be applied if no permanent deformation is to be produced in the bar with the
value PU that will cause rupture. Recalling the average stress, σave = P∕A,
where A is the net cross-sectional area and the stress concentration factor,
K = σmax∕σave, write
P = σave A = σmax A
K (2.41)
for any value of σmax that does not exceed σY. When σmax = σY (Fig. 2.56b),
P = PY, and Eq. (2.40) yields
PY = σYA
K (2.42)
On the other hand, when P = PU (Fig. 2.56d), σave = σY and
P U = σ YA 	(2.43)
Comparing Eqs. (2.42) and (2.43),
PY = PU
K (2.44)
*2.13 	RESIDUAL STRESSES
In Concept Application 2.13 of the preceding section, we considered a rod
that was stretched beyond the yield point. As the load was removed, the rod
did not regain its original length; it had been permanently deformed. However,
(a)
(b)
(c)
max 	Y
Y
max
ave 	(d)
PY
P
PU
P
Y	σ	σ
σ	σ
σ
σ
=
=
Fig. 2.56 	Distribution of stresses in
elastoplastic material under increasing load.

-- 139 of 897 --

*2.13 Residual Stresses 	125
after the load was removed, all stresses disappeared. You should not assume
that this will always be the case. Indeed, when only some of the parts of an
indeterminate structure undergo plastic deformations, as in Concept Applica-
tion 2.15, or when different parts of the structure undergo different plastic
deformations, the stresses in the various parts of the structure will not return
to zero after the load has been removed, because these parts will be restrained
from returning to a state of zero stress by the other parts that they are con-
nected or bonded to. Stresses called residual stresses will remain in various
parts of the structure.
While computation of residual stresses in an actual structure can be
quite involved, the following concept application provides a general under-
standing of the method to be used for their determination.
Concept Application 2.16
Determine the residual stresses in the rod and tube of Fig. 2.54a
after the load P has been increased from zero to 5.7 kips and
decreased back to zero.
Observe from the diagrams of Fig. 2.57 (similar to those in the
previous concept application) that, after the load P has returned to
zero, the internal forces Pr and Pt are not equal to zero. Their values
have been indicated by point E in parts a and b. The corresponding
stresses are not equal to zero either after the assembly has been
unloaded. To determine these residual stresses, first determine the
reverse stresses σ′r and σ′t caused by the unloading and add them to
the maximum stresses σr = 36 ksi and σt = 30 ksi found in part a
of Concept Application 2.15.
The strain caused by the unloading is the same in both the
rod and the tube. It is equal to δ′∕L, where δ′ is the deformation
of the assembly during unloading found in Concept Application 2.15:
ε′ = δ′
L = −45.6 × 10−3 in.
30 in. = −1.52 × 10−3 in./in.
The corresponding reverse stresses in the rod and tube are
σ′r = ε′E r = (−1.52 × 10−3 )(30 × 106 psi) = −45.6 ksi
σ′t = ε′E t = (−1.52 × 10−3 )(15 × 106 psi) = −22.8 ksi
Then the residual stresses are found by superposing the stresses due
to loading and the reverse stresses due to unloading.
(σ r) res = σ r + σ′r = 36 ksi − 45.6 ksi = −9.6 ksi
(σ t) res = σ t + σ′t = 30 ksi − 22.8 ksi = +7.2 ksi
Pr (kips)
2.7
0 	60
Yr 	C
D
E
E
r (10–3 in.)
(a)	(a)
Pt (kips)
3.0
0 	60
Yt
C
C
F	E
t (10 –3 in.)
0
(b)
P (kips)
4.5
5.7
Yr
Yt
(c)
'	p
Pmax
δ
δ
δ 	δ
δ (10–3 in.)
Fig. 2.57 	(a) Rod load-deflection response with
elastic unloading (red dashed line). (b) Tube load-
deflection response; the given loading does not
yield the tube, so unloading is along elastic loading
line with residual tensile stress. (c) Combined rod-
tube assembly load-deflection response with
elastic unloading (red dashed line).

-- 140 of 897 --

126 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Temperature Changes. 	Plastic deformations caused by temperature
changes can also result in residual stresses. For example, consider a small
plug that is to be welded to a large plate (Fig. 2.58). The plug can be
considered a small rod AB to be welded across a small hole in the plate.
During the welding process, the temperature of the rod will be raised to over
1000°C, at which point its modulus of elasticity, stiffness, and stress will
be almost zero. Since the plate is large, its temperature will not be increased
significantly above room temperature (20°C). Thus when the welding is
completed, rod AB is at T = 1000°C with no stress and is attached to the
plate, which is at 20°C.
As the rod cools, its modulus of elasticity increases. At about
500°C, it will approach its normal value of about 200 GPa. As the tem-
perature of the rod decreases further, a situation similar to that considered
in Sec. 2.3 and illustrated in Fig. 2.26 develops. Solving Eq. (2.15) for ΔT,
making σ equal to the yield strength, assuming σY = 300 MPa for the steel
used, and α = 12 × 10−6∕°C, the temperature change that causes the rod
to yield is
ΔT = − σ
Eα = − 300 MPa
(200 GPa)(12 × 10−6 ∕°C) = −125°C
So the rod starts yielding at about 375°C and keeps yielding at a fairly con-
stant stress level as it cools to room temperature. As a result of welding, a
residual stress (approximately equal to the yield strength of the steel used) is
created in the plug and in the weld.
Residual stresses also occur as a result of the cooling of metals that
have been cast or hot rolled. In these cases, the outer layers cool more
rapidly than the inner core. This causes the outer layers to reacquire their
stiffness (E returns to its normal value) faster than the inner core. When
the entire specimen has returned to room temperature, the inner core will
contract more than the outer layers. The result is residual longitudinal
tensile stresses in the inner core and residual compressive stresses in the
outer layers.
Residual stresses due to welding, casting, and hot rolling can be quite
large (of the order of magnitude of the yield strength). These stresses can be
removed by reheating the entire specimen to about 600°C and then allowing
it to cool slowly over a period of 12 to 24 hours.
A 	B
Fig. 2.58 	Small rod welded
to a large plate.

-- 141 of 897 --

*2.13 Residual Stresses 	127
Sample Problem 2.6
The rigid beam ABC is suspended from two steel rods as shown and is
initially horizontal. The midpoint B of the beam is deflected 10 mm
downward by the slow application of the force Q, after which the force
is slowly removed. Knowing that the steel used for the rods is elasto-
plastic with E = 200 GPa and σY = 300 MPa, determine (a) the required
maximum value of Q and the corresponding position of the beam and
(b) the final position of the beam.
STRATEGY: 	You can assume that plastic deformation would occur first
in rod AD (which is a good assumption—why?), and then check this
assumption.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Statics. 	Since Q is applied at the midpoint of the beam (Fig. 1),
PAD = PCE 	and 	Q = 2PAD
Elastic Action (Fig. 2). 	The maximum value of Q and the maximum
elastic deflection of point A occur when σ = σY in rod AD.
(P AD) max = σ YA = (300 MPa)(400 mm2 ) = 120 kN
Qmax = 2(P AD) max = 2(120 kN) 	Qmax = 240 kN 	◂
δA1 = εL = σY
E L = (
300 MPa
200 GPa )(2 m) = 3 mm
2 m
2 m
5 m
2 m
Q
B
D
E
C	A
AD = 400 mm 2
CE = 500 mm2
Areas:
2 m 	2 m
Q
PAD 	PCE
B
C	A
Fig. 1 	Free-body
diagram of rigid beam.
PAD (kN)
120
0 3 	0 	6	11 14 mm
Rod AD 	Rod CE
mm
120
PCE (kN)
H	Y 	Y
J
Fig. 2 	Load-deflection diagrams for
steel rods.
(continued)

-- 142 of 897 --

128 	Stress and Strain—Axial Loading
Since PCE = PAD = 120 kN, the stress in rod CE is
σCE = PCE
A = 120 kN
500 mm2 = 240 MPa
The corresponding deflection of point C is
δC1 = εL = σCE
E L = (
240 MPa
200 GPa )(5 m) = 6 mm
The corresponding deflection of point B is
δB1 = 1
2 (δA1 + δC1 ) = 1
2 (3 mm + 6 mm) = 4.5 mm
Since δB = 10 mm, plastic deformation will occur.
Plastic Deformation. 	For Q = 240 kN, plastic deformation occurs in rod
AD, where σAD = σY = 300 MPa. Since the stress in rod CE is within the
elastic range, δC remains equal to 6 mm. From Fig. 3, the deflection δA for
which δB = 10 mm is obtained by writing
δB2 = 10 mm = 1
2 (δA2 + 6 mm) 	δA2 = 14 mm
3 mm 	6 mm	4.5 mm
A1 	B1 	C1
Q = 240 kN
14 mm 6 mm	10 mm
A2
B2
C1
Q = 240 kN
Deflections for δB = 10 mm
Fig. 3 	Deflection of fully loaded
beam.
Unloading. 	As force Q is slowly removed, the force PAD decreases along
line HJ parallel to the initial portion of the load-deflection diagram of rod AD.
The final deflection of point A is
δA3 = 14 mm − 3 mm = 11 mm
Since the stress in rod CE remained within the elastic range, note that the
final deflection of point C is zero. Fig. 4 illustrates the final position of the
beam.
REFLECT and THINK: 	Due to symmetry in this determinate problem, the
axial forces in the rods are equal. Given that the rods have identical material
properties and that the cross-sectional area of rod AD is smaller than rod CE,
you would therefore expect that rod AD would reach yield first (as assumed
in the STRATEGY step).
11 mm
3 mm
6 mm
A2
A3 B2
C2
B3
C3
Q = 0
Final deflections
δC = 0
Fig. 4 	Beam’s final deflections
with load removed.

-- 143 of 897 --

129
2.93 Knowing that, for the plate shown, the allowable stress is 125 MPa,
determine the maximum allowable value of P when (a) r = 12 mm,
(b) r = 18 mm.
2.94 Knowing that P = 38 kN, determine the maximum stress when
(a) r = 10 mm, (b) r = 16 mm, (c) r = 18 mm.
2.95 A hole is to be drilled in the plate at A. The diameters of the bits
available to drill the hole range from 1
2 to 11
2 in. in 1
4 -in. increments.
If the allowable stress in the plate is 21 ksi, determine (a) the diam-
eter d of the largest bit that can be used if the allowable load P at
the hole is to exceed that at the fillets, (b) the corresponding allow-
able load P.
A
d 	rf =
P
1
2 in.
1
8
	3 in.
3
8 in.	11
16
	4 in.
Fig. P2.95 and P2.96
2.96 (a) For P = 13 kips and d = 1
2 in., determine the maximum stress in
the plate shown. (b) Solve part a, assuming that the hole at A is not
drilled.
2.97 Knowing that, for the plate shown, the allowable stress is 120 MPa,
determine the maximum allowable value of the centric axial load P.
A
B 	50 mm
20 mm
100 mm
P
15 mm
Fig. P2.97 and P2.98
2.98 Two holes have been drilled through a long steel bar that is subjected
to a centric axial load as shown. For P = 32 kN, determine the
maximum stress (a) at A, (b) at B.
2.99 (a) Knowing that the allowable stress is 20 ksi, determine the max-
imum allowable magnitude of the centric load P. (b) Determine the
percent change in the maximum allowable magnitude of P if the
raised portions are removed at the ends of the specimen.
Problems
120 mm
60 mm 	r
P
15 mm
Fig. P2.93 and P2.94
P
P
t =
2 in.
3 in.
5
8 in.
r = 1
4 in.
Fig. P2.99

-- 144 of 897 --

130
2.100 A centric axial force is applied to the steel bar shown. Knowing that
σall = 20 ksi, determine the maximum allowable load P.
3
4 in.
1
2 in.
1
2 in.
5 in.
1 in.
6
rf =
P
Fig. P2.100
2.101 The cylindrical rod AB has a length L = 5 ft and a 0.75-in. diameter;
it is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with
E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 36 ksi. A force P is applied to the bar
and then removed to give it a permanent set δP. Determine the max-
imum value of the force P and the maximum amount δm by which
the bar should be stretched if the desired value of δP is (a) 0.1 in.,
(b) 0.2 in.
L
B
A
P
Fig. P2.101 and P2.102
2.102 The cylindrical rod AB has a length L = 6 ft and a 1.25-in. diameter;
it is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with
E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 36 ksi. A force P is applied to the bar
until end A has moved down by an amount δm. Determine the max-
imum value of the force P and the permanent set of the bar after the
force has been removed, knowing (a) δm = 0.125 in., (b) δm = 0.250 in.
2.103 Rod AB is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic
with E = 200 GPa and σY = 345 MPa. After the rod has been
attached to the rigid lever CD, it is found that end C is 6 mm too
high. A vertical force Q is then applied at C until this point has
moved to position C′. Determine the required magnitude of Q and
the deflection δ1 if the lever is to snap back to a horizontal position
after Q is removed.
2.104 Solve Prob. 2.103, assuming that the yield point of the mild steel is
250 MPa.
6 mm
9-mm diameter
0.4 m 0.7 m
1.25 m
C 	B D
A
C'
1δ
Fig. P2.103

-- 145 of 897 --

131
2.105 Rod ABC consists of two cylindrical portions AB and BC; it is made
of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa
and σY = 250 MPa. A force P is applied to the rod and then removed
to give it a permanent set δP = 2 mm. Determine the maximum value
of the force P and the maximum amount δm by which the rod should
be stretched to give it the desired permanent set.
P
40-mm
diameter
30-mm
diameter
1.2 m
0.8 m
C
B
A
Fig. P2.105 and P2.106
2.106 Rod ABC consists of two cylindrical portions AB and BC; it is made
of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa
and σY = 250 MPa. A force P is applied to the rod until its end A
has moved down by an amount δm = 5 mm. Determine the maximum
value of the force P and the permanent set of the rod after the force
has been removed.
2.107 Rod AB consists of two cylindrical portions AC and BC, each with a
cross-sectional area of 1750 mm2. Portion AC is made of a mild steel
with E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa, and portion BC is made of a
high-strength steel with E = 200 GPa and σY = 345 MPa. A load P
is applied at C as shown. Assuming both steels to be elastoplastic,
determine (a) the maximum deflection of C if P is gradually increased
from zero to 975 kN and then reduced back to zero, (b) the maximum
stress in each portion of the rod, (c) the permanent deflection of C.
190 mm
190 mm
C
B
A
P
Fig. P2.107
2.108 For the composite rod of Prob. 2.107, if P is gradually increased
from zero until the deflection of point C reaches a maximum value
of δm = 0.3 mm and then decreased back to zero, determine (a) the
maximum value of P, (b) the maximum stress in each portion of the
rod, (c) the permanent deflection of C after the load is removed.

-- 146 of 897 --

132
2.109 Each cable has a cross-sectional area of 100 mm2 and is made of an
elastoplastic material for which σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa. A
force Q is applied at C to the rigid bar ABC and is gradually increased
from 0 to 50 kN and then reduced to zero. Knowing that the cables
were initially taut, determine (a) the maximum stress that occurs in
cable BD, (b) the maximum deflection of point C, (c) the final dis-
placement of point C. (Hint: In part c, cable CE is not taut.)
1 m
A
B 	C
Q
D 	E
1 m
2 m
Fig. P2.109
2.110 Solve Prob. 2.109, assuming that the cables are replaced by rods of
the same cross-sectional area and material. Further assume that the
rods are braced so that they can carry compressive forces.
2.111 Two tempered-steel bars, each 3
16 in. thick, are bonded to a 1
2 -in. mild-
steel bar. This composite bar is subjected as shown to a centric axial
load of magnitude P. Both steels are elastoplastic with E = 29 × 106 psi
and with yield strengths equal to 100 ksi and 50 ksi, respectively,
for the tempered and mild steel. The load P is gradually increased
from zero until the deformation of the bar reaches a maximum value
δm = 0.04 in. and then decreased back to zero. Determine (a) the
maximum value of P, (b) the maximum stress in the tempered-steel
bars, (c) the permanent set after the load is removed.
P
14 in.
2.0 in.
P'
in.
1
2 in.
3
16 	3
16
in.
Fig. P2.111

-- 147 of 897 --

133
2.112 For the composite bar of Prob. 2.111, if P is gradually increased
from zero to 98 kips and then decreased back to zero, determine
(a) the maximum deformation of the bar, (b) the maximum stress
in the tempered-steel bars, (c) the permanent set after the load is
removed.
2.113 The rigid bar ABC is supported by two links, AD and BE, of uniform
37.5 × 6-mm rectangular cross section and made of a mild steel that
is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa.
The magnitude of the force Q applied at B is gradually increased
from zero to 260 kN. Knowing that a = 0.640 m, determine (a) the
value of the normal stress in each link, (b) the maximum deflection
of point B.
1.7 m
1 m
2.64 m
C
B
E
D
A
Q
a
Fig. P2.113
2.114 Solve Prob. 2.113, knowing that a = 1.76 m and that the magnitude of
the force Q applied at B is gradually increased from zero to 135 kN.
*2.115 Solve Prob. 2.113, assuming that the magnitude of the force Q
applied at B is gradually increased from zero to 260 kN and then
decreased back to zero. Knowing that a = 0.640 m, determine (a)
the residual stress in each link, (b) the final deflection of point B.
Assume that the links are braced so that they can carry compressive
forces without buckling.
2.116 A uniform steel rod of cross-sectional area A is attached to rigid
supports and is unstressed at a temperature of 45°F. The steel is
assumed to be elastoplastic with σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
Knowing that α = 6.5 × 10−6∕°F, determine the stress in the bar
(a) when the temperature is raised to 320°F, (b) after the tempera-
ture has returned to 45°F.
L
B	A
Fig. P2.116

-- 148 of 897 --

134
2.117 The steel rod ABC is attached to rigid supports and is unstressed at
a temperature of 25°C. The steel is assumed elastoplastic with
E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa. The temperature of both portions
of the rod is then raised to 150°C. Knowing that α = 11.7 × 10−6∕°C,
determine (a) the stress in both portions of the rod, (b) the deflection
of point C.
*2.118 Solve Prob. 2.117, assuming that the temperature of the rod is raised
to 150°C and then returned to 25°C.
*2.119 For the composite bar of Prob. 2.111, determine the residual stresses
in the tempered-steel bars if P is gradually increased from zero to
98 kips and then decreased back to zero.
*2.120 For the composite bar in Prob. 2.111, determine the residual stresses
in the tempered-steel bars if P is gradually increased from zero until
the deformation of the bar reaches a maximum value δm = 0.04 in.
and is then decreased back to zero.
*2.121 Narrow bars of aluminum are bonded to the two sides of a thick steel
plate as shown. Initially, at T1 = 70°F, all stresses are zero. Knowing
that the temperature will be slowly raised to T2 and then reduced to
T1, determine (a) the highest temperature T2 that does not result in
residual stresses, (b) the temperature T2 that will result in a residual
stress in the aluminum equal to 58 ksi. Assume αa = 12.8 × 10−6∕°F
for the aluminum and αs = 6.5 × 10−6∕°F for the steel. Further
assume that the aluminum is elastoplastic with E = 10.9 × 106 psi
and αY = 58 ksi. (Hint: Neglect the small stresses in the plate.)
Fig. P2.121
*2.122 Bar AB has a cross-sectional area of 1200 mm2 and is made of a
steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa and
σY = 250 MPa. Knowing that the force F increases from 0 to 520 kN
and then decreases to zero, determine (a) the permanent deflection
of point C, (b) the residual stress in the bar.
440 mm
a = 120 mm
F
C 	B	A
Fig. P2.122
*2.123 Solve Prob. 2.122, assuming that a = 180 mm.
B	A 	C
A = 500 mm2
A = 300 mm2
150 mm 	250 mm
Fig. P2.117

-- 149 of 897 --

135
Normal Strain
Consider a rod of length L and uniform cross section, and its deformation δ
under an axial load P (Fig. 2.59). The normal strain ε in the rod is defined
as the deformation per unit length:
ε = δ
L (2.1)
Review and Summary
In the case of a rod of variable cross section, the normal strain at any given
point Q is found by considering a small element of rod at Q:
ε = lim
Δx→0
Δδ
Δx = dδ
dx (2.2)
Stress-Strain Diagram
A stress-strain diagram is obtained by plotting the stress σ versus the strain
ε as the load increases. These diagrams can be used to distinguish between
brittle and ductile materials. A brittle material ruptures without any noticeable
prior change in the rate of elongation (Fig. 2.60), while a ductile material
B 	B
C
C
L
A
P
(a) 	(b)
δ
Fig. 2.59 	Undeformed and deformed
axially loaded rod.
Fig. 2.60 	Stress-strain diagram for a typical
brittle material.
Rupture
B	σ	U	σ
σ
=
ε

-- 150 of 897 --

136
yields after a critical stress σY (the yield strength) has been reached (Fig. 2.61).
The specimen undergoes a large deformation before rupturing, with a rela-
tively small increase in the applied load. An example of brittle material with
different properties in tension and compression is concrete.
Hooke’s Law and Modulus of Elasticity
The initial portion of the stress-strain diagram is a straight line. Thus for small
deformations, the stress is directly proportional to the strain:
σ = Eε 	(2.6)
This relationship is Hooke’s law, and the coefficient E is the modulus of
elasticity of the material. The proportional limit is the largest stress for which
Eq. (2.4) applies.
Properties of isotropic materials are independent of direction, while properties
of anisotropic materials depend upon direction. Fiber-reinforced composite
materials are made of fibers of a strong, stiff material embedded in layers of
a weaker, softer material (Fig. 2.62).
Elastic Limit and Plastic Deformation
If the strains caused in a test specimen by the application of a given load
disappear when the load is removed, the material is said to behave elastically.
The largest stress for which this occurs is called the elastic limit of the
material. If the elastic limit is exceeded, the stress and strain decrease in a
linear fashion when the load is removed, and the strain does not return to
zero (Fig. 2.63), indicating that a permanent set or plastic deformation of the
material has taken place.
Fig. 2.61 	Stress-strain diagrams of two typical ductile metal materials.
Yield Strain-hardening
Rupture
0.02
(a) Low-carbon steel
0.0012
0.2 	0.25
60
40
20
Necking
Y	
(ksi)
U
B
Rupture
(b) Aluminum alloy
0.004
0.2
60
40
20
Y	
(ksi)
U
B	σ
σ
σ
	σ
	σ
σ	σ
σ
ε	ε
Fig. 2.62 	Layer of fiber-reinforced
composite material.
Layer of
material
Fibers
y
z
x
Fig. 2.63 	Stress-strain response of ductile
material loaded beyond yield and unloaded.
C
A 	D
Rupture
B
σ
ε

-- 151 of 897 --

137
Fatigue and Endurance Limit
Fatigue causes the failure of structural or machine components after a very
large number of repeated loadings, even though the stresses remain in the
elastic range. A standard fatigue test determines the number n of successive
loading-and-unloading cycles required to cause the failure of a specimen for
any given maximum stress level σ and plots the resulting σ-n curve. The value
of σ for which failure does not occur, even for an indefinitely large number
of cycles, is known as the endurance limit.
Elastic Deformation Under Axial Loading
If a rod of length L and uniform cross section of area A is subjected at
its end to a centric axial load P (Fig. 2.64), the corresponding deforma-
tion is
δ = PL
AE (2.9)
Fig. 2.64 	Undeformed and
deformed axially loaded rod.
L
C
C
A
B 	B
P
δ
If the rod is loaded at several points or consists of several parts of various
cross sections and possibly of different materials, the deformation δ of
the rod must be expressed as the sum of the deformations of its compo-
nent parts:
δ = ∑
i
PiL i
A iE i
(2.10)
Statically Indeterminate Problems
Statically indeterminate problems are those in which the reactions and the
internal forces cannot be determined from statics alone. The equilibrium equa-
tions derived from the free-body diagram of the member under consideration
were complemented by relations involving deformations and obtained from
the geometry of the problem. The forces in the rod and in the tube of Fig. 2.65,
for instance, were determined by observing that their sum is equal to P, and
that they cause equal deformations in the rod and in the tube. Similarly,
Fig. 2.65 	Statically indeterminate problem
where concentric rod and tube have same
strain but different stresses.
P
Tube (A2 , E2 )
Rod (A1 , E1 )
End plate
L

-- 152 of 897 --

138
the reactions at the supports of the bar of Fig. 2.66 could not be obtained
from the free-body diagram of the bar alone, but they could be determined
by expressing that the total elongation of the bar must be equal to zero.
Problems with Temperature Changes
When the temperature of an unrestrained rod AB of length L is increased by ΔT,
its elongation is
δ T = α(ΔT) L 	(2.13)
where α is the coefficient of thermal expansion of the material. The corre-
sponding strain, called thermal strain, is
ε T = αΔT 	(2.14)
and no stress is associated with this strain. However, if rod AB is restrained
by fixed supports (Fig. 2.67), stresses develop in the rod as the temperature
increases, because of the reactions at the supports. To determine the magnitude
P of the reactions, the rod is first detached from its support at B (Fig. 2.68a).
Fig. 2.66 	(a) Axially loaded, statically indeterminate
member. (b) Free-body diagram.
P
L1
L2
RA
RB
(a) 	(b)
L
A
B
A
B
C 	C
P
Fig. 2.67 	Fully restrained bar of length L.
L
A 	B
Fig. 2.68 	Determination of reactions for bar of Fig. 2.67
subject to a temperature increase. (a) Support at B removed.
(b) Thermal expansion. (c) Application of support reaction to
counter thermal expansion.
L
(b)
(c)
L
A
A 	B
B
P
(a) T
A 	B
P	δ
δ

-- 153 of 897 --

139
The deformation δT of the rod occurs as it expands due to the temperature
change (Fig. 2.68b). The deformation δP caused by the force P is required to
bring it back to its original length, so that it may be reattached to the support
at B (Fig. 2.68c).
Lateral Strain and Poisson’s Ratio
When an axial load P is applied to a homogeneous, slender bar (Fig. 2.69),
it causes a strain, not only along the axis of the bar but in any transverse
direction. This strain is the lateral strain, and the ratio of the lateral strain
over the axial strain is called Poisson’s ratio:
ν = − lateral strain
axial strain (2.17)
Multiaxial Loading
The condition of strain under an axial loading in the x direction is
ε x = σx
E ε y = ε z = − νσx
E (2.19)
A multiaxial loading causes the state of stress shown in Fig. 2.70. The result-
ing strain condition was described by the generalized Hooke’s law for a multi-
axial loading.
εx = +σx
E − νσ y
E − νσ z
E
εy = − νσx
E + σy
E − νσ z
E (2.20)
εz = − νσx
E − νσ y
E + σ z
E
Dilatation
If an element of material is subjected to the stresses σx, σy, σz, it will deform
and a certain change of volume will result. The change in volume per unit
volume is the dilatation of the material:
e = 1 − 2ν
E (σ x + σ y + σ z) 	(2.22)
Bulk Modulus
When a material is subjected to a hydrostatic pressure p,
e = − p
k (2.25)
where k is the bulk modulus of the material:
k = E
3(1 − 2ν) (2.24)
Fig. 2.69 	A bar in uniaxial tension.
z
y
x	P
A
Fig. 2.70 	State of stress for multiaxial loading.
xσ
xσ	zσ
zσ
yσ
yσ

-- 154 of 897 --

140
Shearing Strain: Modulus of Rigidity
The state of stress in a material under the most general loading condition
involves shearing stresses, as well as normal stresses (Fig. 2.71). The shearing
stresses tend to deform a cubic element of material into an oblique paral-
lelepiped. The stresses τxy and τyx shown in Fig. 2.72 cause the angles formed
by the faces on which they act to either increase or decrease by a small angle
γxy. This angle defines the shearing strain corresponding to the x and y direc-
tions. Defining in a similar way the shearing strains γyz and γzx, the following
relations were written:
τxy = Gγ xy 	τ yz = Gγ yz 	τ zx = Gγ zx 	(2.27, 2.28)
Fig. 2.71 	Positive stress components at
point Q for a general state of stress.
z
y
x
Q
τxy
τ yx
	τ yz
τ zy
τ zx 	τ xz xσ
yσ
zσ
Fig. 2.72 	Deformation of unit cubic
element due to shearing stress.
1
1
z
y
x
yx
xy
xy	2
xy	2 	γ
γ	+ 	τ
τ
–	π
π
which are valid for any homogeneous isotropic material within its proportional
limit in shear. The constant G is the modulus of rigidity of the material, and
the relationships obtained express Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain.
Together with Eqs. (2.20), they form a group of equations representing the
generalized Hooke’s law for a homogeneous isotropic material under the most
general stress condition.
While an axial load exerted on a slender bar produces only normal strains—
both axial and transverse—on an element of material oriented along the axis

-- 155 of 897 --

141
of the bar, it will produce both normal and shearing strains on an element
rotated through 45° (Fig. 2.73). The three constants E, ν, and G are not inde-
pendent. They satisfy the relation
E
2G = 1 + ν 	(2.34)
This equation can be used to determine any of the three constants in terms of
the other two.
Saint-Venant’s Principle
Saint-Venant’s principle states that except in the immediate vicinity of the
points of application of the loads, the distribution of stresses in a given mem-
ber is independent of the actual mode of application of the loads. This prin-
ciple makes it possible to assume a uniform distribution of stresses in a
member subjected to concentrated axial loads, except close to the points of
application of the loads, where stress concentrations will occur.
Stress Concentrations
Stress concentrations will also occur in structural members near a discontinu-
ity, such as a hole or a sudden change in cross section. The ratio of the
maximum value of the stress occurring near the discontinuity over the average
stress computed in the critical section is referred to as the stress-concentration
factor of the discontinuity:
K = σmax
σave
(2.40)
Plastic Deformations
Plastic deformations occur in structural members made of a ductile material
when the stresses in some part of the member exceed the yield strength of
the material. An idealized elastoplastic material is characterized by the stress-
strain diagram shown in Fig. 2.74. When an indeterminate structure undergoes
Fig. 2.73 	Representations of strain in an
axially loaded bar: (a) cubic strain element
with faces aligned with coordinate axes;
(b) cubic strain element with faces rotated 45°
about z axis.
y
x	1
1
1 + εx
1
(a)
P
(b)
2	2 	'	'
P	P'
P'
νε x
–
–
+ 	π	π 	γ	γ
Fig. 2.74 	Stress-strain diagram for an
idealized elastoplastic material.
D	A
C Rupture
Y
Y	σ
σ
ε
plastic deformations, the stresses do not, in general, return to zero after the load
has been removed. The stresses remaining in the various parts of the structure
are called residual stresses and can be determined by adding the maximum
stresses reached during the loading phase and the reverse stresses corresponding
to the unloading phase.

-- 156 of 897 --

142
2.124 The uniform wire ABC, of unstretched length 2l, is attached to the
supports shown and a vertical load P is applied at the midpoint B.
Denoting by A the cross-sectional area of the wire and by E the
modulus of elasticity, show that, for δ << l, the deflection at the
midpoint B is
δ = l√
3 P
AE
Review Problems
Fig. P2.124
P
l 	l
C
B
A	δ
Fig. P2.125
B
d
C
A
12 in.
18 in.
1.5 in.
2.25 in.
28 kips
E
D
28 kips
Fig. P2.126
C
B
A
3 in.
2 in.
30 kips 	30 kips
P = 40 kips
40 in.
30 in.
2.125 The aluminum rod ABC (E = 10.1 × 106 psi), which consists of two
cylindrical portions AB and BC, is to be replaced with a cylindrical
steel rod DE (E = 29 × 106 psi) of the same overall length. Deter-
mine the minimum required diameter d of the steel rod if its vertical
deformation is not to exceed the deformation of the aluminum rod
under the same load and if the allowable stress in the steel rod is
not to exceed 24 ksi.
2.126 Two solid cylindrical rods are joined at B and loaded as shown.
Rod AB is made of steel (E = 29 × 106 psi), and rod BC of brass
(E = 15 × 106 psi). Determine (a) the total deformation of the
composite rod ABC, (b) the deflection of point B.

-- 157 of 897 --

143
2.127 The brass strip AB has been attached to a fixed support at A and
rests on a rough support at B. Knowing that the coefficient of friction
is 0.60 between the strip and the support at B, determine the decrease
in temperature for which slipping will impend.
Fig. P2.127
3 mm
A
B
40 mm
100 kg
20 mm
Brass strip:
E = 105 GPa
α = 20 × 10– 6/ °C
2.128 The specimen shown is made from a 1-in.-diameter cylindrical steel
rod with two 1.5-in.-outer-diameter sleeves bonded to the rod as
shown. Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the load P so
that the total deformation is 0.002 in., (b) the corresponding defor-
mation of the central portion BC.
2.129 Each of the four vertical links connecting the two rigid horizontal
members is made of aluminum (E = 70 GPa) and has a uniform
rectangular cross section of 10 × 40 mm. For the loading shown,
determine the deflection of (a) point E, (b) point F, (c) point G.
Fig. P2.128
2 in.
2 in.
3 in.
C
D
A
B
P'
P
1 -in. diameter
1-in. diameter
1
2
1 -in. diameter	1
2
2.130 The 4.5-ft concrete post is reinforced with six steel bars, each with
a 11
8 -in. diameter. Knowing that Es = 29 × 106 psi and Ec = 4.2 ×
106 psi, determine the normal stresses in the steel and in the concrete
when a 350-kip axial centric force P is applied to the post.
Fig. P2.129
24 kN
F
E
A
B
C
D
300 mm
250 mm
400 mm
250 mm
40 mm
G
Fig. P2.130
4.5 ft
18 in.
P

-- 158 of 897 --

144
2.131 The steel rods BE and CD each have a 16-mm diameter (E = 200 GPa);
the ends of the rods are single-threaded with a pitch of 2.5 mm.
Knowing that after being snugly fitted, the nut at C is tightened one
full turn, determine (a) the tension in rod CD, (b) the deflection of
point C of the rigid member ABC.
Fig. P2.131
100 mm
2 m
A
C	D
B 	E
3 m
150 mm
Fig. P2.132
B
C
15 in.
25 in. 1.25 in.
A
6 kips	6 kips
2 in.
Fig. P2.133
3.5 in.
5.5 in. 	2.2 in.
P
2.132 A polystyrene rod consisting of two cylindrical portions AB and BC
is restrained at both ends and supports two 6-kip loads as shown.
Knowing that E = 0.45 × 106 psi, determine (a) the reactions at A
and C, (b) the normal stress in each portion of the rod.
2.133 The plastic block shown is bonded to a fixed base and to a horizon-
tal rigid plate to which a force P is applied. Knowing that for the
plastic used G = 55 ksi, determine the deflection of the plate when
P = 9 kips.

-- 159 of 897 --

145
2.134 The aluminum test specimen shown is subjected to two equal and
opposite centric axial forces of magnitude P. (a) Knowing that
E = 70 GPa and σall = 200 MPa, determine the maximum allowable
value of P and the corresponding total elongation of the specimen.
(b) Solve part a, assuming that the specimen has been replaced by
an aluminum bar of the same length and a uniform 60 × 15-mm
rectangular cross section.
Fig. P2.134
150
300
75
150 75
Dimensions in mm
P
15
r = 6
60
P'
Fig. P2.135
L
C P
P
k
m
B
B' C'
2.135 The uniform rod BC has cross-sectional area A and is made of a mild
steel that can be assumed to be elastoplastic with a modulus of elas-
ticity E and a yield strength σY. Using the block-and-spring system
shown, it is desired to simulate the deflection of end C of the rod
as the axial force P is gradually applied and removed—that is, the
deflection of points C and C′ should be the same for all values of P.
Denoting by μ the coefficient of friction between the block and the
horizontal surface, derive an expression for (a) the required mass m
of the block, (b) the required constant k of the spring.

-- 160 of 897 --

146
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer. Write each
program so that it can be used with either SI or U.S. customary units and in
such a way that solid cylindrical elements may be defined by either their
diameter or their cross-sectional area.
2.C1 A rod consisting of n elements, each of which is homogeneous and of
uniform cross section, is subjected to the loading shown. The length
of element i is denoted by Li, its cross-sectional area by Ai, modulus
of elasticity by Ei, and the load applied to its right end by Pi, the mag-
nitude Pi of this load being assumed to be positive if Pi is directed to
the right and negative otherwise. (a) Write a computer program that
can be used to determine the average normal stress in each element,
the deformation of each element, and the total deformation of the rod.
(b) Use this program to solve Probs. 2.20 and 2.126.
2.C2 Rod AB is horizontal with both ends fixed; it consists of n elements,
each of which is homogeneous and of uniform cross section, and is
subjected to the loading shown. The length of element i is denoted
by Li, its cross-sectional area by Ai, its modulus of elasticity by Ei,
and the load applied to its right end by Pi, the magnitude Pi of this
load being assumed to be positive if Pi is directed to the right and
negative otherwise. (Note that P1 = 0.) (a) Write a computer program
that can be used to determine the reactions at A and B, the average
normal stress in each element, and the deformation of each element.
(b) Use this program to solve Prob. 2.39.
2.C3 Rod AB consists of n elements, each of which is homogeneous and
of uniform cross section. End A is fixed, while initially there is a
gap δ0 between end B and the fixed vertical surface on the right. The
length of element i is denoted by Li, its cross-sectional area by Ai,
its modulus of elasticity by Ei, and its coefficient of thermal expan-
sion by αi. After the temperature of the rod has been increased by
ΔT, the gap at B is closed and the vertical surfaces exert equal and
opposite forces on the rod. (a) Write a computer program that can
be used to determine the magnitude of the reactions at A and B, the
normal stress in each element, and the deformation of each element.
(b) Use this program to solve Probs. 2.59 and 2.60.
2.C4 Bar AB has a length L and is made of two different materials of given
cross-sectional area, modulus of elasticity, and yield strength. The bar
is subjected as shown to a load P that is gradually increased from zero
until the deformation of the bar has reached a maximum value δm and
then decreased back to zero. (a) Write a computer program that, for
each of 25 values of δm equally spaced over a range extending from
zero to a value equal to 120% of the deformation causing both mate-
rials to yield, can be used to determine the maximum value Pm of the
load, the maximum normal stress in each material, the permanent
deformation δp of the bar, and the residual stress in each material. (b)
Use this program to solve Probs. 2.111 and 2.112.
Computer Problems
Fig. P2.C1
Element n 	Element 1
Pn 	P1
Fig. P2.C2
Element n 	Element 1
Pn
P2
A
B
Fig. P2.C3
Element n 	Element 1
A B
0	δ
Fig. P2.C4
Plate
A1, E1, ( Y)1
L
A2, E2, ( Y)2
P
σ
σ

-- 161 of 897 --

147
2.C5 The plate has a hole centered across the width. The stress concen-
tration factor for a flat bar under axial loading with a centric hole is
K = 3.00 − 3.13 (
2r
D ) + 3.66 (
2r
D )
2
− 1.53 (
2r
D )
3
where r is the radius of the hole and D is the width of the bar. Write a
computer program to determine the allowable load P for the given val-
ues of r, D, the thickness t of the bar, and the allowable stress σall of
the material. Knowing that t = 1
4 in., D = 3.0 in., and σall = 16 ksi,
determine the allowable load P for values of r from 0.125 in. to
0.75 in., using 0.125-in. increments.
2.C6 A solid truncated cone is subjected to an axial force P as shown.
The exact elongation is (PL)∕(2πc2E). By replacing the cone by n
circular cylinders of equal thickness, write a computer program that
can be used to calculate the elongation of the truncated cone. What
is the percentage error in the answer obtained from the program
using (a) n = 6, (b) n = 12, (c) n = 60?
Fig. P2.C5
1
2 d
1
2 d
D
r 	P	P'
Fig. P2.C6
L
A
B
c
P
2c

-- 162 of 897 --



-- 163 of 897 --

Torsion
3
In the part of the jet engine shown here, the central shaft links the
components of the engine to develop the thrust that propels the
aircraft.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Introduce the concept of torsion in structural members and
machine parts.
• Define shearing stresses and strains in a circular shaft subject
to torsion.
• Define angle of twist in terms of the applied torque, geometry
of the shaft, and material.
• Use torsional deformations to solve indeterminate problems.
• Design shafts for power transmission.
• Review stress concentrations and how they are included in
torsion problems.
• Describe the elastoplastic response of circular shafts.
• Analyze torsion for noncircular members.
• Define the behavior of thin-walled hollow shafts.
©Incamerastock/Alamy Stock Photo

-- 164 of 897 --

150 	Torsion
Introduction
3.1 	CIRCULAR SHAFTS IN
TORSION
3.1A The Stresses in a Shaft
3.1B Deformations in a Circular
Shaft
3.1C Stresses in the Elastic Range
3.2 	ANGLE OF TWIST IN
THE ELASTIC RANGE
3.3 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE
SHAFTS
3.4 	DESIGN OF
TRANSMISSION SHAFTS
3.5 	STRESS
CONCENTRATIONS IN
CIRCULAR SHAFTS
*3.6 	PLASTIC
DEFORMATIONS IN
CIRCULAR SHAFTS
*3.7 	CIRCULAR SHAFTS
MADE OF AN
ELASTOPLASTIC
MATERIAL
*3.8 	RESIDUAL STRESSES IN
CIRCULAR SHAFTS
*3.9 	TORSION OF
NONCIRCULAR
MEMBERS
*3.10 THIN-WALLED
HOLLOW SHAFTS
Introduction
In this chapter, structural members and machine parts that are in torsion will
be analyzed, where the stresses and strains in members of circular cross sec-
tion are subjected to twisting couples, or torques, T and T′ (Fig. 3.1). These
couples have a common magnitude T, and opposite senses. They are vector
quantities and can be represented either by curved arrows (Fig. 3.1a) or by
couple vectors (Fig. 3.1b).
Members in torsion are encountered in many engineering applications.
The most common application is provided by transmission shafts, which are
used to transmit power from one point to another (Photo 3.1). These shafts
can be either solid, as shown in Fig. 3.1, or hollow.
Photo 3.1 	In this automotive power train, the shaft transmits power from the engine
to the rear wheels. ©videodoctor/Shutterstock
The system shown in Fig. 3.2a consists of a turbine A and an electric
generator B connected by a transmission shaft AB. Breaking the system into
its three component parts (Fig. 3.2b), the turbine exerts a twisting couple or
torque T on the shaft, which then exerts an equal torque on the generator. The
generator reacts by exerting the equal and opposite torque T′ on the shaft, and
the shaft reacts by exerting the torque T′ on the turbine.
First the stresses and deformations that take place in circular shafts will
be analyzed. Then an important property of circular shafts is demonstrated:
When a circular shaft is subjected to torsion, every cross section remains
plane and undistorted. Therefore, while the various cross sections along the
(a)
T
B
A
T'
T'
B
T
Fig. 3.1 	Two equivalent ways to represent a torque in a free-body diagram.
(a)
(b)
T
B
A
T'
T'
B
A
T

-- 165 of 897 --

shaft rotate through different angles, each cross section rotates as a solid rigid
slab. This property helps to determine the distribution of shearing strains in
a circular shaft and to conclude that the shearing strain varies linearly with
the distance from the axis of the shaft.
Deformations in the elastic range and Hooke’s law for shearing stress
and strain are used to determine the distribution of shearing stresses in a
circular shaft and derive the elastic torsion formulas.
In Sec. 3.2, the angle of twist of a circular shaft is found when subjected
to a given torque, assuming elastic deformations. The solution of problems
involving statically indeterminate shafts is discussed in Sec. 3.3.
In Sec. 3.4, the design of transmission shafts is accomplished by deter-
mining the required physical characteristics of a shaft in terms of its speed of
rotation and the power to be transmitted.
Section 3.5 accounts for stress concentrations where an abrupt change
in diameter of the shaft occurs. In Secs. 3.6 to 3.8, stresses and deformations
in circular shafts made of a ductile material are found when the yield point
of the material is exceeded. You will then learn how to determine the perma-
nent plastic deformations and residual stresses that remain in a shaft after it
has been loaded beyond the yield point of the material.
The last sections of this chapter study the torsion of noncircular mem-
bers (Sec. 3.9) and analyze the distribution of stresses in thin-walled hollow
noncircular shafts (Sec. 3.10).
B 	Rotation
Generator
A Turbine
B
A 	T'
T'
T
(a)
(b)
T
Fig. 3.2 	(a) A generator receives power at a constant number of revolutions per
minute from a turbine through shaft AB. (b) Free-body diagram of shaft AB along with
the driving and reacting torques on the generator and turbine, respectively.
Introduction 	151

-- 166 of 897 --

152 	Torsion
3.1 	CIRCULAR SHAFTS IN
TORSION
3.1A 	The Stresses in a Shaft
Consider a shaft AB subjected at A and B to equal and opposite torques T and T′.
We pass a section perpendicular to the axis of the shaft through some
arbitrary point C (Fig. 3.3). The free-body diagram of portion BC is shown
in Fig. 3.4b. To maintain equilibrium of portion BC, there must be
forces dF on the cross section at C. These forces arise from the torque
that portion AC exerts on BC as the shaft is twisted (Fig. 3.4a). The con-
ditions of equilibrium for BC require that the system of these forces be
equivalent to an internal torque T, as well as equal and opposite to T′
(Fig. 3.4b). Denoting the perpendicular distance ρ from the force dF to
the axis of the shaft and expressing that the sum of the moments of the
shearing forces dF about the axis of the shaft is equal in magnitude to the
torque T, write
∫ρ dF = T
Since dF = τ dA, where τ is the shearing stress on the element of area dA,
you also can write
∫ρ(τ dA) = T 	(3.1)
While these equations express an important condition that must be satis-
fied by the shearing stresses in any given cross section of the shaft, they do
not tell us how these stresses are distributed in the cross section. Thus the
actual distribution of stresses under a given load is statically indeterminate (i.e.,
this distribution cannot be determined by the methods of statics). However, it
was assumed in Sec. 1.2A that the normal stresses produced by an axial centric
load were uniformly distributed, and this assumption was justified in Sec. 2.10,
except in the neighborhood of concentrated loads. A similar assumption with
respect to the distribution of shearing stresses in an elastic shaft would be
wrong. Withhold any judgment until the deformations that are produced in the
shaft have been analyzed. This will be done in the next section.
As indicated in Sec. 1.4, shear cannot take place in one plane only.
Consider the very small element of shaft shown in Fig. 3.5. The torque applied
to the shaft produces shearing stresses τ on the faces perpendicular to the axis
of the shaft. However, the conditions of equilibrium (Sec. 1.4) require the
existence of equal stresses on the faces formed by the two planes containing
the axis of the shaft. That such shearing stresses actually occur in torsion can
Fig. 3.4 	(a) Free-body diagram of section
BC with torque at C represented by the
contributions of small elements of area
carrying forces dF at a radius ρ from the
section center. (b) Free-body diagram of
section BC having all the small area elements
summed, resulting in torque T.
B
C
B
C
(a)
(b)
dF
ρ
T
T'
T'
Fig. 3.5 	Small element in shaft showing
how shearing stress components act.
Axis of shaft
τ
Fig. 3.3 	Shaft subject to torques, with a
section plane at C.
B
A
C
T	T'

-- 167 of 897 --

3.1 Circular Shafts in Torsion 	153
be demonstrated by considering a “shaft” made of separate slats pinned at both
ends to disks, as shown in Fig. 3.6a. If markings have been painted on two
adjoining slats, it is observed that the slats will slide with respect to each other
when equal and opposite torques are applied to the ends of the “shaft”
(Fig. 3.6b). While sliding will not actually take place in a shaft made of a
homogeneous and cohesive material, the tendency for sliding will exist, show-
ing that stresses occur on longitudinal planes as well as on planes perpendicu-
lar to the axis of the shaft.†
3.1B 	Deformations in a Circular Shaft
Deformation Characteristics. 	Consider a circular shaft attached to a
fixed support at one end (Fig. 3.7a). If a torque T is applied to the other
end, the shaft will twist, with its free end rotating through an angle ϕ called
the angle of twist (Fig. 3.7b). Within a certain range of values of T, the
angle of twist ϕ is proportional to T. Also, ϕ is proportional to the length L
of the shaft. In other words, the angle of twist for a shaft of the same mate-
rial and same cross section, but twice as long, will be twice as large under
the same torque T.
When a circular shaft is subjected to torsion, every cross section
remains plane, which means that the cross sections remain flat and undis-
torted. In other words, while the various cross sections along the shaft
rotate through different amounts, each cross section rotates as a solid rigid
slab. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.8a, which shows the deformations in a
rubber model subjected to torsion. This property is characteristic of cir-
cular shafts, whether solid or hollow—but not of members with noncir-
cular cross section. For example, when a bar of square cross section is
subjected to torsion, its various cross sections warp and do not remain
plane (Fig. 3.8b).
The cross sections of a circular shaft remain plane and undistorted
because a circular shaft is axisymmetric (i.e., its appearance remains the same
when it is viewed from a fixed position and rotated about its axis through an
arbitrary angle). Square bars, on the other hand, retain the same appearance
only if they are rotated through 90° or 180°. Theoretically the axisymmetry
of circular shafts can be used to prove that their cross sections remain plane
and undistorted.
†The twisting of a cardboard tube that has been slit lengthwise provides another demonstra-
tion of the existence of shearing stresses on longitudinal planes.
Fig. 3.7 	Shaft with fixed support and line
AB drawn showing deformation under torsion
loading: (a) unloaded; (b) loaded.
L
(a)
A
B
B
(b)
A'
ϕ
A
B
T
Fig. 3.8 	Comparison of deformations in
(a) circular and (b) square shafts.
(a)
(b)
T
T'
T'
T
Fig. 3.6 	Demonstration of shear in a shaft (a) undeformed;
(b) loaded and deformed.
(b)
(a)
T	T'
(b)
(a)
T	T'

-- 168 of 897 --

154 	Torsion
Fig. 3.11 	Potential deformations of diameter lines if section’s concentric circles
rotate different amounts (a, b) or the same amount (c).
(a)
A
B
T
T'
A
B
(c)
T
T'
(b)
A
B
T'
T
Consider points C and D located on the circumference of a given cross
section, and let C′ and D′ be the positions after the shaft has been twisted
(Fig. 3.9a). The axisymmetry requires that the rotation that would have brought
D into D′ will bring C into C′. Thus, C′ and D′ must lie on the circumference
of a circle, and the arc C′D′ must be equal to the arc CD (Fig. 3.9b).
Assume that C′ and D′ lie on a different circle, and the new circle is
located to the left of the original circle, as shown in Fig. 3.9b. The same
situation will prevail for any other cross section, since all cross sections of
the shaft are subjected to the same internal torque T, and looking at the shaft
from its end A shows that the loading causes any given circle drawn on the
shaft to move away. But viewed from B, the given load looks the same (a
clockwise couple in the foreground and a counterclockwise couple in the
background), where the circle moves toward you. This contradiction proves
that C′ and D′ lie on the same circle as C and D. Thus, as the shaft is twisted,
the original circle just rotates in its own plane. Since the same reasoning can
be applied to any smaller, concentric circle located in the cross section, the
entire cross section remains plane (Fig. 3.10).
This argument does not preclude the possibility for the various con-
centric circles of Fig. 3.10 to rotate by different amounts when the shaft is
twisted. But if that were so, a given diameter of the cross section would be
distorted into a curve, as shown in Fig. 3.11a. Looking at this curve from A,
the outer layers of the shaft get more twisted than the inner ones, while look-
ing from B reveals the opposite (Fig. 3.11b). This inconsistency indicates that
any diameter of a given cross section remains straight (Fig. 3.11c); therefore,
any given cross section of a circular shaft remains plane and undistorted.
Now consider the mode of application of the twisting couples T and T′.
If all sections of the shaft, from one end to the other, are to remain plane and
Fig. 3.10 	Concentric circles at a cross section.
A
B
T
T'
(b)
C'
D'
C
D
(a)
A
B
C'
D'
C
D
A
B
T'
T'
T
T
Fig. 3.9 	Shaft subject to twisting.

-- 169 of 897 --

3.1 Circular Shafts in Torsion 	155
Fig. 3.13 	Shearing strain deformation.
(a) The angle of twist ϕ. (b) Undeformed
portion of shaft of radius ρ. (c) Deformed
portion of shaft; angle of twist ϕ and shearing
strain γ share the same arc length AA′.
L
L
(a)
(b)
(c)
L
B
O
ϕ
c
γ
B
B
A
ρ O
O
A'
A
ρ
ϕ
undistorted, the couples are applied so the ends of the shaft remain plane and
undistorted. This can be accomplished by applying the couples T and T′ to
rigid plates that are solidly attached to the ends of the shaft (Fig. 3.12a). All
sections will remain plane and undistorted when the loading is applied, and
the resulting deformations will be uniform throughout the entire length of the
shaft. All of the equally spaced circles shown in Fig. 3.12a will rotate by the
same amount relative to their neighbors, and each of the straight lines will be
transformed into a curve (helix) intersecting the various circles at the same
angle (Fig. 3.12b).
Shearing Strains. 	The examples given in this and the following sections
are based on the assumption of rigid end plates. However, loading conditions
may differ from those corresponding to the model of Fig. 3.12. This model
helps to define a torsion problem for which we can obtain an exact solution.
By use of Saint-Venant’s principle, the results obtained for this idealized
model may be extended to most engineering applications.
Now we will determine the distribution of shearing strains in a cir-
cular shaft of length L and radius c that has been twisted through an angle
ϕ (Fig. 3.13a). Detaching from the shaft a cylinder of radius ρ, consider the
small square element formed by two adjacent circles and two adjacent
straight lines traced on the surface before any load is applied (Fig. 3.13b).
As the shaft is subjected to a torsional load, the element deforms into a
rhombus (Fig. 3.13c). Here the shearing strain γ in a given element is mea-
sured by the change in the angles formed by the sides of that element (Sec. 2.7).
Since the circles defining two of the sides remain unchanged, the shearing
strain γ must be equal to the angle between lines AB and A′B.
Figure 3.13c shows that, for small values of γ, the arc length AA′ is
expressed as AA′ = Lγ. But since AA′ = ρϕ, it follows that Lγ = ρϕ, or
γ = ρϕ
L (3.2)
where γ and ϕ are in radians. This equation shows that the shearing strain γ at
a given point of a shaft in torsion is proportional to the angle of twist ϕ. It also
shows that γ is proportional to the distance ρ from the axis of the shaft to that
point. Thus, the shearing strain in a circular shaft is zero at the axis of the
shaft, and it then varies linearly with the distance from the axis of the shaft.
From Eq. (3.2), the shearing strain is maximum on the surface of the
shaft, where ρ = c.
γmax = cϕ
L (3.3)
Eliminating ϕ from Eqs. (3.2) and (3.3), the shearing strain γ at a distance ρ
from the axis of the shaft is
γ = ρ
c γmax 	(3.4)
3.1C 	Stresses in the Elastic Range
When the torque T is such that all shearing stresses in the shaft remain below
the yield strength τY, the stresses in the shaft will remain below both the
proportional limit and the elastic limit. Thus Hooke’s law will apply, and there
will be no permanent deformation.
Fig. 3.12 	Visualization of deformation
resulting from twisting couples:
(a) undeformed, (b) deformed.
(b)
(a)
T'
T

-- 170 of 897 --

156 	Torsion
Recalling Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain from Sec. 2.7, write
τ = Gγ 	(3.5)
where G is the modulus of rigidity or shear modulus of the material. Multiply-
ing both members of Eq. (3.4) by G, write
Gγ = ρ
c Gγmax
or, making use of Eq. (3.5),
τ = ρ
c τmax 	(3.6)
This equation shows that, as long as the yield strength (or proportional limit) is
not exceeded in any part of a circular shaft, the shearing stress in the shaft varies
linearly with the distance ρ from the axis of the shaft. Figure 3.14a shows the
stress distribution in a solid circular shaft of radius c. A hollow circular shaft of
inner radius c1 and outer radius c2 is shown in Fig. 3.14b. From Eq. (3.6),
τmin = c1
c2
τmax 	(3.7)
Recall from Sec. 3.1A that the sum of the moments of the elementary
forces exerted on any cross section of the shaft must be equal to the magnitude
T of the torque exerted on the shaft:
∫ρ(τ dA) = T 	(3.1)
Substituting for τ from Eq. (3.6) into Eq. (3.1),
T = ∫ρτ dA = τmax
c ∫ρ2 dA
The integral in the last part represents the polar moment of inertia J of the
cross section with respect to its center O. Therefore,
T = τmax J
c (3.8)
or solving for τmax,
τmax = Tc
J (3.9)
Substituting for τmax from Eq. (3.9) into Eq. (3.6), the shearing stress at any
distance ρ from the axis of the shaft is
τ = Tρ
J (3.10)
Equations (3.9) and (3.10) are known as the elastic torsion formulas. Recall
from statics that the polar moment of inertia of a circle of radius c is J = 1
2 πc4 .
For a hollow circular shaft of inner radius c1 and outer radius c2, the polar
moment of inertia is
J = 1
2 πc2
4 − 1
2 πc1
4 = 1
2 π (c2
4 − c4
1 ) 	(3.11)
When SI metric units are used in Eq. (3.9) or (3.10), T is given in N·m,
c or ρ in meters, and J in m4. The resulting shearing stress is given in N/m2,
that is, pascals (Pa). When U.S. customary units are used, T is given in lb·in.,
c or ρ in inches, and J in in4. The resulting shearing stress is given in psi.
Fig. 3.14 	Distribution of shearing stresses in
a torqued shaft: (a) solid shaft, (b) hollow shaft.
max
	τ	max
	τ
min
	τ
(a) 	(b)
c
τ
ρ
τ
O c1 	c2
	ρ
O
max
	τ
min
	τ
(b)
ρ
τ
c1 	c2
	ρ
O

-- 171 of 897 --

3.1 Circular Shafts in Torsion 	157
Concept Application 3.1
A hollow cylindrical steel shaft is 1.5 m long and has inner and outer diameters
respectively equal to 40 and 60 mm (Fig. 3.15). (a) What is the largest torque
that can be applied to the shaft if the shearing stress is not to exceed 120 MPa?
(b) What is the corresponding minimum value of the shearing stress in the shaft?
The largest torque T that can be applied to the shaft is the torque for
which τmax = 120 MPa. Since this is less than the yield strength for any steel,
use Eq. (3.9). Solving this equation for T,
T = Jτmax
c (1)
Recalling that the polar moment of inertia J of the cross section is given by
Eq. (3.11), where c1 = 1
2 (40 mm) = 0.02 m and c2 = 1
2 (60 mm) = 0.03 m, write
J = 1
2 π (c4
2 − c4
1 ) = 1
2 π (0.034 − 0.024 ) = 1.021 × 10−6 m4
Substituting for J and τmax into Eq. (1) and letting c = c2 = 0.03 m,
T = Jτmax
c = (1.021 × 10−6 m4 )(120 × 106 Pa)
0.03 m = 4.08 kN·m
The minimum shearing stress occurs on the inner surface of the shaft. Equa-
tion (3.7) expresses that τmin and τmax are respectively proportional to c1 and c2:
τmin = c1
c2
τmax = 0.02 m
0.03 m (120 MPa) = 80 MPa
Fig. 3.15 	Hollow shaft with one end
fixed, and having a torque T applied at
the other end.
1.5 m
40 mm
60 mm	
T
The torsion formulas of Eqs. (3.9) and (3.10) were derived for a shaft
of uniform circular cross section subjected to torques at its ends. However,
they also can be used for a shaft of variable cross section or for a shaft sub-
jected to torques at locations other than its ends (Fig. 3.16a). The distribution
of shearing stresses in a given cross section S of the shaft is obtained from
Eq. (3.9), where J is the polar moment of inertia of that section and T repre-
sents the internal torque in that section. T is obtained by drawing the free-
body diagram of the portion of shaft located on one side of the section
(Fig. 3.16b) and writing that the sum of the torques applied (including the
internal torque T) is zero (see Sample Prob. 3.1).
Our analysis of stresses in a shaft has been limited to shearing stresses
due to the fact that the element selected was oriented so that its faces were
either parallel or perpendicular to the axis of the shaft (Fig. 3.5). Now consider
two elements a and b located on the surface of a circular shaft subjected to
torsion (Fig. 3.17). Since the faces of element a are respectively parallel and
Fig. 3.16 	Shaft with variable cross section.
(a) With applied torques and section S.
(b) Free-body diagram of sectioned shaft.
B
(a)
(b)
TC
TE
TB
TA
E
B
S
C
A
S
E
T	TB
TE
Fig. 3.17 	Circular shaft with stress elements
at different orientations.
a
max
	τ
T
T' b

-- 172 of 897 --

158 	Torsion
perpendicular to the axis of the shaft, the only stresses on the element are the
shearing stresses
τmax = Tc
J (3.9)
On the other hand, the faces of element b, which form arbitrary angles with
the axis of the shaft, are subjected to a combination of normal and shearing
stresses. Consider the stresses and resulting forces on faces that are at 45° to
the axis of the shaft. The free-body diagrams of the two triangular elements
are shown in Fig. 3.18. From Fig. 3.18a, the stresses exerted on the faces BC
and BD are the shearing stresses τmax = Tc∕J. The magnitude of the corre-
sponding shear forces is τmax A0, where A0 is the area of the face. Observing
that the components along DC of the two shear forces are equal and opposite,
the force F exerted on DC must be perpendicular to that face and is a tensile
force. Its magnitude is
F = 2(τmaxA0 )cos 45° = τmaxA0 √2 	(3.12)
The corresponding stress is obtained by dividing the force F by the area A of
face DC. Observing that A = A0 √2,
σ = F
A = τmax A0 √2
A0 √2 = τmax 	(3.13)
A similar analysis of the element of Fig. 3.18b shows that the stress on the
face BE is σ = −τmax. Therefore, the stresses exerted on the faces of an ele-
ment c at 45° to the axis of the shaft (Fig. 3.19) are normal stresses equal to
±τmax. Thus, while element a in Fig. 3.19 is in pure shear, element c in the
same figure is subjected to a normal tensile stress on two of its faces and a
normal compressive stress on the other two. Also note that all of the stresses
involved have the same magnitude, Tc∕J.†
Because ductile materials generally fail in shear, a specimen sub-
jected to torsion breaks along a plane perpendicular to its longitudinal axis
(Photo 3.2a). On the other hand, brittle materials are weaker in tension
than in shear. Thus, when subjected to torsion, a brittle material tends to
break along surfaces perpendicular to the direction in which tension is
maximum, forming a 45° angle with the longitudinal axis of the specimen
(Photo 3.2b).
†Stresses on elements of arbitrary orientation, such as in Fig. 3.18b, will be discussed in
Chap. 7.
Photo 3.2 	Shear failure of shaft subject to torque. Courtesy of John DeWolf
(a) Ductile failure 	(b) Brittle failure
T' 	T'
T 	T
(a) 	(b)
C 	C	B 	B
D 	E
max A0
	τ	max A0
	τ
max A0
	τ 	max A0	
τ
45° 	45°
F 	F'
Fig. 3.18 	Forces on faces at 45° to shaft axis.
= Tc
J
max
	τ 	= Tc
J
45°	
σ
a
T
T'
c
±
Fig. 3.19 	Shaft elements with only shearing
stresses or normal stresses.

-- 173 of 897 --

3.1 Circular Shafts in Torsion 	159
Sample Problem 3.1
Shaft BC is hollow with inner and outer diameters of 90 mm and 120 mm,
respectively. Shafts AB and CD are solid and of diameter d. For the loading
shown, determine (a) the maximum and minimum shearing stress in shaft BC,
(b) the required diameter d of shafts AB and CD if the allowable shearing
stress in these shafts is 65 MPa.
0.9 m
d
A
B
TC
TD
0.7 m
0.5 m
120 mm
d
C
D
TA = 6 kN·m
= 14 kN·m
= 26 kN·m
= 6 kN·m
TB
STRATEGY: 	Use free-body diagrams to determine the torque in each shaft.
The torques can then be used to find the stresses for shaft BC and the required
diameters for shafts AB and CD.
MODELING: 	Denoting by TAB the torque in shaft AB (Fig. 1), we pass a
section through shaft AB and, for the free body shown, we write
ΣM x = 0: 	(6 kN·m) − T AB = 0 	T AB = 6 kN·m
We now pass a section through shaft BC (Fig. 2) and, for the free body shown,
we have
ΣM x = 0: 	(6 kN·m) + (14 kN·m) − T BC = 0 	T BC = 20 kN·m
ANALYSIS:
a. Shaft BC. 	For this hollow shaft we have
J = π
2 (c4
2 − c4
1 ) = π
2 [(0.060) 4 − (0.045) 4 ] = 13.92 × 10−6 m4
Maximum Shearing Stress. 	On the outer surface, we have
τmax = τ2 = TBC c2
J = (20 kN·m)(0.060 m)
13.92 × 10−6 m4 	τmax = 86.2 MPa 	◂
A 	TAB
x
TA = 6 kN·m
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram
for section to left of cut
between A and B.
TB
A
B 	TBC
xx
TA = 6 kN·m
= 14 kN·m
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram for
section to left of cut between B
and C.
c1 = 45 mm
c2 = 60 mm
2
1
τ
τ
Fig. 3 	Shearing stress distribution
on cross section.
(continued)

-- 174 of 897 --

160 	Torsion
Minimum Shearing Stress. 	As shown in Fig. 3 the stresses are pro-
portional to the distance from the axis of the shaft.
τmin
τmax
= c1
c2
τmin
86.2 MPa = 45 mm
60 mm τmin = 64.7 MPa 	◂
b. Shafts AB and CD. 	We note that both shafts have the same torque
T = 6 kN·m (Fig. 4). Denoting the radius of the shafts by c and knowing that
τall = 65 MPa, we write
τ = Tc
J 65 MPa = (6 kN·m)c
π
2 c4
c3 = 58.8 × 10−6 m3 	c = 38.9 × 10−3 m
d = 2c = 2(38.9 mm) 	d = 77.8 mm 	◂
A
B
6 kN·m
6 kN·m
Fig. 4 	Free-body diagram
of shaft portion AB.
Sample Problem 3.2
The preliminary design of a motor-to-generator connection calls for the use
of a large hollow shaft with inner and outer diameters of 4 in. and 6 in.,
respectively. Knowing that the allowable shearing stress is 12 ksi, determine
the maximum torque that can be transmitted by (a) the shaft as designed,
(b) a solid shaft of the same weight, and (c) a hollow shaft of the same
weight and an 8-in. outer diameter.
STRATEGY: 	Use Eq. (3.9) to determine the maximum torque using the
allowable stress.
MODELING AND ANALYSIS:
a. Hollow Shaft as Designed. 	Using Fig. 1 and setting τall = 12 ksi,
we write
J = π
2 (c4
2 − c4
1 ) = π
2 [(3 in.) 4 − (2 in.) 4 ] = 102.1 in4
Using Eq. (3.9), we write
τmax = Tc2
J 12 ksi = T (3 in.)
102.1 in4 	T = 408 kip·in. 	◂
c2 = 3 in.
c1 = 2 in.
T
8 ft
T'
T
6 in.	4 in.
Fig. 1 	Shaft as designed.

-- 175 of 897 --

3.1 Circular Shafts in Torsion 	161
b. Solid Shaft of Equal Weight. 	For the shaft as designed and this
solid shaft to have the same weight and length, their cross-sectional areas must
be equal, i.e., A(a) = A(b).
π[(3 in.) 2 − (2 in.) 2 ] = πc2
3 	c3 = 2.24 in.
Using Fig. 2 and setting τall = 12 ksi, we write
τmax = Tc3
J 12 ksi = T (2.24 in.)
π
2 (2.24 in.) 4
T = 211 kip·in. 	◂
c3
T
Fig. 2 	Solid shaft having equal weight.
c. Hollow Shaft of 8-in. Diameter. 	For equal weight, the cross-
sectional areas again must be equal, i.e., A(a) = A(c) (Fig. 3). We determine
the inside diameter of the shaft by writing
π[(3 in.) 2 − (2 in.) 2 ] = π[(4 in.) 2 − c2
5 ] 	c5 = 3.317 in.
For c5 = 3.317 in. and c4 = 4 in.,
J = π
2[(4 in.) 4 − (3.317 in.) 4 ] = 212 in4
With τall = 12 ksi and c4 = 4 in.,
τmax = Tc4
J 12 ksi = T(4 in.)
212 in4 	T = 636 kip·in. 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This example illustrates the advantage obtained
when the shaft material is further from the centroidal axis.
c4 = 4 in.
c5
T
Fig. 3 	Hollow shaft with an 8-in.
outer diameter, having equal weight.

-- 176 of 897 --

162
3.1 Determine the torque T that causes a maximum shearing stress of
70 MPa in the steel cylindrical shaft shown.
3.2 For the cylindrical shaft shown, determine the maximum shearing
stress caused by a torque of magnitude T = 800 N·m.
3.3 A 1.75-kN·m torque is applied to the solid cylinder shown. Deter-
mine (a) the maximum shearing stress, (b) the percent of the torque
carried by the inner 25-mm-diameter core.
50 mm
25 mm
1.75 kN·m
Fig. P3.3
3.4 (a) Determine the maximum shearing stress caused by a 40-kip·in.
torque T in the 3-in.-diameter solid aluminum shaft shown. (b) Solve
part a, assuming that the solid shaft has been replaced by a hollow
shaft of the same outer diameter and of 1-in. inner diameter.
3.5 (a) For the 3-in.-diameter solid cylinder and loading shown, deter-
mine the maximum shearing stress. (b) Determine the inner diameter
of the 4-in.-diameter hollow cylinder shown, for which the maximum
stress is the same as in part a.
T = 40 kip·in.
T'	T'
T'	T'
3 in.
T = 40 kip·in.
4 in.
(b)
(a)
Fig. P3.5
3.6 (a) For the hollow shaft and loading shown, determine the maximum
shearing stress. (b) Determine the diameter of a solid shaft for which
the maximum shearing stress under the loading shown is the same
as in part (a).
Problems
T
18 mm
Fig. P3.1 and P3.2
3 in.
4 ft
T
Fig. P3.4
60 mm
40 mm
2400 N·m
Fig. P3.6

-- 177 of 897 --

163
3.7 The solid spindle AB is made of a steel with an allowable shearing
stress of 12 ksi, and sleeve CD is made of a brass with an allowable
shearing stress of 7 ksi. Determine (a) the largest torque T that can
be applied at A if the allowable shearing stress is not to be exceeded
in sleeve CD, (b) the corresponding required value of the diameter
ds of spindle AB.
4 in.
8 in.
ds
t = 	in.	1
4
3 in.
D
C
A
B
T
Fig. P3.7 and P3.8
3.8 The solid spindle AB has a diameter ds = 1.5 in. and is made of a
steel with an allowable shearing stress of 12 ksi, while sleeve CD is
made of a brass with an allowable shearing stress of 7 ksi. Determine
the largest torque T that can be applied at A.
3.9 The torques shown are exerted on pulleys A, B, and C. The diameter
of shaft AB is 1.3 in. and that of BC is 1.8 in. Knowing that both
shafts are solid, determine the maximum shearing stress in (a) shaft
AB, (b) shaft BC.
6.8 kip·in.
72 in.
C
10.4 kip·in.
3.6 kip·in.
B
48 in.	A
Fig. P3.9 and P3.10
3.10 The shafts of the pulley assembly shown are to be redesigned.
Knowing that the allowable shearing stress in each shaft is 8.5 ksi,
determine the smallest allowable diameter of (a) shaft AB,
(b) shaft BC.

-- 178 of 897 --

164
3.11 The torques shown are exerted on pulleys A and B. Knowing that
both shafts are solid, determine the maximum shearing stress in
(a) shaft AB, (b) shaft BC.
3.12 To reduce the total mass of the assembly of Prob. 3.11, a new
design is being considered in which the diameter of shaft BC will
be smaller. Determine the smallest diameter of shaft BC for which
the maximum value of the shearing stress in the assembly will
not increase.
3.13 Under normal operating conditions, the electric motor exerts a torque
of 2.4 kN·m on shaft AB. Knowing that each shaft is solid,
determine the maximum shearing stress in (a) shaft AB, (b) shaft
BC, (c) shaft CD.
54 mm
46 mm
46 mm
40 mm
A
B
C
D
E
TB = 1.2 kN·m
TC = 0.8 kN·m
TD = 0.4 kN·m
Fig. P3.13
3.14 To reduce the total mass of the assembly of Prob. 3.13, a new
design is being considered in which the diameter of shaft BC will
be smaller. Determine the smallest diameter of shaft BC for which
the maximum value of the shearing stress in the assembly will not
be increased.
3.15 The allowable shearing stress is 15 ksi in the 1.5-in.-diameter steel
rod AB and 8 ksi in the 1.8-in.-diameter brass rod BC. Neglecting
the effect of stress concentrations, determine the largest torque T that
can be applied at A.
3.16 The allowable shearing stress is 15 ksi in the steel rod AB and 8 ksi in
the brass rod BC. Knowing that a torque of magnitude T = 10 kip·in.
is applied at A, determine the required diameter of (a) rod AB,
(b) rod BC.
30 mm
46 mm
C
A
B
TA = 300 N·m
TB = 400 N·m
Fig. P3.11
B
C
Brass
T
A
Steel
Fig. P3.15 and P3.16

-- 179 of 897 --

165
3.17 The solid shaft shown is formed of a brass for which the allowable
shearing stress is 55 MPa. Neglecting the effect of stress concentra-
tions, determine the smallest diameters dAB and d BC for which the
allowable shearing stress is not exceeded.
3.18 Solve Prob. 3.17 assuming that the direction of TC is reversed.
3.19 Shaft AB is made of a steel with an allowable shearing stress of
90 MPa, and shaft BC is made of an aluminum with an allowable
shearing stress of 60 MPa. Knowing that the diameter of shaft BC
is 50 mm and neglecting the effect of stress concentrations, deter-
mine (a) the largest torque T that can be applied at A if the allow-
able stress is not to be exceeded in shaft BC, (b) the corresponding
required diameter of shaft AB.
3.20 Shaft AB has a 30-mm diameter and is made of a steel with an
allowable shearing stress of 90 MPa; shaft BC has a 50-mm diam-
eter and is made of an aluminum alloy with an allowable shearing
stress of 60 MPa. Neglecting the effect of stress concentrations,
determine the largest torque T that can be applied at A.
3.21 Two solid steel shafts are connected by the gears shown. A torque
of magnitude T = 900 N·m is applied to shaft AB. Knowing that
the allowable shearing stress is 50 MPa and considering only
stresses due to twisting, determine the required diameter of (a) shaft
AB, (b) shaft CD.
240 mm
80 mm
B
A
T
C
D
Fig. P3.21 and P3.22
3.22 Shaft CD is made from a 66-mm-diameter rod and is connected to
the 48-mm-diameter shaft AB as shown. Considering only stresses
due to twisting and knowing that the allowable shearing stress is
60 MPa for each shaft, determine the largest torque T that can be
applied.
750 mm
600 mm
TB = 1200 N·m
TC = 400 N·m
dAB 	B
A
C	d BC
Fig. P3.17
C
A
B
Aluminum
Steel
T
Fig. P3.19 and P3.20

-- 180 of 897 --

166
3.23 Under normal operating conditions a motor exerts a torque of mag-
nitude TF at F. The shafts are made of a steel for which the allow-
able shearing stress is 12 ksi and have diameters dCDE = 0.900 in.
and dFGH = 0.800 in. Knowing that rD = 6.5 in. and rG = 4.5 in.,
determine the largest allowable value of TF.
F
TE
H E
A
B
D
C
G
rG
rDTF
Fig. P3.23 and P3.24
3.24 Under normal operating conditions a motor exerts a torque of mag-
nitude TF = 1200 lb·in. at F. Knowing that rD = 8 in., rG = 3 in.,
and the allowable shearing stress is 10.5 ksi in each shaft, determine
the required diameter of (a) shaft CDE, (b) shaft FGH.
3.25 The two solid shafts are connected by gears as shown and are made
of a steel for which the allowable shearing stress is 7000 psi. Know-
ing the diameters of the two shafts are, respectively, dBC = 1.6 in.
and dEF = 1.25 in., determine the largest torque TC that can be
applied at C.
B	4 in.
2.5 in.
E
G
H
A
D
F
C TC
TF
Fig. P3.25 and P3.26
3.26 The two solid shafts are connected by gears as shown and are made
of a steel for which the allowable shearing stress is 8500 psi. Know-
ing that a torque of magnitude TC = 5 kip·in. is applied at C and
that the assembly is in equilibrium, determine the required diameter
of (a) shaft BC, (b) shaft EF.

-- 181 of 897 --

167
3.27 For the gear train shown, the diameters of the three solid shafts are:
dAB = 20 mm 	dCD = 25 mm 	dEF = 40 mm
Knowing that for each shaft the allowable shearing stress is 60 MPa,
determine the largest torque T that can be applied.
B
C
75 mm
A
D
E
F
30 mm
90 mm
T
30 mm
Fig. P3.27 and P3.28
3.28 A torque T = 900 N·m is applied to shaft AB of the gear train
shown. Knowing that the allowable shearing stress is 80 MPa,
determine the required diameter of (a) shaft AB, (b) shaft CD,
(c) shaft EF.
3.29 While the exact distribution of the shearing stresses in a hollow-
cylindrical shaft is as shown in Fig. P3.29a, an approximate value
can be obtained for τmax by assuming that the stresses are uni-
formly distributed over the area A of the cross section, as shown
in Fig. P3.29b, and then further assuming that all of the elemen-
tary shearing forces act at a distance from O equal to the mean
radius 1
2 (c1 + c2 ) of the cross section. This approximate value is
τ0 = T∕Arm, where T is the applied torque. Determine the ratio
τmax∕τ0 of the true value of the maximum shearing stress and its
approximate value τ0 for values of c1∕c2 respectively equal to 1.00,
0.95, 0.75, 0.50, and 0.
3.30 (a) For a given allowable shearing stress, determine the ratio T∕w
of the maximum allowable torque T and the weight per unit length
w for the hollow shaft shown. (b) Denoting by (T∕w)0 the value of
this ratio for a solid shaft of the same radius c2, express the ratio
T∕w for the hollow shaft in terms of (T∕w)0 and c1∕c2.
O 	O
c1
max
r
τ
τ
m
	c2
0
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P3.29
c2
c1
Fig. P3.30

-- 182 of 897 --

168 	Torsion
3.2 	ANGLE OF TWIST IN THE
ELASTIC RANGE
In this section, a relationship will be determined between the angle of twist
ϕ of a circular shaft and the torque T exerted on the shaft. The entire shaft
is assumed to remain elastic. Considering first the case of a shaft of length L
with a uniform cross section of radius c subjected to a torque T at its free
end (Fig. 3.20), recall that the angle of twist ϕ and the maximum shearing
strain γmax are related as
γmax = cϕ
L (3.13)
But in the elastic range, the yield stress is not exceeded anywhere in the shaft.
Hooke’s law applies, and γmax = τmax∕G. Recalling Eq. (3.9),
γmax = τmax
G = Tc
JG (3.14)
Equating the right-hand members of Eqs. (3.3) and (3.14) and solving for ϕ,
write
ϕ = TL
JG (3.15)
where ϕ is in radians. Since L, J, and G are constant for a given shaft, the
relationship obtained shows that, within the elastic range, the angle of twist
ϕ is proportional to the torque T applied to the shaft. This agrees with the
discussion at the beginning of Sec. 3.1B.
Equation (3.15) provides a convenient method to determine the modulus
of rigidity. A cylindrical rod of a material is placed in a torsion testing
machine (Photo 3.3). Torques of increasing magnitude T are applied to the
specimen, and the corresponding values of the angle of twist ϕ in a length L
of the specimen are recorded. As long as the yield stress of the material is
not exceeded, the points obtained by plotting ϕ against T fall on a straight
line. The slope of this line represents the quantity JG∕L, from which the
modulus of rigidity G can be computed.
L
T
c
ϕ
γ max
Fig. 3.20 	Torque applied to free end of
shaft resulting in angle of twist ϕ.
Photo 3.3 	Tabletop torsion testing machine. Courtesy of Tinius Olsen Testing Machine Co., Inc.
Torsion Test

-- 183 of 897 --

3.2 Angle of Twist in the Elastic Range 	169
Concept Application 3.2
What torque should be applied to the end of the shaft of Concept Application 3.1
to produce a twist of 2°? Use the value G = 77 GPa for the modulus of rigid-
ity of steel.
Solving Eq. (3.15) for T, write
T = JG
L ϕ
Substituting the given values
G = 77 × 109 Pa 	L = 1.5 m
ϕ = 2°(
2π rad
360° ) = 34.9 × 10−3 rad
and recalling that, for the given cross section,
J = 1.021 × 10 −6 m4
we have
T = JG
L ϕ = (1.021 × 10−6 m4 )(77 × 109 Pa)
1.5 m (34.9 × 10−3 rad)
= 1.829 × 103 N·m = 1.829 kN·m
Concept Application 3.3
What angle of twist will create a shearing stress of 70 MPa on the inner
surface of the hollow steel shaft of Concept Applications 3.1 and 3.2?
One method for solving this problem is to use Eq. (3.10) to find the
torque T corresponding to the given value of τ and Eq. (3.15) to determine
the angle of twist ϕ corresponding to the value of T just found.
A more direct solution is to use Hooke’s law to compute the shearing
strain on the inner surface of the shaft:
γmin = τmin
G = 70 × 106 Pa
77 × 109 Pa = 909 × 10−6
Recalling Eq. (3.2), which was obtained by expressing the length of arc AA′
in Fig. 3.13c in terms of both γ and ϕ, we have
ϕ = Lγmin
c1
= 1500 mm
20 mm (909 × 10−6 ) = 68.2 × 10−3 rad
To obtain the angle of twist in degrees, write
ϕ = (68.2 × 10−3 rad)(
360°
2π rad) = 3.91°
1.5 m
40 mm
60 mm	
T
Fig. 3.15 	(repeated) Hollow shaft with
one end fixed, and having a torque
T applied at the other end.

-- 184 of 897 --

170 	Torsion
Equation (3.15) can be used for the angle of twist only if the shaft is
homogeneous (constant G), has a uniform cross section, and is loaded only at
its ends. If the shaft is subjected to torques at locations other than its ends or
if it has several portions with various cross sections and possibly of different
materials, it must be divided into parts that satisfy the required conditions for
Eq. (3.15). For shaft AB shown in Fig. 3.21, four different parts should be
considered: AC, CD, DE, and EB. The total angle of twist of the shaft (i.e.,
the angle through which end A rotates with respect to end B) is obtained by
algebraically adding the angles of twist of each component part. Using the
internal torque Ti, length Li, cross-sectional polar moment of inertia Ji, and
modulus of rigidity Gi, corresponding to part i, the total angle of twist of the
shaft is
ϕ = ∑
i
Ti Li
J i Gi
(3.16)
The internal torque Ti in any given part of the shaft is obtained by passing a
section through that part and drawing the free-body diagram of the portion of
shaft located on one side of the section. This procedure is applied in Sample
Prob. 3.3.
For a shaft with a variable circular cross section, as shown in Fig. 3.22,
Eq. (3.15) is applied to a disk of thickness dx. The angle by which one face
of the disk rotates with respect to the other is
dϕ = T dx
JG
where J is a function of x. Integrating in x from 0 to L, the total angle of twist
of the shaft is
ϕ = ∫L
0
T dx
JG (3.17)
The shafts shown in Figs. 3.15 and 3.20 both had one end attached
to a fixed support. In each case, the angle of twist ϕ was equal to the
angle of rotation of its free end. When neither end of a shaft is fixed
(i.e., both ends of a shaft rotate), the angle of twist of the shaft is equal
to the angle through which one end of the shaft rotates with respect to
the other. For example, consider the assembly shown in Fig. 3.23a, con-
sisting of two elastic shafts AD and BE, each of length L, radius c,
modulus of rigidity G, and attached to gears meshed at C. If a torque T
is applied at E (Fig. 3.23b), both shafts will be twisted. Since the end
D of shaft AD is fixed, the angle of twist of AD is measured by the angle
of rotation ϕA of end A. On the other hand, since both ends of shaft BE
rotate, the angle of twist of BE is equal to the difference between the
angles of rotation ϕB and ϕE (i.e., the angle of twist is equal to the angle
through which end E rotates with respect to end B). This relative angle
of rotation, ϕE∕B, is
ϕE∕B = ϕE − ϕB = TL
JG
(a)
(b)
C''
C
B
L
T
r B
E	
ϕ
B	
ϕ
A 	rA
C
Fixed end
B
L
A
D
A	
ϕ
C'
E
E
Fixed support
D
TC
TD
TA
TB
A
C
B
E
D
Fig. 3.21 	Shaft with multiple cross-section
dimensions and multiple loads.
x
A
dx
B
L
T'
T
Fig. 3.22 	Torqued shaft with variable cross
section.
Fig. 3.23 	(a) Gear assembly for transmitting
torque from point E to point D. (b) Angles of
twist at disk E, gear B, and gear A.

-- 185 of 897 --

3.3 Statically Indeterminate Shafts 	171
Concept Application 3.4
For the assembly of Fig. 3.23, knowing that rA = 2rB, determine the angle of
rotation of end E of shaft BE when the torque T is applied at E.
First determine the torque TAD exerted on shaft AD. Observing that equal
and opposite forces F and F′ are applied on the two gears at C (Fig. 3.24)
and recalling that rA = 2rB, the torque exerted on shaft AD is twice as large
as the torque exerted on shaft BE. Thus, TAD = 2T.
Since the end D of shaft AD is fixed, the angle of rotation ϕA of gear A
is equal to the angle of twist of the shaft and is
ϕA = TAD L
JG = 2TL
JG
Since the arcs CC′ and CC″ in Fig. 3.23b must be equal, rAϕA = rBϕB. So,
ϕB = (r A∕r B)ϕA = 2ϕA
Therefore,
ϕB = 2ϕA = 4TL
JG
Next, consider shaft BE. The angle of twist of the shaft is equal to the angle
ϕE∕B through which end E rotates with respect to end B. Thus,
ϕE∕B = TBE L
JG = TL
JG
The angle of rotation of end E is obtained by
ϕE = ϕB + ϕE∕B
= 4TL
JG + TL
JG = 5TL
JG
3.3 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE SHAFTS
There are situations where the internal torques cannot be determined from
statics alone. In such cases, the external torques (i.e., those exerted on the
shaft by the supports and connections) cannot be determined from the free-
body diagram of the entire shaft. This situation is analogous to problems
discussed in Sec. 2.2 involving indeterminate axially loaded members. As
in Sec. 2.2, the equilibrium equations must be complemented by relations
involving the deformations of the shaft and obtained by the geometry of the
problem. These shafts are statically indeterminate. The following concept
application and Sample Prob. 3.5 show how to analyze statically indetermi-
nate shafts.
A B
C
F
F'
rA 	rB
Fig. 3.24 	Gear teeth forces for gears A
and B.

-- 186 of 897 --

172 	Torsion
Concept Application 3.5
A circular shaft AB consists of a 10-in.-long, 7
8 -in.-diameter steel cylinder, in
which a 5-in.-long, 5
8 -in.-diameter cavity has been drilled from end B. The
shaft is attached to fixed supports at both ends, and a 90 lb·ft torque is applied
at its midsection (Fig. 3.25a). Determine the torque exerted on the shaft by
each of the supports.
Drawing the free-body diagram of the shaft and denoting by TA and
TB the torques exerted by the supports (Fig. 3.25b), the equilibrium
equation is
T A + T B = 90 lb·ft
Since this equation is not sufficient to determine the two unknown torques TA
and TB, the shaft is statically indeterminate.
However, TA and TB can be determined if we observe that the total angle
of twist of shaft AB must be zero, since both of its ends are restrained.
Denoting by ϕ1 and ϕ2, respectively, the angles of twist of portions AC and
CB, we write
ϕ = ϕ1 + ϕ2 = 0
From the free-body diagram of a small portion of shaft including end A
(Fig. 3.25c), we note that the internal torque T1 in AC is equal to TA; from
the free-body diagram of a small portion of shaft including end B
(Fig. 3.25d), we note that the internal torque T2 in CB is equal to TB. Recall-
ing Eq. (3.15) and observing that portions AC and CB of the shaft are
twisted in opposite senses, write
ϕ = ϕ1 + ϕ2 = TA L1
J1G − TB L2
J2G = 0
Solving for TB,
T B = L1 J2
L2 J1
T A
Substituting the numerical data gives
L1 = L2 = 5 in.
J1 = 1
2 π ( 7
16 in.) 4 = 57.6 × 10−3 in4
J2 = 1
2 π [( 7
16 in.) 4 − ( 5
16 in.) 4 ] = 42.6 × 10−3 in4
Therefore,
T B = 0.740 T A
Substitute this expression into the original equilibrium equation:
1.740 T A = 90 lb·ft
T A = 51.7 lb·ft 	T B = 38.3 lb·ft
5 in.
5 in.
90 lb·ft B
A
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
TB	T1
T2
TA
TB
TA
A
A
C
B
B
90 lb·ft
Fig. 3.25 	(a) Shaft with a centrally
applied torque and fixed ends. (b) Free-
body diagram of shaft AB. (c, d) Free-body
diagrams for solid and hollow segments.

-- 187 of 897 --

3.3 Statically Indeterminate Shafts 	173
Sample Problem 3.3
The horizontal shaft AD is attached to a fixed base at D and is subjected to
the torques shown. A 44-mm-diameter hole has been drilled into portion CD of
the shaft. Knowing that the entire shaft is made of steel for which G = 77 GPa,
determine the angle of twist at end A.
STRATEGY: 	Use free-body diagrams to determine the torque in each shaft
segment AB, BC, and CD. Then use Eq. (3.16) to determine the angle of twist
at end A.
MODELING: 	Passing a section through the shaft between A and B (Fig. 1),
we find
ΣM x = 0: 	(250 N·m) − T AB = 0 	T AB = 250 N·m
Passing now a section between B and C (Fig. 2) we have
ΣM x = 0: (250 N·m) + (2000 N·m) − T BC = 0 	T BC = 2250 N·m
Since no torque is applied at C,
T CD = T BC = 2250 N·m
B
D
C
A
0.2 m
0.4 m
0.6 m
60 mm
30 mm
250 N·m
2000 N·m	44 mm
A 	x
TAB
250 N·m
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram for finding
internal torque in segment AB.
B
A
TBC
2000 N·m
250 N·m
x
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram for finding
internal torque in segment BC.
(continued)

-- 188 of 897 --

174 	Torsion
ANALYSIS:
Polar Moments of Inertia.
Using Fig. 3,
J AB = π
2 c4 = π
2 (0.015 m) 4 = 0.0795 × 10−6 m4
J BC = π
2 c4 = π
2 (0.030 m) 4 = 1.272 × 10−6 m4
J CD = π
2 (c2
4 − c1
4 ) = π
2 [(0.030 m) 4 − (0.022 m) 4 ] = 0.904 × 10−6 m4
Angle of Twist. 	From Fig. 4, using Eq. (3.16) and recalling that G = 77 GPa
for the entire shaft, we have
ϕA = ∑
i
TiL i
J iG = 1
G (
TAB L AB
J AB
+ TBCL BC
J BC
+ TCD L CD
J CD )
= 1
77 GPa[
(250 N·m)(0.4 m)
0.0795 × 10−6 m4 + (2250)(0.2)
1.272 × 10−6 + (2250)(0.6)
0.904 × 10−6 ]
= 0.01634 + 0.00459 + 0.01939 = 0.0403 rad
= (0.0403 rad) 360°
2π rad ϕA = 2.31° 	◂
22 mm
15 mm
30 mm 30 mm
AB 	BC 	CD
Fig. 3 	Dimensions for three cross
sections of shaft.
C
B A
A
D
ϕ
Fig. 4 	Representation of angle of twist
at end A.
Sample Problem 3.4
Two solid steel shafts are connected by the gears shown. Knowing that
for each shaft G = 11.2 × 106 psi and the allowable shearing stress is
8 ksi, determine (a) the largest torque T0 that may be applied to end A
of shaft AB and (b) the corresponding angle through which end A of
shaft AB rotates.
STRATEGY: 	Use the free-body diagrams and kinematics to deter-
mine the relation between the torques and twist in each shaft seg-
ment, AB and CD. Then use the allowable stress to determine the
torque that can be applied and Eq. (3.15) to determine the angle of
twist at end A.
24 in.
0.75 in.
36 in.
0.875 in.
2.45 in.
A 	T0
D
C
B
1 in.

-- 189 of 897 --

3.3 Statically Indeterminate Shafts 	175
MODELING: 	Denoting by F the magnitude of the tangential force between
gear teeth (Fig. 1), we have
Gear B. 	ΣM B = 0: 	F(0.875 in.) − T0 = 0 	T CD = 2.8T0 	(1)
Gear C. 	ΣM C = 0: 	F(2.45 in.) − T CD = 0
Using kinematics with Fig. 2, we see that the peripheral motions of the
gears are equal and write
r B ϕB = r C ϕC 	ϕB = ϕC
r C
r B
= ϕC
2.45 in.
0.875 in. = 2.8ϕC 	(2)
ANALYSIS:
a. Torque T0. 	For shaft AB, TAB = T0 and c = 0.375 in. (Fig. 3);
considering maximum permissible shearing stress, we write
τ = TAB c
J 8000 psi = T0 (0.375 in.)
1
2 π(0.375 in.)4 	T0 = 663 lb·in. 	◂
For shaft CD using Eq. (1) we have TCD = 2.8T0 (Fig. 4). With c = 0.5 in.
and τall = 8000 psi, we write
τ = TCD c
J 8000 psi = 2.8T0 (0.5 in.)
1
2 π(0.5 in.)4 	T0 = 561 lb·in. 	◂
The maximum permissible torque is the smaller value obtained for T0.
T0 = 561 lb·in. 	◂
b. Angle of Rotation at End A. 	We first compute the angle of twist
for each shaft.
Shaft AB. 	For TAB = T0 = 561 lb·in., we have
ϕA∕B = TAB L
JG = (561 lb·in.)(24 in.)
1
2 π (0.375 in.)4 (11.2 × 106 psi) = 0.0387 rad = 2.22°
Shaft CD. 	TCD = 2.8T0 = 2.8(561 lb·in.)
ϕC∕D = TCD L
JG = 2.8(561 lb·in.)(36 in.)
1
2 π(0.5 in.)4 (11.2 × 106 psi) = 0.0514 rad = 2.95°
Since end D of shaft CD is fixed, we have ϕC = ϕC∕D = 2.95°. Using
Eq. (2) with Fig. 5, we find the angle of rotation of gear B is
ϕB = 2.8ϕC = 2.8(2.95°) = 8.26°
For end A of shaft AB, we have
ϕA = ϕB + ϕA∕B = 8.26° + 2.22° 	ϕA = 10.48° 	◂
C
B
D
A
ϕA = 10.48°
ϕ B = 8.26°
ϕ C = 2.95°
Fig. 5 	Angle of twist results.
C
TCD
F
F
r B = 0.875 in.
r C = 2.45 in.
B
TAB = T0
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of gears B
and C.
ϕ C
C 	B
ϕ B
rB = 0.875 in.
rC = 2.45 in.
Fig. 2 	Angle of twist for gears B and C.
24 in.
B
c = 0.375 in. 	A
TAB = T0
TAB = T0
Fig. 3 	Free-body diagram of shaft AB.
36 in.
TCD
TCD
c = 0.5 in.
D
C
Fig. 4 	Free-body diagram of shaft CD.

-- 190 of 897 --

176 	Torsion
Sample Problem 3.5
A steel shaft and an aluminum tube are connected to a fixed support and
to a rigid disk as shown in the cross section. Knowing that the initial
stresses are zero, determine the maximum torque T0 that can be applied
to the disk if the allowable stresses are 120 MPa in the steel shaft and
70 MPa in the aluminum tube. Use G = 77 GPa for steel and G = 27 GPa
for aluminum.
50 mm	76 mm
8 mm
500 mm
STRATEGY: 	We know that the applied load is resisted by both the shaft
and the tube, but we do not know the portion carried by each part. Thus
we need to look at the deformations. We know that both the shaft and tube
are connected to the rigid disk and that the angle of twist is therefore the
same for each. Once we know the portion of the torque carried by each
part, we can use the allowable stress for each to determine which one
governs and use this to determine the maximum torque.
MODELING: 	We first draw a free-body diagram of the disk (Fig. 1) and find
T0 = T1 + T2 	(1)
Knowing that the angle of twist is the same for the shaft and tube, we write
ϕ1 = ϕ2 : T1L1
J1G1
= T2L2
J2G2
T1 (0.5 m)
(2.003 × 10−6 m4 )(27 GPa) = T2 (0.5 m)
(0.614 × 10−6 m4 )(77 GPa)
T2 = 0.874T1 	(2)
T1
T2
T0
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of end cap.

-- 191 of 897 --

3.3 Statically Indeterminate Shafts 	177
ANALYSIS: 	We need to determine which part reaches its allowable stress
first, and so we arbitrarily assume that the requirement τalum ≤ 70 MPa is
critical. For the aluminum tube in Fig. 2, we have
T1 = τalum J1
c1
= (70 MPa)(2.003 × 10−6 m4 )
0.038 m = 3690 N·m
Using Eq. (2), compute the corresponding value T2 and then find the maxi-
mum shearing stress in the steel shaft of Fig. 3.
T2 = 0.874T1 = 0.874 (3690) = 3225 N·m
τsteel = T2c2
J2
= (3225 N·m)(0.025 m)
0.614 × 10−6 m4 	= 131.3 MPa
25 mm
T2
2
	ϕ
π	
J1 = 	[ (25 mm)4]	2
G1 = 77 GPa
Steel
= 0.614 × 10–6 m4
0.5 m
Fig. 3 	Torque and angle of twist for
solid shaft.
Note that the allowable steel stress of 120 MPa is exceeded; the assump-
tion was wrong. Thus the maximum torque T0 will be obtained by making
τsteel = 120 MPa. Determine the torque T2:
T2 = τsteel J2
c2
= (120 MPa) (0.614 × 10−6 m4 )
0.025 m = 2950 N·m
From Eq. (2), we have
2950 N·m = 0.874T1 	T1 = 3375 N·m
Using Eq. (1), we obtain the maximum permissible torque:
T0 = T1 + T2 = 3375 N·m + 2950 N·m
T0 = 6.325 kN·m 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This example illustrates that each part must not
exceed its maximum allowable stress. Since the steel shaft reaches its allow-
able stress level first, the maximum stress in the aluminum shaft is below
its maximum.
30 mm
0.5 m
T1
1
	ϕ
π	
J1 = [(38 mm)4 – (30 mm)4 ]	2
G1 = 27 GPa
Aluminum
= 2.003 × 10–6m 4
38 mm
Fig. 2 	Torque and angle of twist for
hollow shaft.

-- 192 of 897 --

178
3.31 While an oil well is being drilled at a depth of 2500 m, it is observed
that the top of the 200-mm-diameter steel drill pipe (G = 77.2 GPa)
rotates through 2.5 revolutions before the drilling bit starts to
operate. Determine the maximum shearing stress caused in the
pipe by torsion.
3.32 (a) Determine the angle of twist caused by a 40-kip⋅in. torque T in
the 3-in.-diameter solid aluminum shaft shown (G = 3.7 × 106 psi).
(b) Solve part (a), assuming that the solid shaft has been replaced
by a hollow shaft of the same outer diameter and a 1-in. inner
diameter.
3 in.
4 ft
T
Fig. P3.32
3.33 Determine the smallest allowable diameter of a 10-ft-long steel rod
(G = 11.2 × 106 psi) if the rod is to be twisted through 90° without
exceeding a shearing stress of 15 ksi.
3.34 (a) For the aluminum pipe shown (G = 27 GPa), determine the
torque T0 causing an angle of twist of 2°. (b) Determine the angle
of twist if the same torque T0 is applied to a solid cylindrical shaft
of the same length and cross-sectional area.
2.5 m
40 mm
50 mm
A
B
T0
Fig. P3.34
Problems

-- 193 of 897 --

179
3.35 The electric motor exerts a 500-N·m torque on the aluminum shaft
ABCD when it is rotating at a constant speed. Knowing that
G = 27 GPa and that the torques exerted on pulleys B and C
are as shown, determine the angle of twist between (a) B and C,
(b) B and D.
300 N·m
A
200 N·m
1 m
1.2 m
0.9 m
44 mm
40 mm
B
C
48 mm
D
Fig. P3.35
3.36 The torques shown are exerted on pulleys A and B. Knowing that
the shafts are solid and made of steel (G = 77.2 GPa), determine
the angle of twist between (a) A and B, (b) A and C.
3.37 The aluminum rod BC (G = 26 GPa) is bonded to the brass rod AB
(G = 39 GPa). Knowing that each rod is solid and has a diameter
of 12 mm, determine the angle of twist (a) at B, (b) at C.
Brass
200 mm
300 mm
A
B
C
Aluminum
100 N·m
Fig. P3.37
3.38 The aluminum rod AB (G = 27 GPa) is bonded to the brass rod BD
(G = 39 GPa). Knowing that portion CD of the brass rod is hollow
and has an inner diameter of 40 mm, determine the angle of twist
at A.
30 mm
46 mm
C
A
B
TA = 300 N·m
TB = 400 N·m
0.9 m
0.75 m
Fig. P3.36
400 mm
375 mm
250 mm
D
60 mm
36 mm
TA = 800 N·m
TB = 1600 N·m
C
B
A
Fig. P3.38

-- 194 of 897 --

180
3.39 The solid spindle AB has a diameter ds = 1.75 in. and is made of a
steel with G = 11.2 × 106 psi and τall = 12 ksi, while sleeve CD is
made of a brass with G = 5.6 × 106 psi and τall = 7 ksi. Determine
(a) the largest torque T that can be applied at A if the given allow-
able stresses are not to be exceeded and if the angle of twist of sleeve
CD is not to exceed 0.375°, (b) the corresponding angle through
which end A rotates.
4 in.
8 in.
ds
t = 	in.	1
4
3 in.
D
C
A
B
T
Fig. P3.39 and P3.40
3.40 The solid spindle AB has a diameter ds = 1.5 in. and is made of a
steel with G = 11.2 × 106 psi and τall = 12 ksi, while sleeve CD is
made of a brass with G = 5.6 × 106 psi and τall = 7 ksi. Determine
the largest angle through which end A can be rotated.
3.41 Two shafts, each of 7
8 -in. diameter, are connected by the gears shown.
Knowing that G = 11.2 × 106 psi and that the shaft at F is fixed,
determine the angle through which end A rotates when a 1.2-kip·in.
torque is applied at A.
T
E
F 	B
A
4.5 in.
6 in.
12 in.
8 in.
6 in.
D
C
Fig. P3.41
3.42 The angle of rotation of end A of the gear-and-shaft system shown
must not exceed 4°. Knowing that the shafts are made of a steel for
which τall = 65 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa, determine the largest torque
T that can be safely applied at end A.
30 mm
E
60 mm
30 mm
90 mm
0.5 m
0.1 m
0.2 m
0.4 m
0.2 m
B
D
C
A
T
Fig. P3.42

-- 195 of 897 --

181
3.43 A coder F, used to record in digital form the
rotation of shaft A, is connected to the shaft by
means of the gear train shown, which consists
of four gears and three solid steel shafts each
of diameter d. Two of the gears have a radius r
and the other two a radius nr. If the rotation of
the coder F is prevented, determine in terms of
T, l, G, J, and n the angle through which end
A rotates.
3.44 For the gear train described in Prob. 3.43,
determine the angle through which end A
rotates when T = 5 lb·in., l = 2.4 in., d = 1
16
in., G = 11.2 × 106 psi, and n = 2.
3.45 The design specifications of a 1.2-m-long solid circular transmis-
sion shaft require that the angle of twist of the shaft not exceed
4° when a torque of 750 N·m is applied. Determine the required
diameter of the shaft, knowing that the shaft is made of a steel with
an allowable shearing stress of 90 MPa and a modulus of rigidity
of 77.2 GPa.
3.46 The design specifications for the gear-and-shaft system shown
require that the same diameter be used for both shafts and that the
angle through which pulley A will rotate when subjected to a
2-kip·in. torque TA while pulley D is held fixed will not exceed
7.5°. Determine the required diameter of the shafts if both shafts
are made of a steel with G = 11.2 × 106 psi and τall = 12 ksi.
A
8 in.
6 in.
5 in.
16 in.
2 in.
C
B
D
TA
TD
Fig. P3.46
3.47 Solve Prob. 3.46, assuming that both shafts are made of a brass with
G = 5.6 × 106 psi and τall = 8 ksi.
F
E	D
nr 	r
C
l
TA
B
A
nr
l
l
r
Fig. P3.43

-- 196 of 897 --

182
3.48 The design of the gear-and-shaft system shown requires that steel
shafts of the same diameter be used for both AB and CD. It is
further required that τmax ≤ 60 MPa and that the angle ϕD through
which end D of shaft CD rotates not exceed 1.5°. Knowing that
G = 77.2 GPa, determine the required diameter of the shafts.
A
100 mm
40 mm	C
B D
T = 1000 N·m
400 mm
600 mm
Fig. P3.48
3.49 The electric motor exerts a torque of 800 N·m on the steel shaft
ABCD when it is rotating at a constant speed. Design specifications
require that the diameter of the shaft be uniform from A to D and
that the angle of twist between A and D not exceed 1.5°. Knowing
that τmax ≤ 60 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa, determine the minimum
diameter shaft that can be used.
A
0.3 m
0.6 m
0.4 m 	C
B
500 N·m
300 N·m
D
3.50 A hole is punched at A in a plastic sheet by applying a 600-N force
P to end D of lever CD, which is rigidly attached to the solid
cylindrical shaft BC. Design specifications require that the dis-
placement of D should not exceed 15 mm from the time the punch
first touches the plastic sheet to the time it actually penetrates it.
Determine the required diameter of shaft BC if the shaft is made
of a steel with G = 77.2 GPa and τall = 80 MPa.
500 mm
300 mm
C
D
B
P
A
Fig. P3.50
Fig. P3.49

-- 197 of 897 --

183
3.51 The solid cylinders AB and BC are bonded together at B and are attached
to fixed supports at A and C. Knowing that the modulus of rigidity is
3.7 × 106 psi for aluminum and 5.6 × 106 psi for brass, determine the
maximum shearing stress (a) in cylinder AB, (b) in cylinder BC.
3.52 Solve Prob. 3.51, assuming that cylinder AB is made of steel, for
which G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
3.53 A torque T = 40 kip⋅in. is applied at end A of the composite shaft
shown. Knowing that the modulus of rigidity is 11.2 × 106 psi for
steel and 4 × 106 psi for aluminum, determine (a) the maximum
shearing stress in the steel core, (b) the maximum stress in the alu-
minum shell, (c) the angle of twist at A.
Steel
Aluminum
3 in.
2 in.
A
B
100 in.
1
4
Fig. P3.53 and P3.54
3.54 The composite shaft shown is to be twisted by applying a torque T at
end A. Knowing that the modulus of rigidity is 11.2 × 106 psi for steel
and 4 × 106 psi for aluminum, determine the largest angle through
which end A may be rotated, if the following allowable stresses are
not to be exceeded: τsteel = 8000 psi and τaluminum = 6000 psi.
3.55 Two solid steel shafts (G = 77.2 GPa) are connected to a coupling
disk B and to fixed supports at A and C. For the loading shown,
determine (a) the reaction at each support, (b) the maximum
shearing stress in shaft AB, (c) the maximum shearing stress in
shaft BC.
250 mm
38 mm
1.4 kN·m
50 mm
C
200 mm
B
A
Fig. P3.55
3.56 Solve Prob. 3.55, assuming that the shaft AB is replaced by a hollow
shaft of the same outer diameter and 25-mm inner diameter.
18 in.
12 in.
1.5 in.
2.0 in.
A
C
B
T = 12.5 kip·in.
Aluminum
Brass
Fig. P3.51

-- 198 of 897 --

184
3.57 At a time when rotation is prevented at the lower end of each shaft,
a 50-N⋅m torque is applied to end A of shaft AB. Knowing that
G = 77.2 GPa for both shafts, determine (a) the maximum shear-
ing stress in shaft CD, (b) the angle of rotation at A.
15 mm	18 mm
240 mm
C
B
D
A 	r 	50 mm
r 	75 mm
Fig. P3.57
3.58 Solve Prob. 3.57, assuming that the 80-N⋅m torque is applied to end
C of shaft CD.
3.59 The steel jacket CD has been attached to the 40-mm-diameter steel
shaft AE by means of rigid flanges welded to the jacket and to the
rod. The outer diameter of the jacket is 80 mm and its wall thickness
is 4 mm. If 500-N·m torques are applied as shown, determine the
maximum shearing stress in the jacket.
B
C
D
E
A
T
T'
Fig. P3.59
3.60 A torque T is applied as shown to a solid tapered shaft AB. Show
by integration that the angle of twist at A is
ϕ = 7TL
12πGc4
B
L
A
T
2
c
2c
Fig. P3.60

-- 199 of 897 --

185
3.61 The mass moment of inertia of a gear is to be determined exper-
imentally by using a torsional pendulum consisting of a 6-ft
steel wire. Knowing that G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine the
diameter of the wire for which the torsional spring constant will
be 4.27 lb·ft/rad.
Fig. P3.61
3.62 A solid shaft and a hollow shaft are made of the same material and
are of the same weight and length. Denoting by n the ratio c1∕c2,
show that the ratio Ts∕Th of the torque Ts in the solid shaft to the
torque Th in the hollow shaft is (a) √ (1 − n2 )∕(1 + n2 ) if the max-
imum shearing stress is the same in each shaft, (b) (1 – n2)∕(1 + n2)
if the angle of twist is the same for each shaft.
3.63 An annular plate of thickness t and modulus G is used to connect
shaft AB of radius r1 to tube CD of radius r2. Knowing that a
torque T is applied to end A of shaft AB and that end D of tube
CD is fixed, (a) determine the magnitude and location of the
maximum shearing stress in the annular plate, (b) show that the
angle through which end B of the shaft rotates with respect to
end C of the tube is
ϕBC = T
4πGt(
1
r2
1
− 1
r2
2)
C
t
A
L2
L1
B
D
r1
r2
T
Fig. P3.63

-- 200 of 897 --

186 	Torsion
3.4 	DESIGN OF TRANSMISSION
SHAFTS
The principal specifications to be met in the design of a transmission shaft
are the power to be transmitted and the speed of rotation of the shaft. The
role of the designer is to select the material and the dimensions of the cross
section of the shaft so that the maximum shearing stress does not exceed the
allowable shearing stress when the shaft is transmitting the required power at
the specified speed.
To determine the torque exerted on the shaft, the power P associated
with the rotation of a rigid body subjected to a torque T is
P = Tω 	(3.18)
where ω is the angular velocity of the body in radians per second (rad/s). But
ω = 2πf, where f is the frequency of the rotation (i.e., the number of revolu-
tions per second). The unit of frequency is 1 s−1 and is called a hertz (Hz).
Substituting for ω into Eq. (3.18),
P = 2π f T 	(3.19)
When SI units are used with f expressed in Hz and T in N·m, the
power will be in N·m/s—that is, in watts (W). Solving Eq. (3.19) for T,
the torque exerted on a shaft transmitting the power P at a frequency of
rotation f is
T = P
2π f (3.20)
After determining the torque T to be applied to the shaft and selecting
the material to be used, the designer carries the values of T and the maximum
allowable stress into Eq. (3.9).
J
c = T
τmax
(3.21)
This also provides the minimum allowable parameter J∕c. When SI units
are used, T is expressed in N·m, τmax in Pa (or N/m2), and J∕c in m3. For
a solid circular shaft, J = 1
2πc4 and J∕c = 1
2πc3 ; substituting this value for
J∕c into Eq. (3.21) and solving for c yields the minimum allowable value
for the radius of the shaft. For a hollow circular shaft, the critical param-
eter is J∕c2, where c2 is the outer radius of the shaft; the value of this
parameter may be computed from Eq. (3.11) to determine whether a given
cross section will be acceptable.
When U.S. customary units are used, the frequency is usually expressed
in rpm and the power in horsepower (hp). Before applying Eq. (3.20), it is
then necessary to convert the frequency into revolutions per second (i.e., hertz)
and the power into ft·lb/s or in·lb/s using:
1 rpm = 1
60 s −1 = 1
60Hz
1 hp = 550 ft·lb/s = 6600 in·lb/s

-- 201 of 897 --

3.4 Design of Transmission Shafts 	187
When the power is given in in·lb/s, Eq. (3.20) yields the value of the torque
T in lb·in. Carrying this value of T into Eq. (3.21), and expressing τmax in psi,
the parameter J∕c is given in in3.
Photo 3.4 	In a complex gear train, the maximum allowable
shearing stress of the weakest member must not be exceeded.
©koi88/Alamy Stock Photo
Concept Application 3.6
What size of shaft should be used for the rotor of a 5-hp motor operating at
3600 rpm if the shearing stress is not to exceed 8500 psi in the shaft?
The power of the motor in in·lb/s and its frequency in cycles per second
(or hertz)
P = (5 hp)(
6600 in·lb/s
1 hp 	) = 33,000 in·lb/s
f = (3600 rpm) 1 Hz
60 rpm = 60 Hz = 60 s −1
The torque exerted on the shaft is given by Eq. (3.20):
T = P
2π f = 33,000 in·lb/s
2π (60 s −1 ) = 87.54 lb·in.
Substituting for T and τmax into Eq. (3.21),
J
c = T
τmax
= 87.54 lb·in.
8500 psi = 10.30 × 10−3 in3
But J∕c = 1
2πc3 for a solid shaft. Therefore,
1
2πc3 = 10.30 × 10−3 in3
c = 0.1872 in.
d = 2c = 0.374 in.
A 3
8 -in. shaft should be used.

-- 202 of 897 --

188 	Torsion
3.5 	STRESS CONCENTRATIONS
IN CIRCULAR SHAFTS
The torsion formula τmax = Tc∕J was derived in Sec. 3.1C for a circular shaft
of uniform cross section. Moreover, the shaft in Sec. 3.1B was loaded at its
ends through rigid end plates solidly attached to it. However, torques are usu-
ally applied to the shaft through either flange couplings (Fig. 3.26a) or gears
connected to the shaft by keys fitted into keyways (Fig. 3.26b). In both cases,
the distribution of stresses in and near the section where the torques are
applied will be different from that given by the torsion formula. For example,
high concentrations of stresses occur in the neighborhood of the keyway
shown in Fig. 3.26b. These localized stresses can be determined through
experimental stress analysis methods or through the use of the mathematical
theory of elasticity.
Concept Application 3.7
A shaft consisting of a steel tube of 50-mm outer diameter is to transmit 100 kW
of power while rotating at a frequency of 20 Hz. Determine the tube thickness
that should be used if the shearing stress is not to exceed 60 MPa.
The torque exerted on the shaft is given by Eq. (3.20):
T = P
2π f = 100 × 103 W
2π (20 Hz) = 795.8 N·m
From Eq. (3.21), the parameter J∕c2 must be at least equal to
J
c2
= T
τmax
= 795.8 N·m
60 × 106 N/m2 = 13.26 × 10−6 m3 	(1)
But, from Eq. (3.11),
J
c2
= π
2c2
(c4
2 − c4
1 ) = π
0.050[(0.025) 4 − c4
1 ] 	(2)
Equating the right-hand members of Eqs. (1) and (2),
(0.025) 4 − c4
1 = 0.050
π (13.26 × 10−6 )
c4
1 = 390.6 × 10−9 − 211.0 × 10−9 = 179.6 × 10−9 m4
c1 = 20.6 × 10−3 m = 20.6 mm
The corresponding tube thickness is
c2 − c1 = 25 mm − 20.6 mm = 4.4 mm
A tube thickness of 5 mm should be used.
Fig. 3.26 	Coupling of shafts using
(a) bolted flange, (b) slot for keyway.
(a)
(b)

-- 203 of 897 --

3.5 Stress Concentrations in Circular Shafts 	189
While the formula previously derived for torsional stresses is appli-
cable to the shaft with variable cross sections, it is also necessary to account
for the stress concentrations that exist at the abrupt change in the cross
section. The higher stresses at the discontinuity can be reduced using a fil-
let, as shown at A in Fig. 3.27. The maximum value of the shearing stress
at the fillet is
τmax = K Tc
J (3.22)
where the stress Tc∕J is the stress computed for the smaller-diameter shaft
and K is a stress concentration factor. Since K depends upon the ratio of the
two diameters and the ratio of the radius of the fillet to the diameter of the
smaller shaft, it can be computed and recorded in the form of a table or a
graph, as shown in Fig. 3.28. However, this procedure for determining local-
ized shearing stresses is valid only as long as the value of τmax given by Eq. (3.22)
does not exceed the proportional limit of the material, since the values of K
plotted in Fig. 3.28 were obtained under the assumption of a linear relation
between shearing stress and shearing strain. If plastic deformations occur, the
result is a maximum stress lower than those indicated by Eq. (3.22).
Fig. 3.27 	Shafts having two different
diameters with a fillet at the junction.
D
d
A
Fig. 3.28 	Plot of stress concentration factors for
fillets in circular shafts. (Source: W. D. Pilkey and
D. F. Pilkey, Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors,
3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008.)
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
K
D
r
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0 0 	0.05 0.10 	0.20	0.15 	0.25 0.30
r/d
D
d = 1.111
D
d = 1.25
D
d = 1.666
D
d = 2
D
d = 2.5
d

-- 204 of 897 --

190 	Torsion
Sample Problem 3.6
The stepped shaft shown is to rotate at 900 rpm as it transmits power from a
turbine to a generator. The grade of steel specified in the design has an allow-
able shearing stress of 8 ksi. (a) For the preliminary design shown, determine
the maximum power that can be transmitted. (b) If in the final design the
radius of the fillet is increased so that r = 15
16 in., what will be the percent
change, relative to the preliminary design, in the power that can be
transmitted?
3.75 in. 	9
16	r = 	in.
7.50 in.
STRATEGY: 	Use Fig. 3.28 to account for the influence of stress concentra-
tions on the torque and Eq. (3.20) to determine the maximum power that can
be transmitted.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Preliminary Design. 	Using the notation of Fig. 3.28, we have:
D = 7.50 in., d = 3.75 in., r = 9
16 in. = 0.5625 in.
D
d = 7.50 in.
3.75 in. = 2 r
d = 0.5625 in.
3.75 in. = 0.15
A stress concentration factor K = 1.33 is found from Fig. 3.28.
Torque. 	Recalling Eq. (3.22), we write
τmax = KTc
J T = J
c
τmax
K (1)
where J∕c refers to the smaller-diameter shaft:
J∕c = 1
2πc3 = 1
2π(1.875 in.) 3 = 10.35 in3
and where
τmax
K = 8 ksi
1.33 = 6.02 ksi

-- 205 of 897 --

3.5 Stress Concentrations in Circular Shafts 	191
Substituting into Eq. (1), we find (Fig. 1) T = (10.35 in3)(6.02 ksi) =
62.3 kip·in.
Power. 	Since f = (900 rpm) 1 Hz
60 rpm = 15 Hz = 15 s −1 , we write
Pa = 2π f T = 2π(15 s−1)(62.3 kip·in.) = 5.87 × 106 in·lb/s
Pa = (5.87 × 106 in·lb/s)(1 hp/6600 in·lb/s) 	Pa = 890 hp 	◂
Fig. 1 	Allowable torque for design
having r = 9/16 in.
K 	6.02 ksi
9
16	r 	in.	=	Ta 	62.3 kip·in.	=
= 	=
	max
	τ
m	
τ
b. Final Design. 	For r = 15
16 in. = 0.9375 in.,
D
d = 2 r
d = 0.9375 in.
3.75 in. = 0.250 	K = 1.20
Following the procedure used previously, we write (Fig. 2)
τmax
K = 8 ksi
1.20 = 6.67 ksi
T = J
c
τmax
K = (10.35 in3 )(6.67 ksi) = 69.0 kip·in.
P b = 2π f T = 2π(15 s −1 )(69.0 kip·in.) = 6.50 × 106 in·lb/s
P b = (6.50 × 106 in·lb/s)(1 hp/6600 in·lb/s) = 985 hp
Percent Change in Power
Percent change = 100 Pb − P a
P a
= 100 985 − 890
890 = +11% 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	As demonstrated, a small increase in radius of the
fillet at the transition in the shaft produces a significant change in the maxi-
mum power transmitted.
Fig. 2 	Allowable torque for design
having r = 15/16 in.
K 	6.67 ksi
15
16	r 	in.	=	Tb 	69.0 kip·in.	=
= 	=
	max
	τ
m	
τ

-- 206 of 897 --

192
3.64 Using an allowable shearing stress of 5.4 ksi, design a solid steel
shaft to transmit 16 hp at a speed of (a) 1200 rpm, (b) 2400 rpm.
3.65 Using an allowable shearing stress of 58 MPa, design a solid steel
shaft to transmit 18 kW at a frequency of (a) 30 Hz, (b) 60 Hz.
3.66 Determine the maximum shearing stress in a solid shaft of 1.4-in. diam-
eter as it transmits 66 hp at a speed of (a) 750 rpm, (b) 1500 rpm.
3.67 Determine the maximum shearing stress in a solid shaft of 18-mm
diameter as it transmits 3.4 kW at a frequency of (a) 25 Hz, (b) 50 Hz.
3.68 While a steel shaft of the cross section shown rotates at 120 rpm,
a stroboscopic measurement indicates that the angle of twist is 2°
in a 4-m length. Using G = 77.2 GPa, determine the power being
transmitted.
75 mm	30 mm
Fig. P3.68
3.69 Determine the required thickness of the 50-mm tubular shaft of Con-
cept Application 3.7, if it is to transmit the same power while rotat-
ing at a frequency of 30 Hz.
3.70 A hollow steel drive shaft (G = 11.2 × 106 psi) is 8 ft long and its
outer and inner diameters are respectively equal to 2.50 in. and 1.25 in.
Knowing that the shaft transmits 200 hp while rotating at 1500 rpm,
determine (a) the maximum shearing stress, (b) the angle of twist of
the shaft.
3.71 The hollow steel shaft shown (G = 77.2 GPa, τall = 50 MPa) rotates
at 240 rpm. Determine (a) the maximum power that can be transmit-
ted, (b) the corresponding angle of twist of the shaft.
3.72 One of two hollow drive shafts of a cruise ship is 125 ft long, and
its outer and inner diameters are 16 in. and 8 in., respectively. The
shaft is made of a steel for which τall = 8500 psi and G = 11.2 ×
106 psi. Knowing that the maximum speed of rotation of the shaft
is 165 rpm, determine (a) the maximum power that can be transmit-
ted by the one shaft to its propeller, (b) the corresponding angle of
twist of the shaft.
Problems
Fig. P3.71
5 m
60 mm
25 mm
T
T′

-- 207 of 897 --

193
3.73 The design of a machine element calls for a 40-mm-outer-diameter
shaft to transmit 45 kW. (a) If the speed of rotation is 720 rpm,
determine the maximum shearing stress in shaft a. (b) If the speed
of rotation can be increased 50% to 1080 rpm, determine the largest
inner diameter of shaft b for which the maximum shearing stress will
be the same in each shaft.
3.74 Three shafts and four gears are used to form a gear train that will
transmit power from the motor at A to a machine tool at F. (Bearings
for the shafts are omitted in the sketch.) The diameter of each shaft
is as follows: dAB = 16 mm, dCD = 20 mm, dEF = 28 mm. Knowing
that the frequency of the motor is 24 Hz and that the allowable
shearing stress for each shaft is 75 MPa, determine the maximum
power that can be transmitted.
3.75 Three shafts and four gears are used to form a gear train that will
transmit 7.5 kW from the motor at A to a machine tool at F. (Bear-
ings for the shafts are omitted in the sketch.) Knowing that the fre-
quency of the motor is 30 Hz and that the allowable stress for each
shaft is 60 MPa, determine the required diameter of each shaft.
3.76 The two solid shafts and gears shown are used to transmit 16 hp
from the motor at A operating at a speed of 1260 rpm, to a machine
tool at D. Knowing that each shaft has a diameter of 1 in., determine
the maximum shearing stress (a) in shaft AB, (b) in shaft CD.
Fig. P3.73
d2	40 mm
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P3.74 and P3.75
C
150 mm
60 mm
B
A
F
60 mm
D
150 mm
E
Fig. P3.76 and P3.77
C
5 in.
3 in.
D
A
B
3.77 The two solid shafts and gears shown are used to transmit 16 hp
from the motor at A operating at a speed of 1260 rpm to a
machine tool at D. Knowing that the maximum allowable shear-
ing stress is 8 ksi, determine the required diameter of (a) shaft
AB, (b) shaft CD.

-- 208 of 897 --

194
3.78 The shaft-disk-belt arrangement shown is used to transmit 3 hp
from point A to point D. (a) Using an allowable shearing stress of
9500 psi, determine the required speed of shaft AB. (b) Solve part
(a), assuming that the diameters of shafts AB and CD are, respec-
tively, 0.75 in. and 0.625 in.
3.79 A 1.5-in.-diameter steel shaft of length 4 ft will be used to trans-
mit 60 hp between a motor and a pump. Knowing that G = 11.2
× 106 psi, determine the lowest speed of rotation at which the
stress does not exceed 8500 psi and the angle of twist does not
exceed 2°.
3.80 A 2.5-m-long steel shaft of 30-mm diameter rotates at a frequency
of 30 Hz. Determine the maximum power that the shaft can transmit,
knowing that G = 77.2 GPa, that the allowable shearing stress is
50 MPa, and that the angle of twist must not exceed 7.5°.
3.81 A steel shaft must transmit 150 kW at a speed of 360 rpm. Knowing
that G = 77.2 GPa, design a solid shaft so that the maximum shear-
ing stress will not exceed 50 MPa and the angle of twist in a 2.5-m
length must not exceed 3°.
3.82 A 1.5-m-long tubular steel shaft (G = 77.2 GPa) of 38-mm outer
diameter d1 and 30-mm inner diameter d2 is to transmit 100 kW
between a turbine and a generator. Knowing that the allowable
shearing stress is 60 MPa and that the angle of twist must not
exceed 3°, determine the minimum frequency at which the shaft
can rotate.
Fig. P3.82 and P3.83
d1 = 38 mm 	d2
3.83 A 1.5-m-long tubular steel shaft of 38-mm outer diameter d1 is to
be made of a steel for which τall = 65 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa.
Knowing that the angle of twist must not exceed 4° when the shaft
is subjected to a torque of 600 N·m, determine the largest inner
diameter d2 that can be specified in the design.
3.84 The stepped shaft shown must transmit 40 kW at a speed of 720 rpm.
Determine the minimum radius r of the fillet if an allowable stress
of 36 MPa is not to be exceeded.
3.85 The stepped shaft shown rotates at 450 rpm. Knowing that r = 0.2 in.,
determine the largest torque T that can be transmitted without
exceeding an allowable shearing stress of 7500 psi.
Fig. P3.78
B
C
D
A
3
4 in.
5
8 in.
1
2	r = 4 in.
1
8	r 	1 in.	=
Fig. P3.84
90 mm
45 mm
r
Fig. P3.85
6 in.	5 in.
r

-- 209 of 897 --

195
3.86 Knowing that the stepped shaft shown transmits a torque of magni-
tude T = 2.50 kip·in., determine the maximum shearing stress in the
shaft when the radius of the fillet is (a) r = 1
8 in., (b) r = 3
16 in.
3.87 Knowing that the stepped shaft shown must transmit 45 kW at a
speed of 2100 rpm, determine the minimum radius r of the fillet if
an allowable shearing stress of 50 MPa is not to be exceeded.
Fig. P3.87 and P3.88
60 mm
30 mm
T
T'
3.88 The stepped shaft shown must transmit 45 kW. Knowing that the allow-
able shearing stress in the shaft is 40 MPa and that the radius of the
fillet is r = 6 mm, determine the smallest permissible speed of the shaft.
3.89 A torque of magnitude T = 200 lb·in. is applied to the stepped shaft
shown, which has a full quarter-circular fillet. Knowing that D = 1 in.,
determine the maximum shearing stress in the shaft when (a) d = 0.8 in.,
(b) d = 0.9 in.
Fig. P3.89, P3.90, and P3.91
r = 	–
D
(D d)
	1
2
d
Full quarter-circular fillet
extends to edge of larger shaft.
3.90 In the stepped shaft shown, which has a full quarter-circular fillet,
the allowable shearing stress is 80 MPa. Knowing that D = 30 mm,
determine the largest allowable torque that can be applied to the shaft
if (a) d = 26 mm, (b) d = 24 mm.
3.91 In the stepped shaft shown, which has a full quarter-circular fillet,
D = 1.25 in. and d = 1 in. Knowing that the speed of the shaft is
2400 rpm and that the allowable shearing stress is 7500 psi, deter-
mine the maximum power that can be transmitted by the shaft.
Fig. P3.86
2 in.
1.5 in.
r
T
T'

-- 210 of 897 --

196 	Torsion
*3.6 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
IN CIRCULAR SHAFTS
Equations (3.10) and (3.15) for the stress distribution and the angle of twist
for a circular shaft subjected to a torque T assume that Hooke’s law applied
throughout the shaft. If the yield strength is exceeded in some portion of the
shaft, or the material involved is a brittle material with a nonlinear shearing-
stress-strain diagram, these relationships cease to be valid. This section will
develop a more general method—used when Hooke’s law does not apply—to
determine the distribution of stresses in a solid circular shaft and compute the
torque required to produce a given angle of twist.
No specific stress-strain relationship was assumed in Sec. 3.1B, when
the shearing strain γ varied linearly with the distance ρ from the axis of the
shaft (Fig. 3.29). Thus
γ = ρ
c γmax 	(3.4)
where c is the radius of the shaft.
Assuming that the maximum value τmax of the shearing stress τ has been
specified, the plot of τ versus ρ may be obtained as follows. We first determine
from the shearing-stress-strain diagram the value of γmax corresponding to τmax
(Fig. 3.30), and carry this value into Eq. (3.4). Then, for each value of ρ, we
determine the corresponding value of γ from Eq. (3.4) or Fig. 3.29 and obtain
from the stress-strain diagram of Fig. 3.30 the shearing stress τ corresponding
to this value of γ. Plotting τ against ρ yields the desired distribution of stresses
(Fig. 3.31).
We now recall that, when we derived Eq. (3.1) in Sec. 3.1A, we assumed
no particular relation between shearing stress and strain. We may therefore
use Eq. (3.1) to determine the torque T corresponding to the shearing-stress
distribution obtained in Fig. 3.31. Considering an annular element of radius
ρ and thickness dρ, we express the element of area in Eq. (3.1) as dA = 2πρ dρ
and write
T = ∫c
0
ρτ(2πρ dρ)
or
T = 2π ∫c
0
ρ2τ dρ 	(3.23)
where τ is the function of ρ plotted in Fig. 3.31.
If τ is a known analytical function of γ, Eq. (3.4) can be used to express
τ as a function of ρ, and the integral in Eq. (3.23) can be determined ana-
lytically. Otherwise, the torque T can be obtained through numerical integra-
tion. This computation becomes more meaningful if we observe that the
integral in Eq. (3.23) represents the second moment, or the moment of inertia,
with respect to the vertical axis of the area in Fig. 3.31 located above the
horizontal axis and bounded by the stress-distribution curve.
The ultimate torque TU, associated with the failure of the shaft, can be
determined from the ultimate shearing stress τU by choosing τmax = τU and
carrying out the computations indicated earlier. However, it is often more
O	
ρ
γ
c
max
	γ
Fig. 3.29 	Distribution of shearing strain for
torsion of a circular shaft.
τ = f( )
τ
γ
γ
max
	γ
max
	τ
Fig. 3.30 	Nonlinear shearing-stress-strain
diagram.
τ
O	
ρ	c
max
	τ
Fig. 3.31 	Shearing strain distribution for
shaft with nonlinear stress-strain response.

-- 211 of 897 --

*3.7 Circular Shafts Made of an Elastoplastic Material 	197
convenient to determine TU experimentally by twisting a specimen until it
breaks. Assuming a fictitious linear distribution of stresses, Eq. (3.9) can thus
be used to determine the corresponding maximum shearing stress RT:
R T = TU c
J (3.24)
The fictitious stress RT is called the modulus of rupture in torsion. It can be
used to determine the ultimate torque TU of a shaft made of the same material
but of different dimensions by solving Eq. (3.24) for TU. Since the actual and
the fictitious linear stress distributions shown in Fig. 3.32 must yield the same
value for the ultimate torque TU, the areas must also have the same moment
of inertia with respect to the vertical axis. Thus the modulus of rupture RT
is always larger than the actual ultimate shearing stress τU.
In some cases, the stress distribution and the torque T corresponding to
a given angle of twist ϕ can be determined from the equation of Sec. 3.1B
for shearing strain γ in terms of ϕ, ρ, and the length L of the shaft:
γ = ρϕ
L (3.2)
With ϕ and L given, Eq. (3.2) provides the value of γ corresponding to any
given value of ρ. Using the stress-strain diagram of the material, obtain the
corresponding value of the shearing stress τ and plot τ against ρ. Once the
shearing-stress distribution is obtained, the torque T can be determined ana-
lytically or numerically.
*3.7 	CIRCULAR SHAFTS MADE
OF AN ELASTOPLASTIC
MATERIAL
Consider the case of a solid circular shaft made of an elastoplastic material
having the shearing-stress-strain diagram shown in Fig. 3.33. Using this dia-
gram, we can proceed as indicated earlier and find the stress distribution
across a section of the shaft for any value of the torque T.
As long as the shearing stress τ does not exceed the yield strength τY,
Hooke’s law applies, and the stress distribution across the section is linear
(Fig. 3.34a) with τmax given as:
τmax = Tc
J (3.9)
O	
ρ
τ
U	
τ
c
RT
Fig. 3.32 	Stress distribution in circular shaft
at failure.
Y	
τ
τ
γ
Fig. 3.33 	Elastoplastic stress-strain diagram.
Fig. 3.34 	Stress distributions for elastoplastic shaft at different stages of loading: (a) elastic,
(b) first yield, (c) partially yielded, and (d) fully yielded.
O
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
τ
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
τ	max = Y	
τ
c
c
ρ	c
c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
τ
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
τ	max = Y	
τ
c
c
c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ	O
(a)
τ
τ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
τ	max = Y	
τ
c
O
O
(a)
(b)
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
τ	max = Y	
τ
c
c
τY

-- 212 of 897 --

198 	Torsion
As the torque increases, τmax eventually reaches the value τY (Fig. 3.34b).
Substituting into Eq. (3.9) and solving for the corresponding value of the
torque TY at the onset of yield
T Y = J
c τ Y 	(3.25)
This value is the maximum elastic torque, since it is the largest torque for
which the deformation remains fully elastic. For a solid circular shaft
J∕c = 1
2 πc 3 , we have
T Y = 1
2 πc 3τ Y 	(3.26)
As the torque is increased, a plastic region develops in the shaft around
an elastic core of radius ρY (Fig. 3.34c). In this plastic region, the stress is
uniformly equal to τY, while in the elastic core, the stress varies linearly with
ρ and can be expressed as
τ = τY
ρ Y
ρ 	(3.27)
As T is increased, the plastic region expands until, at the limit, the deforma-
tion is fully plastic (Fig. 3.34d).
Equation (3.23) is used to determine the torque T corresponding to a
given radius ρY of the elastic core. Recalling that τ is given by Eq. (3.27) for
0 ≤ ρ ≤ ρY and is equal to τY for ρY ≤ ρ ≤ c,
T = 2π ∫ρY
0
ρ2
(
τ Y
ρ Y
ρ) dρ + 2π ∫c
ρY
ρ2τ Y dρ
= 1
2 πρ3
Y τ Y + 2
3 πc3τ Y − 2
3 πρ3
Y τ Y
T = 2
3 πc3τ Y (1 − 1
4
ρ3
Y
c 3) (3.28)
or in view of Eq. (3.26),
T = 4
3 T Y (1 − 1
4
ρ3
Y
c 3) (3.29)
where TY is the maximum elastic torque. As ρY approaches zero, the torque
approaches the limiting value
Tp = 4
3 T Y 	(3.30)
This value, which corresponds to a fully plastic deformation (Fig. 3.34d), is
the plastic torque of the shaft. Note that Eq. (3.30) is valid only for a solid
circular shaft made of an elastoplastic material.
Since the distribution of strain across the section remains linear after
the onset of yield, Eq. (3.2) remains valid and can be used to express the
radius ρY of the elastic core in terms of the angle of twist ϕ. If ϕ is large

-- 213 of 897 --

*3.7 Circular Shafts Made of an Elastoplastic Material 	199
enough to cause a plastic deformation, the radius ρY of the elastic core is
obtained by making γ equal to the yield strain γY in Eq. (3.2) and solving for
the corresponding value ρY of the distance ρ.
ρ Y = LγY
ϕ (3.31)
Using the angle of twist at the onset of yield ϕY (i.e., when ρY = c) and mak-
ing ϕ = ϕY and ρY = c in Eq. (3.31), we have
c = LγY
ϕY
(3.32)
Dividing Eq. (3.31) by (3.32)—member by member—provides the
relationship:†
ρY
c = ϕY
ϕ (3.33)
If we carry the expression obtained for ρY∕c into Eq. (3.29), the torque
T as a function of the angle of twist ϕ is
T = 4
3T Y (1 − 1
4
ϕ3
Y
ϕ3) (3.34)
where TY and ϕY are the torque and the angle of twist at the onset of yield.
Note that Eq. (3.34) can be used only for values of ϕ larger than ϕY. For
ϕ < ϕY, the relation between T and ϕ is linear and given by Eq. (3.15). Combining
both equations, the plot of T against ϕ is as represented in Fig. 3.35. As ϕ
increases indefinitely, T approaches the limiting value T p = 4
3 T Y corresponding
to the case of a fully developed plastic zone (Fig. 3.34d). While the value Tp
cannot actually be reached, Eq. (3.34) indicates that it is rapidly approached
as ϕ increases. For ϕ = 2ϕY, T is within about 3% of Tp, and for ϕ = 3ϕY, it
is within about 1%.
Since the plot of T against ϕ for an idealized elastoplastic material
(Fig. 3.35) differs greatly from the shearing-stress-strain diagram (Fig. 3.33),
it is clear that the shearing-stress-strain diagram of an actual material cannot
be obtained directly from a torsion test carried out on a solid circular rod
made of that material. However, a fairly accurate diagram can be obtained
from a torsion test if a portion of the specimen consists of a thin circular
tube.‡ Indeed, the shearing stress will have a constant value τ in that portion.
Thus, Eq. (3.1) reduces to
T = ρAτ
where ρ is the average radius of the tube and A is its cross-sectional area. The
shearing stress is proportional to the torque, and τ easily can be computed
from the corresponding values of T. The corresponding shearing strain γ can
be obtained from Eq. (3.2) and from the values of ϕ and L measured on the
tubular portion of the specimen.
†Equation (3.33) applies to any ductile material with a well-defined yield point, since its
derivation is independent of the shape of the stress-strain diagram beyond the yield point.
‡To minimize the possibility of failure by buckling, the specimen should be made so that
the length of the tubular portion is no longer than its diameter.
0
Y
3 Y
T Y
Tp = 4 TY
T
ϕ 	ϕ	Y	
ϕ 	2 Y	
ϕ
3
Fig. 3.35 	Load-displacement relation for
elastoplastic material.

-- 214 of 897 --

200 	Torsion
*3.8 	RESIDUAL STRESSES
IN CIRCULAR SHAFTS
In the two preceding sections, we saw that a plastic region will develop in a
shaft subjected to a large enough torque, and that the shearing stress τ at any
given point in the plastic region may be obtained from the shearing-stress-
strain diagram of Fig. 3.30. If the torque is removed, the shaft will not return
fully to its unloaded state. As the load is removed, the reduction of stress and
Concept Application 3.8
A solid circular shaft, 1.2 m long and 50 mm in diameter, is subjected to a
4.60-kN·m torque at each end (Fig. 3.36). Assuming the shaft to be made of
an elastoplastic material with a yield strength in shear of 150 MPa and a
modulus of rigidity of 77 GPa, determine (a) the radius of the elastic core,
(b) the angle of twist of the shaft.
a. Radius of Elastic Core. 	Determine the torque TY at the onset of
yield. Using Eq. (3.25) with τY = 150 MPa, c = 25 mm, and
J = 1
2πc4 = 1
2π(25 × 10−3 m) 4 = 614 × 10−9 m4
write
T Y = Jτ Y
c = (614 × 10−9 m4 )(150 × 106 Pa)
25 × 10−3 m = 3.68 kN·m
Solving Eq. (3.29) for (ρY∕c)3 and substituting the values of T and TY, we have
(
ρY
c )
3
= 4 − 3T
T Y
= 4 − 3(4.60 kN·m)
3.68 kN·m = 0.250
ρY
c = 0.630 	ρ Y = 0.630(25 mm) = 15.8 mm
b. Angle of Twist. 	The angle of twist ϕY is determined at the onset of
yield from Eq. (3.15) as
ϕY = T YL
JG = (3.68 × 103 N·m)(1.2 m)
(614 × 10−9 m4 )(77 × 109 Pa) = 93.4 × 10−3 rad
Solving Eq. (3.33) for ϕ and substituting the values obtained for ϕY and ρY∕c,
write
ϕ = ϕY
ρ Y∕c = 93.4 × 10−3 rad
0.630 = 148.3 × 10−3 rad
or
ϕ = (148.3 × 10−3 rad)(
360°
2π rad) = 8.50°
1.2 m
50 mm
4.60 kN·m
4.60 kN·m
Fig. 3.36 	Loaded circular shaft.

-- 215 of 897 --

*3.8 Residual Stresses in Circular Shafts 	201
strain at the point considered will take place along a straight line (Fig. 3.37).
As you will see further in this section, the final value of the stress will not,
in general, be zero. There will be a residual stress at most points, and that
stress may be either positive or negative. We note that, as was the case for
the normal stress, the shearing stress will keep decreasing until it has reached
a value equal to its maximum value at C minus twice the yield strength of
the material.
0
Y
C
τ
τ
γ
2 Y
Y	
τ
Fig. 3.37 	Shear stress-strain diagram for
loading past yield, followed by unloading until
compressive yield occurs.
Consider again the idealized elastoplastic material shown in the shearing-
stress-strain diagram of Fig. 3.33. Assuming that the relationship between
τ and γ at any point of the shaft remains linear as long as the stress does not
decrease by more than 2τY, we can use Eq. (3.15) to obtain the angle through
which the shaft untwists as the torque decreases back to zero. As a result, the
unloading of the shaft is represented by a straight line on the T-ϕ diagram
(Fig. 3.38). Note that the angle of twist does not return to zero after the torque
has been removed. Indeed, the loading and unloading of the shaft result in a
permanent deformation characterized by
ϕp = ϕ − ϕ′ 	(3.35)
where ϕ corresponds to the loading phase and can be obtained from T by
solving Eq. (3.34) with ϕ′ corresponding to the unloading phase obtained from
Eq. (3.15).
0
T
T
TY
ϕ
ϕ
p	
ϕ
	ϕ '
Fig. 3.38 	Torque-angle of twist response for
loading past yield, followed by unloading.
The residual stresses in an elastoplastic material are obtained by applying
the principle of superposition (Sec. 2.13). We consider, on one hand, the

-- 216 of 897 --

202 	Torsion
Concept Application 3.9
For the shaft of Concept Application 3.8, shown in Fig. 3.36, determine (a) the
permanent twist and (b) the distribution of residual stresses after the 4.60-kN·m
torque has been removed.
a. Permanent Twist. 	Recall from Concept Application 3.8 that the
angle of twist corresponding to the given torque is ϕ = 8.50°. The angle ϕ′
through which the shaft untwists as the torque is removed is obtained from
Eq. (3.15). Substituting the given data,
T = 4.60 × 103 N·m
L = 1.2 m
G = 77 × 109 Pa
and J = 614 × 10−9 m4, we have
ϕ′ = TL
JG = (4.60 × 103 N·m)(1.2 m)
(614 × 10−9 m4 )(77 × 109 Pa)
= 116.8 × 10−3 rad
1.2 m
50 mm
4.60 kN·m
4.60 kN·m
Fig. 3.36 	(repeated) Loaded
circular shaft.
(continued)
stresses due to the application of the given torque T and, on the other, the
stresses due to the equal and opposite torque which is applied to unload
the shaft. The first group of stresses reflects the elastoplastic behavior of the
material during the loading phase (Fig. 3.39a). The second group has the lin-
ear behavior of the same material during the unloading phase (Fig. 3.39b).
Adding the two groups of stresses provides the distribution of the residual
stresses in the shaft (Fig. 3.39c).
Figure 3.39c shows that some residual stresses have the same sense as
the original stresses, while others have the opposite sense. This was to be
expected since, according to Eq. (3.1), the relationship
∫ρ(τ dA) = 0 	(3.36)
must be verified after the torque has been removed.
τ
Y
Y
ρ Y	
ρ
0 	0 	0
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
τ
	τ
	τ
ρ
	ρ
	ρ	c 	c	c
= Tc
J
τ'm
Fig. 3.39 	Stress distributions for unloading of shaft with elastoplastic material.

-- 217 of 897 --

*3.8 Residual Stresses in Circular Shafts 	203
0 	0 	0
150
15.8 mm 	15.8 mm
25 mm
–187.3
31.6
–37.3
–118.4
(b) 	(c)
(MPa)
	τ
	(MPa)
	τ
	(MPa)
	τ
ρ
	ρ
	ρ
(a)
Fig. 3.40 	Superposition of stress distributions to obtain residual stresses.
or
ϕ′ = (116.8 × 10−3 rad) 360°
2π rad = 6.69°
The permanent twist is
ϕp = ϕ − ϕ′ = 8.50° − 6.69° = 1.81°
b. Residual Stresses. 	Recall from Concept Application 3.8 that the
yield strength is τY = 150 MPa and the radius of the elastic core corresponding
to the torque is ρY = 15.8 mm. The distribution of the stresses in the loaded
shaft is as shown in Fig. 3.40a.
The distribution of stresses due to the opposite 4.60-kN·m torque required
to unload the shaft is linear, as shown in Fig. 3.40b. The maximum stress in
the distribution of the reverse stresses is obtained from Eq. (3.9):
τ′ max = Tc
J = (4.60 × 103 N·m)(25 × 10−3 m)
614 × 10−9 m4
= 187.3 MPa
Superposing the two distributions of stresses gives the residual stresses
shown in Fig. 3.40c. Even though the reverse stresses exceed the yield strength
τY, the assumption of a linear distribution of these stresses is valid, since they
do not exceed 2τY.

-- 218 of 897 --

204 	Torsion
Sample Problem 3.7
Shaft AB is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with
G = 11.2 × 106 psi and τY = 21 ksi. A torque T is applied and gradually
increased in magnitude. Determine the magnitude of T and the corre-
sponding angle of twist when (a) yield first occurs and (b) the deformation
has become fully plastic.
STRATEGY: 	We use the geometric properties and the resulting stress
distribution on the cross section to determine the torque. The angle of twist
is then determined using Eq. (3.2), applied to the portion of the cross section
that is still elastic.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
The geometric properties of the cross section are
c1 = 1
2 (1.5 in.) = 0.75 in. 	c2 = 1
2 (2.25 in.) = 1.125 in.
J = 1
2 π (c 4
2 − c 4
1 ) = 1
2 π[(1.125 in.) 4 − (0.75 in.) 4 ] = 2.02 in4
a. Onset of Yield. 	For τmax = τY = 21 ksi (Figs. 1 and 2), we find
TY = τ Y J
c2
= (21 ksi)(2.02 in4 )
1.125 in.
T Y = 37.7 kip·in. 	◂
Making ρ = c2 and γ = γY in Eq. (3.2) and solving for ϕ, we obtain the value
of ϕY:
ϕY = γ YL
c2
= τ YL
c2G = (21 × 103 psi)(60 in.)
(1.125 in.)(11.2 × 106 psi) = 0.100 rad
ϕY = 5.73° 	◂
b. Fully Plastic Deformation. 	When the plastic zone reaches the
inner surface (Fig. 3), the stresses are uniformly distributed. Using Eq. (3.23),
we write
Tp = 2πτ Y ∫c2
c1
ρ2 dρ = 2
3πτ Y(c3
2 − c3
1 )
= 2
3π(21 ksi)[(1.125 in.) 3 − (0.75 in.) 3 ]
Tp = 44.1 kip·in. 	◂
When yield first occurs on the inner surface, the deformation is fully plastic;
we have from Eq. (3.2),
ϕf = γ YL
c1
= τ YL
c1G = (21 × 103 psi)(60 in.)
(0.75 in.)(11.2 × 106 psi) = 0.150 rad
ϕf = 8.59° 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	For larger angles of twist, the torque remains
constant; the T-ϕ diagram of the shaft is shown (Fig. 4).
TY 	37.7 kip·in. Y 	21 ksi
Y 	5.73
c2 	1.125 in.
c1 	0.75 in.
ϕ
τ
Fig. 2 	Shearing stress distribution at
impending yield.
21
(ksi)
	τ
γ
T´
2.25 in.
1.5 in.
60 in.
B
A
T
Fig. 1 	Elastoplastic stress-strain diagram.
Tp 	44.1 kip·in. 	Y 	21 ksi
f 	8.59
	ϕ
τ
Fig. 3 	Shearing stress distribution
at fully plastic state.
T Y
T p
T
Y 	f	
ϕ 	ϕ
	ϕ
Fig. 4 	Torque-angle of twist
diagram for hollow shaft.

-- 219 of 897 --

*3.8 Residual Stresses in Circular Shafts 	205
Sample Problem 3.8
For the shaft of Sample Problem 3.7 determine the residual stresses and the
permanent angle of twist after the torque Tp = 44.1 kip·in. has been removed.
STRATEGY: 	We begin with the tube loaded by the fully plastic torque in
Sample Problem 3.7. We apply an equal and opposite torque, knowing that the
stresses induced from this unloading are elastic. Combining the stresses gives
the residual stresses, and the change in the angle of twist is fully elastic.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Recall that when the plastic zone first reached the inner surface, the
applied torque was Tp = 44.1 kip·in. and the corresponding angle of twist
was ϕf = 8.59°. These values are shown in Fig. 1a.
Elastic Unloading. 	We unload the shaft by applying a 44.1 kip·in. torque
in the sense shown in Fig. 1b. During this unloading, the behavior of the
material is linear. Recalling the values found in Sample Prob. 3.7 for c1, c2,
and J, we obtain the following stresses and angle of twist:
τmax = Tc2
J = (44.1 kip·in.)(1.125 in.)
2.02 in4 	= 24.56 ksi
τmin = τmax
c1
c2
= (24.56 ksi) 0.75 in.
1.125 in. = 16.37 ksi
ϕ′ = TL
JG = (44.1 × 103 lb-in.)(60 in.)
(2.02 in4 )(11.2 × 106 psi) = 0.1170 rad = 6.70°
Residual Stresses and Permanent Twist. 	The results of the loading
(Fig. 1a) and the unloading (Fig. 1b) are superposed (Fig. 1c) to obtain the
residual stresses and the permanent angle of twist ϕ p.
16.37 ksi
6.70°	' 	1.89°	p	24.56 ksi
2 	3.56 ksi
1 	4.63 ksi
Y 	21 ksi
f 	8.59°
Tp = 44.1 kip·in.
44.1 kip·in.
ϕ
	ϕ
	ϕ	= 	= 	=
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
τ
τ
τ
Tp = 44.1 kip·in.
44.1 kip·in.
44.1 kip·in.
44.1 kip·in.
Fig. 1 	Superposition of stress distributions to obtain residual stresses.

-- 220 of 897 --

206
3.92 The solid circular shaft shown is made of a steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with τY = 145 MPa. Determine the magnitude T
of the applied torques when the plastic zone is (a) 16 mm deep,
(b) 24 mm deep.
3.93 A 1.25-in. diameter solid rod is made of an elastoplastic material
with τY = 5 ksi. Knowing that the elastic core of the rod is 1 in. in
diameter, determine the magnitude of the applied torque T.
3.94 A 2-in.-diameter solid shaft is made of a mild steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with τY = 20 ksi. Determine the maximum shear-
ing stress and the radius of the elastic core caused by the application
of a torque of magnitude (a) 30 kip·in., (b) 40 kip·in.
3.95 The solid shaft shown is made of a mild steel that is assumed to
be elastoplastic with G = 77.2 GPa and τY = 145 MPa. Determine
the maximum shearing stress and the radius of the elastic core
caused by the application of a torque of magnitude (a) T = 600 N·m,
(b) T = 1000 N·m.
T
30 mm
1.2 m
Fig. P3.95 and P3.96
3.96 The solid shaft shown is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be
elastoplastic with τY = 145 MPa. Determine the radius of the elastic
core caused by the application of a torque equal to 1.1 TY, where TY
is the magnitude of the torque at the onset of yield.
3.97 It is observed that a straightened paper clip can be twisted through
several revolutions by the application of a torque of approximately
60 N·m. Knowing that the diameter of the wire in the paper clip is
0.9 mm, determine the approximate value of the yield stress of the
steel.
3.98 The solid shaft shown is made of a mild steel that is assumed to be
elastoplastic with G = 77.2 GPa and τY = 145 MPa. Determine the
angle of twist caused by the application of a torque of magnitude
(a) T = 600 N·m, (b) T = 1000 N·m.
Problems
Fig. P3.92
c = 32 mm
T
T'
1.2 m
15 mm
B T
A
Fig. P3.98

-- 221 of 897 --

207
3.99 For the solid circular shaft shown, determine the angle of twist
caused by the application of a torque of magnitude (a) T = 80 kip·in.,
(b) T = 130 kip·in.
3 in.	T
4 ft
Fig. P3.99
3.100 A torque T is applied to the 20-mm-diameter steel rod AB. Assuming
the steel to be elastoplastic with G = 77.2 GPa and τY = 145 MPa,
determine (a) the torque T when the angle of twist at A is 25°, (b) the
corresponding diameter of the elastic core of the shaft.
3.101 A 3-ft-long solid shaft has a diameter of 2.5 in. and is made of a
mild steel that is assumed to be elastoplastic with τY = 21 ksi and
G = 11.2 × 106 psi. Determine the torque required to twist the shaft
through an angle of (a) 2.5°, (b) 5°.
3.102 An 18-mm-diameter solid circular shaft is made of a material that
is assumed to be elastoplastic with τY = 145 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa.
For a 1.2-m length of the shaft, determine the maximum shearing
stress and the angle of twist caused by a 200-N·m torque.
3.103 A 1.25-in.-diameter solid circular shaft is made of a material that is
assumed to be elastoplastic with τY = 18 ksi and G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
For an 8-ft length of the shaft, determine the maximum shearing stress
and the angle of twist caused by a 7.5-kip·in. torque.
3.104 The shaft AB is made of a material that is elastoplastic with τY = 90 MPa
and G = 30 GPa. For the loading shown, determine (a) the radius of
the elastic core of the shaft, (b) the angle of twist at end B.
3.105 A solid circular rod is made of a material that is assumed to be elas-
toplastic. Denoting by TY and ϕY, respectively, the torque and the angle
of twist at the onset of yield, determine the angle of twist if the torque
is increased to (a) T = 1.1 TY, (b) T = 1.25 TY, (c) T = 1.3 TY.
3.106 The hollow shaft shown is made of steel which is assumed to be
elastoplastic with τY = 145 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa. Determine the
magnitude T of the torque and the corresponding angle of twist
(a) at the onset of yield, (b) when the plastic zone is 10 mm deep.
3.107 For the shaft of Prob. 3.106, determine (a) angle of twist at which
the section first becomes fully plastic, (b) the corresponding magni-
tude T of the applied torque. Sketch the T-ϕ curve for the shaft.
T
20 mm
1.5 m
B
A
Fig. P3.100
2 m B T
A
= 300 N·m
12 mm
Fig. P3.104
5 m
25 mm
60 mm
T
T'
Fig. P3.106

-- 222 of 897 --

208
3.108 A shaft of mild steel is machined to the shape shown and then
twisted by torques of magnitude 40 kip⋅in. Assuming the steel to be
elastoplastic with τY = 21 ksi, determine (a) the thickness of the
plastic zone in portion CD of the shaft, (b) the length of portion BE
that remains fully elastic.
3.109 The magnitude of the torque T applied to the tapered shaft of
Prob. 3.108 is slowly increased. Determine (a) the largest torque that
may be applied to the shaft, (b) the length of portion BE that remains
fully elastic.
3.110 A hollow shaft of outer and inner diameters respectively equal to
0.6 in. and 0.2 in. is fabricated from an aluminum alloy with the
stress-strain diagram shown. Determine the torque required to twist
a 9-in. length of the shaft through 10°.
3.111 Using the stress-strain diagram shown, determine (a) the torque that
causes a maximum shearing stress of 15 ksi in a 0.8-in.-diameter
solid rod, (b) the corresponding angle of twist in a 20-in. length of
the rod.
3.112 A 50-mm-diameter cylinder is made of a brass for which the stress-
strain diagram is as shown. Knowing that the angle of twist is 5° in
a 725-mm length, determine by approximate means the magnitude
T of the torque applied to the shaft.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.001 	0.002 	0.003
τ (MPa)
γ
725 mm
d = 50 mm T'
T
Fig. P3.112
3.113 Three points on the nonlinear stress-strain diagram used in Prob. 3.112
are (0, 0), (0.0015, 55 MPa), and (0.003, 80 MPa). By fitting the
polynomial T = A + Bγ + Cγ2 through these points, the following
approximate relation has been obtained.
T = 46.7 × 109γ − 6.67 × 1012γ2
Solve Prob. 3.112 using this relation, Eq. (3.2), and Eq. (3.23).
3.114 The solid circular drill rod AB is made of a steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with τY = 22 ksi and G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
Knowing that a torque T = 75 kip·in. is applied to the rod and
then removed, determine the maximum residual shearing stress in
the rod.
3.115 In Prob. 3.114, determine the permanent angle of twist of the rod.
2.5 in. 	2 in.
A 	B 	E 	C 	D
x
T	T′
4 in.
Fig. P3.108
0
4
8
12
16
0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.010
τ (ksi)
γ
Fig. P3.110 and P3.111
1.2 in.
35 ft
B
A
T
Fig. P3.114

-- 223 of 897 --

209
3.116 The solid shaft shown is made of a steel that is assumed to be elas-
toplastic with τY = 145 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa. The torque is
increased in magnitude until the shaft has been twisted through 6°;
the torque is then removed. Determine (a) the magnitude and loca-
tion of the maximum residual shearing stress, (b) the permanent
angle of twist.
3.117 After the solid shaft of Prob. 3.116 has been loaded and unloaded
as described in that problem, a torque T1 of sense opposite to
the original torque T is applied to the shaft. Assuming no change
in the value of ϕY, determine the angle of twist ϕ1 for which
yield is initiated in this second loading and compare it with the
angle ϕY for which the shaft started to yield in the original
loading.
3.118 The hollow shaft shown is made of a steel that is assumed to be
elastoplastic with τY = 145 MPa and G = 77.2 GPa. The magnitude
T of the torques is slowly increased until the plastic zone first reaches
the inner surface of the shaft; the torques are then removed. Deter-
mine the magnitude and location of the maximum residual shearing
stress in the rod.
5 m
25 mm
60 mm
T
T'
Fig. P3.118
3.119 In Prob. 3.118, determine the permanent angle of twist of the rod.
3.120 A torque T applied to a solid rod made of an elastoplastic material
is increased until the rod is fully plastic and then removed. (a) Show
that the distribution of residual shearing stresses is as represented in
the figure. (b) Determine the magnitude of the torque due to the
stresses acting on the portion of the rod located within a circle of
radius c0.
Y
Y
c
c0
τ
τ	1
3
Fig. P3.120
16 mm
0.6 m
B
T
A
Fig. P3.116

-- 224 of 897 --

210 	Torsion
*3.9 	TORSION OF
NONCIRCULAR MEMBERS
The formulas obtained for the distributions of strain and stress under a tor-
sional loading in Sec. 3.1 apply only to members with a circular cross section.
They were derived based on the assumption that the cross section of the
member remained plane and undistorted. This assumption depends upon the
axisymmetry of the member (i.e., the fact that its appearance remains the same
when viewed from a fixed position and rotated about its axis through an
arbitrary angle).
A square bar, on the other hand, retains the same appearance only when
it is rotated through 90° or 180°. Following a line of reasoning similar to that
used in Sec. 3.1B, one could show that the diagonals of the square cross sec-
tion of the bar and the lines joining the midpoints of the sides of that section
remain straight (Fig. 3.41). However, because of the lack of axisymmetry of
the bar, any other line drawn in its cross section will deform when it is twisted,
and the cross section will be warped out of its original plane.
Equations (3.4) and (3.6) define the distributions of strain and stress in
an elastic circular shaft but cannot be used for noncircular members. For
example, it would be wrong to assume that the shearing stress in the cross
section of a square bar varies linearly with the distance from the axis of the
bar and is therefore largest at the corners of the cross section. The shearing
stress is actually zero at these points.
Consider a small cubic element located at a corner of the cross section
of a square bar in torsion and select coordinate axes parallel to the edges
(Fig. 3.42a). Since the face perpendicular to the y axis is part of the free
surface of the bar, all stresses on this face must be zero. Referring to
Fig. 3.42b, we write
τ yx = 0 	τ yz = 0 	(3.37)
For the same reason, all stresses on the face perpendicular to the z axis must
be zero, and
τ zx = 0 	τ zy = 0 	(3.38)
It follows from the first of Eqs. (3.37) and the first of Eqs. (3.38) that
τ xy = 0 	τ xz = 0 	(3.39)
Thus, both components of the shearing stress on the face perpendicular to the
axis of the bar are zero. Thus there is no shearing stress at the corners of the
cross section of the bar.
By twisting a rubber model of a square bar, one finds no deformations—
and no stresses—occur along the edges of the bar, while the largest
deformations—and the largest stresses—occur along the center line of each
of the faces of the bar (Fig. 3.43).
T
T'
Fig. 3.41 	Twisting a shaft of square
cross section.
y
x
zy	
τ 	xy	
τ
xz	
τ
yz	
τ
yx	
τ
zx	
τ
(a)
(b)
z
x
z
y
Fig. 3.42 	Element at corner of square bar
in torsion: (a) location of element in shaft and
(b) potential shearing stress components on
element.
max
	τ
max
	τ 	T
T'
Fig. 3.43 	Stress elements in a torsionally loaded, deformed square bar.

-- 225 of 897 --

*3.9 Torsion of Noncircular Members 	211
The determination of the stresses in noncircular members subjected to
a torsional loading is beyond the scope of this text. However, results obtained
from the mathematical theory of elasticity for straight bars with a uniform
rectangular cross section are given here for our use.† For the rectangular bar
shown in Fig. 3.44, L is the length of the bar, a and b are, respectively,
the wider and narrower side of its cross section, and T is the magnitude of
the torque applied to the bar. The maximum shearing stress occurs along the
center line of the wider face, as shown in Fig. 3.44, and is equal to
τmax = T
c1ab2 	(3.40)
The angle of twist can be expressed as
ϕ = TL
c2ab3G (3.41)
Coefficients c1 and c2 depend only upon the ratio a∕b and are given in Table 3.1
for a number of values of that ratio. Note that Eqs. (3.40) and (3.41) are valid
only within the elastic range.
Table 3.1 shows that for a∕b ≥ 5, the coefficients c1 and c2 are equal.
It may be shown that for such values of a∕b, we have
c1 = c2 = 1
3 (1 − 0.630b∕a) 	(for a∕b ≥ 5 only) 	(3.42)
The distribution of shearing stresses in a noncircular member may be
visualized by using the membrane analogy. A homogeneous elastic membrane
attached to a fixed frame and subjected to a uniform pressure on one of its
sides constitutes an analog of the bar in torsion (i.e., the determination of the
deformation of the membrane depends upon the solution of the same partial
differential equation as the determination of the shearing stresses in the bar).‡
More specifically, if Q is a point of the cross section of the bar and Q′ the
corresponding point of the membrane (Fig. 3.45), the shearing stress τ at Q
has the same direction as the horizontal tangent to the membrane at Q′, and
L
a
b
max
	τ
T
T'
Fig. 3.44 	Shaft with rectangular cross
section, showing the location of maximum
shearing stress.
†See S. P. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1969, sec. 109.
‡Ibid. Sec. 107.
Table 3.1. 	Coefficients for
Rectangular Bars in Torsion
a∕b 	c1 	c2
1.0 	0.208 	0.1406
1.2 	0.219 	0.1661
1.5 	0.231 	0.1958
2.0 	0.246 	0.229
2.5 	0.258 	0.249
3.0 	0.267 	0.263
4.0 	0.282 	0.281
5.0 	0.291 	0.291
10.0 	0.312 	0.312
∞ 	0.333 	0.333
N'
Rectangular frame Tangent of
max. slope
Membrane 	Horizontal
tangent
N
Q
b
a
a
Q'
τ	b
T
Fig. 3.45 	Application of membrane analogy
to shaft with rectangular cross section.

-- 226 of 897 --

212 	Torsion
its magnitude is proportional to the maximum slope of the membrane at Q′.†
Furthermore, the applied torque is proportional to the volume between the
membrane and the plane of the fixed frame. For the membrane of Fig. 3.45,
which is attached to a rectangular frame, the steepest slope occurs at the
midpoint N′ of the larger side of the frame. Thus the maximum shearing stress
in a bar of rectangular cross section occurs at the midpoint N of the larger
side of that section.
The membrane analogy can be used just as effectively to visualize
the shearing stresses in any straight bar of uniform, noncircular cross sec-
tion. In particular, consider several thin-walled members with the cross
sections shown in Fig. 3.46 that are subjected to the same torque. Using
the membrane analogy to help us visualize the shearing stresses, we note
that since the same torque is applied to each member, the same volume is
located under each membrane, and the maximum slope is about the same
in each case. Thus, for a thin-walled member of uniform thickness and
arbitrary shape, the maximum shearing stress is the same as for a rectan-
gular bar with a very large value of a∕b and can be determined from
Eq. (3.40) with c1 = 0.333.‡
*3.10 	THIN-WALLED HOLLOW
SHAFTS
In the preceding section we saw that the determination of stresses in non-
circular members generally requires the use of advanced mathematical
methods. In thin-walled hollow noncircular shafts, a good approximation
of the distribution of stresses in the shaft can be obtained by a simple
computation. Consider a hollow cylindrical member of noncircular section
†This is the slope measured in a direction perpendicular to the horizontal tangent at Q′.
‡It also could be shown that the angle of twist can be determined from Eq. (3.41) with
c2 = 0.333.
a
a	b
b
a b
Fig. 3.46 	Membrane analogy for various thin-walled members.

-- 227 of 897 --

*3.10 Thin-Walled Hollow Shafts 	213
subjected to a torsional loading (Fig. 3.47).† While the thickness t of the
wall may vary within a transverse section, it is assumed that it remains
small compared to the other dimensions of the member. Now detach the
colored portion of wall AB bounded by two transverse planes at a distance
Δx from each other and by two longitudinal planes perpendicular to the
wall. Since the portion AB is in equilibrium, the sum of the forces exerted
on it in the longitudinal x direction must be zero (Fig. 3.48). The only
forces involved in this direction are the shearing forces FA and FB exerted
on the ends of portion AB. Therefore,
ΣF x = 0: 	F A − F B = 0 	(3.43)
Now express FA as the product of the longitudinal shearing stress τA on
the small face at A and of the area tA Δx of that face:
F A = τ A (tAΔx)
While the shearing stress is independent of the x coordinate of the point
considered, it may vary across the wall. Thus, τA represents the average value
of the stress computed across the wall. Expressing FB in a similar way and
substituting for FA and FB into (3.43), write
τ A (tAΔx) − τ B (tBΔx) = 0
or 	τ A tA = τ B tB 	(3.44)
Since A and B were chosen arbitrarily, Eq. (3.44) shows that the product τt
of the longitudinal shearing stress τ and the wall thickness t is constant
throughout the cross section of the member. Denoting this product by q,
we have
q = τt = constant 	(3.45)
Now detach a small element from the wall portion AB (Fig. 3.49).
Since the outer and inner faces are part of the free surface of the hollow
member, the stresses are equal to zero. Recalling Eqs. (1.21) and (1.22) of
Sec. 1.4, the stress components indicated on the other faces by dashed
arrows are also zero, while those represented by solid arrows are equal. Thus
the shearing stress at any point of a transverse section of the hollow mem-
ber is parallel to the wall surface (Fig. 3.50), and its average value computed
across the wall satisfies Eq. (3.45).
x
Δx
A
t
B
T'
T
Fig. 3.47 	Thin-walled hollow shaft subject
to torsional loading.
†The wall of the member must enclose a single cavity and must not be slit open. In other
words, the member should be topologically equivalent to a hollow circular shaft.
x	tA
t B
FA
FB
Δx
A
B
Fig. 3.48 	Segment of thin-walled hollow shaft.
x
t
Δx
Δs
τ
τ
Fig. 3.49 	Small stress element from segment.
t
τ
Fig. 3.50 	Direction of shearing stress on
cross section.

-- 228 of 897 --

214 	Torsion
At this point, an analogy can be made between the distribution of the
shearing stresses τ in the transverse section of a thin-walled hollow shaft and
the distributions of the velocities v in water flowing through a closed channel
of unit depth and variable width. While the velocity v of the water varies from
point to point on account of the variation in the width t of the channel, the
rate of flow, q = vt, remains constant throughout the channel, just as τt in
Eq. (3.45). Because of this, the product q = τt is called the shear flow in the
wall of the hollow shaft.
We will now derive a relation between the torque T applied to a
hollow member and the shear flow q in its wall. Consider a small element
of the wall section, of length ds (Fig. 3.51). The area of the element is
dA = t ds, and the magnitude of the shearing force dF exerted on the
element is
dF = τ dA = τ(t ds) = (τt) ds = q ds 	(3.46)
The moment dMO of this force about an arbitrary point O within the cavity
of the member can be obtained by multiplying dF by the perpendicular dis-
tance p from O to the line of action of dF.
dM O = p dF = p(q ds) = q(p ds) 	(3.47)
But the product p ds is equal to twice the area d𝒶 of the colored triangle in
Fig. 3.52. Thus,
dMO = q(2d𝒶) 	(3.48)
Since the integral around the wall section of the left-hand member of
Eq. (3.48) represents the sum of the moments of all the elementary
shearing forces exerted on the wall section and this sum is equal to the
torque T applied to the hollow member,
T = ∮ dMO = ∮ q(2d𝒶)
The shear flow q being a constant, write
T = 2q𝒶 	(3.49)
where 𝒶 is the area bounded by the center line of the wall cross section
(Fig. 3.53).
The shearing stress τ at any given point of the wall is determined by
substitution of q from Eq. (3.45) into Eq. (3.49). Solving for τ:
τ = T
2t𝒶 (3.50)
O
p	ds
t
dF
Fig. 3.51 	Shear force in the wall.
d
ds
O
p
dF 	𝒶
Fig. 3.52 	Infinitesimal area used in finding
the resultant torque.
τ
t
𝒶
Fig. 3.53 	Area for shear flow.

-- 229 of 897 --

*3.10 Thin-Walled Hollow Shafts 	215
where t is the wall thickness at the point considered and 𝒶 the area bounded
by the center line. Recall that τ represents the average value of the shearing
stress across the wall. However, for elastic deformations, the distribution of
stresses across the wall can be assumed to be uniform, and thus Eq. (3.50)
yields the actual shearing stress at a given point of the wall.
The angle of twist of a thin-walled hollow shaft can be obtained also
by using the method of energy (Chap. 11). Assuming an elastic deformation,
it is shown† that the angle of twist of a thin-walled shaft of length L and
modulus of rigidity G is
ϕ = TL
4𝒶 2G ∮
ds
t (3.51)
where the integral is computed along the center line of the wall section.
†See Prob. 11.70.
Concept Application 3.10
Structural aluminum tubing of 2.5 × 4-in. rectangular cross section was fab-
ricated by extrusion. Determine the shearing stress in each of the four walls
of a portion of such tubing when it is subjected to a torque of 24 kip·in.,
assuming (a) a uniform 0.160-in. wall thickness (Fig. 3.54a) and (b) that as
a result of defective fabrication, walls AB and AC are 0.120 in. thick and walls
BD and CD are 0.200 in. thick (Fig. 3.54b).
a. Tubing of Uniform Wall Thickness. 	The area bounded by the center
line (Fig. 3.54c) is
𝒶 = (3.84 in.)(2.34 in.) = 8.986 in2
Since the thickness of each of the four walls is t = 0.160 in., from Eq. (3.50),
the shearing stress in each wall is
τ = T
2t𝒶 = 24 kip·in.
2(0.160 in.)(8.986 in2 ) = 8.35 ksi
b. Tubing with Variable Wall Thickness. 	Observing that the area 𝒶
bounded by the center line is the same as in part a, and substituting succes-
sively t = 0.120 in. and t = 0.200 in. into Eq. (3.50), we have
τAB = τ AC = 24 kip·in.
2(0.120 in.)(8.986 in2 ) = 11.13 ksi
and
τ BD = τ CD = 24 kip·in.
2(0.200 in.)(8.986 in2 ) = 6.68 ksi
Note that the stress in a given wall depends only upon its thickness.
0.160 in.
4 in.
4 in.
0.160 in.
0.120 in.
0.200 in.
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
D
D
C
C
B
B
A
A
(a)
(b)
3.84 in.
2.34 in. 	t = 0.160 in.
t = 0.160 in.
D
B
C
A
(c)
Fig. 3.54 	Thin-walled aluminum tube:
(a) with uniform thickness, (b) with non-
uniform thickness, (c) area bounded by
center line of wall thickness.

-- 230 of 897 --

216 	Torsion
Sample Problem 3.9
Using τall = 40 MPa, determine the largest torque that may be applied to each
of the brass bars and to the brass tube shown in the accompanying figure.
Note that the two solid bars have the same cross-sectional area, and that the
square bar and square tube have the same outside dimensions.
40 mm	40 mm
64 mm	25 mm
40 mm
40 mm 	t 	6 mm
T3
T2
T1
(1)
(2)
(3)
STRATEGY: 	We obtain the torque using Eq. (3.40) for the solid cross sec-
tions and Eq. (3.50) for the hollow cross section.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
1. Bar with Square Cross Section. 	For a solid bar of rectangular
cross section (Fig. 1), the maximum shearing stress is given by Eq. (3.40),
τmax = T
c1ab2
a
L
b
T
Fig. 1 	General dimensions of
solid rectangular bar in torsion.

-- 231 of 897 --

*3.10 Thin-Walled Hollow Shafts 	217
where the coefficient c1 is obtained from Table 3.1.
a = b = 0.040 m a
b = 1.00 	c1 = 0.208
For τmax = τall = 40 MPa, we have
τmax = T1
c1ab2 	40 MPa = T1
0.208(0.040 m) 3 	T1 = 532 N·m 	◂
2. Bar with Rectangular Cross Section. 	We now have
a = 0.064 m 	b = 0.025 m a
b = 2.56
Interpolating in Table 3.1: c1 = 0.259
τmax = T2
c1ab2 	40 MPa = T2
0.259(0.064 m)(0.025 m) 2 	T2 = 414 N·m 	◂
3. Square Tube. 	For a tube of thickness t (Fig. 2), the shearing stress
is given by Eq. (3.50),
τ = T
2t𝒶
34 mm
34 mm
40 mm
40 mm
t = 6 mm
Fig. 2 	Hollow, square brass bar
section dimensions.
where 𝒶 is the area bounded by the center line of the cross section. We have
𝒶 = (0.034 m)(0.034 m) = 1.156 × 10−3 m2
We substitute τ = τall = 40 MPa and t = 0.006 m and solve for the allowable
torque:
τ = T
2t𝒶 40 MPa = T3
2(0.006 m)(1.156 × 10−3 m2 ) T3 = 555 N·m 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Comparing the capacity of the bar of solid square
cross section with that of the tube with the same outer dimensions demon-
strates the ability of the tube to carry a larger torque.

-- 232 of 897 --

218
3.121 Determine the smallest allowable square cross section of a steel shaft
of length 20 ft if the maximum shearing stress is not to exceed
10 ksi when the shaft is twisted through one complete revolution.
Use G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
3.122 Determine the smallest allowable length of a stainless steel shaft of
3
8 × 3
4 -in. cross section if the shearing stress is not to exceed 15 ksi
when the shaft is twisted through 15°. Use G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
3.123 Using τall = 70 MPa and G = 27 GPa, determine for each of the
aluminum bars shown the largest torque T that can be applied and
the corresponding angle of twist at end B.
3.124 Knowing that the magnitude of the torque T is 200 N·m and that
G = 27 GPa, determine for each of the aluminum bars shown the
maximum shearing stress and the angle of twist at end B.
3.125 Using τall = 7.5 ksi and knowing that G = 5.6 × 106 psi, determine
for each of the cold-rolled yellow brass bars shown the largest
torque T that can be applied and the corresponding angle of twist
at end B.
2 in.
2.8 in.
1.4 in.
16 in.
B
B
A
A
(a)
(b)
T
T
2 in.
Fig. P3.125 and P3.126
3.126 Knowing that T = 7 kip⋅in. and that G = 5.6 × 106 psi, determine
for each of the cold-rolled yellow brass bars shown the maximum
shearing stress and the angle of twist at end B.
Problems
900 mm
25 mm
25 mm
15 mm
45 mm	A
A
B
B
(a)
(b)
T
T
Fig. P3.123 and P3.124

-- 233 of 897 --

219
3.127 The torque T causes a rotation of 0.6° at end B of the aluminum bar
shown. Knowing that b = 15 mm and G = 26 GPa, determine the
maximum shearing stress in the bar.
3.128 The torque T causes a rotation of 2° at end B of the stainless steel
bar shown. Knowing that b = 20 mm and G = 75 GPa, determine
the maximum shearing stress in the bar.
3.129 Two shafts are made of the same material. The cross section of shaft
A is a square of side b and that of shaft B is a circle of diameter b.
Knowing that the shafts are subjected to the same torque, determine
the ratio τA∕τB of maximum shearing stresses occurring in the shafts.
b	b
b
A 	B
Fig. P3.129
3.130 Shafts A and B are made of the same material and have the same
cross-sectional area, but A has a circular cross section and B has a
square cross section. Determine the ratio of the maximum torques
TA and TB when the two shafts are subjected to the same maximum
shearing stress (τA = τB). Assume both deformations to be elastic.
TA
TB
A
B
Fig. P3.130, P3.131, and P3.132
3.131 Shafts A and B are made of the same material and have the same length
and cross-sectional area, but A has a circular cross section and B has a
square cross section. Determine the ratio of the maximum values of the
angles ϕA and ϕB when the two shafts are subjected to the same maxi-
mum shearing stress (τA = τB). Assume both deformations to be elastic.
3.132 Shafts A and B are made of the same material and have the same cross-
sectional area, but A has a circular cross section and B has a square
cross section. Determine the ratio of the maximum shearing stresses
occurring in A and B, respectively, when the two shafts are subjected
to the same torque (TA = TB). Assume both deformations to be elastic.
30 mm
750 mm
B
b
A
T
Fig. P3.127 and P3.128

-- 234 of 897 --

220
3.133 Each of the three steel bars is subjected to a torque as shown.
Knowing that the allowable shearing stress is 8 ksi and that
b = 1.4 in., determine the maximum torque T that can be applied
to each bar.
3.134 Each of the three aluminum bars shown is to be twisted through
an angle of 2°. Knowing that b = 30 mm, τall = 50 MPa, and
G = 27 GPa, determine the shortest allowable length of each
bar.
3.135 A 1.25-m-long steel angle has an L127 × 76 × 6.4 cross section.
From Appendix E we find that the thickness of the section is 6.4 mm
and that its area is 1250 mm2. Knowing that τall = 60 MPa and that
G = 77.2 GPa, and ignoring the effect of stress concentrations, deter-
mine (a) the largest torque T that can be applied, (b) the correspond-
ing angle of twist.
1.25 m
T
Fig. P3.135
3.136 A 3000-lb⋅in. torque is applied to a 6-ft-long steel angle with an
L4 × 4 × 3
8 cross section. From Appendix E we find that the thick-
ness of the section is 3
8 in. and that its area is 2.86 in2. Knowing
that G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine (a) the maximum shearing stress
along line a-a, (b) the angle of twist.
a
a
3
8	L4 	4
Fig. P3.136
3.137 A 4-m-long steel member has a W310 × 60 cross section. Know-
ing that G = 77.2 GPa and that the allowable shearing stress is
40 MPa, determine (a) the largest torque T that can be applied,
(b) the corresponding angle of twist. Refer to Appendix E for
the dimensions of the cross section and neglect the effect of
stress concentrations. (Hint: Consider the web and flanges sepa-
rately and obtain a relation between the torques exerted on the
web and a flange, respectively, by expressing that the resulting
angles of twist are equal.)
T
W310 × 60
Fig. P3.137
(a)
b 	b
b
1.2b
(b)
(c)
T
T
T
Fig. P3.133 and P3.134

-- 235 of 897 --

221
3.138 An 8-ft-long steel member with a W8 × 31 cross section is subjected
to a 5-kip⋅in. torque. The properties of the rolled-steel section are given
in Appendix E. Knowing that G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine (a) the
maximum shearing stress along line a-a, (b) the maximum shearing
stress along line b-b, (c) the angle of twist. (See hint of Prob. 3.137.)
3.139 A 5-kip⋅ft torque is applied to a hollow aluminum shaft having the
cross section shown. Neglecting the effect of stress concentrations,
determine the shearing stress at points a and b.
a
6 in.
4 in.
in.
b
1
4
in.	1
4
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P3.139
3.140 A torque T = 750 kN⋅m is applied to the hollow shaft shown that
has a uniform 8-mm wall thickness. Neglecting the effect of stress
concentrations, determine the shearing stress at points a and b.
90 mm
60°
a
b
Fig. P3.140
3.141 A 5.6-kN⋅m torque is applied to a hollow shaft having the cross
section shown. Neglecting the effect of stress concentrations, deter-
mine the shearing stress at points a and b.
3.142 and 3.143 	A hollow member having the cross section shown is
formed from sheet metal of 2-mm thickness. Knowing that the shear-
ing stress must not exceed 3 MPa, determine the largest torque that
can be applied to the member.
20 mm
20 mm
50 mm
50 mm
Fig. P3.142
100 mm
8 mm
5 mm
5 mm
50 mm
a
b
Fig. P3.141
b 	b
a
a
W8 × 31
Fig. P3.138
10 mm
10 mm
50 mm
50 mm
Fig. P3.143

-- 236 of 897 --

222
3.144 A 90-N⋅m torque is applied to a hollow shaft having the cross section
shown. Neglecting the effect of stress concentrations, determine the
shearing stress at points a and b.
b
40 mm
2 mm
4 mm
a	4 mm
55 mm
55 mm
Fig. P3.144
3.145 A hollow member having the cross section shown is to be formed
from sheet metal of 1
16 -in. thickness. Knowing that a 3-kip⋅in. torque
will be applied to the member, determine the smallest dimension d
that can be used if the shearing stress is not to exceed 500 psi.
2 in.
2 in.
2 in.
2.5 in.	d
Fig. P3.145
3.146 A sheet-metal strip 6 in. wide and 0.12 in. thick is to be formed into a
tube of rectangular cross section. Knowing that τall = 4 ksi, determine
the largest torque that can be applied to the tube when (a) w = 1.5 in.,
(b) w = 1.2 in., (c) w = 1 in.
3.147 A cooling tube having the cross section shown is formed from a sheet
of stainless steel of 3-mm thickness. The radii c1 = 150 mm and c2 =
100 mm are measured to the center line of the sheet metal. Knowing
that a torque of magnitude T = 3 kN⋅m is applied to the tube, deter-
mine (a) the maximum shearing stress in the tube, (b) the magnitude
of the torque carried by the outer circular shell. Neglect the dimension
of the small opening where the outer and inner shells are connected.
c1
O
c2
Fig. P3.147
(3 in.−w)
w
Fig. P3.146

-- 237 of 897 --

223
3.148 A hollow cylindrical shaft was designed to have a uniform wall
thickness of 0.1 in. Defective fabrication, however, resulted in the
shaft having the cross section shown. Knowing that a 15-kip⋅in.
torque is applied to the shaft, determine the shearing stresses at
points a and b.
1.1 in.
0.12 in.
0.08 in.
2.4 in.
a
b
Fig. P3.148
3.149 Equal torques are applied to thin-walled tubes of the same length L,
same thickness t, and same radius c. One of the tubes has been slit
lengthwise as shown. Determine (a) the ratio τb∕τa of the maximum
shearing stresses in the tubes, (b) the ratio ϕb∕ϕa of the angles of
twist of the tubes.
3.150 A hollow cylindrical shaft of length L, mean radius cm, and uniform
thickness t is subjected to a torque of magnitude T. Consider, on
the one hand, the values of the average shearing stress τave and the
angle of twist ϕ obtained from the elastic torsion formulas devel-
oped in Secs. 3.1C and 3.2 and, on the other hand, the correspond-
ing values obtained from the formulas developed in Sec. 3.10 for
thin-walled shafts. (a) Show that the relative error introduced by
using the thin-walled-shaft formulas rather than the elastic torsion
formulas is the same for τave and ϕ and that the relative error is
positive and proportional to the ratio t∕cm. (b) Compare the per-
cent error corresponding to values of the ratio t∕cm of 0.1, 0.2,
and 0.4.
L
t
cm
T
T'
Fig. P3.150
T 	T
T'	T'
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P3.149

-- 238 of 897 --

224
This chapter was devoted to the analysis and design of shafts subjected to
twisting couples, or torques. Except for the last two sections of the chapter,
our discussion was limited to circular shafts.
Deformations in Circular Shafts
The distribution of stresses in the cross section of a circular shaft is statically
indeterminate. The determination of these stresses requires a prior analysis of
the deformations occurring in the shaft (Sec. 3.1B). In a circular shaft sub-
jected to torsion, every cross section remains plane and undistorted. The
shearing strain in a small element with sides parallel and perpendicular to the
axis of the shaft and at a distance ρ from that axis is
γ = ρϕ
L (3.2)
where ϕ is the angle of twist for a length L of the shaft (Fig. 3.55). Equation
(3.2) shows that the shearing strain in a circular shaft varies linearly with
the distance from the axis of the shaft. It follows that the strain is maximum
at the surface of the shaft, where ρ is equal to the radius c of the shaft:
γmax = cϕ
L γ = ρ
c γmax 	(3.3, 3.4)
Shearing Stresses in Elastic Range
The relationship between shearing stresses in a circular shaft within the elastic
range (Sec. 3.1C) and Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain, τ = Gγ, is
τ = ρ
c τmax 	(3.6)
which shows that within the elastic range, the shearing stress τ in a circular
shaft also varies linearly with the distance from the axis of the shaft. Equating
the sum of the moments of the elementary forces exerted on any section of
the shaft to the magnitude T of the torque applied to the shaft, the elastic
torsion formulas are
τmax = Tc
J τ = Tρ
J (3.9, 3.10)
where c is the radius of the cross section and J its centroidal polar moment
of inertia. J = 1
2 πc4 for a solid shaft, and J = 1
2 π(c4
2 − c4
1 ) for a hollow shaft
of inner radius c1 and outer radius c2.
We noted that while the element a in Fig. 3.56 is in pure shear, the element
c in the same figure is subjected to normal stresses of the same magnitude,
Tc∕J, with two of the normal stresses being tensile and two compressive. This
explains why in a torsion test ductile materials, which generally fail in shear,
will break along a plane perpendicular to the axis of the specimen, while
brittle materials, which are weaker in tension than in shear, will break along
surfaces forming a 45° angle with that axis.
Review and Summary
L
L
(a)
(b)
(c)
L
B
O
ϕ
c
γ
B
B
A
ρ O
O
A'
A
ρ
ϕ
Fig. 3.55 	Torsional deformations.
(a) The angle of twist ϕ. (b) Undeformed
portion of shaft of radius ρ. (c) Deformed
portion of shaft; angle of twist ϕ and
shearing strain γ share same arc
length AA′.
= Tc
J
max 	= ± Tc
J
45°
a
σ	τ
T
T′
c
Fig. 3.56 	Shaft elements with only
shearing stresses or normal stresses.

-- 239 of 897 --

225
Angle of Twist
Within the elastic range, the angle of twist ϕ of a circular shaft is proportional
to the torque T applied to it (Fig. 3.57).
ϕ = TL
JG (units of radians) 	(3.15)
where 	L = length of shaft
J = polar moment of inertia of cross section
G = modulus of rigidity of material
L
T
c
ϕ
γ max
Fig. 3.57 	Torque applied to fixed end
shaft resulting in angle of twist ϕ.
If the shaft is subjected to torques at locations other than its ends or consists
of several parts of various cross sections and possibly of different materials,
the angle of twist of the shaft must be expressed as the algebraic sum of the
angles of twist of its component parts:
ϕ = ∑
i
TiL i
J iGi
(3.16)
When both ends of a shaft BE rotate (Fig. 3.58), the angle of twist is
equal to the difference between the angles of rotation ϕB and ϕE of its ends.
When two shafts AD and BE are connected by gears A and B, the torques
applied by gear A on shaft AD and gear B on shaft BE are directly proportional
to the radii rA and rB of the two gears—since the forces applied on each other
by the gear teeth at C are equal and opposite. On the other hand, the angles
ϕA and ϕB are inversely proportional to rA and rB—since the arcs CC′ and
CC″ described by the gear teeth are equal.
C''
T
E	
ϕ
B	
ϕ
C
Fixed end
B
L
A
D
A	
ϕ
C'
E
Fig. 3.58 	Angles of twist at E, gear B,
and gear A for a meshed-gear system.

-- 240 of 897 --

226
Statically Indeterminate Shafts
If the reactions at the supports of a shaft or the internal torques cannot be
determined from statics alone, the shaft is said to be statically indeterminate.
The equilibrium equations obtained from free-body diagrams must be comple-
mented by relationships involving deformations of the shaft and obtained from
the geometry of the problem.
Transmission Shafts
For the design of transmission shafts, the power P transmitted is
P = 2π f T 	(3.19)
where T is the torque exerted at each end of the shaft and f the frequency or
speed of rotation of the shaft. The unit of frequency is the revolution per
second (s−1) or hertz (Hz). If SI units are used, T is expressed in newton-
meters (N·m) and P in watts (W). If U.S. customary units are used, T is
expressed in lb·ft or lb·in., and P in ft·lb/s or in·lb/s; the power can be con-
verted into horsepower (hp) through
1 hp = 550 ft·lb/s = 6600 in·lb/s
To design a shaft to transmit a given power P at a frequency f, solve
Eq. (3.19) for T. This value and the maximum allowable value of τ for the
material can be used with Eq. (3.9) to determine the required shaft diameter.
Stress Concentrations
Stress concentrations in circular shafts result from an abrupt change in the
diameter of a shaft and can be reduced through the use of a fillet (Fig. 3.59).
The maximum value of the shearing stress at the fillet is
τmax = KTc
J (3.22)
where the stress Tc∕J is computed for the smaller-diameter shaft and K is a
stress concentration factor.
Plastic Deformations
Even when Hooke’s law does not apply, the distribution of strains in a
circular shaft is always linear. If the shearing-stress-strain diagram for the
material is known, it is possible to plot the shearing stress τ against the
distance ρ from the axis of the shaft for any given value of τmax (Fig. 3.60).
Summing the torque of annular elements of radius ρ and thickness dρ, the
torque T is
T = ∫c
0
ρτ(2πρ dρ) = 2π ∫c
0
ρ2τ dρ 	(3.23)
where τ is the function of ρ plotted in Fig. 3.60.
Modulus of Rupture
An important value of the torque is the ultimate torque TU, which causes
failure of the shaft. This can be determined either experimentally, or by
Eq. (3.22) with τmax chosen equal to the ultimate shearing stress τU of the
D
d
A
Fig. 3.59 	Shafts having two different
diameters with a fillet at the junction.
τ
O	
ρ	c
max
	τ
Fig. 3.60 	Shearing stress distribution for
shaft with nonlinear stress-strain response.

-- 241 of 897 --

227
material. From TU, and assuming a linear stress distribution (Fig 3.61), we
determined the corresponding fictitious stress RT = TU c∕J, known as the
modulus of rupture in torsion.
Solid Shaft of Elastoplastic Material
In a solid circular shaft made of an elastoplastic material, as long as τmax
does not exceed the yield strength τY of the material, the stress distribution
across a section of the shaft is linear (Fig. 3.62a). The torque TY correspond-
ing to τmax = τY (Fig. 3.62b) is the maximum elastic torque. For a solid cir-
cular shaft of radius c,
T Y = 1
2 πc3τ Y 	(3.26)
As the torque increases, a plastic region develops in the shaft around an
elastic core of radius ρY. The torque T corresponding to a given value of
ρY is
T = 4
3 T Y (1 − 1
4
ρ3
Y
c3 ) (3.29)
O	
ρ
τ
U	
τ
c
RT
Fig. 3.61 	Stress distribution in circular
shaft at failure.
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
τ
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
max = τY	
τ
c
c
c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ
O
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
τ
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
max = τY	
τ
c
c
ρ	c
c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ
O
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
τ
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
ρ
τ	max < Y	
τ
max = τY	
τ
c
c 
ρ	c
c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
τ
τ
τ
ρ
ρ
max = τY	
τ
c
c
ρ	c
τY
τY
Y	
ρ
Fig. 3.62 	Stress distributions for elastoplastic shaft at different stages of loading:
(a) elastic, (b) first yield, (c) partially yielded, and (d) fully yielded.
As ρY approaches zero, the torque approaches a limiting value Tp, called the
plastic torque:
Tp = 4
3 T Y 	(3.30)
Plotting the torque T against the angle of twist ϕ of a solid circular shaft
(Fig. 3.63), the segment of straight line 0Y defined by Eq. (3.15) and fol-
lowed by a curve approaching the straight line T = Tp is
T = 4
3T Y (1 − 1
4
ϕ3
Y
ϕ3) (3.34)
Permanent Deformation and Residual Stresses
Loading a circular shaft beyond the onset of yield and unloading it results in
a permanent deformation characterized by the angle of twist ϕp = ϕ − ϕ′,
where ϕ corresponds to the loading phase described in the previous
paragraph, and ϕ′ to the unloading phase represented by a straight line in
0
Y
3 Y
T Y
Tp = 4 TY
T
ϕ 	ϕ	Y	
ϕ 	2 Y	
ϕ
3
Fig. 3.63 	Load-displacement relation for
elastoplastic material.

-- 242 of 897 --

228
Fig. 3.64. Residual stresses in the shaft can be determined by adding the
maximum stresses reached during the loading phase and the reverse
stresses corresponding to the unloading phase.
Torsion of Noncircular Members
The equations for the distribution of strain and stress in circular shafts are
based on the fact that due to the axisymmetry of these members, cross sections
remain plane and undistorted. This property does not hold for noncircular
members, such as the square bar of Fig. 3.65.
T
T'
Fig. 3.65 	Twisting a shaft of square
cross section.
Bars of Rectangular Cross Section
For straight bars with a uniform rectangular cross section (Fig. 3.66), the
maximum shearing stress occurs along the center line of the wider face of the
bar. The membrane analogy can be used to visualize the distribution of
stresses in a noncircular member.
Thin-Walled Hollow Shafts
The shearing stress in noncircular thin-walled hollow shafts is parallel to
the wall surface and varies both across and along the wall cross section.
Denoting the average value of the shearing stress τ, computed across the
wall at a given point of the cross section, and by t the thickness of the wall
at that point (Fig. 3.67), we demonstrated that the product q = τt, called the
shear flow, is constant along the cross section.
The average shearing stress τ at any given point of the cross section is
τ = T
2t𝒶 (3.50)
0
T
T
TY
ϕ
ϕ
p	
ϕ
	ϕ ′
Fig. 3.64 	Torque-angle of twist
response for loading past yield,
followed by unloading.
Fig. 3.67 	Area for shear flow.
τ
t
𝒶
L
a
b
max
	τ
T
T'
Fig. 3.66 	Shaft with rectangular cross
section, showing the location of maximum
shearing stress.

-- 243 of 897 --

229
3.151 A steel pipe of 12-in. outer diameter is fabricated from 1
4 -in.-thick
plate by welding along a helix that forms an angle of 45° with a
plane parallel to the axis of the pipe. Knowing that the maximum
allowable tensile stress in the weld is 12 ksi, determine the largest
torque that can be applied to the pipe.
3.152 A torque of magnitude T = 120 N·m is applied to shaft AB of the
gear train shown. Knowing that the allowable shearing stress is
75 MPa in each of the three solid shafts, determine the required
diameter of (a) shaft AB, (b) shaft CD, (c) shaft EF.
C
B
F
D
A
30 mm
25 mm
60 mm
75 mm
E
T
Fig. P3.152
3.153 The solid cylindrical rod BC is attached to the rigid lever AB and to
the fixed support at C. The vertical force P applied at A causes a
small displacement Δ at point A. Show that the corresponding max-
imum shearing stress in the rod is
τ = Gd
2LaΔ
where d is the diameter of the rod and G is its modulus of rigidity.
C
L
a
A
P
B
Fig. P3.153
Review Problems
12 in.
in.	1
4
45°
T
T'
Fig. P3.151

-- 244 of 897 --

230
3.154 In the bevel-gear system shown, α = 18.43°. Knowing that the
allowable shearing stress is 8 ksi in each shaft and that the system
is in equilibrium, determine the largest torque TA that can be
applied at A.
3.155 Three solid shafts, each of 3
4 -in. diameter, are connected by the gears
shown. Knowing that G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine (a) the angle
through which end A of shaft AB rotates, (b) the angle through which
end E of shaft EF rotates.
A 	4 in.	6 in.
2 in.
B
3 ft
4 ft
C
E
D
F
r = 1.5 in.
TA = 100 lb·in.
TE = 200 lb·in.
Fig. P3.155
3.156 The composite shaft shown consists of a 5-mm-thick brass jacket
(Gbrass = 39 GPa) bonded to a 40-mm-diameter steel core
(Gsteel = 77.2 GPa). Knowing that the shaft is subjected to a
600-N·m torque, determine (a) the maximum shearing stress in
the brass jacket, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the steel
core, (c) the angle of twist of B relative to A.
2 m
40 mm
5 mm
B
A
Brass jacket
Steel core
T
T'
Fig. P3.156
B
C A
TB
TA
α
α
0.625 in.
0.5 in .
Fig. P3.154

-- 245 of 897 --

231
3.157 Ends A and D of the two solid steel shafts AB and CD are fixed,
while ends B and C are connected to gears as shown. Knowing that
the allowable shearing stress is 50 MPa in each shaft, determine the
largest torque T that can be applied to gear B.
100 mm
60 mm
500 mm
300 mm
A
B 45 mm
40 mm
C
D
T
Fig. P3.157
3.158 As the hollow steel shaft shown rotates at 180 rpm, a stroboscopic
measurement indicates that the angle of twist of the shaft is 3°.
Knowing that G = 77.2 GPa, determine (a) the power being transmit-
ted, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the shaft.
5 m
25 mm
60 mm
T
T'
Fig. P3.158
3.159 Knowing that the allowable shearing stress is 8 ksi for the stepped shaft
shown, determine the magnitude T of the largest torque that can be
transmitted by the shaft when the radius of the fillet is (a) r = 3
16 in.,
(b) r = 1
4 in.
2 in.
1.5 in.
r
T
T'
Fig. P3.159

-- 246 of 897 --

232
3.160 Equal torques are applied to thin-walled tubes of the same thickness
t and same radius c. One of the tubes has been slit lengthwise as
shown. Determine the ratio τb∕τa of the maximum shearing stresses
in the tubes.
T 	T
T'
T'
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P3.160
3.161 Two solid brass rods AB and CD are brazed to a brass sleeve EF.
Determine the ratio d2∕d1 for which the same maximum shearing
stress occurs in the rods and in the sleeve.
C
B
F
E
D
A
d2
d1
T
T'
Fig. P3.161
3.162 The shaft AB is made of a material that is elastoplastic with τY = 12.5 ksi
and G = 4 × 106 psi. For the loading shown, determine (a) the
radius of the elastic core of the shaft, (b) the angle of twist of the
shaft.
6 ft B T
A
= 3 kip·in.
0.5 in.
Fig. P3.162

-- 247 of 897 --

233
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer. Write
each program so that it can be used with either SI or U.S. customary
units.
3.C1 Shaft AB consists of n homogeneous cylindrical elements, which
can be solid or hollow. Its end A is fixed, while its end B is free,
and it is subjected to the loading shown. The length of element i
is denoted by Li, its outer diameter by ODi, its inner diameter by
IDi, its modulus of rigidity by Gi, and the torque applied to its right
end by Ti, the magnitude Ti of this torque being assumed to be
positive if Ti is counterclockwise from end B and negative other-
wise. (Note that IDi = 0 if the element is solid.) (a) Write a com-
puter program that can be used to determine the maximum shearing
stress in each element, the angle of twist of each element, and the
angle of twist of the entire shaft. (b) Use this program to solve
Probs. 3.35, 3.36, and 3.38.
Element 1
Element n
B
A
Tn
T1
Fig. P3.C1
3.C2 The assembly shown consists of n cylindrical shafts, which can be
solid or hollow, connected by gears and supported by brackets (not
shown). End A1 of the first shaft is free and is subjected to a torque
T0, while end Bn of the last shaft is fixed. The length of shaft AiBi
is Li, its outer diameter ODi, its inner diameter IDi, and its modu-
lus of rigidity Gi. (Note that IDi = 0 if the element is solid.) The
radius of gear Ai is ai, and the radius of gear Bi is bi. (a) Write a
computer program that can be used to determine the maximum
shearing stress in each shaft, the angle of twist of each shaft, and
the angle through which end Ai rotates. (b) Use this program to
solve Probs. 3.41 and 3.44.
Computer Problems
A1
b1
A2
a2
B2
B1
A n
an
B n
b n –1
T0
Fig. P3.C2

-- 248 of 897 --

234
3.C3 Shaft AB consists of n homogeneous cylindrical elements, which
can be solid or hollow. Both of its ends are fixed, and it is subjected
to the loading shown. The length of element i is denoted by Li, its
outer diameter by ODi, its inner diameter by IDi, its modulus of
rigidity by Gi, and the torque applied to its right end by Ti, the
magnitude Ti of this torque being assumed to be positive if Ti is
observed as counterclockwise from end B and negative otherwise.
Note that IDi = 0 if the element is solid and also that T1 = 0. Write
a computer program that can be used to determine the reactions at
A and B, the maximum shearing stress in each element, and the
angle of twist of each element. Use this program (a) to solve
Prob. 3.55 and (b) to determine the maximum shearing stress in
the shaft of Sample Problem 3.7.
Element 1
Element n
A
B
T2
Tn
Fig. P3.C3
3.C4 The homogeneous, solid cylindrical shaft AB has a length L, a diam-
eter d, a modulus of rigidity G, and a yield strength τY. It is subjected
to a torque T that is gradually increased from zero until the angle
of twist of the shaft has reached a maximum value ϕm and then
decreased back to zero. (a) Write a computer program that, for each
of 16 values of ϕm equally spaced over a range extending from zero
to a value three times as large as the angle of twist at the onset of
yield, can be used to determine the maximum value Tm of the torque,
the radius of the elastic core, the maximum shearing stress, the per-
manent twist, and the residual shearing stress both at the surface of
the shaft and at the interface of the elastic core and the plastic region.
(b) Use this program to obtain approximate answers to Probs. 3.114,
3.115, and 3.116.
B
L
A
T
Fig. P3.C4

-- 249 of 897 --

235
3.C5 The exact expression is given in Prob. 3.64 for the angle of twist
of the solid tapered shaft AB when a torque T is applied as shown.
Derive an approximate expression for the angle of twist by replac-
ing the tapered shaft by n cylindrical shafts of equal length and of
radius r i = (n + i − 1
2 ) (c∕n), where i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Using for
T, L, G, and c values of your choice, determine the percentage
error in the approximate expression when (a) n = 4, (b) n = 8,
(c) n = 20, (d) n = 100.
L
A
2c
B
c
B
L
A
2c
r1	
L/n
r i
r n
T
A
T
c
Fig. P3.C5
3.C6 A torque T is applied as shown to the long, hollow, tapered shaft
AB of uniform thickness t. Derive an approximate expression for
the angle of twist by replacing the tapered shaft by n cylindrical
rings of equal length and of radius r i = (n + i − 1
2 ) (c∕n), where
i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Using for T, L, G, c, and t values of your
choice, determine the percentage error in the approximate
expression when (a) n = 4, (b) n = 8, (c) n = 20, (d) n = 100.
t
L
A
c
2c
B
T
Fig. P3.C6

-- 250 of 897 --



-- 251 of 897 --

Pure Bending
4
The normal stresses and the curvature resulting from pure bending,
such as those developed in the center portion of the barbell shown,
will be studied in this chapter.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Consider the general principles of bending behavior.
• Define the deformations, strains, and normal stresses in beams
subject to pure bending.
• Describe the behavior of composite beams made of more than
one material.
• Review stress concentrations and how they are included in the
design of beams.
• Study plastic deformations to determine how to evaluate beams
made of elastoplastic materials.
• Analyze members subject to eccentric axial loading, involving
both axial stresses and bending stresses.
• Review beams subject to unsymmetric bending, i.e., where
bending does not occur in a plane of symmetry.
• Study bending of curved members.
©Mel Curtis/Getty Images

-- 252 of 897 --

238 	Pure Bending
Introduction
4.1 	SYMMETRIC MEMBERS
IN PURE BENDING
4.1A Internal Moment and Stress
Relations
4.1B Deformations
4.2 	STRESSES AND
DEFORMATIONS IN THE
ELASTIC RANGE
4.3 	DEFORMATIONS IN A
TRANSVERSE CROSS
SECTION
4.4 	MEMBERS MADE OF
COMPOSITE MATERIALS
4.5 	STRESS CONCENTRATIONS
*4.6 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
*4.6A Members Made of
Elastoplastic Material
*4.6B Members with a Single Plane
of Symmetry
*4.6C Residual Stresses
4.7 	ECCENTRIC AXIAL
LOADING IN A PLANE
OF SYMMETRY
4.8 	UNSYMMETRIC
BENDING ANALYSIS
4.9 	GENERAL CASE OF
ECCENTRIC AXIAL
LOADING ANALYSIS
*4.10 CURVED MEMBERS
Introduction
This chapter and the following two analyze the stresses and strains in
prismatic members subjected to bending. Bending is a major concept used
in the design of many machine and structural components, such as beams
and girders.
This chapter is devoted to the analysis of prismatic members subjected
to equal and opposite couples M and M′ acting in the same longitudinal plane
(Fig. 4.1). Such members are said to be in pure bending. The members are
assumed to possess a plane of symmetry with the couples M and M′ acting
in that plane.
A
B
M
M'
Fig. 4.1 	Member in pure bending
An example of pure bending is provided by the bar of a typical barbell
as it is held overhead by a weight lifter as shown in the opening photo for
this chapter. The bar carries equal weights at equal distances from the hands
of the weight lifter. Because of the symmetry of the free-body diagram of
the bar (Fig. 4.2a), the reactions at the hands must be equal and opposite
to the weights. Therefore, as far as the middle portion CD of the bar is
concerned, the weights and the reactions can be replaced by two equal and
opposite 960-lb⋅in. couples (Fig. 4.2b), showing that the middle portion of
the bar is in pure bending. A similar analysis of a small sport buggy
(Photo 4.1) shows that the axle is in pure bending between the two points
where it is attached to the frame.
The results obtained from the direct applications of pure bending will
be used in the analysis of other types of loadings, such as eccentric axial
loadings and transverse loadings.
12 in. 	26 in. 	12 in.
A 	B
M' = 960 lb·in.	M = 960 lb·in.
C 	D
C 	D
RC = 80 lb
80 lb	80 lb
RD = 80 lb
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.2 	(a) Free-body diagram of the
barbell pictured in the chapter opening photo
and (b) free-body diagram of the center
portion of the bar, which is in pure bending.
Photo 4.1 	The center portion of the rear
axle of the sport buggy is in pure bending.
©Sven Hagolani/Getty Images

-- 253 of 897 --

Introduction 	239
Photo 4.2 shows a 12-in. steel bar clamp used to exert 150-lb forces on
two pieces of lumber as they are being glued together. Figure 4.3a shows the
equal and opposite forces exerted by the lumber on the clamp. These forces
result in an eccentric loading of the straight portion of the clamp. In Fig. 4.3b,
a section CC′ has been passed through the clamp and a free-body diagram
has been drawn of the upper half of the clamp. The internal forces in the
section are equivalent to a 150-lb axial tensile force P and a 750-lb⋅in. couple M.
By combining our knowledge of the stresses under a centric load and the
results of an analysis of stresses in pure bending, the distribution of stresses
under an eccentric load is obtained. This is discussed in Sec. 4.7.
Photo 4.2 	Clamp used to glue lumber pieces
together. ©Ted Foxx/Alamy Stock Photo
5 in.
C 	C' 	C 	C'
P' = 150 lb
P = 150 lb
P' = 150 lb
M = 750 lb·in.
P = 150 lb
5 in.
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 4.3 	(a) Free-body diagram of a clamp, (b) free-body diagram of the
upper portion of the clamp.
The study of pure bending plays an essential role in the study of beams
(i.e., prismatic members) subjected to various types of transverse loads. Con-
sider a cantilever beam AB supporting a concentrated load P at its free end
(Fig. 4.4a). If a section is passed through C at a distance x from A, the free-
body diagram of AC (Fig. 4.4b) shows that the internal forces in the section
consist of a force P′ equal and opposite to P and a couple M of magnitude
M = Px. The distribution of normal stresses in the section can be obtained
from the couple M as if the beam were in pure bending. The shearing stresses
in the section depend on the force P′, and their distribution over a given sec-
tion is discussed in Chap. 6.
The first part of this chapter covers the analysis of stresses and deforma-
tions caused by pure bending in a homogeneous member possessing a plane
of symmetry and made of a material following Hooke’s law. The methods of
statics are used in Sec. 4.1A to derive three fundamental equations which must
be satisfied by the normal stresses in any given cross section of the member.
In Sec. 4.1B, it will be proved that transverse sections remain plane in a
member subjected to pure bending, while in Sec. 4.2, formulas are developed
to determine the normal stresses and radius of curvature for that member
within the elastic range.
Sec. 4.4 covers the stresses and deformations in composite members
made of more than one material, such as reinforced-concrete beams, which
utilize the best features of steel and concrete and are extensively used in the
L
x
P
P
B
C
C
A
A
P'
M
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.4 	(a) Cantilevered beam with end
loading. (b) As portion AC shows, beam is not
in pure bending.

-- 254 of 897 --

240 	Pure Bending
construction of buildings and bridges. You will learn to draw a transformed
section representing a member made of a homogeneous material that under-
goes the same deformations as the composite member under the same loading.
The transformed section is used to find the stresses and deformations in the
original composite member. Section 4.5 is devoted to the determination of
stress concentrations occurring where the cross section of a member under-
goes a sudden change.
Section 4.6 covers plastic deformations, where the members are made
of a material that does not follow Hooke’s law and are subjected to bending.
The stresses and deformations in members made of an elastoplastic material
are discussed in Sec. 4.6A. Starting with the maximum elastic moment MY,
which corresponds to the onset of yield, you will consider the effects of
increasingly larger moments until the plastic moment Mp is reached. You will
also determine the permanent deformations and residual stresses that result
from such loadings (Sec. 4.6C).
In Sec. 4.7, you will analyze an eccentric axial loading in a plane of
symmetry (Fig. 4.3) by superposing the stresses due to pure bending and a
centric axial loading.
The study of the bending of prismatic members concludes with the
analysis of unsymmetric bending (Sec. 4.8), and the study of the general
case of eccentric axial loading (Sec. 4.9). The final section of this chap-
ter is devoted to the determination of the stresses in curved members
(Sec. 4.10).
4.1 	SYMMETRIC MEMBERS IN
PURE BENDING
4.1A 	Internal Moment and Stress
Relations
Consider a prismatic member AB possessing a plane of symmetry and sub-
jected to equal and opposite couples M and M′ acting in that plane (Fig. 4.5a).
If a section is passed through the member AB at some arbitrary point C, the
conditions of equilibrium of the portion AC of the member require the inter-
nal forces in the section to be equivalent to the couple M (Fig. 4.5b). The
moment M of that couple is the bending moment in the section. Following the
usual convention, a positive sign is assigned to M when the member is bent
as shown in Fig. 4.5a (i.e., when the concavity of the beam faces upward)
and a negative sign otherwise.
A
B
C
M
M'
A
C
M
M'
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 4.5 	(a) A member in a state of pure bending. (b) Any intermediate portion
of AB will also be in pure bending.

-- 255 of 897 --

4.1 Symmetric Members in pure bending 	241
On any point on the cross section (Fig. 4.6a), we have σx, the normal
stress, and τxy and τxz, the components of the shearing stress. The system of
these elementary internal forces exerted on the cross section is equivalent to
the couple M (Fig. 4.6).
Recall from statics that a couple M actually consists of two equal and
opposite forces. The sum of the components of these forces in any direction
is therefore equal to zero. Moreover, the moment of the couple is the same
about any axis perpendicular to its plane and is zero about any axis contained
in that plane. Selecting arbitrarily the z axis shown in Fig. 4.6, the equivalence
of the elementary internal forces and the couple M is expressed by writing
that the sums of the components and moments of the forces are equal to the
corresponding components and moments of the couple M:
x components: 	∫σ x dA = 0 	(4.1)
Moments about y axis: 	∫zσ x dA = 0 	(4.2)
Moments about z axis: 	∫ (−yσ x dA) = M 	(4.3)
Three additional equations could be obtained by setting equal to zero the sums
of the y components, z components, and moments about the x axis, but these
equations would involve only the components of the shearing stress and, as
you will see in the next section, the components of the shearing stress are
both equal to zero.
Two remarks should be made at this point:
1. The minus sign in Eq. (4.3) is due to the fact that a tensile stress
(σx > 0) leads to a negative moment (clockwise) of the normal
force σx dA about the z axis.
2. Equation (4.2) could have been anticipated, since the application of
couples in the plane of symmetry of member AB result in a distribution
of normal stresses symmetric about the y axis.
Once more, note that the actual distribution of stresses in a given cross
section cannot be determined from statics alone. It is statically indeterminate
and may be obtained only by analyzing the deformations produced in the
member.
4.1B 	Deformations
We will now analyze the deformations of a prismatic member subjected
to equal and opposite couples M and M′ acting in the plane of symmetry.
The member will bend under the action of the couples, but will remain
symmetric with respect to that plane (Fig. 4.7). Moreover, since the bend-
ing moment M is the same in any cross section, the member will bend
x
z
y
M
x
z
z
y
y
τxz dA
τxydA
=
σ x dA
Fig. 4.6 	Stresses resulting from pure bending moment M.
C
D
A B
M' 	M
B'
Fig. 4.7 	Initially straight members in pure
bending deform into a circular arc.

-- 256 of 897 --

242 	Pure Bending
uniformly. Thus, the line AB along the upper face of the member intersecting
the plane of the couples will have a constant curvature. In other words,
the line AB will be transformed into a circle of center C, as will the line
A′B′ along the lower face of the member. Note that the line AB will
decrease in length when the member is bent (i.e., when M > 0), while
A′B′ will become longer.
Next we will prove that any cross section perpendicular to the axis
of the member remains plane, and that the plane of the section passes
through C. If this were not the case, we could find a point E of the
original section through D (Fig. 4.8a) which, after the member has been
bent, would not lie in the plane perpendicular to the plane of symmetry
that contains line CD (Fig. 4.8b). But, because of the symmetry of the
member, there would be another point E′ that would be transformed
exactly in the same way. Let us assume that, after the beam has been bent,
both points would be located to the left of the plane defined by CD, as
shown in Fig. 4.8b. Since the bending moment M is the same throughout
the member, a similar situation would prevail in any other cross section,
and the points corresponding to E and E′ would also move to the left.
Thus, an observer at A would conclude that the loading causes the points
E and E′ in the various cross sections to move forward (toward the
observer). But an observer at B, to whom the loading looks the same, and
who observes the points E and E′ in the same positions (except that they
are now inverted) would reach the opposite conclusion. This inconsistency
leads us to conclude that E and E′ will lie in the plane defined by CD
and, therefore, that the section remains plane and passes through C. We
should note, however, that this discussion does not rule out the possibil-
ity of deformations within the plane of the section (see Sec. 4.3).
Suppose that the member is divided into a large number of small
cubic elements with faces respectively parallel to the three coordinate
planes. The property we have established requires that these elements be
transformed as shown in Fig. 4.9 when the member is subjected to the
couples M and M′. Since all the faces represented in the two projections
of Fig. 4.9 are at 90° to each other, we conclude that γxy = γzx = 0 and,
thus, that τxy = τxz = 0. Regarding the three stress components that we have
not yet discussed, namely, σy, σz, and τyz, we note that they must be zero
on the surface of the member. Since, on the other hand, the deformations
involved do not require any interaction between the elements of a given
transverse cross section, we can assume that these three stress components
are equal to zero throughout the member. This assumption is verified, both
from experimental evidence and from the theory of elasticity, for slender
members undergoing small deformations.† We conclude that the only non-
zero stress component exerted on any of the small cubic elements consid-
ered here is the normal component σx. Thus at any point of a slender
member in pure bending, we have a state of uniaxial stress. Recalling that,
for M > 0, lines AB and A′B′ are observed, respectively, to decrease and
increase in length, we note that the strain εx and the stress σx are negative
in the upper portion of the member (compression) and positive in the lower
portion (tension).
It follows from above that a surface parallel to the upper and lower faces
of the member must exist where εx and σx are zero. This surface is called the
neutral surface. The neutral surface intersects the plane of symmetry along
D
D
E
A 	B
A 	B
M' 	M
E' E E'
C
EE'
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.8 	(a) Two points in a cross section at
D that is perpendicular to the member’s axis.
(b) Considering the possibility that these
points do not remain in the cross section after
bending.
†Also see Prob. 4.32.
y
A
C
B
x
x
z
M' 	M
M'
A' 	B'
(a)
(b)
M
Fig. 4.9 	Member subject to pure bending
shown in two views. (a) Longitudinal, vertical
section (plane of symmetry). (b) Longitudinal,
horizontal section.

-- 257 of 897 --

4.1 Symmetric Members in pure bending 	243
an arc of circle DE (Fig. 4.10a), and it intersects a transverse section along a
straight line called the neutral axis of the section (Fig. 4.10b). The origin of
coordinates is now selected on the neutral surface—rather than on the lower
face of the member—so that the distance from any point to the neutral surface
is measured by its coordinate y.
Denoting by ρ the radius of arc DE (Fig. 4.10a), by θ the central angle
corresponding to DE, and observing that the length of DE is equal to the
length L of the undeformed member, we write
L = ρθ 	(4.4)
Considering the arc JK located at a distance y above the neutral surface, its
length L′ is
L′ = (ρ − y)θ 	(4.5)
Since the original length of arc JK was equal to L, the deformation of JK is
δ = L′ − L 	(4.6)
or, substituting from Eqs. (4.4) and (4.5) into Eq. (4.6),
δ = (ρ − y)θ − ρθ = −yθ 	(4.7)
The longitudinal strain εx in the elements of JK is obtained by dividing δ by
the original length L of JK. Write
εx = δ
L = −yθ
ρθ
or
ε x = −y
ρ (4.8)
The minus sign is due to the fact that it is assumed the bending moment is
positive, and thus the beam is concave upward.
y
y
ρ – y
A
J
D
O
O
C
BK
E
x
y
y
c
z
A' 	B'
(a) 	(b)
Neutral
axis
θ
ρ
Fig. 4.10 	Establishment of neutral axis. (a) Longitudinal, vertical section (plane
of symmetry). (b) Transverse section at origin.

-- 258 of 897 --

244 	Pure Bending
Because of the requirement that transverse sections remain plane, iden-
tical deformations occur in all planes parallel to the plane of symmetry. Thus,
the value of the strain given by Eq. (4.8) is valid anywhere along the member,
and on any cross section. The equation also shows that the longitudinal nor-
mal strain εx varies linearly with the distance y from the neutral surface.
The strain εx reaches its maximum absolute value when y is largest.
Denoting the largest distance from the neutral surface as c (corresponding to
either the upper or the lower surface of the member) and the maximum abso-
lute value of the strain as εm, we have
εm = c
ρ (4.9)
Solving Eq. (4.9) for ρ and substituting into Eq. (4.8),
ε x = − y
c ε m 	(4.10)
To compute the strain or stress at a given point of the member, we must
first locate the neutral surface in the member. To do this, we must specify the
stress-strain relation of the material used, as will be considered in the next section.†
4.2 	STRESSES AND
DEFORMATIONS IN THE
ELASTIC RANGE
We now consider the case when the bending moment M is such that the normal
stresses in the member remain below the yield strength σY. This means that the
stresses in the member remain below the proportional limit and the elastic limit
as well. There will be no permanent deformation, and Hooke’s law for uniaxial
stress applies. Assuming the material to be homogeneous and denoting its mod-
ulus of elasticity by E, the normal stress in the longitudinal x direction is
σ x = Eε x 	(4.11)
Recalling Eq. (4.10) and multiplying both members by E, we write
Eε x = − y
c (Eε m)
or using Eq. (4.11),
σx = − y
c σ m 	(4.12)
where σm denotes the maximum absolute value of the stress. This result shows
that, in the elastic range, the normal stress varies linearly with the distance
from the neutral surface (Fig. 4.11).
†Let us note that, if the member possesses both a vertical and a horizontal plane of symmetry
(e.g., a member with a rectangular cross section) and the stress-strain curve is the same in
tension and compression, the neutral surface will coincide with the plane of symmetry (see
Sec. 4.6).
y
c
x
Neutral surface
σm
Fig. 4.11 	Bending stresses vary linearly with
distance from the neutral axis.

-- 259 of 897 --

4.2 Stresses and Deformations in the Elastic Range 	245
Note that neither the location of the neutral surface nor the maximum
value σm of the stress has yet to be determined. Both can be found using
Eqs. (4.1) and (4.3). Substituting for σx from Eq. (4.12) into Eq. (4.1), write
∫σ x dA = ∫(− y
c σ m)dA = − σ m
c ∫y dA = 0
from which
∫y dA = 0 	(4.13)
This equation shows that the first moment of the cross section about its neu-
tral axis must be zero.† Thus, for a member subjected to pure bending and as
long as the stresses remain in the elastic range, the neutral axis passes through
the centroid of the section.
Recall Eq. (4.3), which was developed with respect to an arbitrary
horizontal z axis:
∫ (−yσ x dA) = M 	(4.3)
Specifying that the z axis coincides with the neutral axis of the cross section,
substitute σx from Eq. (4.12) into Eq. (4.3):
∫ (−y)(− y
c σ m)dA = M
or
σm
c ∫y2 dA = M 	(4.14)
Recall that for pure bending the neutral axis passes through the centroid of
the cross section and I is the moment of inertia or second moment of area of
the cross section with respect to a centroidal axis perpendicular to the plane
of the couple M. Solving Eq. (4.14) for σm,‡
σm = Mc
I (4.15)
Substituting for σm from Eq. (4.15) into Eq. (4.12), we obtain the normal
stress σx at any distance y from the neutral axis:
σx = − My
I (4.16)
Equations (4.15) and (4.16) are called the elastic flexure formulas. The normal
stress σx caused by the bending or “flexing” of the member is often referred
to as the flexural stress. The stress is compressive (σx < 0) above the neutral
axis (y > 0) when the bending moment M is positive and tensile (σx > 0)
when M is negative.
†See Appendix B for a discussion of the moments of areas.
‡Recall that the bending moment is assumed to be positive. If the bending moment is
negative, M should be replaced in Eq. (4.15) by its absolute value ∣M∣.

-- 260 of 897 --

246 	Pure Bending
Returning to Eq. (4.15), the ratio I∕c depends only on the geometry of
the cross section. This ratio is defined as the elastic section modulus S, where
Elastic section modulus = S = I
c (4.17)
Substituting S for I∕c into Eq. (4.15), this equation in alternative form is
σm = M
S (4.18)
Since the maximum stress σm is inversely proportional to the elastic section
modulus S, beams should be designed with as large a value of S as is practi-
cal. For example, a wooden beam with a rectangular cross section of width b
and depth h has
S = I
c =
1
12 bh3
h∕2 = 1
6 bh2 = 1
6 Ah 	(4.19)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the beam. For two beams with the
same cross-sectional area A (Fig. 4.12), the beam with the larger depth h
will have the larger section modulus and will be the more effective in
resisting bending.†
In the case of structural steel (Photo 4.3), American standard beams
(S-beams) and wide-flange beams (W-beams) are preferred to other shapes
†However, large values of the ratio h∕b could result in lateral instability of the beam.
Photo 4.3 	Wide-flange steel beams are used in the
frame of this building. ©Hisham Ibrahim/Stockbyte/Getty Images
h = 6 in. 	h = 8 in.
b = 4 in.
b = 3 in.
A = 24 in2
Fig. 4.12 	Wood beam cross sections.

-- 261 of 897 --

4.2 Stresses and Deformations in the Elastic Range 	247
because a large portion of their cross section is located far from the neutral
axis (Fig. 4.13). Thus, for a given cross-sectional area and a given depth, their
design provides large values of I and S. Values of the elastic section modulus
of commonly manufactured beams can be obtained from tables listing the
various geometric properties of such beams (Appendix E has examples of
some of the commonly used beam sections). To determine the maximum stress
σm in a given section of a standard beam, the engineer needs only to read the
value of the elastic section modulus S in such a table and divide the bending
moment M in the section by S.
The deformation of the member caused by the bending moment M is
measured by the curvature of the neutral surface. The curvature is defined
as the reciprocal of the radius of curvature ρ and can be obtained by solving
Eq. (4.9) for 1∕ρ:
1
ρ = εm
c (4.20)
In the elastic range, εm = σm∕E. Substituting for εm into Eq. (4.20) and recall-
ing Eq. (4.15), write
1
ρ = σm
Ec = 1
Ec
Mc
I
or
1
ρ = M
EI (4.21)
c
c
(a) 	(b)
N. A.
Fig. 4.13 	Two types of steel beam cross
sections: (a) American Standard beam (S),
(b) wide-flange beam (W).
Concept Application 4.1
A steel bar of 0.8 × 2.5-in. rectangular cross section is subjected to two
equal and opposite couples acting in the vertical plane of symmetry of the
bar (Fig. 4.14a). Determine the value of the bending moment M that causes
the bar to yield. Assume σY = 36 ksi.
Since the neutral axis must pass through the centroid C of the cross
section, c = 1.25 in. (Fig. 4.14b). On the other hand, the centroidal moment
of inertia of the rectangular cross section is
I = 1
12 bh3 = 1
12 (0.8 in.)(2.5 in.) 3 = 1.042 in4
Solving Eq. (4.15) for M, and substituting the above data,
M = I
c σ m = 1.042 in4
1.25 in. (36 ksi)
M = 30 kip·in.
M' 	M
0.8 in.
2.5 in.
(a)
1.25 in.
0.8 in.
N. A.
C
2.5 in.
(b)
Fig. 4.14 	(a) Bar of rectangular cross
section in pure bending. (b) Centroid
and dimensions of cross section.

-- 262 of 897 --

248 	Pure Bending
4.3 	DEFORMATIONS IN A
TRANSVERSE CROSS
SECTION
While Sec. 4.1B showed that the transverse cross section of a member in
pure bending remains plane, there is the possibility of deformations
within the plane of the section. Recall from Sec. 2.4 that elements in a
state of uniaxial stress, σ x ≠ 0, σy = σz = 0, are deformed in the transverse
Concept Application 4.2
An aluminum rod with a semicircular cross section of radius r = 12 mm
(Fig. 4.15a) is bent into the shape of a circular arc of mean radius ρ = 2.5 m.
Knowing that the flat face of the rod is turned toward the center of curvature
of the arc, determine the maximum tensile and compressive stress in the rod.
Use E = 70 GPa.
We can use Eq. (4.21) to determine the bending moment M correspond-
ing to the given radius of curvature ρ and then Eq. (4.15) to determine σm.
However, it is simpler to use Eq. (4.9) to determine εm and Hooke’s law to
obtain σm.
The ordinate y of the centroid C of the semicircular cross section is
y = 4r
3π = 4(12 mm)
3π = 5.093 mm
The neutral axis passes through C (Fig. 4.15b), and the distance c to the point
of the cross section farthest away from the neutral axis is
c = r − y = 12 mm − 5.093 mm = 6.907 mm
Using Eq. (4.9),
ε m = c
ρ = 6.907 × 10−3 m
2.5 m = 2.763 × 10−3
and applying Hooke’s law,
σ m = Eε m = (70 × 109 Pa)(2.763 × 10−3 ) = 193.4 MPa
Since this side of the rod faces away from the center of curvature, the stress
obtained is a tensile stress. The maximum compressive stress occurs on the
flat side of the rod. Using the fact that the stress is proportional to the distance
from the neutral axis, write
σcomp = − y
c σ m = − 5.093 mm
6.907 mm (193.4 MPa)
= −142.6 MPa
r = 12 mm
(a)
N. A.
c
y
C
(b)
Fig. 4.15 	(a) Semicircular
section of rod in pure bending.
(b) Centroid and neutral axis of
cross section.

-- 263 of 897 --

4.3 Deformations in a Transverse Cross Section 	249
y and z directions, as well as in the axial x direction. The normal strains
εy and εz depend upon Poisson’s ratio ν for the material used and are
expressed as
εy = −νε x 	ε z = −νε x
or recalling Eq. (4.8),
ε y = νy
ρ ε z = νy
ρ (4.22)
These relationships show that the elements located above the neutral
surface (y > 0) expand in both the y and z directions, while the elements
located below the neutral surface (y < 0) contract. In a member of rect-
angular cross section, the expansion and contraction of the various ele-
ments in the vertical direction will compensate, and no change in the
vertical dimension of the cross section will be observed. As far as the
deformations in the horizontal transverse z direction are concerned, how-
ever, the expansion of the elements located above the neutral surface and
the corresponding contraction of the elements located below that surface
will result in the various horizontal lines in the section being bent into
arcs of circle (Fig. 4.16). This situation is similar to that in a longitudinal
cross section. Comparing the second of Eqs. (4.22) with Eq. (4.8), the
neutral axis of the transverse section is bent into a circle of radius ρ′ = ρ/ν.
The center C′ of this circle is located below the neutral surface (assuming
M > 0) (i.e., on the side opposite to the center of curvature C). The recip-
rocal of the radius of curvature ρ′ represents the curvature of the transverse
cross section and is called the anticlastic curvature.
Anticlastic curvature = 1
ρ′ = ν
ρ (4.23)
In this section we will now discuss the manner in which the couples
M and M′ are applied to the member. If all transverse sections of the member,
from one end to the other, are to remain plane and free of shearing stresses,
the couples must be applied so that the ends remain plane and free of shear-
ing stresses. This can be accomplished by applying the couples M and M′ to
the member through the use of rigid and smooth plates (Fig. 4.17). The forces
exerted by the plates will be normal to the end sections, and these sections,
while remaining plane, will be free to deform, as described earlier in this
section.
Note that these loading conditions cannot be actually realized, since
they require each plate to exert tensile forces on the corresponding end sec-
tion below its neutral axis, while allowing the section to freely deform in its
own plane. The fact that the rigid-end-plates model of Fig. 4.17 cannot be
physically realized, however, does not detract from its importance, which is
to allow us to visualize the loading conditions corresponding to the relation-
ships in the preceding sections. Actual loading conditions may differ appre-
ciably from this idealized model. Using Saint-Venant’s principle, however,
these relationships can be used to compute stresses in engineering situations,
as long as the section considered is not too close to the points where the
couples are applied.
Neutral
surface
x
z
Neutral axis of
transverse section
C'
C
y
ρ
ρ
ρ' = ρ/ν
Fig. 4.16 	Deformation of a transverse
cross section.
M	M'
Fig. 4.17 	Pure bending with end plates to
ensure plane sections remain plane.

-- 264 of 897 --

250 	Pure Bending
Sample Problem 4.1
The rectangular tube shown is extruded from an aluminum alloy for
which σY = 40 ksi, σU = 60 ksi, and E = 10.6 × 106 psi. Neglecting the
effect of fillets, determine (a) the bending moment M for which the fac-
tor of safety will be 3.00 and (b) the corresponding radius of curvature
of the tube.
M
x
STRATEGY: 	Use the factor of safety to determine the allowable stress.
Then calculate the bending moment and radius of curvature using Eqs. (4.15)
and (4.21).
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Moment of Inertia. 	Considering the cross-sectional area of the tube as the
difference between the two rectangles shown in Fig. 1 and recalling the for-
mula for the centroidal moment of inertia of a rectangle, write
I = 1
12 (3.25)(5) 3 − 1
12 (2.75)(4.5) 3 	I = 12.97 in4
Allowable Stress. 	For a factor of safety of 3.00 and an ultimate stress of
60 ksi, we have
σall = σU
F.S. = 60 ksi
3.00 = 20 ksi
Since σall < σY, the tube remains in the elastic range and we can apply the
results of Sec. 4.2.
a. Bending Moment. 	With c = 1
2 (5 in.) = 2.5 in., we write
σall = Mc
I M = I
c σall = 12.97 in4
2.5 in. (20 ksi) 	M = 103.8 kip⋅in. 	◂
b. Radius 	of 	Curvature. 	Using 	Fig. 	2 	and 	recalling 	that
E = 10.6 × 106 psi, we substitute this value and the values obtained
for I and M into Eq. (4.21) and find
1
ρ = M
EI = 103.8 × 103 lb·in.
(10.6 × 106 psi)(12.97 in4 ) = 0.755 × 10−3 in−1
ρ = 1325 in. 	ρ = 110.4 ft 	◂
5 in. 	C
t
t
t
t = 0.25 in.
3.25 in.
t
x
C
3.25 in.
5 in. 	4.5 in.	
x
2.75 in.
= 	−
Fig. 1 	Superposition for calculating
moment of inertia.
O
M
c
c
ρ
Fig. 2 	Deformed shape
of beam.

-- 265 of 897 --

4.3 Deformations in a Transverse Cross Section 	251
REFLECT and THINK: 	Alternatively, we can calculate the radius of
curvature using Eq. (4.9). Since we know that the maximum stress is
σall = 20 ksi, the maximum strain εm can be determined, and Eq. (4.9) gives
εm = σall
E = 20 ksi
10.6 × 106 psi = 1.887 × 10−3 in./in.
εm = c
ρ 	ρ = c
ε m
= 2.5 in.
1.887 × 10−3 in./in.
ρ = 1325 in. 	ρ = 110.4 ft 	◂
Sample Problem 4.2
A cast-iron machine part is acted upon by the 3 kN⋅m couple shown. Knowing
that E = 165 GPa and neglecting the effect of fillets, determine (a) the maxi-
mum tensile and compressive stresses in the casting and (b) the radius of
curvature of the casting.
STRATEGY: 	The moment of inertia is determined, recognizing that it is
first necessary to determine the location of the neutral axis. Then Eqs. (4.15)
and (4.21) are used to determine the stresses and radius of curvature.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Centroid. 	Divide the T-shaped cross section into two rectangles as shown
in Fig. 1 and write
Area, mm2 	y , mm 	y A, mm3
1 	(20)(90) = 1800 	50 	90 × 103 	Y ΣA = ΣyA
2 	(40)(30) = 1200 	20 	24 × 103 	Y (3000) = 114 × 106
ΣA = 3000 	ΣyA = 114 × 103 	Y = 38 mm
90 mm
40 mm
2
1
30 mm
20 mm
x'
x
C
y2 = 20 mm
y1 = 50 mm
ϒ
Fig. 1 	Composite areas for calculating centroid.
90 mm
30 mm
20 mm
40 mm
M = 3 kN·m
(continued)

-- 266 of 897 --

252 	Pure Bending
Centroidal Moment of Inertia. 	The parallel-axis theorem is used to
determine the moment of inertia of each rectangle (Fig. 2) with respect to the
axis x′ that passes through the centroid of the composite section. Adding the
moments of inertia of the rectangles, write
Ix′ = Σ (I + Ad2 ) = Σ ( 1
12 bh3 + Ad2 )
= 1
12 (90)(20) 3 + (90 × 20)(12) 2 + 1
12 (30)(40) 3 + (30 × 40)(18) 2
= 868 × 103 mm4
I = 868 × 10−9 m4
a. Maximum Tensile Stress. 	Since the applied couple bends the cast-
ing downward, the center of curvature is located below the cross section. The
maximum tensile stress occurs at point A (Fig. 3), which is farthest from the
center of curvature.
σA = McA
I = (3 kN·m)(0.022 m)
868 × 10−9 m4 	σA = +76.0 MPa 	◂
Maximum Compressive Stress. 	This occurs at point B (Fig. 3):
σ B = − McB
I = − (3 kN·m)(0.038 m)
868 × 10−9 m4 	σB = −131.3 MPa 	◂
b. Radius of Curvature. 	From Eq. (4.21), using Fig. 3, we have
1
ρ = M
EI = 3 kN·m
(165 GPa)(868 × 10−9 m4 )
= 20.95 × 10−3 m−1 	ρ = 47.7 m 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note the T section has a vertical plane of sym-
metry, with the applied moment in that plane. Thus the couple of this applied
moment lies in the plane of symmetry, resulting in symmetrical bending. Had
the couple been in another plane, we would have unsymmetric bending and
thus would need to apply the principles of Sec. 4.8.
cA = 0.022 m
A
B
C
Center of curvature
cB = 0.038 m
x'
ρ
Fig. 3 	Radius of curvature is measured
to the centroid of the cross section.
12 mm
18 mm
22 mm
= 38 mm
x'
2
1
C
ϒ
Fig. 2 	Composite areas for calculating
moment of inertia.

-- 267 of 897 --

253
4.1 and 4.2 	Knowing that the couple shown acts in a vertical plane, deter-
mine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B.
30 mm
40 mm
M = 500 N·m
A
B
Fig. P4.1
4.3 Using an allowable stress of 155 MPa, determine the largest bending
moment M that can be applied to the wide-flange beam shown.
Neglect the effect of fillets.
200 mm
220 mm
12 mm
12 mm
8 mm
C 	x
y
M
Fig. P4.3
4.4 Solve Prob. 4.3, assuming that the wide-flange beam is bent about
the y axis by a couple of moment My.
4.5 Using an allowable stress of 16 ksi, determine the largest couple that
can be applied to each pipe.
M2
M1
0.1 in.
0.2 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
(a)
(b)
Fig. P4.5
Problems
M = 25 kip·in.
A r = 0.75 in.
1.2 in.
1.2 in.
4.8 in.
B
Fig. P4.2

-- 268 of 897 --

254
4.6 A beam of the cross section shown is extruded from an aluminum
alloy for which σY = 250 MPa and σU = 450 MPa. Using a factor
of safety of 3.00, determine the largest couple that can be applied to
the beam when it is bent about the z axis.
4.7 and 4.8 Two W4 × 13 rolled sections are welded together as shown.
Knowing that for the steel alloy used σU = 58 ksi and using a factor
of safety of 3.0, determine the largest couple that can be applied
when the assembly is bent about the z axis.
y
z 	C
Fig. P4.7
y
z
C
Fig. P4.8
4.9 through 4.11 Two vertical forces are applied to a beam of the cross
section shown. Determine the maximum tensile and compressive
stresses in portion BC of the beam.
D	C	B	A
25 kips 	25 kips
20 in. 	20 in.
60 in.
4 in.
1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
6 in.
8 in.
Fig. P4.10
10 mm 	10 mm
50 mm
10 mm
150 mm 	150 mm
A 	D
B 	C
10 kN 	10 kN
250 mm
50 mm
Fig. P4.11
D	C	B	A
6 in.
2 in.
3 in.	3 in.
15 kips 	15 kips
3 in.
40 in. 	40 in.
60 in.
Fig. P4.9
24 mm
80 mm
24 mm
16 mm
z
y
C	Mz
Fig. P4.6

-- 269 of 897 --

255
4.12 Knowing that a beam of the cross section shown is bent about a
horizontal axis and that the bending moment is 6 kN⋅m, determine
the total force acting on the shaded portion of the web.
4.13 Knowing that a beam of the cross section shown is bent about a
horizontal axis and that the bending moment is 8 kN⋅m, determine
the total force acting on the top flange.
45 mm
15 mm
15 mm
15 mm
y
z 	C
75 mm
Fig. P4.13 and P4.14
4.14 Knowing that a beam of the cross section shown is bent about a
vertical axis and that the bending moment is 4 kN⋅m, determine the
total force acting on the shaded portion of the lower flange.
4.15 Knowing that for the casting shown the allowable stress is 5 ksi in
tension and 18 ksi in compression, determine the largest couple M
that can be applied.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.	0.5 in.
1 in.
M
Fig. P4.15
4.16 The beam shown is made of a nylon for which the allowable stress
is 24 MPa in tension and 30 MPa in compression. Determine the
largest couple M that can be applied to the beam.
M
15 mm
d = 30 mm
20 mm
40 mm
Fig. P4.16
4.17 Solve Prob. 4.16, assuming that d = 40 mm.
72 mm
216 mm
36 mm	54 mm
108 mm
y
z 	C
Fig. P4.12

-- 270 of 897 --

256
4.18 For the casting shown, determine the largest couple M that can be
applied without exceeding either of the following allowable stresses:
σall = +6 ksi, σall = −15 ksi.
3 in.
2 in.
5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
M
Fig. P4.18
4.19 and 4.20 	Knowing that for the extruded beam shown the allowable
stress is 120 MPa in tension and 150 MPa in compression, determine
the largest couple M that can be applied.
M
48 mm
48 mm
48 mm
36 mm
36 mm
Fig. P4.20
4.21 Straight rods of 6-mm diameter and 30-m length are stored by coil-
ing the rods inside a drum of 1.25-m inside diameter. Assuming that
the yield strength is not exceeded, determine (a) the maximum stress
in a coiled rod, (b) the corresponding bending moment in the rod.
Use E = 200 GPa.
Fig. P4.21
54 mm
40 mm
80 mm
M
Fig. P4.19

-- 271 of 897 --

257
4.22 A 900-mm strip of steel is bent into a full circle by two couples
applied as shown. Determine (a) the maximum thickness t of the
strip if the allowable stress of the steel is 420 MPa, (b) the corre-
sponding moment M of the couples. Use E = 200 GPa.
4.23 Straight rods of 0.30-in. diameter and 200-ft length are sometimes
used to clear underground conduits of obstructions or to thread wires
through a new conduit. The rods are made of high-strength steel and,
for storage and transportation, are wrapped on spools of 5-ft diam-
eter. Assuming that the yield strength is not exceeded, determine
(a) the maximum stress in a rod, when the rod, which is initially
straight, is wrapped on a spool, (b) the corresponding bending
moment in the rod. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
4.24 A 60-N⋅m couple is applied to the steel bar shown. (a) Assuming that
the couple is applied about the z axis as shown, determine the maximum
stress and the radius of curvature of the bar. (b) Solve part a, assuming
that the couple is applied about the y axis. Use E = 200 GPa.
20 mm
12 mm
60 N·m
z
y
Fig. P4.24
4.25 (a) Using an allowable stress of 120 MPa, determine the largest
couple M that can be applied to a beam of the cross section shown.
(b) Solve part a, assuming that the cross section of the beam is an
80-mm square.
4.26 A thick-walled pipe is bent about a horizontal axis by a couple M.
The pipe may be designed with or without four fins. (a) Using an
allowable stress of 20 ksi, determine the largest couple that may be
applied if the pipe is designed with four fins as shown. (b) Solve
part a, assuming that the pipe is designed with no fins.
4.27 A couple M will be applied to a beam of rectangular cross section
that is to be sawed from a log of circular cross section. Determine the
ratio d/b for which (a) the maximum stress σm will be as small as
possible, (b) the radius of curvature of the beam will be maximum.
b
d
M'
M
Fig. P4.27
C
80 mm
5 mm 	5 mm
10 mm
10 mm
80 mm
M
Fig. P4.25
900 mm
8 mm
t
r
M	M'
Fig. P4.22
5 ft
Fig. P4.23
0.75 in.
0.2 in.
1.5 in.
0.1 in.
M
Fig. P4.26

-- 272 of 897 --

258
4.28 A portion of a square bar is removed by milling, so that its cross
section is as shown. The bar is then bent about its horizontal axis
by a couple M. Considering the case where h = 0.9h0, express
the maximum stress in the bar in the form σm = kσ0 where σ0 is
the maximum stress that would have occurred if the original
square bar had been bent by the same couple M, and determine
the value of k.
h
h
C
h0
h0
M
Fig. P4.28
4.29 In Prob. 4.28, determine (a) the value of h for which the maximum
stress σm is as small as possible, (b) the corresponding value of k.
4.30 For the bar and loading of Concept Application 4.1, determine (a) the
radius of curvature ρ, (b) the radius of curvature ρ′ of a transverse
cross section, (c) the angle between the sides of the bar that were
originally vertical. Use E = 29 × 106 psi and ν = 0.29.
4.31 A W200 × 31.3 rolled-steel beam is subjected to a couple M of
moment 45 kN⋅m. Knowing that E = 200 GPa and ν = 0.29, deter-
mine (a) the radius of curvature ρ, (b) the radius of curvature ρ′ of
a transverse cross section.
z
x
y
C
A
M
Fig. P4.31
4.32 It was assumed in Sec. 4.1B that the normal stresses σy in a member
in pure bending are negligible. For an initially straight elastic mem-
ber of rectangular cross section, (a) derive an approximate expression
for σy as a function of y, (b) show that (σy)max = −(c/2ρ)(σx)max and,
thus, that σy can be neglected in all practical situations. (Hint: Consider
the free-body diagram of the portion of beam located below the
surface of ordinate y and assume that the distribution of the stress σx
is still linear.)
y
y = − c
y = + c
σ x
σ y 	σy
σ x
2
θ
2
θ
2
θ
2
θ
Fig. P4.32

-- 273 of 897 --

4.4 Members Made of Composite Materials 	259
4.4 	MEMBERS MADE OF
COMPOSITE MATERIALS
The derivations given in Sec. 4.2 are based on the assumption of a homo-
geneous material with a given modulus of elasticity E. If the member is made
of two or more materials with different moduli of elasticity, the member is a
composite member.
Consider a bar consisting of two portions of different materials bonded
together as shown in Fig. 4.18. This composite bar will deform as described
in Sec. 4.1B, since its cross section remains the same throughout its entire
length, and since no assumption was made in Sec. 4.1B regarding the stress-
strain relationship of the material or materials involved. Thus, the normal
strain εx still varies linearly with the distance y from the neutral axis of the
section (Fig. 4.19a and b), and Eq. (4.8) holds:
εx = − y
ρ 	(4.8)
1
2
N. A.
—
y
E2y
σ2 = − —–
σ1 = − —–	εx = − E1y
y 	y
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σ x	ε x
ρ
ρ	ρ
Fig. 4.19 	Stress and strain distributions in bar made of two materials. (a) Neutral
axis shifted from centroid. (b) Strain distribution. (c) Corresponding stress distribution.
However, it cannot be assumed that the neutral axis passes through the cen-
troid of the composite section, and one of the goals of this analysis is to
determine the location of this axis.
Since the moduli of elasticity E1 and E2 of the two materials are differ-
ent, the equations for the normal stress in each material are
σ1 = E1ε x = − E1 y
ρ
σ2 = E2ε x = − E2 y
ρ 	(4.24)
A stress-distribution curve is obtained that consists of two segments with
straight lines as shown in Fig. 4.19c. It follows from Eqs. (4.24) that the
force dF1 exerted on an element of area dA of the upper portion of the cross
section is
dF1 = σ1 dA = − E1 y
ρ dA 	(4.25)
M
1
2
Fig. 4.18 	Cross section made with
different materials.

-- 274 of 897 --

260 	Pure Bending
while the force dF2 exerted on an element of the same area dA of the lower
portion is
dF2 = σ2 dA = − E2 y
ρ dA 	(4.26)
Denoting the ratio E2∕E1 of the two moduli of elasticity by n, we can write
dF2 = − (nE1 )y
ρ 	dA = − E1 y
ρ 	(n dA) 	(4.27)
Comparing Eqs. (4.25) and (4.27), we note that the same force dF2 would be
exerted on an element of area n dA of the first material. Thus the resistance
to bending of the bar would remain the same if both portions were made of
the first material, provided that the width of each element of the lower portion
were multiplied by the factor n. Note that this widening (if n > 1) or narrow-
ing (if n < 1) must be in a direction parallel to the neutral axis of the section,
since it is essential that the distance y of each element from the neutral axis
remain the same. This new cross section shown on the right in Fig. 4.20 is
called the transformed section of the member.
Since the transformed section represents the cross section of a mem-
ber made of a homogeneous material with a modulus of elasticity E1, the
method described in Sec. 4.2 can be used to determine the neutral axis of
the section and the normal stress at various points. The neutral axis is
drawn through the centroid of the transformed section (Fig. 4.21), and the
stress σx at any point of the corresponding homogeneous member obtained
from Eq. (4.16) is
σx = − My
I (4.16)
where y is the distance from the neutral surface and I is the moment of iner-
tia of the transformed section with respect to its centroidal axis.
To obtain the stress σ1 at a point located in the upper portion of the
cross section of the original composite bar, compute the stress σx at the cor-
responding point of the transformed section. However, to obtain the stress σ2
at a point in the lower portion of the cross section, we must multiply by n the
stress σx computed at the corresponding point of the transformed section.
Indeed, the same elementary force dF2 is applied to an element of area n dA
of the transformed section and to an element of area dA of the original section.
Thus the stress σ2 at a point of the original section must be n times larger
than the stress at the corresponding point of the transformed section.
The deformations of a composite member can also be determined by
using the transformed section. We recall that the transformed section repre-
sents the cross section of a member, made of a homogeneous material of
modulus E1, which deforms in the same manner as the composite member.
Therefore, using Eq. (4.21), we write that the curvature of the composite
member is
1
ρ = M
E1I
where I is the moment of inertia of the transformed section with respect to
its neutral axis.
b
dA 	n dA
nb	b
b
=
Fig. 4.20 	Transformed section based
on replacing lower material with that
used on top.
C N. A.
σx = − —–
My
I
y	y
σx
Fig. 4.21 	Distribution of stresses in
transformed section.

-- 275 of 897 --

4.4 Members Made of Composite Materials 	261
Concept Application 4.3
A bar obtained by bonding together pieces of steel (Es = 29 × 106 psi) and
brass (Eb = 15 × 106 psi) has the cross section shown (Fig. 4.22a). Determine
the maximum stress in the steel and in the brass when the bar is in pure
bending with a bending moment M = 40 kip⋅in.
0.75 in.
0.4 in. 	0.4 in.
3 in.
Steel
Brass 	Brass
(a)
1.45 in.
2.25 in.
0.4 in. 	0.4 in.
3 in.
c = 1.5 in.
All brass
N. A.
(b)
Fig. 4.22 	(a) Composite bar. (b) Transformed section.
The transformed section corresponding to an equivalent bar made entirely
of brass is shown in Fig. 4.22b. Since
n = E s
E b
= 29 × 106 psi
15 × 106 psi = 1.933
the width of the central portion of brass, which replaces the original steel
portion, is obtained by multiplying the original width by 1.933:
(0.75 in.)(1.933) = 1.45 in.
Note that this change in dimension occurs in a direction parallel to the neutral
axis. The moment of inertia of the transformed section about its centroidal
axis is
I = 1
12 bh3 = 1
12 (2.25 in.)(3 in.) 3 = 5.063 in4
and the maximum distance from the neutral axis is c = 1.5 in. Using
Eq. (4.15), the maximum stress in the transformed section is
σ m = Mc
I = (40 kip·in.)(1.5 in.)
5.063 in4 	= 11.85 ksi
This value also represents the maximum stress in the brass portion of the
original composite bar. The maximum stress in the steel portion, however, will
be larger than for the transformed section, since the area of the central portion
must be reduced by the factor n = 1.933. Thus,
(σbrass ) max = 11.85 ksi
(σsteel ) max = (1.933)(11.85 ksi) = 22.9 ksi

-- 276 of 897 --

262 	Pure Bending
An important example of structural members made of two different
materials is furnished by reinforced concrete beams (Photo 4.4). These beams,
when subjected to positive bending moments, are reinforced by steel rods
placed a short distance above their lower face (Fig. 4.23a). Since concrete is
very weak in tension, it cracks below the neutral surface, and the steel rods
carry the entire tensile load, while the upper part of the concrete beam carries
the compressive load.
b	b
d
1
2 x
x
N. A.
d – x
C
nAs 	Fs
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σ
Fig. 4.23 	Reinforced concrete beam: (a) Cross section showing location of
reinforcing steel. (b) Transformed section of all concrete. (c) Concrete stresses
and resulting steel force.
To obtain the transformed section of a reinforced concrete beam, we
replace the total cross-sectional area As of the steel bars by an equivalent area
nAs, where n is the ratio Es∕Ec of the moduli of elasticity of steel and concrete
(Fig. 4.23b). Since the concrete in the beam acts effectively only in compres-
sion, only the portion located above the neutral axis should be used in the
transformed section.
The position of the neutral axis is obtained by determining the distance
x from the upper face of the beam to the centroid C of the transformed sec-
tion. Using the width of the beam b and the distance d from the upper face
to the centerline of the steel rods, the first moment of the transformed section
with respect to the neutral axis must be zero. Since the first moment of each
portion of the transformed section is obtained by multiplying its area by the
distance of its own centroid from the neutral axis,
(bx) x
2 − nA s(d − x) = 0
or
1
2 bx2 + nA s x − nA sd = 0 	(4.28)
Solving this quadratic equation for x, both the position of the neutral axis in
the beam and the portion of the cross section of the concrete beam that is
effectively used are obtained.
The stresses in the transformed section are determined as explained
earlier in this section (see Sample Prob. 4.4). The distribution of the compres-
sive stresses in the concrete and the resultant Fs of the tensile forces in the
steel rods are shown in Fig. 4.23c.
Photo 4.4 	Reinforced concrete building
frame. ©Bohemian Nomad Picturemakers/Corbis
Documentary/Getty Images

-- 277 of 897 --

4.5 Stress Concentrations 	263
4.5 	STRESS CONCENTRATIONS
The formula σm = Mc∕I for a member with a plane of symmetry and a uniform
cross section is accurate throughout the entire length of the member only if
the couples M and M′ are applied through the use of rigid and smooth plates.
Under other conditions of application of the loads, stress concentrations exist
near the points where the loads are applied.
Higher stresses also occur if the cross section of the member under-
goes a sudden change. Two particular cases are a flat bar with a sudden
change in width and a flat bar with grooves. Since the distribution of
stresses in the critical cross sections depends only upon the geometry of
the members, stress-concentration factors can be determined for various
ratios of the parameters involved and recorded, as shown in Figs. 4.24 and
4.25. The value of the maximum stress in the critical cross section is
expressed as
σ m = K Mc
I (4.29)
where K is the stress-concentration factor determined from the appropriate
plot in Fig. 4.24 or 4.25 and c and I refer to the critical section (i.e., the sec-
tion of width d). The figures clearly show the importance of using fillets and
grooves of radius r as large as practical.
Finally, as for axial loading and torsion, the values of the factors K are
computed under the assumption of a linear relation between stress and strain.
In many applications, plastic deformations occur and result in values of the
maximum stress lower than those indicated by Eq. (4.29).
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0	K
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0 0 	0.05 	0.10 	0.15 	0.20 	0.25 	0.3
r/d
d
r
D
D
d = 3
2
1.5
1.2
1.1
1.02
1.01
M	M'
Fig. 4.24 	Stress-concentration factors for flat bars with fillets
under pure bending. (Source: W. D. Pilkey and D. F. Pilkey,
Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors, 3rd ed., John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 2008.)
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0	K
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0 0 	0.05 	0.10 	0.15 	0.20 	0.25 	0.30
r/d
D
d = 2
D 	d
2r
r
1.5
1.2
1.1
1.05
M	M'
Fig. 4.25 	Stress-concentration factors for flat bars with
grooves (notches) under pure bending. (Source: W. D. Pilkey and
D. F. Pilkey, Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors, 3rd ed.,
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008.)

-- 278 of 897 --

264 	Pure Bending
Concept Application 4.4
Grooves 10 mm deep are to be cut in a steel bar which is 60 mm wide and
9 mm thick (Fig. 4.26). Determine the smallest allowable width of the grooves
if the stress in the bar is not to exceed 150 MPa when the bending moment
is equal to 180 N⋅m.
d
10 mm
10 mm
D = 60 mm
b = 9 mm
2r
r
(a) 	(b)
c
Fig. 4.26 	(a) Notched bar dimensions.
(b) Cross section.
Note from Fig. 4.26a that
d = 60 mm − 2(10 mm) = 40 mm
c = 1
2d = 20 mm 	b = 9 mm
The moment of inertia of the critical cross section about its neutral axis is
I = 1
12bd3 = 1
12 (9 × 10−3 m)(40 × 10−3 m) 3
= 48 × 10−9 m4
The value of the stress Mc∕I is
Mc
I = (180 N·m)(20 × 10−3 m)
48 × 10−9 m4 	= 75 MPa
Substituting this value for Mc∕I into Eq. (4.29) and making σm = 150 MPa,
write
150 MPa = K(75 MPa)
K = 2
On the other hand,
D
d = 60 mm
40 mm = 1.5
Using the curve of Fig. 4.25 corresponding to D∕d = 1.5, we find that the
value K = 2 corresponds to a value r∕d equal to 0.13. Therefore,
r
d = 0.13
r = 0.13d = 0.13(40 mm) = 5.2 mm
The smallest allowable width of the grooves is
2r = 2(5.2 mm) = 10.4 mm

-- 279 of 897 --

4.5 Stress Concentrations 	265
Sample Problem 4.3
Two steel plates have been welded together to form a beam in the shape of a
T that has been strengthened by securely bolting to it the two oak timbers
shown in the figure. The modulus of elasticity is 12.5 GPa for the wood and
200 GPa for the steel. Knowing that a bending moment M = 50 kN⋅m is
applied to the composite beam, determine (a) the maximum stress in the wood
and (b) the stress in the steel along the top edge.
STRATEGY: 	The beam is first transformed to a beam made of a single
material (either steel or wood). The moment of inertia is then determined
for the transformed section, and this is used to determine the required
stresses, remembering that the actual stresses must be based on the original
material.
MODELING:
Transformed Section. 	First compute the ratio
n = Es
E w
= 200 GPa
12.5 GPa = 16
Multiplying the horizontal dimensions of the steel portion of the section by
n = 16, a transformed section made entirely of wood is obtained.
Neutral Axis. 	Fig. 1 shows the transformed section. The neutral axis passes
through the centroid of the transformed section. Since the section consists of
two rectangles,
Y = ΣyA
ΣA = (0.160 m)(3.2 m × 0.020 m) + 0
3.2 m × 0.020 m + 0.470 m × 0.300 m = 0.050 m
16(0.200 m) = 3.2 m
0.150 m
0.150 m
0.020 m 	y
Y
C
O
0.160 m
16(0.020 m) = 0.32 m
0.075 m	0.075 m
z
Fig. 1 	Transformed cross section.
200 mm
20 mm
300 mm
20 mm 75 mm	75 mm
(continued)

-- 280 of 897 --

266 	Pure Bending
Centroidal Moment of Inertia. 	Using Fig. 2 and the parallel-axis
theorem,
I = 1
12 (0.470)(0.300) 3 + (0.470 × 0.300)(0.050) 2
+ 1
12 (3.2)(0.020) 3 + (3.2 × 0.020)(0.160 − 0.050) 2
= 2.19 × 10−3 m4
ANALYSIS:
a. Maximum Stress in Wood. 	The wood farthest from the neutral
axis is located along the bottom edge, where c2 = 0.200 m.
σw = Mc2
I = (50 × 103 N·m)(0.200 m)
2.19 × 10−3 m4
σw = 4.57 MPa 	◂
b. Stress in Steel. 	Along the top edge, c1 = 0.120 m. From the trans-
formed section we obtain an equivalent stress in wood, which must be multi-
plied by n to obtain the stress in steel.
σs = n Mc1
I = (16) (50 × 103 N·m)(0.120 m)
2.19 × 10−3 m4
σs = 43.8 MPa 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Since the transformed section was based on a
beam made entirely of wood, it was necessary to use n to get the actual stress
in the steel. Furthermore, at any common distance from the neutral axis, the
stress in the steel will be substantially greater than that in the wood, reflective
of the much larger modulus of elasticity for the steel.
N. A.
0.050 m
y
C
O
c1 = 0.120 m
c2 = 0.200 m
z
Fig. 2 	Transformed section showing neutral
axis and distances to extreme fibers.
Sample Problem 4.4
A concrete floor slab is reinforced by 5
8 -in.-diameter steel rods placed 1.5 in.
above the lower face of the slab and spaced 6 in. on centers, as shown in the
figure. The modulus of elasticity is 3.6 × 106 psi for the concrete used and
29 × 106 psi for the steel. Knowing that a bending moment of 40 kip⋅in. is
applied to each 1-ft width of the slab, determine (a) the maximum stress in
the concrete and (b) the stress in the steel.
STRATEGY: 	Transform the section to a single material, concrete, and then
calculate the moment of inertia for the transformed section. Continue by
calculating the required stresses, remembering that the actual stresses must be
based on the original material.
6 in.
6 in.
6 in.
6 in.
5.5 in.
4 in.

-- 281 of 897 --

4.5 Stress Concentrations 	267
MODELING:
Transformed Section. 	Consider a portion of the slab 12 in. wide, in
which there are two 5
8 -in.-diameter rods having a total cross-sectional area
A s = 2[
π
4 (
5
8 in.)
2
] = 0.614 in2
Since concrete acts only in compression, all the tensile forces are carried
by the steel rods, and the transformed section (Fig. 1) consists of the two
areas shown. One is the portion of concrete in compression (located
above the neutral axis) and the other is the transformed steel area nAs.
We have
n = E s
E c
= 29 × 106 psi
3.6 × 106 psi = 8.06
nA s = 8.06(0.614 in2 ) = 4.95 in2
Neutral Axis. 	The neutral axis of the slab passes through the centroid of
the transformed section. Summing moments of the transformed area about the
neutral axis, write
12x (
x
2) − 4.95(4 − x) = 0 	x = 1.450 in.
Moment of Inertia. 	Using Fig. 2, the centroidal moment of inertia of the
transformed area is
I = 1
3 (12)(1.450) 3 + 4.95(4 − 1.450) 2 = 44.4 in4
ANALYSIS:
a. Maximum Stress in Concrete. 	Fig. 3 shows the stresses on the
cross section. At the top of the slab, we have c1 = 1.450 in. and
σc = Mc1
I = (40 kip·in.)(1.450 in.)
44.4 in4 	σc = 1.306 ksi 	◂
b. Stress in Steel. 	For the steel, we have c2 = 2.55 in., n = 8.06 and
σ s = n Mc2
I = 8.06 (40 kip·in.)(2.55 in.)
44.4 in4 	σs = 18.52 ksi 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Since the transformed section was based on a
beam made entirely of concrete, it was necessary to use n to get the actual
stress in the steel. The difference in the resulting stresses reflects the large
differences in the moduli of elasticity.
nAs = 4.95 in2
4 in.
12 in.
N. A.
4 − x
x C
Fig. 1 	Transformed section.
4.95 in2
4 in.
12 in.
c2 = 4 − x = 2.55 in.
c1 = x = 1.450 in.
Fig. 2 	Dimensions of transformed
section used to calculate moment of
inertia.
σc = 1.306 ksi
σs = 18.52 ksi
Fig. 3 	Stress diagram.

-- 282 of 897 --

268
4.33 and 4.34 	A bar having the cross section shown has been formed by
securely bonding brass and aluminum stock. Using the data given in
the table, determine the largest permissible bending moment when
the composite bar is bent about a horizontal axis.
Aluminum 	Brass
Modulus of elasticity 	70 GPa 	105 GPa
Allowable stress 	100 MPa 	160 MPa
Aluminum
Brass
10 mm 	10 mm
10 mm
10 mm
40 mm
40 mm
Fig. P4.34
4.35 and 4.36 	For the composite bar indicated, determine the largest per-
missible bending moment when the bar is bent about a vertical axis.
4.35 Bar of Prob. 4.33.
4.36 Bar of Prob. 4.34.
4.37 Three wooden beams and two steel plates are securely bolted together
to form the composite member shown. Using the data given in the
table, determine the largest permissible bending moment when the
member is bent about a horizontal axis.
Wood 	Steel
Modulus of elasticity 	2 × 106 psi 	29 × 106 psi
Allowable stress 	2000 psi 	22,000 psi
2 in. 2 in. 2 in.
10 in.
in.	1
4
Fig. P4.37
4.38 For the composite member of Prob. 4.37, determine the largest permis-
sible bending moment when the member is bent about a vertical axis.
Problems
30 mm
6 mm
6 mm
30 mm
Aluminum
Brass
Fig. P4.33

-- 283 of 897 --

269
4.39 A copper strip (Ec = 105 GPa) and an aluminum strip (Ea = 75 GPa)
are bonded together to form the composite beam shown. Knowing
that the beam is bent about a horizontal axis by a couple of moment
M = 35 N⋅m, determine the maximum stress in (a) the aluminum
strip, (b) the copper strip.
24 mm
6 mm
6 mm
Aluminum
Copper
Fig. P4.39
4.40 A steel bar (Es = 210 GPa) and an aluminum bar (Ea = 70 GPa) are
bonded together to form the composite bar shown. Determine the
maximum stress in (a) the aluminum, (b) the steel, when the bar is
bent about a horizontal axis, with M = 60 N⋅m.
4.41 The 6 × 10-in. timber beam has been strengthened by bolting to it the
steel straps shown. The modulus of elasticity for wood is 1.5 × 106 psi
and for steel is 29 × 106 psi. Knowing that the beam is bent about a
horizontal axis by a couple of moment M = 200 kip⋅in., determine the
maximum stress in (a) the wood, (b) the steel.
in.	2 × 3
8
	in.	2 × 3
8
6 in.
10 in.
Fig. P4.41
4.42 The 6 × 12-in. timber beam has been strengthened by bolting to it the
steel reinforcement shown. The modulus of elasticity for wood is
1.8 × 106 psi and for steel is 29 × 106 psi. Knowing that the beam
is bent about a horizontal axis by a couple of moment M = 450 kip⋅in.,
determine the maximum stress in (a) the wood, (b) the steel.
4.43 For the composite beam in Prob. 4.39, determine the radius of cur-
vature caused by the couple of moment 35 N⋅m.
4.44 For the composite beam in Prob. 4.40, determine the radius of cur-
vature caused by the couple of moment 60 N⋅m.
4.45 For the composite beam in Prob. 4.41, determine the radius of curvature
caused by the couple of moment 200 kip⋅in.
4.46 For the composite beam in Prob. 4.42, determine the radius of cur-
vature caused by the couple of moment 450 kip⋅in.
8 mm
8 mm
8 mm
24 mm
Steel
Aluminum
Fig. P4.40
6 in.
12 in.
C8 × 11.5
M
Fig. P4.42

-- 284 of 897 --

270
4.47 A concrete slab is reinforced by 5
8 –in.-diameter steel rods placed
on 5.5-in. centers as shown. The modulus of elasticity is 3 × 106 psi
for the concrete and 29 × 10 6 psi for the steel. Using an allowable
stress of 1400 psi for the concrete and 20 ksi for the steel, deter-
mine the largest bending moment in a portion of slab 1 ft wide.
4.48 Solve Prob. 4.47, assuming that the spacing of the 5
8 –in.-diameter
steel rods is increased to 7.5 in.
4.49 The reinforced concrete beam shown is subjected to a positive bend-
ing moment of 175 kN⋅m. Knowing that the modulus of elasticity is
25 GPa for the concrete and 200 GPa for the steel, determine (a) the
stress in the steel, (b) the maximum stress in the concrete.
300 mm
540 mm
60 mm
25-mm
diameter
Fig. P4.49
4.50 Solve Prob. 4.49, assuming that the 300-mm width is increased to
350 mm.
4.51 Knowing that the bending moment in the reinforced concrete beam
is +100 kip⋅ft and that the modulus of elasticity is 3.625 × 106 psi
for the concrete and 29 × 106 psi for the steel, determine (a) the
stress in the steel, (b) the maximum stress in the concrete.
4.52 A concrete beam is reinforced by three steel rods placed as shown.
The modulus of elasticity is 3 × 10 6 psi for the concrete and
29 × 10 6 psi for the steel. Using an allowable stress of 1350 psi for
the concrete and 20 ksi for the steel, determine the largest allowable
positive bending moment in the beam.
4.53 The design of a reinforced concrete beam is said to be balanced if the
maximum stresses in the steel and concrete are equal, respectively, to
the allowable stresses σs and σc. Show that to achieve a balanced design
the distance x from the top of the beam to the neutral axis must be
x = d
1 + σ s E c
σ c E s
where Ec and Es are the moduli of elasticity of concrete and steel,
respectively, and d is the distance from the top of the beam to the
reinforcing steel.
4.54 For the concrete beam shown, the modulus of elasticity is 25 GPa for
the concrete and 200 GPa for the steel. Knowing that b = 200 mm and
d = 450 mm, and using an allowable stress of 12.5 MPa for the concrete
and 140 MPa for the steel, determine (a) the required area As of the steel
reinforcement if the beam is to be balanced, (b) the largest allowable
bending moment. (See Prob. 4.53 for definition of a balanced beam.)
5.5 in.	6 in.
5.5 in.
4 in.
5.5 in.
5.5 in.
-in. diameter	5
8
Fig. P4.47
12 in.
2.5 in.
20 in.
4 in.	24 in.
1-in.
diameter
Fig. P4.51
b
d
Fig. P4.53 and P4.54
8 in.
2 in.
16 in. 	-in. diameter	7
8
Fig. P4.52

-- 285 of 897 --

271
4.55 and 4.56 	Five metal strips, each 0.5 × 1.5-in. cross section, are
bonded together to form the composite beam shown. The modulus
of elasticity is 30 × 106 psi for the steel, 15 × 106 psi for the brass,
and 10 × 106 psi for the aluminum. Knowing that the beam is bent
about a horizontal axis by a couple of moment 12 kip⋅in., determine
(a) the maximum stress in each of the three metals, (b) the radius
of curvature of the composite beam.
Aluminum
Brass
Steel
Brass
Aluminum
1.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
Fig. P4.55
4.57 The composite beam shown is formed by bonding together a brass
rod and an aluminum rod of semicircular cross sections. The modu-
lus of elasticity is 15 × 106 psi for the brass and 10 × 106 psi for
the aluminum. Knowing that the composite beam is bent about a
horizontal axis by couples of moment 8 kip⋅in., determine the max-
imum stress (a) in the brass, (b) in the aluminum.
Brass
Aluminum
0.8 in.
Fig. P4.57
4.58 A steel pipe and an aluminum pipe are securely bonded together
to form the composite beam shown. The modulus of elasticity is
200 GPa for the steel and 70 GPa for the aluminum. Knowing
that the composite beam is bent by a couple of moment 500 N⋅m,
determine the maximum stress (a) in the aluminum, (b) in the
steel.
4.59 The rectangular beam shown is made of a plastic for which the value
of the modulus of elasticity in tension is one-half of its value in
compression. For a bending moment M = 600 N⋅m, determine the
maximum (a) tensile stress, (b) compressive stress.
50 mm
100 mm
Et = 	Ec
1
2
Ec
M
+ ε
+ σ
Fig. P4.59
Steel
38 mm
10 mm	z
y
3 mm
6 mm
Aluminum
Fig. P4.58
Steel
Aluminum
Brass
Aluminum
Steel
1.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
Fig. P4.56

-- 286 of 897 --

272
*4.60 A rectangular beam is made of material for which the modulus of
elasticity is Et in tension and Ec in compression. Show that the cur-
vature of the beam in pure bending is
1
ρ = M
E r I
where
Er = 4Et Ec
( √E t + √E c)2
4.61 Knowing that M = 250 N⋅m, determine the maximum stress in the
beam shown when the radius r of the fillets is (a) 4 mm, (b) 8 mm.
4.62 Knowing that the allowable stress for the beam shown is 90 MPa,
determine the allowable bending moment M when the radius r of the
fillets is (a) 8 mm, (b) 12 mm.
4.63 Semicircular grooves of radius r must be milled as shown in the top
and bottom portions of a steel member. Knowing that M = 4 kip⋅in.,
determine the maximum stress in the member when the radius r of
the semicircular grooves is (a) r = 0.25 in., (b) r = 0.375 in.
4.64 Semicircular grooves of radius r must be milled as shown in the top
and bottom portions of a steel member. Using an allowable stress of
10 ksi, determine the largest bending moment that can be applied to
the member when (a) r = 0.25 in., (b) r = 0.5 in.
4.65 A couple of moment M = 2 kN⋅m is to be applied to the end of a
steel bar. Determine the maximum stress in the bar (a) if the bar is
designed with grooves having semicircular portions of radius r = 10 mm,
as shown in Fig. a, (b) if the bar is redesigned by removing the
material to the left and right of the dashed lines as shown in Fig. b.
(a) 	(b)
100 mm
150 mm
18 mm
100 mm
150 mm
18 mm
M 	M
Fig. P4.65 and P4.66
4.66 The allowable stress used in the design of a steel bar is 80 MPa. Deter-
mine the largest couple M that can be applied to the bar (a) if the bar is
designed with grooves having semicircular portions of radius r = 15 mm,
as shown in Fig. a, (b) if the bar is redesigned by removing the material
to the left and right of the dashed lines as shown in Fig. b.
r
80 mm
40 mm
8 mm
M
Fig. P4.61 and P4.62
r
M
3 in.
1 in.
Fig. P4.63 and P4.64

-- 287 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	273
*4.6 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
In the fundamental relation σx = −My∕I in Sec. 4.2, Hooke’s law was applied
throughout the member. If the yield strength is exceeded in some portion of
the member or if the material involved is a brittle material with a nonlinear
stress-strain diagram, this relationship ceases to be valid. This section devel-
ops a more general method for the determination of the distribution of
stresses in a member in pure bending that can be used when Hooke’s law
does not apply.
Recall that no specific stress-strain relationship was assumed in
Sec. 4.1B, when it was proved that the normal strain εx varies linearly
with the distance y from the neutral surface. This property can be used
now to write
εx = − y
c ε m 	(4.10)
where y represents the distance of the point considered from the neutral sur-
face, and c is the maximum value of y.
However, we cannot assume that the neutral axis passes through the
centroid of a given section, since this property was derived in Sec. 4.2 under
the assumption of elastic deformations. The neutral axis must be located by
trial and error until a distribution of stresses has been found that satisfies
Eqs. (4.1) and (4.3) of Sec. 4.1. However, in a member possessing both a
vertical and a horizontal plane of symmetry and made of a material charac-
terized by the same stress-strain relationship in tension and compression,
the neutral axis coincides with the horizontal axis of symmetry of that sec-
tion. The properties of the material require that the stresses be symmetric
with respect to the neutral axis (i.e., with respect to some horizontal axis)
and this condition is met [and Eq. (4.1) satisfied] only if that axis is the
horizontal axis of symmetry.
The distance y in Eq. (4.10) is measured from the horizontal axis of
symmetry z of the cross section, and the distribution of strain εx is linear
and symmetric with respect to that axis (Fig. 4.27). On the other hand, the
stress-strain curve is symmetric with respect to the origin of coordinates
(Fig. 4.28).
The distribution of stresses in the cross section of the member (i.e., the
plot of σx versus y) is obtained as follows. Assuming that σmax has been spec-
ified, we first determine the value of εm from the stress-strain diagram and
carry it into Eq. (4.10). Then for each value of y, determine the corresponding
value of εx from Eq. (4.10) or Fig. 4.27, and obtain from the stress-strain
diagram of Fig. 4.28 the stress σx corresponding to εx. Plotting σx against y
yields the desired distribution of stresses (Fig. 4.29).
Recall that Eq. (4.3) assumed no particular relation between stress and
strain. Therefore, Eq. (4.3) can be used to determine the bending moment M
corresponding to the stress distribution obtained in Fig. 4.29. Considering a
member with a rectangular cross section of width b, the element of area in
Eq. (4.3) is expressed as dA = b dy, so
M = −b ∫c
−c
yσ x dy 	(4.30)
z
– c
–
M	M'
y
c
εx
εm
εm
Fig. 4.27 	Linear strain distribution in
member under pure bending.
0 	εx	εm
σx
σmax
Fig. 4.28 	Material with
nonlinear stress-strain diagram.
y
c
– c 	σmax
σx
Fig. 4.29 	Nonlinear stress
distribution in member under pure
bending.

-- 288 of 897 --

274 	Pure Bending
where σx is the function of y plotted in Fig. 4.29. Since σx is an odd function
of y, Eq. (4.30) in the alternative form is
M = −2b ∫c
0
yσ x dy 	(4.31)
If σx is a known analytical function of εx, Eq. (4.10) can be used to
express σx as a function of y, and the integral in Eq. (4.31) can be determined
analytically. Otherwise, the bending moment M can be obtained through a
numerical integration. This computation becomes more meaningful if it is
noted that the integral in Eq. (4.31) represents the first moment with respect
to the horizontal axis of the area in Fig. 4.29 that is located above the
horizontal axis and is bounded by the stress-distribution curve and the ver-
tical axis.
An important value is the ultimate bending moment MU, which causes
failure of the member. This can be determined from the ultimate strength σU
of the material by choosing σmax = σU. However, it is found more convenient
in practice to determine MU experimentally for a specimen of a given material.
Assuming a fictitious linear distribution of stresses, Eq. (4.15) is used to
determine the corresponding maximum stress RB:
RB = MU c
I (4.32)
The fictitious stress RB is called the modulus of rupture in bending of the
material. It can be used to determine the ultimate bending moment MU of a
member made of the same material and having a cross section of the same
shape, but of different dimensions, by solving Eq. (4.32) for MU. Since, in the
case of a member with a rectangular cross section, the actual and the fictitious
linear stress distributions shown in Fig. 4.30 must yield the same value MU
for the ultimate bending moment, the areas they define must have the same
first moment with respect to the horizontal axis. Thus the modulus of rupture
RB will always be larger than the actual ultimate strength σU.
*4.6A 	Members Made of Elastoplastic
Material
To gain a better insight into the plastic behavior of a member in bending,
consider a member made of an elastoplastic material and assume the member
to have a rectangular cross section of width b and depth 2c (Fig. 4.31). Recall
from Sec. 2.12 the stress-strain diagram for an idealized elastoplastic material
is as shown in Fig. 4.32.
RB
y
σx
σU
Fig. 4.30 	Member stress distribution
at ultimate moment MU.
c
b
c
N. A.
Fig. 4.31 	Member with
rectangular cross section.
Y
ε	εY
σY
σ
Fig. 4.32 	Idealized elastoplastic
stress-strain diagram.

-- 289 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	275
As long as the normal stress σx does not exceed the yield strength σY,
Hooke’s law applies, and the stress distribution across the section is linear
(Fig. 4.33a). The maximum value of the stress is
σm = Mc
I (4.15)
As the bending moment increases, σm eventually reaches σY (Fig. 4.33b). Sub-
stituting this value into Eq. (4.15) and solving for M, the value MY of the
bending moment at the onset of yield is
M Y = I
c σ Y 	(4.33)
The moment MY is called the maximum elastic moment, since it is the largest
moment for which the deformation remains fully elastic. Recalling that, for
the rectangular cross section,
I
c = b(2c) 3
12c = 2
3 bc2 	(4.34)
so
MY = 2
3 bc2σ Y 	(4.35)
As the bending moment increases further, plastic zones develop in the
member. The stress is uniformly equal to −σY in the upper zone and to +σY
in the lower zone (Fig. 4.33c). Between the plastic zones, an elastic core
subsists in which the stress σx varies linearly with y:
σ x = − σY
y Y
y 	(4.36)
Here yY represents half the thickness of the elastic core. As M increases,
the plastic zones expand, and at the limit, the deformation is fully plastic
(Fig. 4.33d).
Equation (4.31) is used to determine the value of the bending moment
M corresponding to a given thickness 2yY of the elastic core. Recalling that
σx is given by Eq. (4.36) for 0 ≤ y ≤ yY and is equal to −σY for yY ≤ y ≤ c,
M = −2b ∫yY
0
y (− σ Y
y Y
y) dy − 2b ∫c
yY
y(−σ Y) dy
= 2
3 by2
Y σ Y + bc2σ Y − by2
Y σ Y
M = bc2σ Y (1 − 1
3
y2
Y
c2) (4.37)
or in view of Eq. (4.35),
M = 3
2M Y (1 − 1
3
y2
Y
c2) (4.38)
ELASTIC
y
c
−c
−c
−c
−c
(a) M < M ϒ
(c) M > Mϒ
(b) M = Mϒ
(d) M = Mp
ELASTIC
y
ELASTIC
PLASTIC
PLASTIC
y
c
PLASTIC
y
c
c
σ x
σx
σx
σ x
σmax = σ m < σ ϒ
σmax = σ m = σ ϒ
σmax = σ ϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
σ ϒ
Fig. 4.33 	Bending stress distribution in a
member for: (a) elastic, M < MY; (b) yield
impending, M = MY; (c) partially yielded,
M > MY; and (d) fully plastic, M = Mp.

-- 290 of 897 --

276 	Pure Bending
where MY is the maximum elastic moment. Note that as yY approaches zero,
the bending moment approaches the limiting value
M p = 3
2 M Y 	(4.39)
This value of the bending moment corresponds to fully plastic deformation
(Fig. 4.33d) and is called the plastic moment of the member. Note that
Eq. (4.39) is valid only for a rectangular member made of an elastoplas-
tic material.
The distribution of strain across the section remains linear after the
onset of yield. Therefore, Eq. (4.8) remains valid and can be used to determine
the half-thickness yY of the elastic core:
y Y = ε Yρ 	(4.40)
where εY is the yield strain and ρ is the radius of curvature corresponding
to a bending moment M ≥ MY. When the bending moment is equal to MY,
yY = c and Eq. (4.40) yields
c = ε Yρ Y 	(4.41)
where ρY is the radius of curvature corresponding to MY. Dividing Eq. (4.40)
by Eq. (4.41) member by member, the relationship is†
yY
c = ρ
ρ Y
(4.42)
Substituting for yY∕c from Eq. (4.42) into Eq. (4.38), the bending moment M
is a function of the radius of curvature ρ of the neutral surface:
M = 3
2M Y (1 − 1
3
ρ2
ρ2
Y) (4.43)
Note that Eq. (4.43) is valid only after the onset of yield for values of M larger
than MY. For M < MY, Eq. (4.21) should be used.
Observe from Eq. (4.43) that the bending moment reaches M p = 3
2 M Y
only when ρ = 0. Since we clearly cannot have a zero radius of curvature at
every point of the neutral surface, a fully plastic deformation cannot develop
in pure bending. However, in Chap. 6 it will be shown that such a situation
may occur at one point in a beam under a transverse loading.
The stress distributions in a rectangular member corresponding to the
maximum elastic moment MY and to the limiting case of the plastic moment
Mp are represented in Fig. 4.34. Since, the resultants of the tensile and com-
pressive forces must pass through the centroids of and be equal in magnitude
to the volumes representing the stress distributions, then
R Y = 1
2 bcσY
and
Rp = bcσY
†Equation (4.42) applies to any member made of any ductile material with a well-defined
yield point, since its derivation is independent of both the shape of the cross section and the
shape of stress-strain diagram beyond the yield point.
b
c
c
z 	2c/3
2c/3
R' Y
b
c
c
z
Rp
c/2
c/2
R' p
(a)
(b)
y
y
RY
− σ Y
− σ Y
σ m = σY
σx
σ Y
σx
Fig. 4.34 	Stress distributions in member
at (a) maximum elastic moment and
(b) plastic moment.

-- 291 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	277
The moments of the corresponding couples are, respectively,
M Y = ( 4
3c)R Y = 2
3bc2σ Y 	(4.44)
and
M p = cR p = bc2σ Y 	(4.45)
Thus for a rectangular member M p = 3
2 M Y as required by Eq. (4.39).
For beams of nonrectangular cross section, the computation of the
maximum elastic moment MY and of the plastic moment Mp is usually
simplified if a graphical method of analysis is used, as shown in Sample
Prob. 4.5. In this case, the ratio k = Mp∕MY is generally not equal to 3
2 .
For structural shapes such as wide-flange beams, this ratio varies approx-
imately from 1.08 to 1.14. Because it depends only upon the shape of the
cross section, the ratio k = Mp∕MY is called the shape factor of the cross
section. Note that if the shape factor k and the maximum elastic moment
MY of a beam are known, the plastic moment Mp of the beam can be
obtained by
Mp = kM Y 	(4.46)
The ratio Mp∕σY is called the plastic section modulus of the member
and is denoted by Z. When the plastic section modulus Z and the yield
strength σY of a beam are known, the plastic moment Mp of the beam can
be obtained by
M p = Zσ Y 	(4.47)
Recalling from Eq. (4.18) that MY = SσY and comparing this relationship with
Eq. (4.47), the shape factor k = Mp∕MY of a given cross section is the ratio
of the plastic and elastic section moduli:
k = Mp
M Y
= ZσY
Sσ Y
= Z
S (4.48)
Considering a rectangular beam of width b and depth h, note from
Eqs. (4.45) and (4.47) that the plastic section modulus of a rectangular
beam is
Z = Mp
σ Y
= bc2σ Y
σ Y
= bc2 = 1
4 bh2
However, recall from Eq. (4.19) that the elastic section modulus of the same
beam is
S = 1
6 bh2
Substituting the values obtained for Z and S into Eq. (4.48), the shape factor
of a rectangular beam is
k = Z
S =
1
4 bh2
1
6 bh2 = 3
2

-- 292 of 897 --

278 	Pure Bending
Concept Application 4.5
A member of uniform rectangular cross section 50 × 120 mm (Fig. 4.35) is
subjected to a bending moment M = 36.8 kN⋅m. Assuming that the member
is made of an elastoplastic material with a yield strength of 240 MPa and a
modulus of elasticity of 200 GPa, determine (a) the thickness of the elastic
core and (b) the radius of curvature of the neutral surface.
a. Thickness of Elastic Core. 	Determine the maximum elastic moment
MY. Substituting the given data into Eq. (4.34),
I
c = 2
3 bc2 = 2
3 (50 × 10−3 m)(60 × 10−3 m) 2
= 120 × 10−6 m3
Then carrying this value and σY = 240 MPa into Eq. (4.33),
MY = I
c σ Y = (120 × 10−6 m3 )(240 MPa) = 28.8 kN·m
Substituting the values of M and MY into Eq. (4.38),
36.8 kN·m = 3
2 (28.8 kN·m)(1 − 1
3
y2
Y
c2)
(
y Y
c )
2
= 0.444 yY
c = 0.666
Since c = 60 mm,
y Y = 0.666(60 mm) = 40 mm
Thus, the thickness 2yY of the elastic core is 80 mm.
b. Radius of Curvature. 	The yield strain is
ε Y = σY
E = 240 × 106 Pa
200 × 109 Pa = 1.2 × 10−3
Solving Eq. (4.40) for ρ and substituting the values obtained for yY and εY,
ρ = yY
ε Y
= 40 × 10−3 m
1.2 × 10−3 = 33.3 m
c = 60 mm
c = 60 mm
b = 50 mm
yY
Fig. 4.35 	Rectangular cross
section with load MY < M < Mp.
*4.6B 	Members with a Single Plane
of Symmetry
So far the member in bending has had two planes of symmetry: one
containing the couples M and M′ and one perpendicular to that plane.
Now consider when the member possesses only one plane of symmetry
containing the couples M and M′. Our analysis will be limited to the

-- 293 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	279
situation where the deformation is fully plastic, with the normal stress
uniformly equal to −σY above the neutral surface and +σY below that
surface (Fig. 4.36a).
As indicated in Sec. 4.6, the neutral axis cannot be assumed to coin-
cide with the centroidal axis of the cross section when the cross section
is not symmetric to that axis. To locate the neutral axis, we consider that
the resultant R1 of the elementary compressive forces is exerted on the
portion A1 of the cross section located above the neutral axis, and the
resultant R2 of the tensile forces is exerted on the portion A2 located below
the neutral axis (Fig. 4.36b). Since the forces R1 and R2 form a couple
equivalent to the one applied to the member, they must have the same
magnitude. Therefore R1 = R2, or A1σY = A2σY, from which we conclude
that A1 = A2. Therefore, the neutral axis divides the cross section into
portions of equal areas. Note that the axis obtained in this way is not a
centroidal axis of the section.
The lines of action of the resultants R1 and R2 pass through the cen-
troids C1 and C2 of the two portions just defined. Denoting by d the distance
between C1 and C2 and by A the total area of the cross section, the plastic
moment of the member is
M p = (
1
2 Aσ Y)d
The actual computation of the plastic moment of a member with only one
plane of symmetry is given in Sample Prob. 4.6.
*4.6C 	Residual Stresses
We have just seen that plastic zones develop in a member made of an elasto-
plastic material if the bending moment is large enough. When the bending
moment is decreased back to zero, the corresponding reduction in stress and
strain at any given point is represented by a straight line on the stress-strain
diagram, as shown in Fig. 4.37. The final value of the stress at a point will
not (in general) be zero. There is a residual stress at most points, and that
stress may or may not have the same sign as the maximum stress reached at
the end of the loading phase.
Since the linear relation between σx and εx applies at all points of the
member during the unloading phase, Eq. (4.16) can be is used to obtain the
change in stress at any given point. The unloading phase can be handled by
assuming the member to be fully elastic.
The residual stresses are obtained by applying the principle of
superposition in a manner similar to that described in Sec. 2.13 for a
member subject to an axial centric load, or in Sec. 3.8 for a member
subject to a torque. We consider, on one hand, the stresses due to the
application of the given bending moment M, and on the other, the reverse
stresses due to the equal and opposite bending moment −M that is applied
to unload the member. The first group of stresses reflect the elastoplastic
behavior of the material during the loading phase, and the second group
the linear behavior of the same material during the unloading phase.
Adding the two groups of stresses provides the distribution of residual
stresses in the member.
Neutral
surface
(a)
(b)
R2
C1
C2
A2
A1
d 	R1
N.A.
−σY
+σY
Fig. 4.36 	Nonsymmetrical beam subject
to plastic moment. (a) Stress distributions
and (b) resultant forces acting at tension/
compression centroids.
εx
σ x
σY
−σY
εY
Fig. 4.37 	Elastoplastic material
stress-strain diagram with load reversal.

-- 294 of 897 --

280 	Pure Bending
Concept Application 4.6
For the member of Fig. 4.35, determine (a) the distribution of the residual
stresses, (b) the radius of curvature, after the bending moment has been
decreased from its maximum value of 36.8 kN⋅m back to zero.
a. Distribution of Residual Stresses. 	Recall from Concept Applica-
tion 4.5 that the yield strength is σY = 240 MPa and the thickness of the elastic
core is 2y Y = 80 mm. The distribution of the stresses in the loaded member
is as shown in Fig. 4.38a.
The distribution of the reverse stresses due to the opposite 36.8 kN⋅m
bending moment required to unload the member is linear and is shown in
Fig. 4.38b. The maximum stress σ′m in that distribution is obtained from
Eq. (4.15). Recalling that I∕c = 120 × 10−6 m3,
σ′m = Mc
I = 36.8 kN·m
120 × 10−6 m3 = 306.7 MPa
Superposing the two distributions of stresses, obtain the residual stresses
shown in Fig. 4.38c. We note that even though the reverse stresses are larger
than the yield strength σY, the assumption of a linear distribution of the reverse
stresses is valid, since they do not exceed 2σY.
b. Radius of Curvature after Unloading. 	We apply Hooke’s law at any
point of the core ∣y∣ < 40 mm, since no plastic deformation has occurred in that
portion of the member. Thus the residual strain at the distance y = 40 mm is
ε x = σ x
E = −35.5 × 106 Pa
200 × 109 Pa = −177.5 × 10−6
Solving Eq. (4.8) for ρ and substituting the appropriate values of y and εx gives
ρ = − y
ε x
= 40 × 10−3 m
177.5 × 10−6 = 225 m
The value obtained for ρ after the load has been removed represents a perma-
nent deformation of the member.
–40
40
60
40
204.5 306.7 	–35.5
–40
–60
40
66.7
60 	60
–60 	–60
–240 	240
y(mm) 	y(mm) 	y(mm)
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σx(MPa)
σY
σx(MPa)	σx(MPa)
σ'm
Fig. 4.38 	Determination of residual stress. (a) Stresses at maximum moment. (b) Unloading. (c) Residual stresses.

-- 295 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	281
Sample Problem 4.5
Beam AB has been fabricated from a high-strength low-alloy steel that is
assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 50 ksi. Neglecting
the effect of fillets, determine the bending moment M and the corresponding
radius of curvature (a) when yield first occurs, (b) when the flanges have just
become fully plastic.
STRATEGY: 	Up to the point that yielding first occurs at the top and bottom
of this symmetrical section, the stresses and radius of curvature are calculated
assuming elastic behavior. A further increase in load causes plastic behavior
over parts of the cross section, and it is then necessary to work with the
resulting stress distribution on the cross section to obtain the corresponding
moment and radius of curvature.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Onset of Yield. 	The centroidal moment of inertia of the section is
I = 1
12 (12 in.)(16 in.) 3 − 1
12 (12 in. − 0.75 in.)(14 in.) 3 = 1524 in4
Bending Moment. 	For σmax = σY = 50 ksi and c = 8 in., we have
M Y = σ Y I
c = (50 ksi)(1524 in4 )
8 in. MY = 9525 kip⋅in. 	◂
Radius of Curvature. 	As shown in Fig. 1, the strain at the top and
bottom is the strain at initial yielding, εY = σY∕E = (50 ksi)∕(29 × 106 psi) =
0.001724. Noting that c = 8 in., we have from Eq. (4.41)
c = εYρY 	8 in. = 0.001724ρY 	ρY = 4640 in. 	◂
B
A
16 in.
1 in.
in.
1 in.
12 in.
3
4
M
y
z 	C
E
O 1
8 in.
8 in.
Strain
distribution
Stress
distribution
σ
σY = 50 ksi
σY
εY = 0.001724
εY = 0.001724
ε
Fig. 1 	Elastoplastic material response and
elastic strain and stress distributions.
(continued)

-- 296 of 897 --

282 	Pure Bending
b. Flanges Fully Plastic. 	When the flanges have just become fully
plastic, the strains and stresses in the section are as shown in Fig. 2.
C
in.
1 in. Strain
distribution
Stress
distribution
Resultant
force
7 in.
7 in.
7 in.
7 in.
3
4
R4
R1
R2
R3
1 in.
7.5 in.
7.5 in.
4.67 in.
4.67 in.
z
εY
εY = 0.001724 	σY = 50 ksi
Fig. 2 	Strain and stress distributions with flanges fully plastic.
The compressive forces exerted on the top flange and on the top half of
the web are replaced by their resultants R1 and R2. Similarly, replace the
tensile stresses by R3 and R4.
R1 = R4 = (50 ksi)(12 in.)(1 in.) = 600 kips
R2 = R3 = 1
2 (50 ksi)(7 in.)(0.75 in.) = 131.3 kips
Bending Moment. 	Summing the moments of R1, R2, R3, and R4
about the z axis, write
M = 2[R1 (7.5 in.) + R2 (4.67 in.)]
= 2[(600)(7.5) + (131.3)(4.67)] 	M = 10,230 kip·in. 	◂
Radius of Curvature. 	Since yY = 7 in. for this loading, we have from
Eq. (4.40)
y Y = ε Yρ 	7 in. = (0.001724)ρ 	ρ = 4060 in. = 338 ft 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Once the load is increased beyond that which
causes initial yielding, it is necessary to work with the actual stress distribu-
tion to determine the applied moment. The radius of curvature is based on
the elastic portion of the beam.

-- 297 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	283
Sample Problem 4.6
Determine the plastic moment Mp of a beam with the cross section shown
when the beam is bent about a horizontal axis. Assume that the material is
elastoplastic with a yield strength of 240 MPa.
STRATEGY: 	All portions of the cross section are yielding, and the result-
ing stress distribution must be used to determine the moment. Since the
beam is not symmetrical, it is first necessary to determine the location of
the neutral axis.
MODELING:
Neutral Axis. 	When the deformation is fully plastic, the neutral axis
divides the cross section into two portions of equal areas (Fig. 1). Since the
total area is
A = (100)(20) + (80)(20) + (60)(20) = 4800 mm2
the area located above the neutral axis must be 2400 mm2. Write
(20)(100) + 20y = 2400 	y = 20 mm
Note that the neutral axis does not pass through the centroid of the cross
section.
ANALYSIS:
Plastic Moment. 	Using Fig. 2, the resultant Ri of the elementary forces
exerted on the partial area Ai is equal to
R i = A i σ Y
and passes through the centroid of that area. We have
R1 = A1σ Y = [(0.100 m)(0.020 m)]240 MPa = 480 kN
R2 = A2σ Y = [(0.020 m)(0.020 m)]240 MPa = 96 kN
R3 = A3σ Y = [(0.020 m)(0.060 m)]240 MPa = 288 kN
R4 = A4σ Y = [(0.060 m)(0.020 m)]240 MPa = 288 kN
60 mm
100 mm
20 mm 80 mm
20 mm
20 mm
100 mm
20 mm
Neutral axis
20 mm
y
Fig. 1 	For fully plastic deformation,
neutral axis divides the cross section
into two equal areas.
100 mm
60 mm
z
A3
A4
A2
A1
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
60 mm
20 mm
30 mm
30 mm
70 mm
10 mm
R1
R2
R3
R4
x
y
z
σ Y = 240 MPa
Fig. 2 	Fully plastic stress distributions and resultant forces for finding the plastic moment.
(continued)

-- 298 of 897 --

284 	Pure Bending
The plastic moment Mp is obtained by summing the moments of the forces
about the z axis.
Mp = (0.030 m)R1 + (0.010 m)R2 + (0.030 m)R3 + (0.070 m)R4
= (0.030 m)(480 kN) + (0.010 m)(96 kN)
+(0.030 m)(288 kN) + (0.070 m)(288 kN)
= 44.16 kN·m 	Mp = 44.2 kN⋅m 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Since the cross section is not symmetric about the
z axis, the sum of the moments of R1 and R2 is not equal to the sum of the
moments of R3 and R4.
Sample Problem 4.7
For the beam of Sample Prob. 4.5, determine the residual stresses and the
permanent radius of curvature after the 10,230-kip⋅in. couple M has been
removed.
STRATEGY: 	Start with the moment and stress distribution when the flanges
have just become plastic. The beam is then unloaded by a couple that is equal
and opposite to the couple originally applied. During the unloading, the action
of the beam is fully elastic. The stresses due to the original loading and
those due to the unloading are superposed to obtain the residual stress
distribution.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Loading. 	In Sample Prob. 4.5, a couple of moment M = 10,230 kip⋅in. was
applied and the stresses shown in Fig. 1a were obtained.
Elastic Unloading. 	The beam is unloaded by the application of a couple
of moment M = −10,230 kip⋅in. (which is equal and opposite to the couple
originally applied). During this unloading, the action of the beam is fully
elastic; recalling from Sample Prob. 4.5 that I = 1524 in4
σ′m = Mc
I = (10,230 kip·in.)(8 in.)
1524 in4 	= 53.70 ksi
The stresses caused by the unloading are shown in Fig. 1b.

-- 299 of 897 --

*4.6 Plastic Deformations 	285
Residual Stresses. 	We superpose the stresses due to the loading
(Fig. 1a) and to the unloading (Fig. 1b) and obtain the residual stresses
in the beam (Fig. 1c).
10,230 kip·in.	M = 10,230 kip·in.
+3.01 ksi
+3.70 ksi
8 in. 7 in. 	8 in. 	7 in.
(b)	(a) 	(c)
σ Y = − 50 ksi
σ = 46.99 ksi
σ'm = 53.70 ksi
− 3.70 ksi
− 3.01 ksi
Fig. 1 	Superposition of plastic loading and elastic unloading to obtain residual stresses.
Permanent Radius of Curvature. 	At y = 7 in. the residual stress is
σ = −3.01 ksi. Since no plastic deformation occurred at this point, Hooke’s
law can be used, and εx = σ∕E. Recalling Eq. (4.8), we write
ρ = − y
ε x
= − yE
σ = − (7 in.)(29 × 106 psi)
−3.01 ksi = +67,400 in. 	ρ = 5620 ft 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	From Fig. 2, note that the residual stress is tensile
on the upper face of the beam and compressive on the lower face, even though
the beam is concave upward.
σ = + 3.70 ksi (tension)
σ = − 3.70 ksi (compression)
ρ
Fig. 2 	Representation of the permanent
radius of curvature.

-- 300 of 897 --

286
4.67 A bar of rectangular cross section, made of a steel assumed to be
elastoplastic with σY = 320 MPa, is subjected to a couple M parallel
to the z axis. Determine the moment M of the couple for which
(a) yield first occurs, (b) the plastic zones at the top and bottom of
the bar are 5 mm thick.
M
y
z
15 mm
12 mm
Fig. P4.67
4.68 Solve Prob. 4.67, assuming that the couple M is parallel to the y axis.
4.69 A solid square rod of side 0.6 in. is made of a steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 48 ksi. Knowing
that a couple M is applied and maintained about an axis parallel to
a side of the cross section, determine the moment M of the couple
for which the radius of curvature is 6 ft.
4.70 For the solid square rod of Prob. 4.69, determine the moment M for
which the radius of curvature is 3 ft.
4.71 The prismatic rod shown is made of a steel that is assumed to be
elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa and σY = 280 MPa. Knowing that
couples M and M′ of moment 525 N⋅m are applied and maintained
about axes parallel to the y axis, determine (a) the thickness of the
elastic core, (b) the radius of curvature of the bar.
18 mm
24 mm
x
y
M'
M
Fig. P4.71
4.72 Solve Prob. 4.71, assuming that the couples M and M′ are applied
and maintained about axes parallel to the x axis.
Problems

-- 301 of 897 --

287
4.73 and 4.74 	A beam of the cross section shown is made of a steel that
is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 200 GPa and σY = 240 MPa.
For bending about the z axis, determine the bending moment at
which (a) yield first occurs, (b) the plastic zones at the top and bot-
tom of the bar are 30 mm thick.
z
y
90 mm
60 mm
C
Fig. P4.73
4.75 and 4.76 	A beam of the cross section shown is made of a steel
that is assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 29 × 106 psi and
σY = 42 ksi. For bending about the z axis, determine the bend-
ing moment at which (a) yield first occurs, (b) the plastic zones
at the top and bottom of the bar are 1 in. thick.
0.5 in. 2 in. 0.5 in.
C
z
y
1 in.
1 in.
2 in.
Fig. P4.75
4.77 through 4.80 	For the beam indicated, determine (a) the plastic
moment Mp, (b) the shape factor of the cross section.
4.77 	Beam of Prob. 4.73.
4.78 	Beam of Prob. 4.74.
4.79 	Beam of Prob. 4.75.
4.80 	Beam of Prob. 4.76.
30 mm
30 mm
30 mm
30 mm
15 mm	15 mm
z
y
C
Fig. P4.74
C
z
y
1 in. 1 in. 1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
2 in.
Fig. P4.76

-- 302 of 897 --

288
4.81 through 4.83 	Determine the plastic moment Mp of a steel beam of
the cross section shown, assuming the steel to be elastoplastic with
a yield strength of 240 MPa.
50 mm
30 mm
10 mm
30 mm
10 mm	10 mm
Fig. P4.82
36 mm
30 mm
Fig. P4.83
4.84 Determine the plastic moment Mp of the cross section shown, assum-
ing the steel to be elastoplastic with a yield strength of 36 ksi.
4 in.
3 in.
2 in.
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P4.84
4.85 Determine the plastic moment Mp of the cross section shown when
the beam is bent about a horizontal axis. Assume the material to be
elastoplastic with a yield strength of 175 MPa.
5 mm
80 mm
5 mm
120 mm
t = 5 mm
Fig. P4.85
4.86 Determine the plastic moment Mp of a steel beam of the cross section
shown, assuming the steel to be elastoplastic with a yield strength
of 36 ksi.
2 in.
4 in.
3 in.
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P4.86
4.87 and 4.88 	For the beam indicated, a couple of moment equal to the
full plastic moment Mp is applied and then removed. Using a yield
strength of 240 MPa, determine the residual stress at y = 45 mm.
4.87 Beam of Prob. 4.73.
4.88 Beam of Prob. 4.74.
r = 18 mm
Fig. P4.81

-- 303 of 897 --

289
4.89 and 4.90 	For the beam indicated, a couple of moment equal to the
full plastic moment Mp is applied and then removed. Using a yield
strength of 42 ksi, determine the residual stress at (a) y = 1 in.,
(b) y = 2 in.
4.89 Beam of Prob. 4.75.
4.90 Beam of Prob. 4.76.
4.91 A bending couple is applied to the beam of Prob. 4.73, causing
plastic zones 30 mm thick to develop at the top and bottom of the
beam. After the couple has been removed, determine (a) the residual
stress at y = 45 mm, (b) the points where the residual stress is zero,
(c) the radius of curvature corresponding to the permanent deforma-
tion of the beam.
4.92 A beam of the cross section shown is made of a steel that is
assumed to be elastoplastic with E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 42 ksi.
A bending couple is applied to the beam about the z axis, causing
plastic zones 2 in. thick to develop at the top and bottom of the
beam. After the couple has been removed, determine (a) the resid-
ual stress at y = 2 in., (b) the points where the residual stress is
zero, (c) the radius of curvature corresponding to the permanent
deformation of the beam.
C	z
y
1 in. 1 in. 1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
2 in.
Fig. P4.92
4.93 A rectangular bar that is straight and unstressed is bent into an arc
of circle of radius ρ by two couples of moment M. After the
couples are removed, it is observed that the radius of curvature
of the bar is ρR. Denoting by ρY the radius of curvature of the bar
at the onset of yield, show that the radii of curvature satisfy the
following relation:
1
ρ R
= 1
ρ{1 − 3
2
ρ
ρ Y[1 − 1
3 (
ρ
ρ Y)
2
]}
4.94 A solid bar of rectangular cross section is made of a material that is
assumed to be elastoplastic. Denoting by MY and ρY, respectively, the
bending moment and radius of curvature at the onset of yield,
determine (a) the radius of curvature when a couple of moment
M = 1.25 MY is applied to the bar, (b) the radius of curvature after
the couple is removed. Check the results obtained by using the rela-
tion derived in Prob. 4.93.

-- 304 of 897 --

290
4.95 The prismatic bar AB is made of a steel that is assumed to be
elastoplastic and for which E = 200 GPa. Knowing that the
radius of curvature of the bar is 2.4 m when a couple of moment
M = 350 N⋅m is applied as shown, determine (a) the yield
strength of the steel, (b) the thickness of the elastic core of
the bar.
4.96 The prismatic bar AB is made of an aluminum alloy for which
the tensile stress-strain diagram is as shown. Assuming that the
σ-ε diagram is the same in compression as in tension, determine
(a) the radius of curvature of the bar when the maximum stress
is 250 MPa, (b) the corresponding value of the bending moment.
(Hint: For part b, plot σ versus y and use an approximate method
of integration.)
M
60 mm
40 mm
A
M'
B
300
200
100
0 	0.005 	0.010 	ε
σ (MPa)
Fig. P4.96
4.97 The prismatic bar AB is made of a bronze alloy for which the tensile
stress-strain diagram is as shown. Assuming that the σ-ε diagram is
the same in compression as in tension, determine (a) the maximum
stress in the bar when the radius of curvature of the bar is 100 in.,
(b) the corresponding value of the bending moment. (See hint given
in Prob. 4.96.)
4.98 A prismatic bar of rectangular cross section is made of an alloy for
which the stress-strain diagram can be represented by the relation
ε = kσn for σ > 0 and ε = –∣kσn∣ for σ < 0. If a couple M is applied
to the bar, show that the maximum stress is
σm = 1 + 2n
3n
Mc
I
M
ε
σ
Fig. P4.98
B
A
16 mm 	20 mm
M
Fig. P4.95
1.2 in.
0.8 in.
A
B
50
30
40
20
10
0 0.004 	0.008
M
σ (ksi)
ε
Fig. P4.97

-- 305 of 897 --

4.7 Eccentric Axial Loading in a Plane of Symmetry 	291
4.7 	ECCENTRIC AXIAL LOADING
IN A PLANE OF SYMMETRY
We saw in Sec. 1.2A that the distribution of stresses in the cross section of a
member under axial loading can be assumed uniform only if the line of action
of the loads P and P′ passes through the centroid of the cross section. Such
a loading is said to be centric. Let us now analyze the distribution of stresses
when the line of action of the loads does not pass through the centroid of the
cross section. In this case, the loading is eccentric, creating a bending moment
in addition to a normal force.
Two examples of an eccentric loading are shown in Photos 4.5 and 4.6.
In Photo 4.5, the weight of the lamp causes an eccentric loading on the post.
Likewise, the vertical forces exerted on the press in Photo. 4.6 cause an eccen-
tric loading on the back column of the press.
Photo 4.5 	Walkway light.
©Sandy Maya Matzen/Shutterstock
Photo 4.6 	Bench press.
Courtesy of John DeWolf
In this section, our analysis will be limited to members that possess a
plane of symmetry, and it will be assumed that the loads are applied in the plane
of symmetry of the member (Fig. 4.39a). The internal forces acting on a given
cross section may then be represented by a force F applied at the centroid C of
the section and a couple M acting in the plane of symmetry of the member
(Fig. 4.39b). The conditions of equilibrium of the free body AC require that the
force F be equal and opposite to P′ and that the moment of the couple M be
equal and opposite to the moment of P′ about C. Denoting by d the distance
from the centroid C to the line of action AB of the forces P and P′, we have
F = P 	and 	M = Pd 	(4.49)
We now observe that the internal forces in the section would have been
represented by the same force and couple if the straight portion DE of mem-
ber AB had been detached from AB and subjected simultaneously to the cen-
tric loads P and P′ and to the bending couples M and M′ (Fig. 4.40). Thus
the stress distribution due to the original eccentric loading can be obtained by
superposing the uniform stress distribution corresponding to the centric loads
d
d
D 	E
C P	P'
A 	B	
(a)
D
C F
M
P'
A
(b)
Fig. 4.39 	(a) Member with eccentric
loading. (b) Free-body diagram of the
member with internal forces at section C.
D 	E
C P
(a)
P'
M' 	M
D
C F = P
(b)
P'
M' 	M
Fig. 4.40 	(a) Free-body diagram of straight
portion DE. (b) Free-body diagram of portion CD.

-- 306 of 897 --

292 	Pure Bending
P and P′ and the linear distribution corresponding to the bending couples M
and M′ (Fig. 4.41). Write
σ x = (σ x) centric + (σ x) bending
or recalling Eqs. (1.5) and (4.16),
σ x = P
A − My
I (4.50)
where A is the area of the cross section and I its centroidal moment of inertia
and y is measured from the centroidal axis of the cross section. This relationship
shows that the distribution of stresses across the section is linear but not uni-
form. Depending upon the geometry of the cross section and the eccentricity of
the load, the combined stresses may all have the same sign, as shown in
Fig. 4.41, or some may be positive and others negative, as shown in Fig. 4.42.
In the latter case, there will be a line in the section, along which σx = 0. This
line represents the neutral axis of the section. We note that the neutral axis does
not coincide with the centroidal axis of the section, since σx ≠ 0 for y = 0.
y 	y 	y
C 	C 	C	+ 	=	σ x 	σx 	σ x
Fig. 4.41 	Stress distribution for eccentric loading is obtained by superposing the axial
and pure bending distributions.
y
C 	C
y
C
N.A.
y
σ x 	σ x 	σx
=	+
Fig. 4.42 	Alternative stress distribution for eccentric loading that results in zones of
tension and compression.
The results obtained are valid only to the extent that the conditions of
applicability of the superposition principle (Sec. 2.5) and of Saint-Venant’s
principle (Sec. 2.10) are met. This means that the stresses involved must not
exceed the proportional limit of the material. The deformations due to bend-
ing must not appreciably affect the distance d in Fig. 4.39a, and the cross
section where the stresses are computed must not be too close to points D or E.
The first of these requirements clearly shows that the superposition method
cannot be applied to plastic deformations.
Concept Application 4.7
An open-link chain is obtained by bending low-carbon steel rods of 0.5-in.
diameter into the shape shown (Fig. 4.43a). Knowing that the chain carries a
load of 160 lb, determine (a) the largest tensile and compressive stresses in
the straight portion of a link, (b) the distance between the centroidal and the
neutral axis of a cross section. 	(continued)

-- 307 of 897 --

4.7 Eccentric Axial Loading in a Plane of Symmetry 	293
a. Largest Tensile and Compressive Stresses. 	The internal forces in
the cross section are equivalent to a centric force P and a bending couple M
(Fig. 4.43b) of magnitudes
P = 160 lb
M = Pd = (160 lb)(0.65 in.) = 104 lb·in.
The corresponding stress distributions are shown in Fig. 4.43c and d. The dis-
tribution due to the centric force P is uniform and equal to σ0 = P∕A. We have
A = πc2 = π(0.25 in.) 2 = 0.1963 in2
σ0 = P
A = 160 lb
0.1963 in2 = 815 psi
The distribution due to the bending couple M is linear with a maximum stress
σm = Mc∕I. We write
I = 1
4 πc4 = 1
4 π(0.25 in.) 4 = 3.068 × 10−3 in4
σ m = Mc
I = (104 lb·in.)(0.25 in.)
3.068 × 10−3 in4 	= 8475 psi
Superposing the two distributions, we obtain the stress distribution corre-
sponding to the given eccentric loading (Fig. 4.43e). The largest tensile and
compressive stresses in the section are found to be, respectively,
σ t = σ0 + σ m = 815 + 8475 = 9290 psi
σ c = σ0 − σ m = 815 − 8475 = −7660 psi
b. Distance Between Centroidal and Neutral Axes. 	The distance
y0 from the centroidal to the neutral axis of the section is obtained by
setting σx = 0 in Eq. (4.50) and solving for y0:
0 = P
A − My0
I
y0 =(
P
A)(
I
M) = (815 psi) 3.068 × 10−3 in4
104 lb·in.
= 0.0240 in.
160 lb
160 lb
0.5 in.
0.65 in.
(a)
160 lb
M
P	d = 0.65 in.
C
(b)
8475 psi
– 8475 psi – 7660 psi
N.A.
815 psi
C 	y 	C 	y 	C 	y
9290 psi
(c) 	(d) 	(e)
σ x 	σx 	σx
=	+
Fig. 4.43 	(a) Open chain link under loading. (b) Free-body diagram for section at C. (c) Axial
stress at section C. (d) Bending stress at C. (e) Superposition of stresses.

-- 308 of 897 --

294 	Pure Bending
Sample Problem 4.8
Knowing that for the cast-iron link shown the allowable stresses are 30 MPa
in tension and 120 MPa in compression, determine the largest force P which
can be applied to the link. (Note: The T-shaped cross section of the link has
previously been considered in Sample Prob. 4.2.)
A
B
D
10 mm
a
a
P'	P
STRATEGY: 	The stresses due to the axial load and the couple resulting
from the eccentricity of the axial load with respect to the neutral axis are
superposed to obtain the maximum stresses. The cross section is singly sym-
metric, so it is necessary to determine both the maximum compression stress
and the maximum tension stress and compare each to the corresponding allow-
able stress to find P.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Properties of Cross Section. 	The cross section is shown in Fig. 1. From
Sample Prob. 4.2, we have
A = 3000 mm2 = 3 × 10−3 m2 	Y = 38 mm = 0.038 m
I = 868 × 10−9 m4
We now write (Fig. 2): 	d = (0.038 m) − (0.010 m) = 0.028 m
cA = 0.022 m
cB = 0.038 m
0.010 m
A
d
B
C
D
Fig. 2 	Dimensions for finding d.
Force and Couple at C. 	Using Fig. 3, we replace P by an equivalent
force-couple system at the centroid C.
P = P 	M = P(d) = P(0.028 m) = 0.028P
A
C
D
B P
d
A
C
B
P
M
Fig. 3 	Equivalent force-couple system
at centroid C.
90 mm
20 mm
40 mm
10 mm
30 mm
Section a– a
A
B
C
D	ϒ
Fig. 1 	Section geometry to find
centroid location.

-- 309 of 897 --

4.7 Eccentric Axial Loading in a Plane of Symmetry 	295
The force P acting at the centroid causes a uniform stress distribution (Fig. 4a).
The bending couple M causes a linear stress distribution (Fig. 4b).
σ0 = P
A = P
3 × 10−3 = 333P 	(Compression)
σ1 = McA
I = (0.028P)(0.022)
868 × 10−9 	= 710P 	(Tension)
σ2 = McB
I = (0.028P)(0.038)
868 × 10−9 	= 1226P 	(Compression)
Superposition. 	The total stress distribution (Fig. 4c) is found by superpos-
ing the stress distributions caused by the centric force P and by the couple M.
Since tension is positive, and compression negative, we have
σA = − P
A + McA
I = −333P + 710P = +377P 	(Tension)
σB = − P
A − McB
I = −333P − 1226P = −1559P 	(Compression)
C
B
A 	A
McA
I
C
B
A
C
B
=
=
McB
I
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σ2
σ1
σB
σA
σ0
Fig. 4 	Stress distribution at section C is
superposition of axial and bending
distributions.
Largest Allowable Force. 	The magnitude of P for which the tensile
stress at point A is equal to the allowable tensile stress of 30 MPa is found
by writing
σ A = 377P = 30 MPa 	P = 79.6 kN 	◂
We also determine the magnitude of P for which the stress at B is equal to
the allowable compressive stress of 120 MPa.
σ B = −1559P = −120 MPa 	P = 77.0 kN 	◂
The magnitude of the largest force P that can be applied without exceeding
either of the allowable stresses is the smaller of the two values we have found.
P = 77.0 kN 	◂

-- 310 of 897 --

296
4.99 Knowing that the magnitude of the vertical force P is 2 kN, deter-
mine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B.
A 	D
18 mm
40 mm
12 mm
12 mm
P
B
Fig. P4.99
4.100 A small post DE is supported by a short 10 × 10-in. column as
shown. In a section ABC, sufficiently far from the post to remain
plane, determine the stress at (a) corner A, (b) corner C.
15 kips
C
B
A
D
E
4.5 in.
5.5 in.
5 in. 5 in.
Fig. P4.100
4.101 Two forces P can be applied separately or at the same time to a plate
that is welded to a solid circular bar of radius r. Determine the larg-
est compressive stress in the circular bar, (a) when both forces are
applied, (b) when only one of the forces is applied.
P	P
r 	r
Fig. P4.101
Problems

-- 311 of 897 --

297
4.102 A short 120 × 180-mm column supports the three axial loads shown.
Knowing that section ABD is sufficiently far from the loads to
remain plane, determine the stress at (a) corner A, (b) corner B.
x
z
y
30 kN
20 kN
100 kN
30 mm
60 mm
120 mm
90 mm
90 mm
A
B
D
C
Fig. P4.102
4.103 As many as three axial loads, each of magnitude P = 50 kN, can be
applied to the end of a W200 × 31.1 rolled-steel shape. Determine the
stress at point A, (a) for the loading shown, (b) if loads are applied at
points 1 and 2 only.
80 mm
80 mm
2 3
1
C
A
P
P
P
Fig. P4.103
4.104 Two 10-kN forces are applied to a 20 × 60-mm rectangular bar as
shown. Determine the stress at point A when (a) b = 0, (b) b = 15 mm,
(c) b = 25 mm.
4.105 Portions of a 1
2 × 1
2-in. square bar have been bent to form the two machine
components shown. Knowing that the allowable stress is 15 ksi, deter-
mine the maximum load that can be applied to each component.
1 in.
(a) 	(b)
P'	P 	P'	P
Fig. P4.105
z
x
y
A
C
b
25 mm
10 mm
30 mm
30 mm
10 mm
10 kN
10 kN
Fig. P4.104

-- 312 of 897 --

298
4.106 Knowing that the allowable stress in section a-a is 75 MPa, deter-
mine the largest force that can be exerted by the press shown.
P'
P
a 	a
80 mm
48 mm	32 mm
48 mm
200 mm 	80 mm
Section a-a
Fig. P4.106
4.107 A milling operation was used to remove a portion of a solid bar of
square cross section. Knowing that a = 30 mm, d = 20 mm, and
σall = 60 MPa, determine the magnitude P of the largest forces that
can be safely applied at the centers of the ends of the bar.
4.108 A milling operation was used to remove a portion of a solid bar of
square cross section. Forces of magnitude P = 18 kN are applied
at the centers of the ends of the bar. Knowing that a = 30 mm and
σall = 135 MPa, determine the smallest allowable depth d of the
milled portion of the bar.
4.109 The two forces shown are applied to a rigid plate supported by a
steel pipe of 8-in. outer diameter and 7-in. inner diameter. Determine
the value of P for which the maximum compressive stress in the pipe
is 15 ksi.
P	5 in.	12 kips
Fig. P4.109
4.110 An offset h must be introduced into a solid circular rod of diameter d.
Knowing that the maximum stress after the offset is introduced must
not exceed 5 times the stress in the rod when it is straight, determine
the largest offset that can be used.
4.111 An offset h must be introduced into a metal tube of 0.75-in. outer
diameter and 0.08-in. wall thickness. Knowing that the maximum
stress after the offset is introduced must not exceed 4 times the stress
in the tube when it is straight, determine the largest offset that can
be used.
a
a
d
P'
P
Fig. P4.107 and P4.108
P'
P'
P
P
d
d
h
Fig. P4.110 and P4.111

-- 313 of 897 --

299
4.112 A short column is made by nailing four 1 × 4-in. planks to a 4 × 4-in.
timber. Using an allowable stress of 600 psi, determine the largest
compressive load P that can be applied at the center of the top section
of the timber column as shown if (a) the column is as described,
(b) plank 1 is removed, (c) planks 1 and 2 are removed, (d) planks 1,
2, and 3 are removed, (e) all planks are removed.
4.113 A vertical rod is attached at point A to the cast-iron hanger shown.
Knowing that the allowable stresses in the hanger are σall = +5 ksi
and σall = −12 ksi, determine the largest downward force and the
largest upward force that can be exerted by the rod.
0.75 in.
3 in.
3 in.
1 in.
1.5 in. 	1.5 in.
a	a
B	A 0.75 in.
Section a-a
Fig. P4.113
4.114 To provide access to the interior of a hollow square tube of 0.25-in.
wall thickness, the portion CD of one side of the tube has been
removed. Knowing that the loading of the tube is equivalent to two
equal and opposite 15-kip forces acting at the geometric centers A
and E of the ends of the tube, determine (a) the maximum stress in
section a-a, (b) the stress at point F. Given: The centroid of the cross
section shown is at C and Iz = 4.81 in4.
z
A, E
C
y
F 4 in.
2 in.
2 in.
1.429 in.
Section a-a
a
A
B
D
a
4 in.
4 in.
P'
P
E
Fig. P4.114
4.115 Knowing that the clamp shown has been tightened on wooden planks
being glued together until P = 400 N, determine in section a-a,
(a) the stress at point A, (b) the stress at point D, (c) the location of
the neutral axis.
P'	P
a
a
B
A
D
Section a-a
50 mm 20 mm
10 mm 	4 mm
4 mm
Fig. P4.115
11
2	4
3
16 kips
Fig. P4.112

-- 314 of 897 --

300
4.116 The shape shown was formed by bending a thin steel plate. Assum-
ing that the thickness t is small compared to the length a of each
side of the shape, determine the stress (a) at A, (b) at B, (c) at C.
4.117 Three steel plates, each of 25 × 150-mm cross section, are welded
together to form a short H-shaped column. Later, for architectural
reasons, a 25-mm strip is removed from each side of one of the
flanges. Knowing that the load remains centric with respect to the
original cross section, and that the allowable stress is 100 MPa,
determine the largest force P that (a) could be applied to the original
column, (b) can be applied to the modified column.
4.118 A vertical force P of magnitude 20 kips is applied at point C located
on the axis of symmetry of the cross section of a short column.
Knowing that y = 5 in., determine (a) the stress at point A, (b) the
stress at point B, (c) the location of the neutral axis.
(a) 	(b)
y
y
y 	x
x
A
A
B
B
C
3 in.	3 in.
4 in.
2 in.
2 in. 	2 in.
1 in.
P
Fig. P4.118
4.119 Knowing that the allowable stress in section a-a of the hydraulic
press shown is 6 ksi in tension and 12 ksi in compression, determine
the largest force P that can be exerted by the press.
a	a
1 in.
1 in.
10 in.
10 in.
Section a-a	12 in.
P'
P
Fig. P4.119
50 mm
50 mm
P
Fig. P4.117
P'
P
A
B
C
a 	a
t
90°
Fig. P4.116

-- 315 of 897 --

301
4.120 The four bars shown have the same cross-sectional area. For the
given loadings, show that (a) the maximum compressive stresses are
in the ratio 4:5:7:9, (b) the maximum tensile stresses are in the ratio
2:3:5:3. (Note: The cross section of the triangular bar is an equilat-
eral triangle.)
P
P
P
P
Fig. P4.120
4.121 An eccentric force P is applied as shown to a steel bar of 25 × 90-mm
cross section. The strains at A and B have been measured and found
to be
εA = +350 μ 	εB = −70 μ
Knowing that E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the distance d, (b) the
magnitude of the force P.
30 mm
45 mm
15 mm
90 mm
25 mm
d
A
B 	P
Fig. P4.121
4.122 Solve Prob. 4.121, assuming that the measured strains are
εA = +600 μ 	εB = +420 μ
4.123 The C-shaped steel bar is used as a dynamometer to determine the
magnitude P of the forces shown. Knowing that the cross section of
the bar is a square of side 40 mm and that the strain on the inner
edge was measured and found to be 450 μ, determine the magnitude
P of the forces. Use E = 200 GPa.
40 mm
80 mm
P'
P
Fig. P4.123

-- 316 of 897 --

302
4.124 A short length of a rolled-steel column supports a rigid plate on
which two loads P and Q are applied as shown. The strains at two
points A and B on the centerline of the outer faces of the flanges
have been measured and found to be
εA = −400 × 10−6 in./in. 	εB = −300 × 10−6 in./in.
Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the magnitude of each load.
z
x
B 	A
A = 10.0 in2
I z = 273 in4
y
A
z 	x
6 in. 6 in.
P
Q 10 in.
Fig. P4.124
4.125 A single vertical force P is applied to a short steel post as shown.
Gages located at A, B, and C indicate the following strains:
εA = −500 μ 	εB = −1000 μ 	εC = −200 μ
Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the magnitude of P,
(b) the line of action of P, (c) the corresponding strain at the hidden
edge of the post, where x = −2.5 in. and z = −1.5 in.
P
C
B
A
y
z 	x
3 in.
5 in.
Fig. P4.125
4.126 The eccentric axial force P acts at point D, which must be located
25 mm below the top surface of the steel bar shown. For P = 60 kN,
(a) determine the depth d of the bar for which the tensile stress at
point A is maximum, (b) the corresponding stress at A.
a = 25 mm
b = 40 mm
20 mm
A
D
C	B
d 	P
Fig. P4.126

-- 317 of 897 --

4.8 Unsymmetric Bending Analysis 	303
4.8 	UNSYMMETRIC BENDING
ANALYSIS
Our analysis of pure bending has been limited so far to members possessing
at least one plane of symmetry and subjected to couples acting in that plane.
Because of the symmetry of such members and of their loadings, the members
remain symmetric with respect to the plane of the couples and thus bend in
that plane (Sec. 4.1B). This is illustrated in Fig. 4.44; part a shows the cross
section of a member possessing two planes of symmetry, one vertical and one
horizontal, and part b the cross section of a member with a single, vertical
plane of symmetry. In both cases the couple exerted on the section acts in the
vertical plane of symmetry of the member and is represented by the horizon-
tal couple vector M, and in both cases the neutral axis of the cross section is
found to coincide with the axis of the couple.
Let us now consider situations where the bending couples do not act in
a plane of symmetry of the member, either because they act in a different
plane (Fig. 4.45a and b), or because the member does not possess any plane
of symmetry (Fig. 4.45c). In such situations, we cannot assume that the mem-
ber will bend in the plane of the couples. In each case in Fig. 4.45, the
couple exerted on the section has again been assumed to act in a vertical plane
and has been represented by a horizontal couple vector M. However, since
the vertical plane is not a plane of symmetry, we cannot expect the member
to bend in that plane, nor can we expect the neutral axis of the section to
coincide with the axis of the couple.
(a)
(b)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
(c)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
M
z
y
N.A.
C
(a)
(b)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
(c)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
M
z
y
N.A.
C
(a)
(b)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
(c)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
M
z
y
N.A.
C
Fig. 4.45 	Moment not in plane of symmetry.
The precise conditions under which the neutral axis of a cross section
of arbitrary shape coincides with the axis of the couple M representing the
forces acting on that section is shown in Fig. 4.46. Both the couple vector M
M	z
y
N.A. 	C
(a)
(b)
M	z
y
N.A.
C
Fig. 4.44 	Moment in plane
of symmetry.
z
N.A.
C
x
−y
y
z
z
C
x
y
M
σx dA
=
Fig. 4.46 	Section of arbitrary shape where the neutral axis coincides with the
axis of couple M.

-- 318 of 897 --

304 	Pure Bending
and the neutral axis are assumed to be directed along the z axis. Recall from
Sec. 4.1A that the elementary internal forces σx dA form a system equivalent
to the couple M. Thus,
x components: 	∫σ x dA = 0 	(4.1)
moments about y axis: 	∫zσ x dA = 0 	(4.2)
moments about z axis: 	∫ (−yσ x dA) = M 	(4.3)
When all of the stresses are within the proportional limit, the first of these
equations leads to the requirement that the neutral axis be a centroidal axis,
and the last to the fundamental relation σx = −My∕I. Since we had assumed
in Sec. 4.1A that the cross section was symmetric with respect to the y axis,
Eq. (4.2) was dismissed as trivial at that time. Now that we are considering
a cross section of arbitrary shape, Eq. (4.2) becomes highly significant.
Assuming the stresses to remain within the proportional limit of the material,
σx = −σm y∕c is substituted into Eq. (4.2) for
∫z(−σm y
c )dA = 0 	or 	∫yz dA = 0 	(4.51)
The integral ∫yzdA represents the product of inertia Iyz of the cross section
with respect to the y and z axes, and will be zero if these axes are the prin-
cipal centroidal axes of the cross section.† Thus the neutral axis of the cross
section coincides with the axis of the couple M representing the forces acting
on that section if, and only if, the couple vector M is directed along one of
the principal centroidal axes of the cross section.
Note that the cross sections shown in Fig. 4.44 are symmetric with
respect to at least one of the coordinate axes. In each case, the y and z axes
are the principal centroidal axes of the section. Since the couple vector M
is directed along one of the principal centroidal axes, the neutral axis coin-
cides with the axis of the couple. Also, if the cross sections are rotated
through 90° (Fig. 4.47), the couple vector M is still directed along a prin-
cipal centroidal axis, and the neutral axis again coincides with the axis of
the couple, even though in case b the couple does not act in a plane of
symmetry of the member.
In Fig. 4.45, neither of the coordinate axes is an axis of symmetry for
the sections shown, and the coordinate axes are not principal axes. Thus, the
couple vector M is not directed along a principal centroidal axis, and the
neutral axis does not coincide with the axis of the couple. However, any given
section possesses principal centroidal axes, even if it is unsymmetric, as the
section shown in Fig. 4.45c, and these axes may be determined analytically
or by using Mohr’s circle.† If the couple vector M is directed along one of
the principal centroidal axes of the section, the neutral axis will coincide with
the axis of the couple (Fig. 4.48), and the equations derived for symmetric
members can be used to determine the stresses.
As you will see presently, the principle of superposition can be used to
determine stresses in the most general case of unsymmetric bending. Consider
first a member with a vertical plane of symmetry subjected to bending couples
†See Ferdinand P. Beer and E. Russell Johnston, Jr., Mechanics for Engineers, 5th ed.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008, or Vector Mechanics for Engineers, 12th ed., McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2019, Secs. 9.3–9.4.
(a)
(b)
M
N.A.
N.A.
z
y
C
M	
z
y
C
Fig. 4.47 	Moment aligned
with principal centroidal axis.
N.A.
(a)
M	z
y
C
N.A.
(b)
M	z
y
C
Fig. 4.48 	Moment aligned
with principal centroidal axis
of an unsymmetric shape.

-- 319 of 897 --

4.8 Unsymmetric Bending Analysis 	305
M and M′ acting in a plane forming an angle θ with the vertical plane
(Fig. 4.49). The couple vector M representing the forces acting on a given
cross section forms the same angle θ with the horizontal z axis (Fig. 4.50).
Resolving the vector M into component vectors Mz and My along the z and
y axes, respectively, gives
Mz = M cos θ 	M y = M sin θ 	(4.52)
M 	My
Mz
y
z 	C
θ
Fig. 4.50 	Applied moment is
resolved into y and z components.
Since the y and z axes are the principal centroidal axes of the cross sec-
tion, Eq. (4.16) determines the stresses resulting from the application of
either of the couples represented by Mz and My. The couple Mz acts in a
vertical plane and bends the member in that plane (Fig. 4.51). The result-
ing stresses are
σx = −Mz y
Iz
(4.53)
M'z
z
y
Mz
x
y
Fig. 4.51 	Mz acts in a plane that includes
a principal centroidal axis, bending the
member in the vertical plane.
where Iz is the moment of inertia of the section about the principal cen-
troidal z axis. The negative sign is due to the compression above the xz
plane (y > 0) and tension below (y < 0). The couple My acts in a hori-
zontal plane and bends the member in that plane (Fig. 4.52). The resulting
stresses are
σx = + My z
Iy
(4.54)
where Iy is the moment of inertia of the section about the principal centroidal
y axis, and where the positive sign is due to the fact that we have tension to
M
x
z
y
M' θ
Fig. 4.49 	Unsymmetric bending, with
bending moment not in a plane of symmetry.
M'y
z
z
My
x
y
Fig. 4.52 	My acts in a plane that includes a
principal centroidal axis, bending the member
in the horizontal plane.

-- 320 of 897 --

306 	Pure Bending
the left of the vertical xy plane (z > 0) and compression to its right (z < 0).
The distribution of the stresses caused by the original couple M is obtained
by superposing the stress distributions defined by Eqs. (4.53) and (4.54),
respectively. We have
σx = − Mz y
Iz
+ My z
Iy
(4.55)
Note that the expression obtained can also be used to compute the
stresses in an unsymmetric section, as shown in Fig. 4.53, once the principal
centroidal y and z axes have been determined. However, Eq. (4.55) is valid
only if the conditions of applicability of the principle of superposition are
met. It should not be used if the combined stresses exceed the proportional
limit of the material or if the deformations caused by one of the couples
appreciably affect the distribution of the stresses due to the other.
Equation (4.55) shows that the distribution of stresses caused by unsym-
metric bending is linear. However, the neutral axis of the cross section will
not, in general, coincide with the axis of the bending couple. Since the normal
stress is zero at any point of the neutral axis, the equation defining that axis
is obtained by setting σx = 0 in Eq. (4.55).
− Mz y
Iz
+ My z
Iy
= 0
Solving for y and substituting for Mz and My from Eqs. (4.52) gives
y = (
Iz
Iy
tan θ) z 	(4.56)
This equation is for a straight line of slope m = (Iz∕Iy) tan θ. Thus the angle
ϕ that the neutral axis forms with the z axis (Fig. 4.54) is defined by the
relation
tan ϕ = Iz
Iy
tan θ 	(4.57)
where θ is the angle that the couple vector M forms with the same axis. Since
Iz and Iy are both positive, ϕ and θ have the same sign. Furthermore, ϕ > θ
when Iz > Iy, and ϕ < θ when Iz < Iy. Thus, the neutral axis is always located
between the couple vector M and the principal axis corresponding to the
minimum moment of inertia.
M	
N. A.
C
y
z
θ	ϕ
Fig. 4.54 	Neutral axis for
unsymmetric bending.
C
y
z
Fig. 4.53 	Unsymmetric cross
section with principal axes.

-- 321 of 897 --

4.8 Unsymmetric Bending Analysis 	307
Concept Application 4.8
A 1600-lb⋅in. couple is applied to a wooden beam, of rectangular cross section
1.5 by 3.5 in., in a plane forming an angle of 30° with the vertical (Fig. 4.55a).
Determine (a) the maximum stress in the beam and (b) the angle that the
neutral surface forms with the horizontal plane.
C
30°
3.5 in.
1.5 in.
1600 lb·in.
(a)
Mz
My
E	D
C
A 	B
y
z
1.75 in.
0.75 in.
1600 lb·in.
(b)
θ = 30°
N. A.
 	E
C
D
A 	B
y
z
(c)
ϕ
a. Maximum Stress. 	The components Mz and My of the couple vector
are first determined (Fig. 4.55b):
M z = (1600 lb·in.) cos 30° = 1386 lb·in.
M y = (1600 lb·in.) sin 30° = 800 lb·in.
Compute the moments of inertia of the cross section with respect to the z and
y axes:
Iz = 1
12 (1.5 in.)(3.5 in.) 3 = 5.359 in4
Iy = 1
12 (3.5 in.)(1.5 in.) 3 = 0.9844 in4
The largest tensile stress due to Mz occurs along AB and is
σ1 = Mzy
Iz
= (1386 lb·in.)(1.75 in.)
5.359 in4 	= 452.6 psi
The largest tensile stress due to My occurs along AD and is
σ2 = My z
Iy
= (800 lb·in.)(0.75 in.)
0.9844 in4 	= 609.5 psi
The largest tensile stress due to the combined loading, therefore, occurs at A
and is
σmax = σ1 + σ2 = 452.6 + 609.5 = 1062 psi
The largest compressive stress has the same magnitude and occurs at E.
D
E
B
−1062 psi
1062 psi
Neutral axis
A
C
(d)
Fig. 4.55 	(a) Rectangular wood
beam subject to unsymmetric
bending. (b) Bending moment
resolved into components. (c) Cross
section with neutral axis. (d) Stress
distribution.
(continued)

-- 322 of 897 --

308 	Pure Bending
b. Angle of Neutral Surface with Horizontal Plane. 	The angle ϕ that
the neutral surface forms with the horizontal plane (Fig. 4.55c) is obtained
from Eq. (4.57):
tan ϕ = Iz
Iy
tan θ = 5.359 in4
0.9844 in4 tan 30° = 3.143
ϕ = 72.4°
The distribution of the stresses across the section is shown in Fig. 4.55d.
4.9 	GENERAL CASE OF
ECCENTRIC AXIAL
LOADING ANALYSIS
In Sec. 4.7 we analyzed the stresses produced in a member by an eccentric
axial load that was applied in a plane of symmetry of the member, with
the result that the member bent in the plane of the couples. We will now
study the more general case when the axial load is not applied in a plane
of symmetry.
Consider a straight member AB subjected to equal and opposite
eccentric axial forces P and P′ (Fig. 4.56a), and let a and b be the dis-
tances from the line of action of the forces to the principal centroidal axes
of the cross section of the member. The eccentric force P is statically
equivalent to the system consisting of a centric force P and of the two
couples My and Mz of moments My = Pa and Mz = Pb in Fig. 4.56b.
Similarly, the eccentric force P′ is equivalent to the centric force P′ and
the couples M′y and M′z.
By virtue of Saint-Venant’s principle (Sec. 2.10), replace the original
loading of Fig. 4.56a by the statically equivalent loading of Fig. 4.56b to deter-
mine the distribution of stresses in section S of the member (as long as that
section is not too close to either end). The stresses due to the loading of
Fig. 4.56b can be obtained by superposing the stresses corresponding to the
centric axial load P and to the bending couples My and Mz, as long as the
conditions of the principle of superposition are satisfied (Sec. 2.5). The stresses
due to the centric load P are given by Eq. (1.5), and the stresses due to the
bending couples by Eq. (4.55). Therefore,
σx = P
A − Mz y
Iz
+ My z
Iy
(4.58)
where y and z are measured from the principal centroidal axes of the sec-
tion. This relationship shows that the distribution of stresses across the
section is linear.
In computing the combined stress σx from Eq. (4.58), be sure to cor-
rectly determine the sign of each of the three terms in the right-hand mem-
ber, since each can be positive or negative, depending upon the sense of the
B
A
S
x
C
a	b	z
y
P'
P
P'
(a)
B
A
S
x
y
C
z
M'z Mz
M'y
My
P
(b)
Fig. 4.56 	Eccentric axial loading. (a) Axial
force applied away from section centroid.
(b) Equivalent force-couple system acting at
centroid.

-- 323 of 897 --

4.9 General Case of Eccentric Axial Loading Analysis 	309
loads P and P′ and the location of their line of action with respect to the
principal centroidal axes of the cross section. The combined stresses σ x
obtained from Eq. (4.58) at various points of the section may all have the
same sign, or some may be positive and others negative. In the latter case,
there will be a line in the section along which the stresses are zero. Setting
σ x = 0 in Eq. (4.58), the equation of a straight line representing the neutral
axis of the section is
M z
Iz
y − M y
Iy
z = P
A
Concept Application 4.9
A vertical 4.80-kN load is applied as shown on a wooden post of rectangular
cross section, 80 by 120 mm (Fig. 4.57a). (a) Determine the stress at points
A, B, C, and D. (b) Locate the neutral axis of the cross section.
4.80 kN
35 mm
120 mm 	80 mm
D
C
B
A
y
z 	x
(a)
P = 4.80 kN
Mz = 120 N·m Mx = 192 N·m
D
C
B
A
y
z x
(b)
Fig. 4.57 	(a) Eccentric load on a rectangular wood column. (b) Equivalent force-
couple system for eccentric load.
a. Stresses. 	The given eccentric load is replaced by an equivalent
system consisting of a centric load P and two couples Mx and Mz repre-
sented by vectors directed along the principal centroidal axes of the section
(Fig. 4.57b). Thus
M x = (4.80 kN)(40 mm) = 192 N·m
M z = (4.80 kN)(60 mm − 35 mm) = 120 N·m
Compute the area and the centroidal moments of inertia of the cross section:
A = (0.080 m)(0.120 m) = 9.60 × 10−3 m2
Ix = 1
12 (0.120 m)(0.080 m) 3 = 5.12 × 10−6 m4
Iz = 1
12 (0.080 m)(0.120 m) 3 = 11.52 × 10−6 m4
(continued)

-- 324 of 897 --

310 	Pure Bending
The stress σ0 due to the centric load P is negative and uniform across the
section:
σ0 = P
A = −4.80 kN
9.60 × 10−3 m2 = −0.5 MPa
The stresses due to the bending couples Mx and Mz are linearly distributed
across the section with maximum values equal to
σ1 = Mx zmax
Ix
= (192 N·m)(40 mm)
5.12 × 10−6 m4 	= 1.5 MPa
σ2 = Mz xmax
Iz
= (120 N·m)(60 mm)
11.52 × 10−6 m4 	= 0.625 MPa
The stresses at the corners of the section are
σ y = σ0 ± σ1 ± σ2
where the signs must be determined from Fig. 4.57b. Noting that the stresses
due to Mx are positive at C and D and negative at A and B, and the stresses
due to Mz are positive at B and C and negative at A and D, we obtain
σ A = −0.5 − 1.5 − 0.625 = −2.625 MPa
σ B = −0.5 − 1.5 + 0.625 = −1.375 MPa
σ C = −0.5 + 1.5 + 0.625 = +1.625 MPa
σ D = −0.5 + 1.5 − 0.625 = +0.375 MPa
b. Neutral Axis. 	The stress will be zero at a point G between B and C,
and at a point H between D and A (Fig. 4.57c). Since the stress distribution
is linear,
BG
80 mm = 1.375
1.625 + 1.375 BG = 36.7 mm
HA
80 mm = 2.625
2.625 + 0.375 HA = 70 mm
The neutral axis can be drawn through points G and H (Fig. 4.57d).
The distribution of the stresses across the section is shown in Fig. 4.57e.
80 mm
80 mm
0.375 MPa
1.625 MPa
−1.375 MPa
−2.625 MPa
C 	A
D
H	G	B
(c)
C
A
D
H
G
x
z
O
B
Neutral axis
(d)
C
H
B
A
−2.625 MPa
Neutral
axis
+1.625 MPa	+0.375 MPa
G
−1.375 MPa
(e)
Fig. 4.57 	(cont.) (c) Stress distributions along edges BC and AD. (d) Neutral axis through points G and H. (e) Stress distribution
for eccentric load.

-- 325 of 897 --

4.9 General Case of Eccentric Axial Loading Analysis 	311
Sample Problem 4.9
A horizontal load P is applied as shown to a short section of an S10 × 25.4
rolled-steel member. Knowing that the compressive stress in the member is
not to exceed 12 ksi, determine the largest permissible load P.
STRATEGY: 	The load is applied eccentrically with respect to both centroi-
dal axes of the cross section. The load is replaced with an equivalent force-
couple system at the centroid of the cross section. The stresses due to the
axial load and the two couples are then superposed to determine the maximum
stresses on the cross section.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Properties of Cross Section. 	The cross section is shown in Fig. 1, and
the following data are taken from Appendix E.
Area: A = 7.46 in2
Section moduli: Sx = 24.7 in3 	Sy = 2.91 in3
C
y
x
4.66 in.
10 in.
Fig. 1 	Rolled-steel member.
Force and Couple at C. 	Using Fig. 2, we replace P by an equivalent
force-couple system at the centroid C of the cross section.
Mx = (4.75 in.)P 	My = (1.5 in.)P
Note that the couple vectors Mx and My are directed along the principal axes
of the cross section.
Normal Stresses. 	The absolute values of the stresses at points A, B, D,
and E due, respectively, to the centric load P and to the couples Mx and
My are
σ1 = P
A = P
7.46 in2 = 0.1340P
σ2 = Mx
Sx
= 4.75P
24.7 in3 = 0.1923P
σ3 = My
Sy
= 1.5P
2.91 in3 = 0.5155P
4.75 in.
1.5 in.
C
S10 × 25.4 	P
y
x	A
B
C
P
Mx
My
D
E
Fig. 2 	Equivalent force-couple system
at section centroid.
(continued)

-- 326 of 897 --

312 	Pure Bending
Superposition. 	The total stress at each point is found by superposing the
stresses due to P, Mx, and My. We determine the sign of each stress by care-
fully examining the sketch of the force-couple system.
σ A = −σ1 + σ2 + σ3 = −0.1340P + 0.1923P + 0.5155P = +0.574P
σ B = −σ1 + σ2 − σ3 = −0.1340P + 0.1923P − 0.5155P = −0.457P
σ D = −σ1 − σ2 + σ3 = −0.1340P − 0.1923P + 0.5155P = +0.189P
σ E = −σ1 − σ2 − σ3 = −0.1340P − 0.1923P − 0.5155P = −0.842P
Largest Permissible Load. 	The maximum compressive stress occurs at
point E. Recalling that σall = −12 ksi, we write
σall = σ E 	−12 ksi = −0.842P 	P = 14.3 kips 	◂
*Sample Problem 4.10
A couple of magnitude M0 = 1.5 kN⋅m acting in a vertical plane is applied
to a beam having the Z-shaped cross section shown. Determine (a) the stress
at point A and (b) the angle that the neutral axis forms with the horizontal
plane. The moments and product of inertia of the section with respect to the
y and z axes have been computed and are
Iy = 3.25 × 10−6 m4
Iz = 4.18 × 10−6 m4
Iyz = 2.87 × 10−6 m4
STRATEGY: 	The Z-shaped cross section does not have an axis of symme-
try, so it is first necessary to determine the orientation of the principal axes
and the corresponding moments of inertia. The applied load is then resolved
into components along the principal axes. The stresses due to the axial load
and the two couples are then superposed to determine the stress at point A.
The angle between the neutral axis and horizontal plane is then found using
Eq. (4.57).
M0
y
z
x
M0 = 1.5 kN·m
y
A
C	z
12 mm 	12 mm
100 mm
12 mm
80 mm

-- 327 of 897 --

4.9 General Case of Eccentric Axial Loading Analysis 	313
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Principal Axes. 	We draw Mohr’s circle and determine the orientation of the
principal axes and the corresponding principal moments of inertia (Fig. 1).†
tan 2θm = FZ
EF = 2.87
0.465 2θm = 80.8° 	θm = 40.4°
R2 = (EF) 2 + (FZ) 2 = (0.465) 2 + (2.87) 2 	R = 2.91 × 10−6 m4
Iu = Imin = OU = Iave − R = 3.72 − 2.91 = 0.810 × 10−6 m4
Iv = Imax = OV = Iave + R = 3.72 + 2.91 = 6.63 × 10−6 m4
Iyz(10 –6 m4)
I y, Iz (10–6 m4)
Iave = 3.72 	Z(4.18, –2.87)
Y(3.25, 2.87)
O 	U 	D 	E F
R
R
V
2θ m
Fig. 1 	Mohr’s circle analysis.
Loading. 	As shown in Fig. 2, the applied couple M0 is resolved into
components parallel to the principal axes.
M u = M0 sin θm = 1500 sin 40.4° = 972 N·m
M v = M0 cos θm = 1500 cos 40.4° = 1142 N·m
a. Stress at A. 	The perpendicular distances from each principal axis to
point A shown in Fig. 3 are
uA = y A cos θm + z A sin θm = 50 cos 40.4° + 74 sin 40.4° = 86.0 mm
v A = −y A sin θm + z A cos θm = −50 sin 40.4° + 74 cos 40.4° = 23.9 mm
Considering separately the bending about each principal axis, note that Mu
produces a tensile stress at point A while Mv produces a compressive stress
at the same point.
σ A = + Mu v A
Iu
− Mv uA
Iv
= + (972 N·m)(0.0239 m)
0.810 × 10−6 m4 	− (1142 N·m)(0.0860 m)
6.63 × 10−6 m4
= +(28.68 MPa) − (14.81 MPa) 	σA = +13.87 MPa 	◂
b. Neutral Axis. 	As shown in Fig. 4, we find the angle ϕ that the
neutral axis forms with the v axis.
tan ϕ = Iv
Iu
tan θm = 6.63
0.810 tan 40.4° 	ϕ = 81.8°
The angle β formed by the neutral axis and the horizontal is
β = ϕ − θm = 81.8° − 40.4° = 41.4° 	β = 41.4° 	◂
†See Ferdinand F. Beer and E. Russell Johnston, Jr., Mechanics for Engineers, 5th ed.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008, or Vector Mechanics for Engineers–12th ed., McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2019, Secs. 9.3–9.4.
M0 = 1.5 kN·m 	Mu
Mv
y
u
A
C	z
v
θm
θ m = 40.4°
Fig. 2 	Bending moment resolved
along principal axes.
z
v
zA sin θm
yA cos θm
yA = 50 mm
zA = 74 mm y
u
C
A
vA
uA 	θm
Fig. 3 	Location of A relative to principal axis.
u
v
M0 C
N.A.
ϕ
θm
β
Fig. 4 	Cross section with
neutral axis.

-- 328 of 897 --

314
4.127 through 4.134 	The couple M is applied to a beam of the cross
section shown in a plane forming an angle β with the vertical. Deter-
mine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B, (c) point D.
Problems
A B
z
y
16 mm
16 mm
40 mm 	40 mm
M = 300 N·m
D
C
β = 60°
Fig. P4.127
z
y
0.6 in.
0.4 in.
0.6 in.
M = 400 lb·in.
A 	B
D
C
β = 30°
Fig. P4.128
M = 25 kN·m
C
80 mm
80 mm
30 mm
20 mm
z
y
A 	B
D
β = 15°
Fig. P4.129
6 in.
6 in.
2.94 in.
C12 × 20.7
A B
D
C
M = 120 kip·in.
0.698 in.
z
y
β = 10°
Fig. P4.130
A
2.5 in.
5 in.
2.5 in.
3 in.
y
z
3 in.
1 in.	1 in.
B
C
D
5 in.
M = 60 kip·in.
β = 50°
Fig. P4.131
A 	B
4 in.
1.6 in.	2.4 in.
4.8 in.
C
M = 75 kip·in.
D
y
z
β = 75°
Fig. P4.132
y
z
M = 100 N·m
A
B
r = 20 mm
C
D
β = 30°
Fig. P4.133
165 mm
310 mm
15°
M = 16 kN·m
W310 × 38.7
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. P4.134

-- 329 of 897 --

315
4.135 through 4.140 The couple M acts in a vertical plane and is applied
to a beam oriented as shown. Determine (a) the angle that the neutral
axis forms with the horizontal, (b) the maximum tensile stress in the
beam.
6 in.
3.33 in.
20°
C 	B
D
A
E
M = 15 kip·in.
S6 × 12.5
Fig. P4.135
A
B
14.5 mm
C200 × 17.1
203 mm
57.4 mm
C
M = 2.8 kN·m
D
E
10°
Fig. P4.136
z'
y'
F
E
D
B
	A
C
M = 4 kN·m
60 mm
23.33 mm
60 mm
30 mm
25°
30 mm
Fig. P4.137
A
B
in.
4 in. 4 in.
4 in.
0.859 in.
45°
C
M = 15 kip·in.
D
1
2
y'
z'
Iy' = 6.74 in4
Iz' = 21.4 in4
Fig. P4.138
M = 750 N·m
20°
90 mm
25 mm
25 mm
30 mm
C
B
A
Fig. P4.140
A
M = 120 N·m
20°
D
B
E 10 mm
10 mm
10 mm
10 mm
6 mm
y'
z' 	6 mm
C
Iy' = 14.77 × 103 mm 4
Iz' = 53.6 × 103 mm 4
Fig. P4.139

-- 330 of 897 --

316
*4.141 through *4.143 	The couple M acts in a vertical plane and is applied
to a beam oriented as shown. Determine the stress at point A.
C
A
z
y
2.4 in.
2.4 in. 2.4 in.
2.4 in.
2.4 in.
2.4 in.
M = 125 kip·in.
Fig. P4.142
C
A
Iy = 185.9 in4
Iz = 1730 in4
Iyz = +146.5 in4
z
y
8 in.
6 in.
8 in.
3 in.
3 in.
M = 350 kip·in.
Fig. P4.143
4.144 The tube shown has a uniform wall thickness of 12 mm. For the
loading given, determine (a) the stress at points A and B, (b) the
point where the neutral axis intersects line ABD.
75 mm
125 mm
28 kN
28 kN
14 kN
A
D
B 	G
H
E
F
Fig. P4.144
4.145 A horizontal load P of magnitude 100 kN is applied to the beam
shown. Determine the largest distance a for which the maximum
tensile stress in the beam does not exceed 75 MPa.
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
60 mm
P	
z 	x
O
a
y
Fig. P4.145
A
40 mm
10 mm
40 mm
10 mm 	10 mm	70 mm
C	M = 1.2 kN·m
y
z
Iy = 1.894 × 10 6 mm4
Iz = 0.614 × 106 mm4
Iyz = +0.800 × 106 mm 4
Fig. P4.141

-- 331 of 897 --

317
4.146 Knowing that P = 90 kips, determine the largest distance a for which
the maximum compressive stress does not exceed 18 ksi.
1 in.
1 in.
1 in.
4 in. 	5 in.
2.5 in.
P
a
Fig. P4.146 and P4.147
4.147 Knowing that a = 1.25 in., determine the largest value of P that can
be applied without exceeding either of the following allowable stresses:
σten = 10 ksi 	σcomp = 18 ksi
4.148 The 120-kN load may be applied at any point on the circumference
of the 40-mm-radius circle shown. If θ = 20°, determine (a) the
stress at A, (b) the stress at B, (c) the point where the neutral axis
intersects line ABD.
4.149 Knowing that the 120-kN load may be applied at any point on
the circumference of the 40-mm-radius circle shown, deter-
mine (a) the value of θ for which the stress at D reaches its
largest value, (b) the corresponding stress at A, B, and D.
4.150 A beam having the cross section shown is subjected to a couple
M0 that acts in a vertical plane. Determine the largest permissible
value of the moment M0 of the couple if the maximum stress in the
beam is not to exceed 12 ksi. Given: Iy = Iz = 11.3 in4, A = 4.75 in2,
kmin = 0.983 in. (Hint: By reason of symmetry, the principal axes
form an angle of 45° with the coordinate axes. Use the relations
Imin = Ak2min and Imin + Imax = Iy + Iz.)
C
0.5 in.
5 in.
1.43 in.
1.43 in.
5 in.
0.5 in.
y
z 	M0
Fig. P4.150
4.151 Solve Prob. 4.150, assuming that the couple M0 acts in a horizontal
plane.
P = 120 kN
z
100 mm	160 mm
A
y
C
r = 40 mm
θ
x
B
D
Fig. P4.148 and P4.149

-- 332 of 897 --

318
4.152 The Z section shown is subjected to a couple M0 acting in a vertical
plane. Determine the largest permissible value of the moment M0
of the couple if the maximum stress is not to exceed 80 MPa.
Given: Imax = 2.28 × 10−6 m4, Imin = 0.23 × 10−6 m4, principal axes
25.7°⦪ and 64.3°⦨.
C
40 mm
10 mm 	10 mm
10 mm
70 mm
y
z
40 mm
M0
Fig. P4.152
4.153 Solve Prob. 4.152 assuming that the couple M0 acts in a horizontal
plane.
4.154 Two horizontal loads are applied as shown to a short section of a
C10 × 15.3 rolled-steel channel. Knowing that the tensile stress in
the member is not to exceed 10 ksi, determine the largest permis-
sible load P.
P
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
15 kips
C
Fig. P4.154
4.155 A beam having the cross section shown is subjected to a couple
M0 acting in a vertical plane. Determine the largest permissible value
of the moment M0 of the couple if the maximum stress is not to
exceed 100 MPa. Given: Iy = Iz = b4∕36 and Iyz = b4∕72.
20 mm
20 mm
b = 60 mm
b = 60 mm
M0
z
y
C
Fig. P4.155
4.156 Show that, if a solid rectangular beam is bent by a couple applied
in a plane containing one diagonal of a rectangular cross section, the
neutral axis will lie along the other diagonal.
M
A
B
E
C
D
h
b
Fig. P4.156

-- 333 of 897 --

319
4.157 (a) Show that the stress at corner A of the prismatic member shown
in Fig. a will be zero if the vertical force P is applied at a point
located on the line
x
b∕6 + z
h∕6 = 1
(b) Further show that, if no tensile stress is to occur in the member,
the force P must be applied at a point located within the area bounded
by the line found in part a and three similar lines corresponding to
the condition of zero stress at B, C, and D, respectively. This area,
shown in Fig. b, is known as the kern of the cross section.
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
z
z x
x
b
h
y
h
6
b
6	(a) 	(b)
P
Fig. P4.157
4.158 A beam of unsymmetric cross section is subjected to a couple M0
acting in the horizontal plane xz. Show that the stress at point A of
coordinates y and z is
σ A = z Iz − yIyz
Iy Iz − I 2
yz
M y
where Iy, Iz, and Iyz denote the moments and product of inertia of the
cross section with respect to the coordinate axes, and My the moment
of the couple.
4.159 A beam of unsymmetric cross section is subjected to a couple M0
acting in the vertical plane xy. Show that the stress at point A of
coordinates y and z is
σ A = −yIy − zIyz
Iy Iz − I 2
yz
M z
where Iy, Iz, and Iyz denote the moments and product of inertia of the
cross section with respect to the coordinate axes, and Mz the moment
of the couple.
4.160 (a) Show that, if a vertical force P is applied at point A of the section
shown, the equation of the neutral axis BD is
(
xA
r2
z ) x + (
zA
r2
x ) z = −1
where rz and rx denote the radius of gyration of the cross section
with respect to the z axis and the x axis, respectively. (b) Further
show that, if a vertical force Q is applied at any point located on
line BD, the stress at point A will be zero.
A
C
y
y
z
z
x
Fig. P4.158 and P4.159
A
B
C P
D
y
x
z xA z A
Fig. P4.160

-- 334 of 897 --

320 	Pure Bending
*4.10 	CURVED MEMBERS
Our analysis of stresses due to bending has been restricted so far to members
that are straight along their length. In this section, we will determine the
bending stresses due to the application of equal and opposite couples to a
member that is initially curved. Our discussion is limited to curved members
with uniform cross sections possessing a plane of symmetry in which the
bending couples are applied. It is assumed that all stresses remain below the
proportional limit.
If the initial curvature of the member is small (i.e., the radius of cur-
vature is large compared to the depth of its cross section) an approximation
can be obtained for the distribution of stresses by assuming the member to be
straight and using the formulas derived in Secs. 4.1B and 4.2.†
However, when the curvature is large, i.e., when the radius of curvature
and the dimensions of the cross section of the member are of the same order
of magnitude, it is necessary to use a different method of analysis, which was
first introduced by the German engineer E. Winkler (1835–1888).
Consider the curved member of uniform cross section shown in Fig. 4.58.
Its transverse section is symmetric with respect to the y axis (Fig. 4.58b) and,
in its unstressed state, its upper and lower surfaces intersect the vertical xy plane
along arcs of circle AB and FG centered at C (Fig. 4.58a). Now apply two equal
†See Prob. 4.166.
R
R
A
J
D
F 	G
E
B
K
y
r
r
C 	C
y
y
y
x 	x	z
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
N. A.
F'
D'
J'
A'
R' M	M'
C'
r'
B'
K'
E'
y
y
G'
θ
θ' = θ + Δθ
Fig. 4.58 	Curved member in pure bending: (a) undeformed, (b) cross section, and (c) deformed.
and opposite couples M and M′ in the plane of symmetry of the member
(Fig. 4.58c). A reasoning similar to that of Sec. 4.1B would show that any
transverse plane section containing C remains plane, and the various arcs of
circle indicated in Fig. 4.58a are transformed into circular and concentric arcs
with a center C′ different from C. If the couples M and M′ are directed as
shown, the curvature of the various arcs of circle increases; that is, A′C′ < AC.
Also, the couples M and M′ cause the length of the upper surface of the
member to decrease (A′B′ < AB) and the length of the lower surface to

-- 335 of 897 --

*4.10 Curved Members 	321
increase (F′G′ > FG). Therefore, we conclude that a neutral surface must
exist in the member, the length of which remains constant. The intersection
of the neutral surface with the xy plane is shown in Fig. 4.58a by the arc DE
of radius R, and in Fig. 4.58c by the arc D′E′ of radius R′. The central angles θ
and θ′ corresponding respectively to DE and D′E′ express the fact that the
length of the neutral surface remains constant by
Rθ = R′θ′ 	(4.59)
Considering the arc of circle JK located at a distance y above the
neutral surface and denoting respectively by r and r′ the radius of this arc
before and after the bending couples have been applied, the deformation of
JK is
δ = r′θ′ − rθ 	(4.60)
Observing from Fig. 4.58 that
r = R − y 	r′ = R′ − y 	(4.61)
and substituting these expressions into Eq. (4.60),
δ = (R′ − y)θ′ − (R − y)θ
or recalling Eq. (4.59) and setting θ′ − θ = Δθ,
δ = −yΔθ 	(4.62)
The normal strain εx in the elements of JK is obtained by dividing the defor-
mation δ by the original length rθ of arc JK:
ε x = δ
rθ = − y Δθ
rθ
Recalling the first of the relationships in Eq. (4.61),
ε x = − Δθ
θ
y
R − y (4.63)
This relationship shows that, while each transverse section remains plane, the
normal strain εx does not vary linearly with the distance y from the neutral
surface.
The normal stress σx can be obtained from Hooke’s law, σx = Eεx, by
substituting for εx from Eq. (4.63):
σx = − E Δθ
θ
y
R − y (4.64)
or alternatively, recalling the first of Eqs. (4.61),
σ x = − E Δθ
θ
R − r
r (4.65)
Equation (4.64) shows that, like εx, the normal stress σx does not vary linearly
with the distance y from the neutral surface. Plotting σx versus y, an arc of
hyperbola is obtained (Fig. 4.59).
N. A.
y
z
y
σ x
Fig. 4.59 	Stress distribution in curved beam.

-- 336 of 897 --

322 	Pure Bending
To determine the location of the neutral surface in the member and the
value of the coefficient E Δθ∕θ used in Eqs. (4.64) and (4.65), we recall that
the elementary forces acting on any transverse section must be statically
equivalent to the bending couple M. Expressing that the sum of the elemen-
tary forces acting on the section must be zero and that the sum of their
moments about the transverse z axis must be equal to the bending moment M,
write the equations
∫σ x dA = 0 	(4.1)
and
∫ (−yσ x dA) = M 	(4.3)
Substituting for σx from Eq. (4.65) into Eq. (4.1), write
− ∫ E Δθ
θ
R − r
r dA = 0
∫ R − r
r dA = 0
R ∫ dA
r − ∫dA = 0
from which it follows that the distance R from the center of curvature C to
the neutral surface is defined by
R = A
∫ dA
r
(4.66)
Note that the value obtained for R is not equal to the distance r from
C to the centroid of the cross section, since r is defined by a different rela-
tionship, namely,
r = 1
A ∫r dA 	(4.67)
Thus in a curved member the neutral axis of a transverse section does not
pass through the centroid of that section (Fig. 4.60).† Expressions for the
†However, an interesting property of the neutral surface is noted if Eq. (4.66) is written in
the alternative form
1
R = 1
A ∫ 1
r dA 	(4.66a)
Equation (4.66a) shows that, if the member is divided into a large number of fibers of cross-
sectional area dA, the curvature 1∕R of the neutral surface is equal to the average value of
the curvature 1∕r of the various fibers.
N. A.
Centroid
z
y
C
R
e
r
Fig. 4.60 	Parameter e locates neutral
axis relative to the centroid of a curved
member section.

-- 337 of 897 --

*4.10 Curved Members 	323
radius R of the neutral surface will be derived for some specific cross-sectional
shapes in Concept Application 4.10 and in Probs. 4.187 through 4.189. These
expressions are shown in Fig. 4.61.
Substituting now for σx from Eq. (4.65) into Eq. (4.3), write
∫ E Δθ
θ
R − r
r y dA = M
or since y = R − r,
E Δθ
θ ∫ (R − r) 2
r dA = M
Expanding the square in the integrand, we obtain after reductions
E Δθ
θ 	[R2 ∫ dA
r − 2RA + ∫r dA] = M
Recalling Eqs. (4.66) and (4.67), we note that the first term in the brackets is
equal to RA, while the last term is equal to rA. Therefore,
E Δθ
θ (RA − 2RA + rA) = M
and solving for E Δθ∕θ,
E Δθ
θ = M
A(r − R) (4.68)
r1
r2
b
R = 	R = 	R = 	R =
h
h
r2
C
c
C
Rectangle
r1
	ln
r1
r2
b
− 1
h
h
r2
C
r1
r2
h
C
Triangle	Circle
h
r2
(r + 	r2 − c2)
r1
2
1
2
1
ln
h2(b1 + b2)
− h(b1 − b2 )	(b1r2 − b2r1)
Trapezoid
r2
r1
2
1
ln
b1
b2
r
Fig. 4.61 	Radius of neutral surface for various cross-sectional shapes.

-- 338 of 897 --

324 	Pure Bending
Referring to Fig. 4.58, Δθ > 0 for M > 0. It follows that r − R > 0, or R < r,
regardless of the shape of the section. Thus the neutral axis of a transverse
section is always located between the centroid of the section and the center
of curvature of the member (Fig. 4.60). Setting r − R = e, Eq. (4.68) is writ-
ten in the form
E Δθ
θ = M
Ae (4.69)
Substituting for E Δθ∕θ from Eq. (4.69) into Eqs. (4.64) and (4.65), the alter-
native expressions for the normal stress σx in a curved beam are
σx = − My
Ae(R − y) (4.70)
and
σx = M(r − R)
Aer (4.71)
Note that the parameter e in the previous equations is a small quantity
obtained by subtracting two lengths of comparable size, R and r. To determine
σx with a reasonable degree of accuracy, it is necessary to compute R and r
very accurately, particularly when both of these quantities are large (i.e., when
the curvature of the member is small). However, it is possible in such a case
to obtain a good approximation for σx by using the formula σx = −My∕I
developed for straight members.
We will now determine the change in curvature of the neutral surface
caused by the bending moment M. Solving Eq. (4.59) for the curvature 1∕R′
of the neutral surface in the deformed member,
1
R′ = 1
R
θ′
θ
or setting θ′ = θ + Δθ and recalling Eq. (4.69),
1
R′ = 1
R (1 + Δθ
θ ) = 1
R (1 + M
EAe)
the change in curvature of the neutral surface is
1
R′ − 1
R = M
EAeR (4.72)

-- 339 of 897 --

*4.10 Curved Members 	325
Concept Application 4.10
A curved rectangular bar has a mean radius r = 6 in. and a cross
section of width b = 2.5 in. and depth h = 1.5 in. (Fig. 4.62a).
Determine the distance e between the centroid and the neutral axis
of the cross section.
We first derive the expression for the radius R of the neutral
surface. Denoting by r1 and r2, respectively, the inner and outer
radius of the bar (Fig. 4.62b), use Eq. (4.66) to write
R = A
∫r2
r1
dA
r
= bh
∫r2
r1
b dr
r
= h
∫r2
r1
dr
r
R = h
ln r2
r1
(4.73)
For the given data,
r1 = r − 1
2h = 6 − 0.75 = 5.25 in.
r2 = r + 1
2h = 6 + 0.75 = 6.75 in.
Substituting for h, r1, and r2 into Eq. (4.73),
R = h
ln r2
r1
= 1.5 in.
ln 6.75
5.25
= 5.9686 in.
The distance between the centroid and the neutral axis of the cross section
(Fig. 4.62c) is thus
e = r − R = 6 − 5.9686 = 0.0314 in.
Note that it was necessary to calculate R with five significant figures in order
to obtain e with the usual degree of accuracy.
h
b
h/2
C 	C
r	r
(a)
r2
r2
b
dr	dr
r1 r1
r
C 	C
r
(b)
r = 6 in.
C
R = 5.9686 in.
e = 0.0314 in.
Neutral axis
Centroid
(c)
Fig. 4.62 	(a) Curved rectangular bar. (b) Dimensions for curved bar. (c) Location of the
neutral axis.

-- 340 of 897 --

326 	Pure Bending
Concept Application 4.11
For the bar of Concept Application 4.10, determine the largest tensile
and compressive stresses, knowing that the bending moment in the bar
is M = 8 kip⋅in.
Use Eq. (4.71) with the given data
M = 8 kip·in. 	A = bh = (2.5 in.)(1.5 in.) = 3.75 in2
and the values obtained in Concept Application 4.10 for R and e:
R = 5.969 	e = 0.0314 in.
First using r = r2 = 6.75 in. in Eq. (4.71), write
σmax = M(r2 − R)
Aer2
= (8 kip·in.)(6.75 in. − 5.969 in.)
(3.75 in2 )(0.0314 in.)(6.75 in.)
= 7.86 ksi
Now using r = r1 = 5.25 in. in Eq. (4.71),
σmin = M(r1 − R)
Aer1
= (8 kip·in.)(5.25 in. − 5.969 in.)
(3.75 in2 )(0.0314 in.)(5.25 in.)
= −9.30 ksi
Remark. 	Compare the values obtained for σmax and σmin with the result for
a straight bar. Using Eq. (4.15) of Sec. 4.2,
σmax, min = ± Mc
I
= ± (8 kip·in.)(0.75 in.)
1
12 (2.5 in.)(1.5 in.) 3 = ±8.53 ksi

-- 341 of 897 --

*4.10 Curved Members 	327
Sample Problem 4.11
A machine component has a T-shaped cross section and is loaded as shown.
Knowing that the allowable compressive stress is 50 MPa, determine the larg-
est force P that can be applied to the component.
60 mm
20 mm
Section a-a
40 mm
20 mm
30 mm	80 mm	a
a
P' 	P
STRATEGY: 	The properties are first determined for the singly symmetric
cross section. The force and couple at the critical section are used to calculate
the maximum compressive stress, which is obtained by superposing the axial
stress and the bending stress determined from Eqs. (4.66) and (4.71). This
stress is then equated to the allowable compressive stress to determine the
force P.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Centroid of the Cross Section. 	Locate the centroid D of the cross sec-
tion (Fig. 1).
Ai, mm2 	ri , mm 	ri Ai, mm3 	r ΣAi = Σri Ai
1 	(20)(80) = 1600 	40 	64 × 103 	r (2400) = 120 × 103
2 	(40)(20) = 800 	70 	56 × 103 	r = 50 mm = 0.050 m
Σ Ai = 2400 	Σ ri Ai = 120 × 103
40 mm
20 mm
2
1	20 mm
30 mm 	80 mm
r2 = 70 mm
r1 = 40 mm
Fig. 1 	Composite areas to calculate centroid
location.
Force and Couple at D. 	The internal forces in section a–a are equivalent
to a force P acting at D and a couple M of moment (Fig. 2)
M = P(50 mm + 60 mm) = (0.110 m)P
(continued)
M
P
B
A
C
50 mm
60 mm
D
P'
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of
left side.

-- 342 of 897 --

328 	Pure Bending
Superposition. 	The centric force P causes a uniform compressive stress
on section a–a, shown in Fig. 3a. The bending couple M causes a varying
stress distribution [Eq. (4.71)], shown in Fig. 3b. We note that the couple M
tends to increase the curvature of the member and is therefore positive (see
Fig. 4.58). The total stress at a point of section a–a located at distance r from
the center of curvature C is
σ = − P
A + M(r − R)
Aer (1)
B
P
A
D
A
(a) 	(b)
C
B
M (r − R)
Aer
D
A 	R
r
C
σ = − 	σ =
Fig. 3 	Stress distribution is the
superposition of (a) axial stress and
(b) bending stress.
Radius of Neutral Surface. 	Using Fig. 4, we now determine the radius
R of the neutral surface by using Eq. (4.66).
R = A
∫ dA
r
= 2400 mm2
∫r2
r1
(80 mm) dr
r + ∫r3
r2
(20 mm) dr
r
= 2400
80 ln 50
30 + 20 ln 90
50
= 2400
40.866 + 11.756 = 45.61 mm
= 0.04561 m
We also compute: e = r − R = 0.05000 m − 0.04561 m = 0.00439 m
Allowable Load. 	We observe that the largest compressive stress will occur
at point A where r = 0.030 m. Recalling that σall = 50 MPa and using
Eq. (1), write
−50 × 106 Pa = − P
2.4 × 10−3 m2 + (0.110 P)(0.030 m − 0.04561 m)
(2.4 × 10−3 m2 )(0.00439 m)(0.030 m)
−50 × 106 = −417P − 5432P 	P = 8.55 kN 	◂
B
A
D
C
dr
r
20 mm
80 mm
r3 = 90 mm
r2 = 50 mm
r1 = 30 mm
Fig. 4 	Geometry of cross section.

-- 343 of 897 --

329
4.161 For the curved bar and loading shown, determine the stress at point A
when (a) r1 = 30 mm, (b) r1 = 50 mm.
A	A
B	B
20 mm
30 mm
C
75 N·m 	75 N·m r1
Fig. P4.161 and P4.162
4.162 For the curved bar and loading shown, determine the stress at points A
and B when r1 = 40 mm.
4.163 For the machine component and loading shown, determine the stress
at point A when (a) h = 2 in., (b) h = 2.6 in.
4.164 For the machine component and loading shown, determine the stress
at points A and B when h = 2.5 in.
4.165 The curved bar shown has a cross section of 40 × 60 mm and an
inner radius r1 = 15 mm. For the loading shown, determine the larg-
est tensile and compressive stresses.
40 mm
60 mm
120 N·m
r1
Fig. P4.165 and P4.166
4.166 For the curved bar and loading shown, determine the percent error
introduced in the computation of the maximum stress by assuming
that the bar is straight. Consider the case when (a) r1 = 20 mm,
(b) r1 = 200 mm, (c) r1 = 2 m.
Problems
C
B
A	0.75 in.
4 kip·in.
3 in.
h
4 kip·in.
Fig. P4.163 and P4.164

-- 344 of 897 --

330
4.167 Steel links having the cross section shown are available with differ-
ent central angles β. Knowing that the allowable stress is 12 ksi,
determine the largest force P that can be applied to a link for which
β = 90°.
0.4 in.
0.4 in.
0.3 in.
0.8 in.
0.8 in.
1.2 in.
A 	A
C 	C
B
P' 	P
B
β
Fig. P4.167
4.168 Solve Prob. 4.167, assuming that β = 60°.
4.169 The curved bar shown has a cross section of 30 × 30 mm. Knowing
that the allowable compressive stress is 175 MPa, determine the
largest allowable distance a.
20 mm
20 mm
30 mm
30 mm
B 	A C
a
5 kN
5 kN
Fig. P4.169
4.170 For the split ring shown, determine the stress at (a) point A,
(b) point B.
90 mm
40 mm
14 mm
2500 N
B
A
Fig. P4.170

-- 345 of 897 --

331
4.171 Three plates are welded together to form the curved beam shown.
For M = 8 kip⋅in., determine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B,
(c) the centroid of the cross section.
A
C
B
M' 	M
2 in.
3 in.
0.5 in. 	2 in.
3 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
Fig. P4.171 and P4.172
4.172 Three plates are welded together to form the curved beam shown.
For the given loading, determine the distance e between the neutral
axis and the centroid of the cross section.
4.173 A machine component has a T-shaped cross section that is orien-
tated as shown. Knowing that M = 2.5 kN·m, determine the stress
at (a) point A, (b) point B.
Dimensions in mm
100
60
50	40 	20
20
B
	C A
D
A 	B
M =
2.5 kN·m
Fig. P4.173 and P4.174
4.174 Assuming that the couple shown is replaced by a vertical 10-kN
force attached at point D and acting downward, determine the stress
at (a) point A, (b) point B.
4.175 The split ring shown has an inner radius r1 = 0.8 in. and a circular
cross section of diameter d = 0.6 in. Knowing that each of the 120-lb
forces is applied at the centroid of the cross section, determine the
stress (a) at point A, (b) at point B.
4.176 Solve Prob. 4.175, assuming that the ring has an inner radius r1 = 0.6 in.
and a cross-sectional diameter d = 0.8 in.
120 lb	120 lb
d	A
B
r1
Fig. P4.175

-- 346 of 897 --

332
4.177 The bar shown has a circular cross section of 14-mm diameter. Know-
ing that a = 32 mm, determine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B.
220 N
220 N
12 mm
16 mm
a
B 	A C
Fig. P4.177 and P4.178
4.178 The bar shown has a circular cross section of 14-mm diameter. Know-
ing that the allowable stress is 38 MPa, determine the largest permis-
sible distance a from the line of action of the 220-N forces to the plane
containing the center of curvature of the bar.
4.179 The curved bar shown has a circular cross section of 32-mm diameter.
Determine the largest couple M that can be applied to the bar about
a horizontal axis if the maximum stress is not to exceed 60 MPa.
4.180 Knowing that P = 10 kN, determine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B.
90 mm
80 mm
A
B
100 mm
P
Fig. P4.180
4.181 and 4.182 Knowing that M = 5 kip⋅in., determine the stress at
(a) point A, (b) point B.
3 in.
M
M B
A
C
3 in.
2 in.
2 in.
2.5 in.
Fig. P4.182
16 mm
12 mm
M
C
Fig. P4.179
2.5 in.
3 in. 2 in. 2 in. 3 in.
B
C
M
A 	M
Fig. P4.181

-- 347 of 897 --

333
4.183 Knowing that the machine component shown has a trapezoidal cross
section with a = 3.5 in. and b = 2.5 in., determine the stress at
(a) point A, (b) point B.
6 in. 4 in.
C
	B
B
A
A	b 	a
80 kip·in.
Fig. P4.183 and P4.184
4.184 Knowing that the machine component shown has a trapezoidal cross
section with a = 2.5 in. and b = 3.5 in., determine the stress at
(a) point A, (b) point B.
4.185 For the curved beam and loading shown, determine the stress at
(a) point A, (b) point B.
20 mm
30 mm
35 mm
40 mm
a
a
B
A
B
A
250 N·m	250 N·m
Section a-a
Fig. P4.185
4.186 For the crane hook shown, determine the largest tensile stress in
section a-a.
35 mm
60 mm
25 mm 40 mm
60 mm
15 kN
a
a
Section a-a
Fig. P4.186

-- 348 of 897 --

334
*4.187 through 4.189 Using Eq. (4.66), derive the expression for R given
in Fig. 4.61 for
*4.187 A circular cross section.
4.188 A trapezoidal cross section.
4.189 A triangular cross section.
4.190 Show that if the cross section of a curved beam consists of two
or more rectangles, the radius R of the neutral surface can be
expressed as
R = A
ln[(
r2
r1)
b1
(
r3
r2)
b2
(
r4
r3)
b3
]
where A is the total area of the cross section.
r1
r2
b1
b2
b3
r3
r4
Fig. P4.190
*4.191 For a curved bar of rectangular cross section subjected to a bending
couple M, show that the radial stress at the neutral surface is
σr = M
Ae (1 − r1
R − ln R
r1)
and compute the value of σr for the curved bar of Concept Applica-
tions 4.10 and 4.11. (Hint: Consider the free-body diagram of the
portion of the beam located above the neutral surface.)
C
R
b
r1
	2
θ
2
θ
σ x
σ r
σ r
σ x
Fig. P4.191

-- 349 of 897 --

335
This chapter was devoted to the analysis of members in pure bending. The
stresses and deformation in members subjected to equal and opposite
couples M and M′ acting in the same longitudinal plane (Fig. 4.63) were
studied.
Normal Strain in Bending
In members possessing a plane of symmetry and subjected to couples acting
in that plane, it was proven that transverse sections remain plane as a member
is deformed. A member in pure bending also has a neutral surface along
which normal strains and stresses are zero. The longitudinal normal strain εx
varies linearly with the distance y from the neutral surface:
ε x = −y
ρ (4.8)
where ρ is the radius of curvature of the neutral surface (Fig. 4.64). The
intersection of the neutral surface with a transverse section is known as the
neutral axis of the section.
Normal Stress in Elastic Range
For members made of a material that follows Hooke’s law, the normal stress
σx varies linearly with the distance from the neutral axis (Fig. 4.65). Using
the maximum stress σm, the normal stress is
σ x = −y
c σ m 	(4.12)
where c is the largest distance from the neutral axis to a point in the section.
Elastic Flexure Formula
By setting the sum of the elementary forces σx dA equal to zero, we
proved that the neutral axis passes through the centroid of the cross sec-
tion of a member in pure bending. Then by setting the sum of the moments
of the elementary forces equal to the bending moment, the elastic flexure
formula is
σm = Mc
I (4.15)
where I is the moment of inertia of the cross section with respect to the neu-
tral axis. The normal stress at any distance y from the neutral axis is
σx = − My
I (4.16)
Review and Summary
A
B
M
M'
Fig. 4.63 	Member in pure bending.
y
y
A
J
D
O
C
BK
E
x	A' 	B'
ρ − y	ρ
θ
Fig. 4.64 	Deformation with respect to
neutral axis.
y
c
Neutral surface σx
σm
Fig. 4.65 	Stress distribution for the
elastic flexure formula.

-- 350 of 897 --

336
Elastic Section Modulus
Noting that I and c depend only on the geometry of the cross section we
introduced the elastic section modulus
S = I
c (4.17)
Use the section modulus to write an alternative expression for the maximum
normal stress:
σm = M
S (4.18)
Curvature of Member
The curvature of a member is the reciprocal of its radius of curvature, and
may be found by
1
ρ = M
EI (4.21)
Anticlastic Curvature
In the bending of homogeneous members possessing a plane of symmetry,
deformations occur in the plane of a transverse cross section and result in
anticlastic curvature of the members.
Members Made of Several Materials
We considered the bending of members made of several materials with
different moduli of elasticity. While transverse sections remain plane, the
neutral axis does not pass through the centroid of the composite cross sec-
tion (Fig. 4.66). Using the ratio of the moduli of elasticity of the materials,
we obtained a transformed section corresponding to an equivalent member
made entirely of one material. The methods previously developed are used
to determine the stresses in this equivalent homogeneous member
(Fig. 4.67), and the ratio of the moduli of elasticity is used to determine
the stresses in the composite beam.
1
2
N. A.
—
y 	E1y
y 	y
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
—–	σ1 = −	εx = −
εx
ρ	ρ
E2y
—–	σ2 = − ρ
σ x
Fig. 4.66 	(a) Composite section. (b) Strain distribution. (c) Stress distribution.
C N. A.
—–
My
I
y	y
σx
σx = −
Fig. 4.67 	Transformed section.

-- 351 of 897 --

337
Stress Concentrations
Stress concentrations occur in members in pure bending and were discussed;
charts giving stress-concentration factors for flat bars with fillets and grooves
also were presented in Figs. 4.24 and 4.25.
Plastic Deformations
A rectangular beam made of an elastoplastic material (Fig. 4.68) was
analyzed as the magnitude of the bending moment was increased (Fig. 4.69).
The maximum elastic moment MY occurs when yielding is initiated in the
beam (Fig. 4.69b). As the bending moment is increased, plastic zones
develop (Fig. 4.69c), and the size of the elastic core of the member is
decreased. When the beam becomes fully plastic (Fig. 4.69d), the maxi-
mum or plastic moment Mp is obtained. Permanent deformations and
residual stresses remain in a member after the loads that caused yielding
have been removed.
Y
ε	εY
σ
σY
Fig. 4.68 	Elastoplastic
stress-strain diagram.
ELASTIC
y
c
ELASTIC
y
ELASTIC
PLASTIC
y
c
c
σ x
σ x
σ x
−c
−c
(a) M < Mϒ
(b) M = Mϒ
σmax = σ m < σ ϒ
σmax = σ m = σ ϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
ELASTIC
y
c
ELASTIC
y
ELASTIC
PLASTIC
PLASTIC
y
c
PLASTIC
y
c
c
σ x
σ x
σ x
σ x
−c
−c
−c
(a) M < Mϒ
(c) M > Mϒ
(b) M = Mϒ
σmax = σ m < σ ϒ
σmax = σ m = σ ϒ
σmax = σ ϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
ELASTIC
y
c
ELASTIC
y
ELASTIC
PLASTIC
PLASTIC
y
c
PLASTIC
y
c
c
σ x
σ x
σ x
σ x
−c
−c
−c
−c
(a) M < Mϒ
(c) M > Mϒ
(b) M = Mϒ
(d) M = Mp
σmax = σ m < σ ϒ
σmax = σ m = σ ϒ
σmax = σ ϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
σ ϒ
ELASTIC
y
c
ELASTIC
y
ELASTIC
PLASTIC
PLASTIC
y
c
PLASTIC
y
c
c
σ x
σ x
σ x
σ x
−c
−c
−c
(a) M < Mϒ
(c) M > Mϒ
(b) M = Mϒ
σmax = σ m < σ ϒ
σmax = σ m = σ ϒ
σmax = σ ϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
−σϒ
Fig. 4.69 	Bending stress distribution in a member for (a) elastic, M < MY ; (b) yield
impending, M = MY ; (c) partially yielded, M > MY ; and (d) fully plastic, M = Mp.

-- 352 of 897 --

338
Eccentric Axial Loading
When a member is loaded eccentrically in a plane of symmetry, the eccen-
tric load is replaced with a force-couple system located at the centroid of
the cross section (Fig. 4.70). The stresses from the centric load and the
bending couple are superposed (Fig. 4.71):
σ x = P
A − My
I (4.50)
y
C 	C
y
C
N.A.
y
σ x 	σ x 	σx
+ 	=
Fig. 4.71 	Stress distribution for eccentric loading is obtained by superposing the axial
and pure bending distributions.
Unsymmetric Bending
For bending of members of unsymmetric cross section, the flexure formula
may be used, provided that the couple vector M is directed along one of the
principal centroidal axes of the cross section. When necessary, M can be
resolved into components along the principal axes, and the stresses superposed
due to the component couples (Figs. 4.72 and 4.73).
σ x = −Mzy
Iz
+ My z
Iy
(4.55)
M
x
z
y
M' θ
Fig. 4.72 	Unsymmetric bending with
bending moment not in a plane of
symmetry.
M 	My
Mz
y
z 	C
θ
Fig. 4.73 	Applied moment
resolved into y and z
components.
For the couple M shown in Fig. 4.74, the orientation of the neutral axis
is defined by
tan ϕ = Iz
Iy
tan θ 	(4.57)
d
D
C F
M
P'
A
Fig. 4.70 	Section of an
eccentrically loaded member.
M	
N. A.
C
y
z
ϕ 	θ
Fig. 4.74 	Neutral axis for
unsymmetric bending.

-- 353 of 897 --

339
General Eccentric Axial Loading
For the general case of eccentric axial loading, the load is replaced by a
force-couple system located at the centroid. The stresses are superposed due
to the centric load and the two component couples directed along the princi-
pal axes:
σ x = P
A − Mz y
Iz
+ My z
Iy
(4.58)
Curved Members
In the analysis of stresses in curved members (Fig. 4.75), transverse sections
remain plane when the member is subjected to bending. The stresses do not
vary linearly, and the neutral surface does not pass through the centroid of
the section. The distance R from the center of curvature of the member to the
neutral surface is
R = A
∫ dA
r
(4.66)
where A is the area of the cross section. The normal stress at a distance y
from the neutral surface is
σx = − My
Ae(R − y) (4.70)
where M is the bending moment and e is the distance from the centroid of
the section to the neutral surface.
R
A
J
D
F 	G
E
B
K
y
r
C
y
x
θ
Fig. 4.75 	Curved member geometry.

-- 354 of 897 --

340
4.192 Two vertical forces are applied to a beam of the cross section shown.
Determine the maximum tensile and compressive stresses in portion
BC of the beam.
C	B
A
9 kN	9 kN
10 mm
400 mm 	500 mm
30 mm	30 mm
45 mm
Fig. P4.192
4.193 A steel band saw blade that was originally straight passes over
8-in.-diameter pulleys when mounted on a band saw. Determine
the maximum stress in the blade, knowing that it is 0.018 in. thick
and 0.625 in. wide. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
4.194 A couple of magnitude M is applied to a square bar of side a. For
each of the orientations shown, determine the maximum stress and
the curvature of the bar.
(a) 	(b)
a
M 	M
Fig. P4.194
4.195 A thick-walled pipe of the cross section shown is made of a steel that
is assumed to be elastoplastic with a yield strength σY. Derive an
expression for the plastic moment Mp of the pipe in terms of c1, c2,
and σY.
c2
c1
Fig. P4.195
Review Problems
0.018 in.
Fig. P4.193

-- 355 of 897 --

341
4.196 To increase corrosion resistance, a 2-mm-thick cladding of alumi-
num has been added to a steel bar as shown. The modulus of elastic-
ity is 200 GPa for steel and 70 GPa for aluminum. For a bending
moment of 300 N·m, determine (a) the maximum stress in the steel,
(b) the maximum stress in the aluminum, (c) the radius of curvature
of the bar.
4.197 The vertical portion of the press shown consists of a rectangular tube
of wall thickness t = 10 mm. Knowing that the press has been tight-
ened on wooden planks being glued together until P = 20 kN, deter-
mine the stress at (a) point A, (b) point B.
P'
P
a 	a
t
t
80 mm
60 mm
Section a-a
A 	B
200 mm 80 mm
Fig. P4.197
4.198 For the loading shown, determine (a) the stress at points A and B,
(b) the point where the neutral axis intersects line ABD.
H
E
A
G
D
250 lb
500 lb
150 lb
4 in.
B
F
1.8 in.
Fig. P4.198
4.199 Knowing that the maximum allowable stress is 45 MPa, determine
the magnitude of the largest moment M that can be applied to the
component shown.
B
C
A
M'	M 	150 mm
135 mm
36 mm
45 mm
B
A
Fig. P4.199
46 mm
50 mm
M = 300 N·m
30 mm
26 mm
Fig. P4.196

-- 356 of 897 --

342
4.200 Determine the maximum stress in each of the two machine elements
shown.
400 lb
400 lb
400 lb
400 lb
3
2.5
1.5 0.5
3
2.5
Dimensions in inches
1.5 	0.5
0.5
0.5
r = 0.3 	r = 0.3
Fig. P4.200
4.201 Three 120 × 10-mm steel plates have been welded together to
form the beam shown. Assuming that the steel is elastoplastic
with E = 200 GPa and σY = 300 MPa, determine (a) the bending
moment for which the plastic zones at the top and bottom of the
beam are 40 mm thick, (b) the corresponding radius of curvature
of the beam.
4.202 A short length of a W8 × 31 rolled-steel shape supports a rigid plate
on which two loads P and Q are applied as shown. The strains at
two points A and B on the centerline of the outer faces of the flanges
have been measured and found to be
ε A = −550 × 10 −6 in./in. 	ε B = −680 × 10 −6 in./in.
Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the magnitude of each
load.
4.203 Two thin strips of the same material and same cross section are bent
by couples of the same magnitude and glued together. After the two
surfaces of contact have been securely bonded, the couples are
removed. Denoting by σ1 the maximum stress and by ρ1 the radius
of curvature of each strip while the couples were applied, determine
(a) the final stresses at points A, B, C, and D, (b) the final radius of
curvature.
M1
M1
M'1
M'1
A
C
B
D
σ1
σ1
σ1
σ1
Fig. P4.203
10 mm
120 mm
10 mm
120 mm
10 mm
M
Fig. P4.201
B	A
4.5 in.	P 	Q	4.5 in.
Fig. P4.202

-- 357 of 897 --

343
Computer Problems
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
4.C1 Two aluminum strips and a steel strip are to be bonded together to
form a composite member of width b = 60 mm and depth h = 40 mm.
The modulus of elasticity is 200 GPa for the steel and 75 GPa for
the aluminum. Knowing that M = 1500 N⋅m, write a computer pro-
gram to calculate the maximum stress in the aluminum and in the
steel for values of a from 0 to 20 mm using 2-mm increments. Using
appropriate smaller increments, determine (a) the largest stress that
can occur in the steel and (b) the corresponding value of a.
4.C2 A beam of the cross section shown, made of a steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with a yield strength σY and a modulus of elastic-
ity E is bent about the x axis. (a) Denoting by yY the half thickness
of the elastic core, write a computer program to calculate the bend-
ing moment M and the radius of curvature ρ for values of yY from
1
2 d to 1
6 d using decrements equal to 1
2 t f. Neglect the effect of fillets.
(b) Use this program to solve Prob. 4.201.
4.C3 An 8-kip⋅in. couple M is applied to a beam of the cross section
shown in a plane forming an angle β with the vertical. Noting that the
centroid of the cross section is located at C and that the y and z axes
are principal axes, write a computer program to calculate the stress at
A, B, C, and D for values of β from 0 to 180° using 10° increments.
(Given: Iy = 6.23 in4 and Iz = 1.481 in4.)
z
0.4	0.4
1.6
1.2
0.4
1.2
0.4 0.8
Dimensions in inches
0.4	0.8
B
E D
A
y
M
C
β
β
Fig. P4.C3
4.C4 Couples of moment M = 2 kN⋅m are applied as shown to a curved
bar having a rectangular cross section with h = 100 mm and b = 25 mm.
Write a computer program and use it to calculate the stresses at
points A and B for values of the ratio r1⧸h from 10 to 1 using dec-
rements of 1, and from 1 to 0.1 using decrements of 0.1. Using
appropriate smaller increments, determine the ratio r1⧸h for which
the maximum stress in the curved bar is 50% larger than the maxi-
mum stress in a straight bar of the same cross section.
b = 60 mm
h = 40 mm
a
a
Steel
Aluminum
Fig. P4.C1
d 	x
y	tf
tw
bf
Fig. P4.C2
B
b
r1	
M'	M
A	A
B
C
h
Fig. P4.C4

-- 358 of 897 --

344
4.C5 The couple M is applied to a beam of the cross section shown. (a) Write
a computer program that, for loads expressed in either SI or U.S. cus-
tomary units, can be used to calculate the maximum tensile and com-
pressive stresses in the beam. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 4.9,
4.10, and 4.11.
M
h1
h2
b1
hn
bn
b2
Fig. P4.C5
4.C6 A solid rod of radius c = 1.2 in. is made of a steel that is assumed
to be elastoplastic with E = 29,000 ksi and σY = 42 ksi. The rod is
subjected to a couple of moment M that increases from zero to the
maximum elastic moment MY and then to the plastic moment Mp.
Denoting by yY the half thickness of the elastic core, write a com-
puter program and use it to calculate the bending moment M and the
radius of curvature ρ for values of yY from 1.2 in. to 0 using 0.2-in.
decrements. (Hint: Divide the cross section into 80 horizontal ele-
ments of 0.03-in. height.)
c
z
y
y
M
Δy
Fig. P4.C6
4.C7 The machine element of Prob. 4.182 is to be redesigned by removing
part of the triangular cross section. It is believed that the removal of
a small triangular area of width a will lower the maximum stress in
the element. To verify this design concept, write a computer program
to calculate the maximum stress in the element for values of a from
0 to 1 in. using 0.1-in. increments. Using appropriate smaller incre-
ments, determine the distance a for which the maximum stress is as
small as possible and the corresponding value of the maximum stress.
3 in.	2 in.
2.5 in.	C
B
a
A
Fig. P4.C7

-- 359 of 897 --



-- 360 of 897 --



-- 361 of 897 --

Analysis and
Design of Beams
for Bending
5
The beams supporting the overhead crane system are subject to
transverse loads, causing the beams to bend. The normal stresses
resulting from such loadings will be determined in this chapter.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Draw shear and bending-moment diagrams using static
equilibrium applied to sections.
• Describe the relationships between applied loads, shear, and
bending moments throughout a beam.
• Use section modulus to design beams.
• Use singularity functions to determine shear and bending-
moment diagrams.
• Design nonprismatic beams to provide constant strength
throughout these members.
©hxdyl/Shutterstock

-- 362 of 897 --

348 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Introduction
5.1 	SHEAR AND BENDING-
MOMENT DIAGRAMS
5.2 	RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN LOAD,
SHEAR, AND BENDING
MOMENT
5.3 	DESIGN OF PRISMATIC
BEAMS FOR BENDING
*5.4 	SINGULARITY
FUNCTIONS USED TO
DETERMINE SHEAR
AND BENDING
MOMENT
*5.5 	NONPRISMATIC BEAMS
Introduction
This chapter and most of the next one are devoted to the analysis and the design
of beams, which are structural members supporting loads applied at various
points along the member. Beams are usually long, straight prismatic members.
Steel and aluminum beams play an important part in both structural and mechan-
ical engineering. Timber beams are widely used in home construction (Photo 5.1).
In most cases, the loads are perpendicular to the axis of the beam. This transverse
loading causes only bending and shear in the beam. When the loads are not at
a right angle to the beam, they also produce axial forces in the beam.
Photo 5.1 	Timber beams used in a residential dwelling.
©Huntstock/age fotostock
The transverse loading of a beam may consist of concentrated loads
P1, P2, . . . expressed in newtons, pounds, or their multiples of kilonewtons
and kips (Fig. 5.1a); of a distributed load w expressed in N/m, kN/m, lb/ft,
or kips/ft (Fig. 5.1b); or of a combination of both. When the load w per unit
length has a constant value over part of the beam (as between A and B in
Fig. 5.1b), the load is uniformly distributed.
Beams are often classified based on the arrangement of their supports.
Fig. 5.2 illustrates the most common of these support configurations. The
distance L between the supports is called the span. Note that the reactions at
the supports of the beams in Fig. 5.2a–c involve a total of only three unknowns
and can be determined by the methods of statics. Such beams are said to be
L
(a) Simply supported beam
Statically
Determinate
Beams
Statically
Indeterminate
Beams
L2	L1
(d) Continuous beam
L
(b) Overhanging beam
L
Beam fixed at one end
and simply supported
at the other end
(e)
L
(c) Cantilever beam
L
( f ) Fixed beam
Fig. 5.2 	Common beam support configurations.
C	B
P1
(a) Concentrated loads
w
P2
A 	D
(b) Distributed loads
A
B
C
Fig. 5.1 	Transversely loaded beams.

-- 363 of 897 --

Introduction 	349
statically determinate. On the other hand, the reactions at the supports of the
beams in Fig. 5.2d–f involve more than three unknowns and cannot be deter-
mined by the methods of statics alone. The properties of the beams with
regard to their resistance to deformations must be taken into consideration.
Such beams are said to be statically indeterminate, and their analysis will be
discussed in Chap. 9.
Sometimes two or more beams are connected by hinges to form a single
continuous structure. Two examples of beams hinged at a point H are shown
in Fig. 5.3. Note that the reactions at the supports involve four unknowns and
cannot be determined from the free-body diagram of the two-beam system.
They can be determined by recognizing that the internal moment at the hinge
is zero. Then, after considering the free-body diagram of each beam sepa-
rately, six unknowns are involved (including two force components at the
hinge), and six equations are available.
Externally applied transverse loads (i.e., loads perpendicular to the
beam’s axis) will develop certain forces inside the beam. In any section of the
beam, these internal forces consist of a shear force V and a bending couple M.
For example, a simply supported beam AB is carrying two concentrated loads
and a uniformly distributed load (Fig. 5.4a). To determine the internal forces
in a section through point C, draw the free-body diagram of the entire beam
to obtain the reactions at the supports (Fig. 5.4b). Passing a section through
C, then draw the free-body diagram of AC (Fig. 5.4c), from which the shear
force V and the bending couple M are found.
The bending couple M creates normal stresses in the cross section,
while the shear force V creates shearing stresses. In most cases, the dominant
criterion in the design of a beam for strength is the maximum value of the
normal stress in the beam. The normal stresses in a beam are the subject of
this chapter, while shearing stresses are discussed in Chap. 6.
Since the distribution of the normal stresses in a given section depends
only upon the bending moment M and the geometry of the section,† the elas-
tic flexure formulas derived in Sec. 4.2 are used to determine the maximum
stress, σm, as well as the stress at any given point on the cross section, σx:‡
σm = ∣M∣ c
I (5.1)
and
σx = − My
I (5.2)
where I is the moment of inertia of the cross section with respect to a cen-
troidal axis perpendicular to the plane of the couple, y is the distance from
the neutral surface, and c is the maximum value of that distance (see Fig. 4.11).
Also recall from Sec. 4.2 that the maximum value σm of the normal stress can
be expressed in terms of the section modulus S. Thus
σm = ∣M∣
S (5.3)
†It is assumed that the distribution of the normal stresses in a given cross section is not
affected by the deformations caused by the shearing stresses. This assumption will be verified
in Sec. 6.2.
‡Recall from Sec. 4.1 that M can be positive or negative, depending upon whether the con-
cavity of the beam at the point considered faces upward or downward. Thus, in a transverse
loading the sign of M can vary along the beam. On the other hand, since σm is a positive
quantity, the absolute value of M is used in Eq. (5.1).
B
C
A
w
a
P1 	P2
(a) Transversely loaded beam
B
C
C
A
w P1
RA 	RB
P2
(b) Free-body diagram to find
support reactions
A
wa
P1
V
M
RA
(c) Free-body diagram to find
internal forces at C
Fig. 5.4 	Analysis of a simply
supported beam.
B
H
(a)
A
C
B
H
(b)
A
Fig. 5.3 	Beams connected by hinges.

-- 364 of 897 --

350 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
The fact that σm is inversely proportional to S underlines the importance of
selecting beams with a large section modulus. Section moduli of various
rolled-steel shapes are given in Appendix E, while the section modulus of a
rectangular shape is
S = 1
6 bh2 	(5.4)
where b and h are, respectively, the width and the depth of the cross
section.
Equation (5.3) also shows that for a beam of uniform cross section,
σm is proportional to ∣M ∣. Thus the maximum value of the normal stress
in the beam occurs in the section where ∣M ∣ is largest. One of the most
important parts of the design of a beam for a given loading condition is
the determination of the location and magnitude of the largest bending
moment.
This task is made easier if a bending-moment diagram is drawn,
where the bending moment M is determined at various points of the beam
and plotted against the distance x measured from one end. It is also easier
if a shear diagram is drawn by plotting the shear V against x. The sign
convention used to record the values of the shear and bending moment is
discussed in Sec. 5.1.
In Sec. 5.2 relationships between load, shear, and bending moments are
derived and used to obtain the shear and bending-moment diagrams. This
approach facilitates the determination of the largest absolute value of the bend-
ing moment and the maximum normal stress in the beam.
In Sec. 5.3 beams are designed for bending such that the maximum
normal stress in these beams will not exceed their allowable values.
Another method to determine the maximum values of the shear and
bending moment is based on expressing V and M in terms of singularity func-
tions. This is discussed in Sec. 5.4. This approach lends itself well to the use
of computers and will be expanded in Chap. 9 for the determination of the
slope and deflection of beams.
Finally, the design of nonprismatic beams (i.e., beams with a vari-
able cross section) is discussed in Sec. 5.5. By selecting the shape and
size of the variable cross section so that its elastic section modulus S = I∕c
varies along the length of the beam in the same way as ∣M ∣, it is possible
to design beams where the maximum normal stress in each section is
equal to the allowable stress of the material. Such beams are said to be
of constant strength.
5.1 	SHEAR AND BENDING-
MOMENT DIAGRAMS
The maximum absolute values of the shear and bending moment in a beam
are easily found if V and M are plotted against the distance x measured from
one end of the beam. Developing such plots and equations for V and M has
other applications as well. For example, as you will see in Chap. 9, the
knowledge of M as a function of x is essential to determine the deflection
of a beam.
In this section of the book, the shear and bending-moment diagrams are
obtained by determining the values of V and M at selected points of the beam.
These values are found by passing a section through the point to be determined

-- 365 of 897 --

5.1 Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams 	351
(Fig. 5.5a) and considering the equilibrium of the portion of beam located on
either side of the section (Fig. 5.5b). Since the shear forces V and V′ have
opposite senses, recording the shear at point C with an up or down arrow
is meaningless, unless it is indicated at the same time which of the free
bodies AC and CB is being considered. For this reason, the shear V is
recorded with a plus sign if the shear forces are directed as in Fig. 5.5b
and a minus sign otherwise. A similar convention is applied for the bending
moment M.† Summarizing the sign conventions:
The shear V and the bending moment M at a given point of a beam are
positive when the internal forces and couples acting on each portion of the
beam are directed as shown in Fig. 5.6a.
1. The shear at any given point of a beam is positive when the external
forces (loads and reactions) acting on the beam tend to shear off the
beam at that point as indicated in Fig. 5.6b.
2. The bending moment at any given point of a beam is positive when the
external forces acting on the beam tend to bend the beam at that point
as indicated in Fig. 5.6c.
It is helpful to note that the values of the shear and of the bending
moment are positive in the left half of a simply supported beam carrying
a single concentrated load at its midpoint, as is discussed in Concept
Application 5.1.
(a)
(b)
B
C
A
w
x
P1 	P2
C	A
w	P1
RA
V
M B
C
P2
RB
M'
V'
Fig. 5.5 	Determination of shear force, V, and bending moment, M, at a
given section. (a) Loaded beam with section indicated at arbitrary position x.
(b) Free-body diagrams drawn to the left and right of the section at C.
†This convention is the same as we used in Sec. 4.1.
V
M
M'
V'
(a) Internal forces
(positive shear and positive bending moment)
(b) Effect of external forces
(positive shear)
(c) Effect of external forces
(positive bending moment)
Fig. 5.6 	Sign convention for shear and bending moment.

-- 366 of 897 --

352 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Concept Application 5.1
Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for a simply sup-
ported beam AB of span L subjected to a single concentrated
load P at its midpoint C (Fig. 5.7a).
B
C
A
P
L	
1
2 	L	
1
2
(a)
Determine the reactions at the supports from the free-body
diagram of the entire beam (Fig. 5.7b). The magnitude of each
reaction is equal to P∕2.
Next cut the beam at a point D between A and C and draw
the free-body diagrams of AD and DB (Fig. 5.7c). Assuming that
the shear and bending moment are positive, we direct the internal
forces V and V′ and the internal couples M and M′ as in Fig. 5.6a.
Consider the free body AD. The sum of the vertical components
and the sum of the moments about D of the forces acting on the
free body are zero, so V = +P∕2 and M = +Px∕2. Both the shear
and the bending moment are positive. This is checked by observing
that the reaction at A tends to shear off and bend the beam at D
as indicated in Fig. 5.6b and c. We plot V and M between A and
C (Fig. 5.7d and e). The shear has a constant value V = P∕2, while
the bending moment increases linearly from M = 0 at x = 0 to
M = PL∕4 at x = L∕2.
Cutting the beam at a point E between C and B and consider-
ing the free body EB (Fig. 5.7d), the sum of the vertical compo-
nents and the sum of the moments about E of the forces acting on
the free body are zero. Obtain V = −P∕2 and M = P(L − x)∕2.
Therefore, the shear is negative, and the bending moment positive.
This is checked by observing that the reaction at B bends the beam
at E as in Fig. 5.6c but tends to shear it off in a manner opposite
to that shown in Fig. 5.6b. The shear and bending-moment dia-
grams of Fig. 5.7e and f are completed by showing the shear with
a constant value V = −P∕2 between C and B, while the bending
moment decreases linearly from M = PL∕4 at x = L∕2 to M = 0
at x = L.
RA = 	P	
1
2
RA = 	P	
1
2
RA = 	P	
1
2
RB = 	P	
1
2
RB = 	P	
1
2
RB = 	P	
1
2
PL
x
1
4
B
C 	E	D
A
P
L	
1
2 	L	
1
2
B
C
D
D
A
x
x
x
P
(b)
(c)
V M
M'
V'
L	
1
2
L 	L	1
2
P	
1
2
P	
1
2
B
C 	E
E
L 	x
L
M
V
A
P
(d)
(e)
( f )
V
M
M'
V' –
–
Fig. 5.7 	(a) Simply supported beam with
midpoint load P. (b) Free-body diagram of entire
beam. (c) Free-body diagrams with section taken
to left of load P. (d) Free-body diagrams with
section taken to right of load P. (e) Shear diagram.
(f ) Bending-moment diagram.

-- 367 of 897 --

5.1 Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams 	353
Note from Concept Application 5.1 that when a beam is subjected only
to concentrated loads, the shear is constant between loads and the bending
moment varies linearly between loads. In such situations, the shear and
bending-moment diagrams can be drawn easily once the values of V and
M have been obtained at sections selected just to the left and just to the
right of the points where the loads and reactions are applied (see Sample
Prob. 5.1).
Concept Application 5.2
Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for a cantilever beam AB of
span L supporting a uniformly distributed load w (Fig. 5.8a).
Cut the beam at a point C, located between A and B, and draw the free-
body diagram of AC (Fig. 5.8b), directing V and M as in Fig. 5.6a. Using
the distance x from A to C and replacing the distributed load over AC by its
resultant wx applied at the midpoint of AC, write
+ ↑ ΣF y = 0: 	−wx − V = 0 	V = −wx
+⤴ΣM C = 0: 	wx (
x
2) + M = 0 	M = − 1
2 wx2
Note that the shear diagram is represented by an oblique straight line
(Fig. 5.8c) and the bending-moment diagram by a parabola (Fig. 5.8d).
The maximum values of V and M both occur at B, where
V B = −wL 	M B = − 1
2wL2
L
A 	B
w
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
x	
1
2
V
M
x
A
C
w
wx
x
V
A
L
B
wL2	1
2
x
M
A
L
B
VB = – wL
M B = –
Fig. 5.8 	(a) Cantilevered beam supporting
a uniformly distributed load. (b) Free-body
diagram of section AC. (c) Shear diagram.
(d) Bending-moment diagram.

-- 368 of 897 --

354 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Sample Problem 5.1
For the timber beam and loading shown, draw the shear and bending-
moment diagrams and determine the maximum normal stress due to
bending.
B
2.5 m 	3 m 	2 m
250 mm
80 mm
C D	A
20 kN 	40 kN
STRATEGY: 	After using statics to find the reaction forces, identify sec-
tions to be analyzed. You should section the beam at points to the immediate
left and right of each concentrated force to determine values of V and M at
these points.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Considering the entire beam to be a free body (Fig. 1),
RB = 40 kN ↑ 	RD = 14 kN ↑
Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams. 	Determine the internal forces
just to the right of the 20-kN load at A. Considering the stub of beam to
the left of section 1 as a free body and assuming V and M to be positive
(according to the standard convention), write
+ ↑ ΣFy = 0 : 	−20 kN − V1 = 0 	V1 = −20 kN
+⤴ΣM1 = 0 : 	(20 kN)(0 m) + M1 = 0 	M1 = 0
Next consider the portion to the left of section 2 to be a free body
and write
+ ↑ ΣFy = 0 : 	−20 kN − V2 = 0 	V2 = −20 kN
+⤴ΣM2 = 0 : 	(20 kN)(2.5 m) + M2 = 0 	M2 = −50 kN·m
The shear and bending moment at sections 3, 4, 5, and 6 are determined
in a similar way from the free-body diagrams shown in Fig. 1:
V3 = +26 kN 	M3 = −50 kN·m
V4 = +26 kN 	M4 = +28 kN·m
V5 = −14 kN 	M5 = +28 kN·m
V6 = −14 kN 	M6 = 0
B
1 	3 	5	2 	6	4
2.5 m 	3 m 	2 m
C
D
A
20 kN
20 kN
2.5 m 	3 m 	2 m
40 kN
14 kN
46 kN
M1
V1
20 kN
M2
V2
20 kN
46 kN
M3
V3
20 kN
46 kN
M4
V4
20 kN 	40 kN
46 kN
M5
V5
V
M
x
x
20 kN 	40 kN
46 kN
14 kN
14 kN
+26 kN
+28 kN·m
– 50 kN·m
40 kN
M6
M'4
V'4
V6
–	20 kN	–
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of beam,
free-body diagrams of section to left of cut,
shear diagram, bending-moment diagram.

-- 369 of 897 --

5.1 Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams 	355
For several of the latter sections, the results may be obtained more easily by
considering the portion to the right of the section to be a free body. For
example, for the portion of beam to the right of section 4,
+ ↑ ΣFy = 0 : 	V4 − 40 kN + 14 kN = 0 	V4 = +26 kN
+⤴ΣM4 = 0 : 	−M4 + (14 kN)(2 m) = 0 	M4 = +28 kN·m
Now plot the six points shown on the shear and bending-moment diagrams.
As indicated earlier, the shear is of constant value between concentrated loads,
and the bending moment varies linearly.
Maximum Normal Stress. 	This occurs at B, where ∣M∣ is largest. Use
Eq. (5.4) to determine the section modulus of the beam:
S = 1
6 bh2 = 1
6 (0.080 m)(0.250 m) 2 = 833.33 × 10−6 m3
Substituting this value and ∣M∣ = ∣MB∣ = 50 × 103 N·m into Eq. (5.3)
gives
σ m = ∣M B∣
S = (50 × 103 N·m)
833.33 × 10−6 = 60.00 × 106 Pa
Maximum normal stress in the beam = 60.0 MPa 	◂
Sample Problem 5.2
The structure shown consists of a W10 × 112 rolled-steel beam AB and two
short members welded together and to the beam. (a) Draw the shear and
bending-moment diagrams for the beam and the given loading. (b) Determine
the maximum normal stress in sections just to the left and just to the right of
point D.
STRATEGY: 	You should first replace the 10-kip load with an equivalent
force-couple system at D. You can section the beam within each region of
continuous load (including regions of no load) and find equations for the shear
and bending moment.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Equivalent Loading of Beam. 	The 10-kip load is replaced by an equiva-
lent force-couple system at D. The reaction at B is determined by considering
the beam to be free body (Fig. 1).
(continued)
8 ft 3 ft
10 kips
3 kips/ft
A 	C 	D
E
B
3 ft	2 ft

-- 370 of 897 --

356 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
a. Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams
From A to C. 	Determine the internal forces at a distance x from point A
by considering the portion of beam to the left of section 1. That part of the
distributed load acting on the free body is replaced by its resultant, and
+ ↑ ΣFy = 0 : 	−3 x − V = 0 	V = −3 x kips
+⤴ΣM1 = 0 : 	3 x( 1
2 x) + M = 0 	M = −1.5 x 2 kip·ft
Since the free-body diagram shown in Fig. 1 can be used for all values
of x smaller than 8 ft, the expressions obtained for V and M are valid in
the region 0 < x < 8 ft.
From C to D. 	Considering the portion of beam to the left of section 2 and
again replacing the distributed load by its resultant,
+ ↑ ΣF y = 0 : 	−24 − V = 0 	V = −24 kips
+⤴ΣM2 = 0 : 	24(x − 4) + M = 0 	M = 96 − 24 x kip·ft
These expressions are valid in the region 8 ft < x < 11 ft.
From D to B. 	Using the position of beam to the left of section 3, the region
11 ft < x < 16 ft is
V = −34 kips 	M = 226 − 34 x kip·ft
The shear and bending-moment diagrams for the entire beam now can be
plotted. Note that the couple of moment 20 kip·ft applied at point D introduces
a discontinuity into the bending-moment diagram.
b. Maximum Normal Stress to the Left and Right of Point D.
From Appendix E for the W10 × 112 rolled-steel shape, S = 126 in3 about
the X-X axis.
To the left of D: 	∣M∣ = 168 kip·ft = 2016 kip·in. Substituting for ∣M∣
and S into Eq. (5.3), write
σ m = ∣M∣
S = 2016 kip·in.
126 in3 	= 16.00 ksi 	σm = 16.00 ksi 	◂
To the right of D: 	∣M∣ = 148 kip·ft = 1776 kip·in. Substituting for ∣M∣
and S into Eq. (5.3), write
σ m = ∣M∣
S = 1776 kip·in.
126 in3 	= 14.10 ksi 	σm = 14.10 ksi 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	It was not necessary to determine the reactions at
the right end to draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams. However,
having determined these at the start of the solution, they can be used as checks
of the values at the right end of the shear and bending-moment diagrams.
3 kips/ft
24 kips
10 kips 	34 kips
A 	1 	2 	3	C 	D 	B
x
x
x
V
M
x
3x
x
x
M
V
M
V
2
x – 4
x – 4
x – 11
24 kips
– 24 kips
– 34 kips
10
kips
8 ft 	11 ft 	16 ft
M
V
–168 kip·ft
–96 kip·ft
–318 kip·ft
20 kip·ft
20 kip·ft
318 kip·ft
–148 kip·ft
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam, free-
body diagrams of sections to left of cut,
shear diagram, bending-moment diagram.

-- 371 of 897 --

357
Problems
5.1 through 5.6 For the beam and loading shown, (a) draw the shear and
bending-moment diagrams, (b) determine the equations of the shear
and bending-moment curves.
D
w
A
B
a 	a
C
L
Fig. P5.6
D	A B
a 	a
C
L
P 	P
Fig. P5.5
w
A 	C
B
a
L
Fig. P5.4
B
w
A
L
Fig. P5.1
B
P
C	A
L
b	a
Fig. P5.2
B
w0
A
L
Fig. P5.3
5.7 and 5.8 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown, and determine the maximum absolute value of
(a) the shear, (b) the bending moment.
12 in.	9 in.	12 in.	9 in.
5 lb 	12 lb 	5 lb 	5 lb
B
A
E	D	C
Fig. P5.8
A 	B
1.5 m 	1.5 m 0.9 m
0.6 m
C 	D 	E
48 kN 	60 kN 	60 kN
Fig. P5.7
5.9 and 5.10 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown, and determine the maximum absolute value of
(a) the shear, (b) the bending moment.
B	A
C 	D
30 kN/m 	60 kN
2 m 	2 m	1 m
Fig. P5.9
B	A
C
3 kips/ft 	30 kips
3 ft	6 ft
Fig. P5.10

-- 372 of 897 --

358
5.11 and 5.12 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown, and determine the maximum absolute value of
(a) the shear, (b) the bending moment.
B	A C 	D 	E
600 lb 	600 lb
12 in. 	12 in.
8 in.
3600 lb·in.
Fig. P5.12
2 kN 	8 kN 	2 kN
0.3 m 	0.3 m 	0.3 m 	0.3 m
0.2 m
0.2 m
C
A
D 	E 	F
G
B
Fig. P5.11
5.13 and 5.14 Assuming the reaction of the ground is uniformly distrib-
uted, draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam AB
and determine the maximum absolute value of (a) the shear, (b) the
bending moment.
B
C 	D 	E
10 kN/m
36 kN
A
0.9 m 	0.9 m 	0.9 m 	0.9 m
10 kN/m
Fig. P5.13
B	A
C 	D
3 kips	3 kips
4.5 ft 1.5 ft	1.5 ft
Fig. P5.14
5.15 and 5.16 For the beam and loading shown, determine the maximum
normal stress due to bending on a transverse section at C.
B
A
C
3 kN/m
1.5 m 	1.5 m 	2.2 m
100 mm
200 mm
10 kN
Fig. P5.15
750 lb
B	A
C 	D
150 lb/ft
750 lb
3 in.
12 in.
4 ft	4 ft	4 ft
Fig. P5.16
5.17 For the beam and loading shown, determine the maximum normal
stress due to bending on a transverse section at C.
B	A
C 	D 	E 	F 	G
25
kN
25
kN
10
kN
10
kN
10
kN
6 @ 0.375 m = 2.25 m
S200 × 27.4
Fig. P5.17

-- 373 of 897 --

359
5.18 For the beam and loading shown, determine the maximum normal
stress due to bending on section a-a.
B	A
a
a
30 kN 50 kN 50 kN 30 kN
2 m
5 @ 0.8 m = 4 m
W310 × 52
Fig. P5.18
B	A
C
25 kips 25 kips
5 kips/ft
D 	E
2.5 ft
2.5 ft	2.5 ft 7.5 ft
W16 × 77
Fig. P5.20
B	A
C
6 kN
1.5 m 	2.1 m
W310 × 32.7
4 kN/m
Fig. P5.19
B	A
C 	D 	E
25 kips 	25 kips 	25 kips
2 ft	1 ft 	2 ft
6 ft
S12 × 35
Fig. P5.21
Hinge
2.4 m
0.6 m
1.5 m 	1.5 m
C	B
A 	E
D
80 kN/m 	160 kN
W310 × 60
Fig. P5.22
H	A
7 @ 200 mm = 1400 mm
Hinge
30 mm
20 mm
C	B 	D 	E 	F 	G
300 N 	300 N 	300 N	40 N
Fig. P5.23
5.19 and 5.20 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the maximum
normal stress due to bending on a transverse section at C.
5.21 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam and
loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due to
bending.
5.22 and 5.23 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due
to bending.

-- 374 of 897 --

360
5.24 and 5.25 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due
to bending.
B
C 	D 	E
A
8 kN 	8 kN
W310 × 23.8
1 m 	1 m 	1 m 	1 m
W
Figs. P5.26 and P5.27
B	A
C 	D
a 	5 ft	8 ft
W14 × 22
10 kips	5 kips
Fig. P5.28
9 kN/m
30 kN·m
B	A
C 	D
2 m 	2 m 	2 m
W200 × 22.5
Fig. P5.24
B	A
C 	D
5 ft 	5 ft	8 ft
W14 × 22
10 kips	5 kips
Fig. P5.25
5.26 Knowing that W = 12 kN, draw the shear and bending-moment dia-
grams for beam AB and determine the maximum normal stress due
to bending.
5.27 Determine (a) the magnitude of the counterweight W for which the
maximum absolute value of the bending moment in the beam is as
small as possible, (b) the corresponding maximum normal stress due
to bending. (Hint: Draw the bending-moment diagram and equate
the absolute values of the largest positive and negative bending
moments obtained.)
5.28 Determine (a) the distance a for which the absolute value of the
bending moment in the beam is as small as possible, (b) the cor-
responding maximum normal stress due to bending. (See hint of
Prob. 5.27.)

-- 375 of 897 --

361
5.29 Knowing that P = Q = 480 N, determine (a) the distance a for which
the absolute value of the bending moment in the beam is as small
as possible, (b) the corresponding maximum normal stress due to
bending. (See hint of Prob. 5.27.)
B	A
a
C 	D
P 	Q 	12 mm
18 mm
500 mm	500 mm
Fig. P5.29
Hinge
18 ft
B
a
C
4 kips/ft
W14 × 68
A
Fig. P5.31
B
d
A
L = 10 ft
Fig. P5.32
B
b
b
A 	D	C
1.2 m 	1.2 m 	1.2 m
Fig. P5.33
5.30 Solve Prob. 5.29, assuming that P = 480 N and Q = 320 N.
5.31 Determine (a) the distance a for which the absolute value of the
bending moment in the beam is as small as possible, (b) the cor-
responding maximum normal stress due to bending. (See hint of
Prob. 5.27.)
5.32 A solid steel rod of diameter d is supported as shown. Knowing
that for steel γ = 490 lb/ft3, determine the smallest diameter d
that can be used if the normal stress due to bending is not to
exceed 4 ksi.
5.33 A solid steel bar has a square cross section of side b and is supported
as shown. Knowing that for steel ρ = 7860 kg/m3, determine the
dimension b for which the maximum normal stress due to bending
is (a) 10 MPa, (b) 50 MPa.

-- 376 of 897 --

362 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
5.2 	RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
LOAD, SHEAR, AND
BENDING MOMENT
When a beam carries more than two or three concentrated loads, or when it
carries distributed loads, the method outlined in Sec. 5.1 for plotting shear
and bending moment can prove quite cumbersome. The construction of the
shear and bending-moment diagrams will be greatly simplified if certain
relations existing between load, shear, and bending moment are taken into
consideration.
For example, a simply supported beam AB is carrying a distributed load
w per unit length (Fig. 5.9a), where C and C′ are two points of the beam at
a distance Δx from each other. The shear and bending moment at C are
denoted by V and M, respectively, and assumed to be positive. The shear and
bending moment at C′ are denoted by V + ΔV and M + ΔM.
Detach the portion of beam CC′ and draw its free-body diagram
(Fig. 5.9b). The forces exerted on the free body include a load of mag-
nitude w Δx and internal forces and couples at C and C′. Since shear and
bending moment are assumed to be positive, the forces and couples are
directed as shown.
Relationships between Load and Shear. 	The sum of the vertical
components of the forces acting on the free body CC′ is zero, so
+ ↑ ΣF y = 0: 	V − (V + ΔV) − w Δx = 0
ΔV = −w Δx
Dividing both members of the equation by Δx and then letting Δx approach
zero,
dV
dx = −w 	(5.5)
Equation (5.5) indicates that, for a beam loaded as shown in Fig. 5.9a, the
slope dV∕dx of the shear curve is negative. The magnitude of the slope at any
point is equal to the load per unit length at that point.
B	A
C
w
D	C'
x
(a)
w Δx
w
C 	C'
(b)
1
2
V
M
V + ΔV
M + ΔM
Δx 	Δx
Δx
Fig. 5.9 	(a) Simply supported beam subjected to a distributed load, with a small element between
C and C ′, (b) free-body diagram of the element.

-- 377 of 897 --

5.2 Relationships Between Load, Shear, and Bending Moment 	363
Integrating Eq. (5.5) between points C and D,
V D − V C = − ∫xD
xC
w dx 	(5.6a)
V D − V C = −(area under load curve between C and D) 	(5.6b)
This result is illustrated in Fig. 5.10b. Note that this result could be obtained
by considering the equilibrium of the portion of beam CD, since the area
under the load curve represents the total load applied between C and D.
Also, Eq. (5.5) is not valid at a point where a concentrated load is
applied; the shear curve is discontinuous at such a point, as seen in Sec. 5.1.
Similarly, Eqs. (5.6a) and (5.6b) are not valid when concentrated loads are
applied between C and D, since they do not take into account the sudden
change in shear caused by a concentrated load. Equations (5.6a) and (5.6b)
should be applied only between successive concentrated loads.
Relationships between Shear and Bending Moment. 	Returning
to the free-body diagram of Fig. 5.9b and writing that the sum of the moments
about C′ is zero, we have
+⤴ΣM C′ = 0: 	(M + ΔM) − M − V Δx + w Δx Δx
2 = 0
ΔM = V Δx − 1
2 w (Δx) 2
Dividing both members by Δx and then letting Δx approach zero,
dM
dx = V 	(5.7)
Equation (5.7) indicates that the slope dM∕dx of the bending-moment curve
is equal to the value of the shear. This is true at any point where the shear
has a well-defined value (i.e., no concentrated load is applied). Equation (5.7)
also shows that V = 0 at points where M is maximum. This property facilitates
the determination of the points where the beam is likely to fail under bending.
Integrating Eq. (5.7) between points C and D,
MD − M C = ∫xD
xC
V dx 	(5.8a)
M D − M C = area under shear curve between C and D 	(5.8b)
This result is illustrated in Fig. 5.10c. Note that the area under the shear curve
is positive where the shear is positive and negative where the shear is negative.
Equations (5.8a) and (5.8b) are valid even when concentrated loads are applied
between C and D, as long as the shear curve has been drawn correctly. The
equations are not valid if a couple is applied at a point between C and D,
since they do not take into account the sudden change in bending moment
caused by a couple (see Sample Prob. 5.6).
In most engineering applications, one needs to know the value of the
bending moment at only a few specific points. Once the shear diagram has been
drawn and after M has been determined at one of the ends of the beam, the
value of the bending moment can be obtained at any given point by computing
the area under the shear curve and using Eq. (5.8b).
(a)
wC 	wD
VC
MC
MD
VD
xD	xC
LCD
C 	D
(b)
V C
VD 	VC 	(area under w
between C and D)
Slope 	(load per unit
length at that point)
x D
VD
xC
(c)
M C
MD
xC 	xD
Slope 	V at that point
M D 	MC 	(area under
V between
C and D)
= –
= –
=
=	–
–
Fig. 5.10 	Relationships between load, shear,
and bending moment. (a) Section of loaded
beam. (b) Shear curve for section. (c) Bending-
moment curve for section.

-- 378 of 897 --

364 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
An alternative approach for determining the maximum value of the
bending moment in Concept Application 5.3 would be to use the shear dia-
gram of Fig. 5.11c. Since MA = 0, the maximum value of the bending moment
for that beam is obtained simply by measuring the area of the shaded triangle
of the positive portion of the shear diagram. So,
Mmax = 1
2
L
2
wL
2 = wL2
8
Note that in Concept Application 5.3 the load curve is a horizontal straight
line, the shear curve an oblique straight line, and the bending-moment curve a
parabola. If the load curve had been an oblique straight line (first degree), the shear
curve would have been a parabola (second degree), and the bending-moment curve
a cubic (third degree). The shear and bending-moment curves are always one and
two degrees higher than the load curve, respectively. With this in mind, the shear
and bending-moment diagrams can be drawn without actually determining the
functions V(x) and M(x). The sketches will be more accurate if we make use of
the fact that at any point where the curves are continuous, the slope of the shear
curve is equal to −w and the slope of the bending-moment curve is equal to V.
Concept Application 5.3
Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the simply sup-
ported beam shown in Fig. 5.11a and determine the maximum value
of the bending moment.
From the free-body diagram of the entire beam (Fig. 5.11b), we
determine the magnitude of the reactions at the supports:
R A = R B = 1
2wL
Next, draw the shear diagram. Close to the end A of the beam, the shear
is equal to RA, (i.e., to 1
2wL) which can be checked by considering as a
free body a very small portion of the beam. Using Eq. (5.6a), the shear
V at any distance x from A is
V − V A = − ∫x
0
w dx = −wx
V = V A − wx = 1
2 wL − wx = w( 1
2L − x)
Thus the shear curve is an oblique straight line that crosses the x axis
at x = L∕2 (Fig. 5.11c). Considering the bending moment, observe that
MA = 0. The value M of the bending moment at any distance x from A
is obtained from Eq. (5.8a):
M − M A = ∫x
0
V dx
M = ∫x
0
w( 1
2L − x)dx = 1
2w(Lx − x2 )
The bending-moment curve is a parabola. The maximum value of the
bending moment occurs when x = L∕2, since V (and thus dM∕dx) is
zero for this value of x. Substituting x = L∕2 in the last equation,
Mmax = wL2∕8 (Fig. 5.11d).
B
w
A
L
(a)
B
w
A
RB =	RA = 	wL	
1
2	wL	
1
2
(b)
(c)
wL	
1
2
wL	
1
2
L	
1
2
x
V
L
–
(d)
wL2	1
8
L 	L	
1
2
M
x
Fig. 5.11 	(a) Simply supported beam with
uniformly distributed load. (b) Free-body
diagram. (c) Shear diagram. (d) Bending-
moment diagram.

-- 379 of 897 --

5.2 Relationships Between Load, Shear, and Bending Moment 	365
Sample Problem 5.3
Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam and loading
shown.
STRATEGY: 	The beam supports two concentrated loads and one dis-
tributed load. You can use the equations in this section between these
loads and under the distributed load, but you should expect changes in
the diagrams at the concentrated load points.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Consider the entire beam as a free body as shown in Fig. 1.
+⤴ ΣM A = 0:
D(24 ft) − (20 kips)(6 ft) − (12 kips)(14 ft) − (12 kips)(28 ft) = 0
D = +26 kips 	D = 26 kips ↑
+↑ΣF y = 0: 	A y − 20 kips − 12 kips + 26 kips − 12 kips = 0
Ay = +18 kips 	A y = 18 kips ↑
→
+ ΣF x = 0: 	A x = 0 	A x = 0
Note that at both A and E the bending moment is zero. Thus, two points
(indicated by dots) are obtained on the bending-moment diagram.
Shear Diagram. 	Since dV∕dx = −w, between concentrated loads and
reactions the slope of the shear diagram is zero (i.e., the shear is con-
stant). The shear at any point is determined by dividing the beam into
two parts and considering either part to be a free body. For example,
using the portion of beam to the left of section 1, the shear between B
and C is
+↑ ΣFy = 0: 	+18 kips − 20 kips − V = 0 	V = −2 kips
Also, the shear is +12 kips just to the right of D and zero at end E. Since
the slope dV∕dx = −w is constant between D and E, the shear diagram
between these two points is a straight line.
Bending-Moment Diagram. 	Recall that the area under the shear
curve between two points is equal to the change in bending moment
between the same two points. For convenience, the area of each portion
of the shear diagram is computed and indicated in parentheses on the
diagram in Fig. 1. Since the bending moment M A at the left end is known
to be zero,
M B − M A = +108 	M B = +108 kip·ft
M C − M B = −16 	M C = +92 kip·ft
M D − M C = −140 	M D = −48 kip·ft
M E − M D = +48 	M E = 0
Since ME is known to be zero, a check of the computations is obtained.
E	A B 	C
6 ft
20 kips 	12 kips 	1.5 kips/ft
8 ft 	8 ft	10 ft
D
E
E
A
A
A x
Ay
B 	C
6 ft
4 ft
20 kips 	12 kips
20 kips
20 kips
12 kips
26 kips	18 kips
18 kips
V (kips)
M (kip·ft)
x
x
+18 (+108)
+108
+92
(+48)
	+12
( 	)
( 	)
14
15 kips/ft
12 kips
8 ft 	8 ft	10 ft
D
B 	1 	C 	D
D
M
V
–
48	–
2	–
16	–
140	–
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of beam, free-body
diagram of section to left of cut, shear diagram,
bending-moment diagram.
(continued)

-- 380 of 897 --

366 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Between the concentrated loads and reactions, the shear is constant. Thus
the slope dM∕dx is constant, and the bending-moment diagram is drawn by con-
necting the known points with straight lines. Between D and E where the shear
diagram is an oblique straight line, the bending-moment diagram is a parabola.
From the V and M diagrams, note that Vmax = 18 kips and Mmax =
108 kip·ft.
REFLECT and THINK: 	As expected, the shear and bending-moment dia-
grams show abrupt changes at the points where the concentrated loads act.
Sample Problem 5.4
The W360 × 79 rolled-steel beam AC is simply supported and carries the
uniformly distributed load shown. Draw the shear and bending-moment
diagrams for the beam, and determine the location and magnitude of the
maximum normal stress due to bending.
C
B
A
20 kN/m
6 m 	3 m
STRATEGY: 	A load is distributed over part of the beam. You can use
the equations in this section in two parts: for the load and for the no-load
regions. From the discussion in this section, you can expect the shear
diagram will show an oblique line under the load, followed by a horizontal
line. The bending-moment diagram should show a parabola under the load
and an oblique line under the rest of the beam.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Considering the entire beam as a free body (Fig. 1),
RA = 80 kN ↑ 	RC = 40 kN ↑
Shear Diagram. 	The shear just to the right of A is V A = +80 kN. Since
the change in shear between two points is equal to minus the area under
the load curve between the same two points, VB is
V B − V A = −(20 kN/m)(6 m) = −120 kN
V B = −120 + V A = −120 + 80 = −40 kN
C
C
B
w
A
V
D 	B
b
a
A
20 kN/m
80 kN
80 kN
( 160)
40 kN
( 120) 40 kN	( 40)
6 m
x 	4m	=
160 kN·m
120 kN·m
x
M
A
x
x
– – –
+
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram, shear diagram,
bending-moment diagram.

-- 381 of 897 --

5.2 Relationships Between Load, Shear, and Bending Moment 	367
The slope dV∕dx = −w is constant between A and B, and the shear diagram
between these two points is represented by a straight line. Between B and C,
the area under the load curve is zero; therefore,
V C − V B = 0 	V C = V B = −40 kN
and the shear is constant between B and C.
Bending-Moment Diagram. 	Note that the bending moment at each end
is zero. To determine the maximum bending moment, locate the section D of
the beam where V = 0.
V D − V A = −wx
0 − 80 kN = −(20 kN/m) x
Solving for x, x = 4 m 	◂
The maximum bending moment occurs at point D, where dM∕dx = V = 0.
The areas of various portions of the shear diagram are computed and given
(in parentheses). The area of the shear diagram between two points is equal
to the change in bending moment between the same two points, giving
MD − MA = +160 kN⋅m 	MD = +160 kN⋅m
MB − MD = − 40 kN⋅m 	MB = +120 kN⋅m
MC − MB = −120 kN⋅m 	MC = 0
The bending-moment diagram consists of an arc of parabola followed by a
segment of straight line. The slope of the parabola at A is equal to the value
of V at that point.
Maximum Normal Stress. 	This occurs at D, where ∣M ∣ is largest.
From Appendix E, for a W360 × 79 rolled-steel shape, S = 1270 mm3
about a horizontal axis. Substituting this and ∣M ∣ = ∣MD∣ = 160 × 103 N·m
into Eq. (5.3),
σ m = ∣M D∣
S = 160 × 103 N·m
1270 × 10−6 m3 = 126.0 × 106 Pa
Maximum normal stress in the beam = 126.0 MPa 	◂

-- 382 of 897 --

368 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Sample Problem 5.5
Sketch the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the cantilever beam
shown in Fig. 1.
STRATEGY: 	Because there are no support reactions until the right
end of the beam, you can rely solely on the equations from this sec-
tion without needing to use free-body diagrams and equilibrium equa-
tions. Due to the non-uniform distributed load, you should expect the
results to involve equations of higher degree, with a parabolic curve
in the shear diagram and a cubic curve in the bending-moment
diagram.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Shear Diagram. 	At the free end of the beam, V A = 0. Between A and B,
the area under the load curve is 1
2 w0 a. Thus,
V B − V A = − 1
2 w0 a 	V B = − 1
2 w0 a
Between B and C, the beam is not loaded, so V C = V B. At A, w = w0.
According to Eq. (5.5), the slope of the shear curve is dV∕dx = −w0 , while
at B the slope is dV∕dx = 0. Between A and B, the loading decreases lin-
early, and the shear diagram is parabolic. Between B and C, w = 0, and
the shear diagram is a horizontal line.
Bending-Moment Diagram. 	The bending moment M A at the free end
of the beam is zero. Compute the area under the shear curve to obtain.
M B − M A = − 1
3 w0 a2 	M B = − 1
3 w0 a2
M C − M B = − 1
2 w0 a(L − a)
M C = − 1
6 w0 a(3L − a)
The sketch of the bending-moment diagram is completed by recalling
that dM∕dx = V. Between A and B, the diagram is represented by a
cubic curve with zero slope at A and between B and C by a straight
line.
REFLECT and THINK: 	Although not strictly required for the solution
of this problem, determination of the support reactions would serve as an
excellent check of the final values of the shear and bending-moment
diagrams.
C	B
w0
A
V
M
a
L
w0a2	1
3 	w0a(L 	a)	1
2
w0a	1
2
w0a2	1
3
w0a(3L 	a)	1
6
w0a
x
x
1
2
– 	–
– 	–
–
– 	–
–
Fig. 1 	Beam with load, shear diagram,
bending-moment diagram.

-- 383 of 897 --

5.2 Relationships Between Load, Shear, and Bending Moment 	369
Sample Problem 5.6
The simple beam AC in Fig. 1 is loaded by a couple of moment T
applied at point B. Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams of
the beam.
STRATEGY: 	The load supported by the beam is a concentrated couple.
Since the only vertical forces are those associated with the support reac-
tions, you should expect the shear diagram to be of constant value. How-
ever, the bending-moment diagram will have a discontinuity at B due to
the couple.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
The entire beam is taken as a free body.
RA = T
L ↑ 	RC = T
L ↓
The shear at any section is constant and equal to T∕L. Since a couple is
applied at B, the bending-moment diagram is discontinuous at B. It is
represented by two oblique straight lines and decreases suddenly at B by
an amount equal to T. This discontinuity can be verified by equilibrium
analysis. For example, considering the free body of the portion of the beam
from A to just beyond the right of B as shown in Fig. 1, M is
+⤴ΣM B = 0: 	− T
L a + T + M = 0 	M = −T (1 − a
L)
REFLECT and THINK: 	Notice that the applied couple results in a
sudden change to the moment diagram at the point of application in the
same way that a concentrated force results in a sudden change to the
shear diagram.
Fig. 1 	Beam with load, shear diagram,
bending-moment diagram, free-body
diagram of section to left of B.
C
B
A
V
M
B
L
x
x
T
a
T
L
T(1 	)
a
L
T a
L
T V M
RA 	T L
– 	–̸
=

-- 384 of 897 --

370
5.34 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.1a.
5.35 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.2a.
5.36 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.3a.
5.37 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.4a.
5.38 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.5a.
5.39 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.6a.
5.40 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.7.
5.41 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.8.
5.42 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.9.
5.43 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.10.
5.44 and 5.45 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the
beam and loading shown, and determine the maximum absolute
value of (a) the shear, (b) the bending moment.
Problems
0.5 m
4 kN
1 m 	1 m 0.5 m
4 kN
A
E
D	C B
F
Fig. P5.44 	Fig. P5.45
300 N 	300 N
200 mm
75 mm
200 mm 	200 mm
A 	C 	D
B
F
E
5.46 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.15.
5.47 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.16.
5.48 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.18.
5.49 Using the method of Sec. 5.2, solve Prob. 5.20.
5.50 and 5.51 	Determine (a) the equations of the shear and bending-
moment curves for the beam and loading shown, (b) the maximum
absolute value of the bending moment in the beam.
w
L
A
B 	x
w 	w0 [x/L] 1/2	=
Fig. P5.50
w
A
L
B x
w = w0 l +	(	(x2
L2
Fig. P5.51

-- 385 of 897 --

371
Fig. P5.52
B x
w 	w 	w0 sin
A
L
L
= 	π x
B x
w
A
L
w = w0 1 – x
L(	(
Fig. P5.53
5.52 and 5.53 	Determine (a) the equations of the shear and bending-
moment curves for the beam and loading shown, (b) the maximum
absolute value of the bending moment in the beam.
Fig. P5.54
A
C 	D
B
2 ft 	10 ft 	3 ft
3 kips/ft
S10 × 25.4
60 kN 	60 kN 	120 kN
A
C 	D 	E
B
W250 × 49.1
0.8 m
1.4 m
0.4 m
Fig. P5.55
A 	B
C
0.9 m 	3 m
12 kN/m
9 kN
W200 × 19.3
Fig. P5.56
C
A 	B 	10 in.
8 ft 	4 ft 3 in.
3 kips/ft
12 kip·ft
Fig. P5.57
A 	B
D	C
80 kN/m
W250 × 80
1.2 m 	1.2 m	1.6 m
60 kN·m 	12 kN·m
Fig. P5.59
A
B
C
16 in. 	24 in.
25 lb/in.
500 lb
S4 × 7.7
Fig. P5.58
5.54 and 5.55 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the
beam and loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress
due to bending.
5.56 and 5.57 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due
to bending.
5.58 and 5.59 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam
and loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due
to bending.

-- 386 of 897 --

372
5.60 Knowing that beam AB is in equilibrium under the loading shown,
draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams and determine the
maximum normal stress due to bending.
0.4 m
P 	Q 	24 mm
0.2 m 0.5 m 	0.5 m
60 mm	A C 	D 	E 	F B
0.3 m
Fig. P5.62
C 	D 	B	A
2 kN/m
P
0.1 m 	0.1 m 	0.125 m
36 mm
18 mm
Q
Fig. P5.64
A 	C 	B	D
400 kN/m
W200 × 22.5	w0
0.3 m 	0.3 m	0.4 m
Fig. P5.60
5.61 Knowing that beam AB is in equilibrium under the loading shown,
draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams and determine the
maximum normal stress due to bending.
*5.62 The beam AB supports two concentrated loads P and Q. The normal
stress due to bending on the bottom edge of the beam is +55 MPa
at D and +37.5 MPa at F. (a) Draw the shear and bending-moment
diagrams for the beam. (b) Determine the maximum normal stress
due to bending that occurs in the beam.
*5.63 The beam AB supports a uniformly distributed load of 480 lb/ft and
two concentrated loads P and Q. The normal stress due to bending
on the bottom edge of the lower flange is +14.85 ksi at D and
+10.65 ksi at E. (a) Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams
for the beam. (b) Determine the maximum normal stress due to bend-
ing that occurs in the beam.
*5.64 Beam AB supports a uniformly distributed load of 2 kN/m and two
concentrated loads P and Q. It has been experimentally determined
that the normal stress due to bending in the bottom edge of the
beam is −56.9 MPa at A and −29.9 MPa at C. Draw the shear and
bending-moment diagrams for the beam and determine the magni-
tudes of the loads P and Q.
B	A
1.2 ft 	1.2 ft
C
w0 	50 lb/ft
T
w0
3
4 in.
=
Fig. P5.61
A
480 lb/ft
1 ft 	1 ft
1.5 ft 	1.5 ft
W8 × 31
8 ft
P
B
C 	D 	E 	F
Q
Fig. P5.63

-- 387 of 897 --

5.3 Design of Prismatic Beams for Bending 	373
5.3 	DESIGN OF PRISMATIC
BEAMS FOR BENDING
The design of a beam is usually controlled by the maximum absolute value
∣M∣max of the bending moment that occurs in the beam. The largest normal
stress σm in the beam is found at the surface of the beam in the critical section
where ∣M∣max occurs and is obtained by substituting ∣M∣max for ∣M∣ in Eq. (5.1)
or Eq. (5.3).†
σ m = ∣M∣ maxc
I (5.1a)
σ m = ∣M∣ max
S (5.3a)
A safe design requires that σm ≤ σall, where σall is the allowable stress for the
material used. Substituting σall for σm in (5.3a) and solving for S yields the
minimum allowable value of the section modulus for the beam being designed:
Smin = ∣M∣ max
σall
(5.9)
In this section, we examine the process for designing common types of
beams. This includes timber beams of rectangular cross section and rolled-
steel beams of various cross sections. A proper procedure should lead to the
most economical design. This means that among beams of the same type and
same material, and other things being equal, the beam with the smallest weight
per unit length—and thus the smallest cross-sectional area—should be
selected, since this beam will be the least expensive.
The design procedure generally includes the following steps:‡
Step 1. First determine the value of σall for the material selected from a table
of properties of materials or from design specifications. You also can
compute this value by dividing the ultimate strength σU of the material
by an appropriate factor of safety (Sec. 1.5C). Assuming that the value
of σall is the same in tension and in compression, proceed as follows.
Step 2. Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams corresponding to the
specified loading conditions, and determine the maximum absolute
value ∣M∣max of the bending moment in the beam.
Step 3. Determine from Eq. (5.9) the minimum allowable value Smin of the
section modulus of the beam.
Step 4. For a timber beam, the depth h of the beam, its width b, or the ratio
h/b characterizing the shape of its cross section probably will have been
specified. The unknown dimensions can be selected by using Eq. (4.19),
so b and h satisfy the relation 1
6 bh2 = S ≥ Smin.
†For beams that are not symmetrical with respect to their neutral surface, the largest of the
distances from the neutral surface to the surfaces of the beam should be used for c in
Eq. (5.1) and in the computation of the section modulus S = I∕c.
‡It is assumed that all beams considered in this chapter are adequately braced to prevent
lateral buckling and bearing plates are provided under concentrated loads applied to rolled-
steel beams to prevent local buckling (crippling) of the web.

-- 388 of 897 --

374 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Step 5. For a rolled-steel beam, consult the appropriate table in Appen-
dix E. Of the available beam sections, consider only those with a
section modulus S ≥ Smin and select the section with the smallest
weight per unit length. This is the most economical of the sections
for which S ≥ Smin. Note that this is not necessarily the section with
the smallest value of S (see Concept Application 5.4). In some
cases, the selection of a section may be limited by considerations
such as the allowable depth of the cross section or the allowable
deflection of the beam (see Chap. 9).
The previous discussion was limited to materials for which σall is the
same in tension and compression. If σall is different, make sure to select
the beam section where σm ≤ σall for both tensile and compressive stresses.
If the cross section is not symmetric about its neutral axis, the largest
tensile and the largest compressive stresses will not necessarily occur in
the section where ∣M ∣ is maximum (one may occur where M is maximum
and the other where M is minimum). Thus, step 2 should include the deter-
mination of both Mmax and Mmin, and step 3 should take into account both
tensile and compressive stresses.
Finally, the design procedure described in this section takes into account
only the normal stresses occurring on the surface of the beam. Short beams,
especially those made of timber, may fail in shear under a transverse loading.
The determination of shearing stresses in beams will be discussed in Chap. 6.
Also, in rolled-steel beams normal stresses larger than those considered here
may occur at the junction of the web with the flanges. This will be discussed
in Chap. 8.
Concept Application 5.4
Select a wide-flange beam to support the 15-kip load as shown in Fig. 5.12.
The allowable normal stress for the steel used is 24 ksi.
15 kips
8 ft
A 	B
Fig. 5.12 	Cantilevered wide-flange
beam with end load.
1. The allowable normal stress is given: σall = 24 ksi.
2. The shear is constant and equal to 15 kips. The bending moment is
maximum at B.
∣M∣ max = (15 kips)(8 ft) = 120 kip·ft = 1440 kip·in.

-- 389 of 897 --

5.3 Design of Prismatic Beams for Bending 	375
*Load and Resistance Factor Design. 	This alternative method of
design was applied to members under axial loading in Sec. 1.5D. It also can
be applied to the design of beams in bending. Replace the loads PD, PL, and
PU in Eq. (1.27) by the bending moments MD, ML, and MU:
γ D M D + γ LM L ≤ ϕM U 	(5.10)
The coefficients γD and γL are the load factors, and the coefficient ϕ is the
resistance factor. The moments MD and ML are the bending moments due to
the dead and the live loads, respectively. MU is equal to the product of the
ultimate strength σU of the material and the section modulus S of the beam:
MU = SσU.
3. The minimum allowable section modulus is
Smin = ∣M∣ max
σall
= 1440 kip·in.
24 ksi = 60.0 in3
4. Referring to the table of Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes in
Appendix E, note that the shapes are arranged in groups of the
same depth and are listed in order of decreasing weight. We
choose the lightest beam in each group having a section modulus
S = I∕c at least as large as Smin and record the results in the fol-
lowing table.
Shape 	S, in3
W21 × 44 	81.6
W18 × 50 	88.9
W16 × 40 	64.7
W14 × 43 	62.6
W12 × 50 	64.2
W10 × 54 	60.0
The most economical is the W16 × 40 shape since it weighs only 40 lb/ft,
even though it has a larger section modulus than two of the other shapes. The
total weight of the beam will be (8 ft) × (40 lb) = 320 lb. This weight is
small compared to the 15,000-1b load and thus can be neglected in our
analysis.

-- 390 of 897 --

376 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Sample Problem 5.7
A 12-ft-long overhanging timber beam AC with an 8-ft span AB is to
be designed to support the distributed and concentrated loads shown.
Knowing that timber of 4-in. nominal width (3.5-in. actual width) with
a 1.75-ksi allowable stress is to be used, determine the minimum
required depth h of the beam.
STRATEGY: 	Draw the bending-moment diagram to find the absolute
maximum. Then, using this, you can determine the required section proper-
ties that satisfy the given allowable stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Consider the entire beam to be a free body (Fig. 1).
+⤴ ΣM A = 0: B(8 ft) − (3.2 kips)(4 ft) − (4.5 kips)(12 ft) = 0
B = 8.35 kips 	B = 8.35 kips ↑
+	→ΣFx = 0: 	A x = 0
+ ↑ ΣF y = 0: A y + 8.35 kips − 3.2 kips − 4.5 kips = 0
Ay = −0.65 kips 	A = 0.65 kips ↓
B
A
V
A
A x
Ay
B
C
8 ft 	4 ft
3.2 kips 4.5 kips
( 18)
( 18)
4.50
kips
3.85 kips
0.65
kips
C	B 	x
–
– 	–
+
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam and its
shear diagram.
B
A 	C 	h
8 ft 	4 ft
3.5 in.	400 lb/ft 	4.5 kips

-- 391 of 897 --

5.3 Design of Prismatic Beams for Bending 	377
Shear Diagram. 	The shear just to the right of A is VA = Ay = −0.65 kips.
Since the change in shear between A and B is equal to minus the area under the
load curve between these two points, VB is obtained by
V B − V A = −(400 lb/ft)(8 ft) = −3200 lb = −3.20 kips
V B = V A − 3.20 kips = −0.65 kips − 3.20 kips = −3.85 kips.
The reaction at B produces a sudden increase of 8.35 kips in V, resulting in
a shear equal to 4.50 kips to the right of B. Since no load is applied between
B and C, the shear remains constant between these two points.
Determination of ∣M∣max. 	Observe that the bending moment is equal to
zero at both ends of the beam: MA = MC = 0. Between A and B, the bend-
ing moment decreases by an amount equal to the area under the shear curve,
and between B and C it increases by a corresponding amount. Thus the
maximum absolute value of the bending moment is ∣M ∣max = 18.00 kip·ft.
Minimum Allowable Section Modulus. 	Substituting the values of σall
and ∣M∣max into Eq. (5.9) gives
Smin = ∣M∣max
σall
= (18 kip·ft)(12 in./ft)
1.75 ksi = 123.43 in3
Minimum Required Depth of Beam. 	Recalling the formula developed
in step 4 of the design procedure and substituting the values of b and Smin,
we have
1
6bh2 ≥ Smin 1
6 (3.5 in.)h2 ≥ 123.43 in3 	h ≥ 14.546 in.
The minimum required depth of the beam is 	h = 14.55 in. 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	In practice, standard wood shapes are specified by
nominal dimensions that are slightly larger than actual. In this case, specify
a 4 × 16-in. member with the actual dimensions of 3.5 × 15.25 in.
Sample Problem 5.8
A 5-m-long, simply supported steel beam AD is to carry the distributed and
concentrated loads shown. Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the
grade of steel is 160 MPa, select the wide-flange shape to be used.
STRATEGY: 	Draw the bending-moment diagram to find the absolute
maximum bending moment. Then, using this moment, you can determine the
required section modulus that satisfies the given allowable stress.
B
A
C 	D
3 m 1 m 	1 m
20 kN
50 kN
(continued)

-- 392 of 897 --

378 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Consider the entire beam to be a free body (Fig. 1).
+⤴ΣM A = 0: D(5 m) − (60 kN)(1.5 m) − (50 kN)(4 m) = 0
D = 58.0 kN 	D = 58.0 kN ↑
+
→ΣFx = 0: 	A x = 0
+ ↑ ΣF y = 0: A y + 58.0 kN − 60 kN − 50 kN = 0
Ay = 52.0 kN 	A = 52.0 kN ↑
Shear Diagram. 	The shear just to the right of A is VA = Ay = +52.0 kN.
Since the change in shear between A and B is equal to minus the area under
the load curve between these two points,
V B = 52.0 kN − 60 kN = −8 kN
The shear remains constant between B and C, where it drops to −58 kN,
and keeps this value between C and D. Locate the section E of the beam
where V = 0 by
V E − V A = −wx
0 − 52.0 kN = −(20 kN/m) x
So, x = 2.60 m.
Determination of ∣M∣max. 	The bending moment is maximum at E,
where V = 0. Since M is zero at the support A, its maximum value at E
is equal to the area under the shear curve between A and E. Therefore,
∣M∣max = ME = 67.6 kN·m.
Minimum Allowable Section Modulus. 	Substituting the values of
σall and ∣M∣max into Eq. (5.9) gives
Smin = ∣M∣max
σall
= 67.6 kN·m
160 MPa = 422.5 × 10−6 m3 = 422.5 × 103 mm3
Selection of Wide-Flange Shape. 	From Appendix E, compile a list
of shapes that have a section modulus larger than Smin and are also the
lightest shape in a given depth group (Fig. 2).
The lightest shape available is W360 × 32.9 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	When a specific allowable normal stress is the
sole design criterion for beams, the lightest acceptable shapes tend to be
deeper sections. In practice, there will be other criteria to consider that
may alter the final shape selection.
C	B 	D
1.5 m
52 kN
x 	2.6 m
58 kN
8 kN
(67.6)
1.5 m 1 m 	1 m
50 kN
D
A
V
A E 	B 	C 	D x
A x
A y
60 kN
–
–	=
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam and its
shear diagram.
Fig. 2 	Lightest shape in each
depth group that provides the
required section modulus.
Shape 	S, mm3
W410 × 38.8 	629
W360 × 32.9 	475
W310 × 38.7 	547
W250 × 44.8 	531
W200 × 46.1 	451

-- 393 of 897 --

379
Problems
5.65 and 5.66 	For the beam and loading shown, design the cross section
of the beam, knowing that the grade of timber used has an allowable
normal stress of 12 MPa.
1.8 kN 	3.6 kN
C	B
A 	D 	h
0.8 m 	0.8 m 	0.8 m
40 mm
Fig. P5.65
25 kN/m
1
2 d
d
B 	A
2.5 m
Fig. P5.66
4.8 kips 	4.8 kips
2 kips 	2 kips
F
b
A
2 ft 2 ft 	3 ft 	2 ft 2 ft
9.5 in.
B C 	D E
Fig. P5.68
A
B
200lb/ft
2b
b
5 ft
Fig. P5.67
A
B
150 mm
b	3 kN/m
C
2.4 m 	1.2 m
Fig. P5.70
C
A B
D 	h
0.6 m 	0.6 m
3 m
100 mm	6 kN/m
2.5 kN	2.5 kN
Fig. P5.69
5.67 and 5.68 	For the beam and loading shown, design the cross section
of the beam, knowing that the grade of timber used has an allowable
normal stress of 1750 psi.
5.69 and 5.70 	For the beam and loading shown, design the cross section
of the beam, knowing that the grade of timber used has an allowable
normal stress of 12 MPa.

-- 394 of 897 --

380
5.71 and 5.72 	Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 24 ksi, select the most economical wide-flange beam to support
the loading shown.
0.5 kip/ft
1.5 kips/ft
18 ft
A
B
Fig. P5.72
D	C
A
B 	E
F
6 ft	2 ft 2 ft 	2 ft 2 ft
11 kips/ft 	20 kips	20 kips
Fig. P5.71
5.73 and 5.74 	Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 160 MPa, select the most economical wide-flange beam to support
the loading shown.
5.75 and 5.76 	Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 24 ksi, select the most economical S-shape beam to support the
loading shown.
90 kN
A 	E
1.8 m
0.6 m
0.6 m 	0.6 m
90 kN
D	C	B
90 kN
Fig. P5.73
C
D	A
B
0.8 m 	0.8 m
2.4 m
50 kN/m
Fig. P5.74
3 kips/ft
18 kips
A
D	C	B
6 ft 	6 ft 3 ft
Fig. P5.75
48 kips 	48 kips 	48 kips
A
D
E
C	B
6 ft 2 ft	2 ft	2 ft
Fig. P5.76
5.77 and 5.78 	Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 160 MPa, select the most economical S-shape beam to support the
loading shown.
100 kN/m
80 kN
A 	C
B
0.8 m 	1.6 m
Fig. P5.77
30 kN/m
80 kN
A 	D
C	B
0.9 m
3.6 m
1.8 m
Fig. P5.78

-- 395 of 897 --

381
5.79 A steel pipe of 100-mm diameter is to support the loading shown.
Knowing that the stock of pipes available has thicknesses varying
from 6 to 24 mm in 3-mm increments, and that the allowable normal
stress for the steel used is 150 MPa, determine the minimum wall
thickness t that can be used.
5.80 Two metric rolled-steel channels are to be welded along their edges
and used to support the loading shown. Knowing that the allowable
normal stress for the steel used is 150 MPa, determine the most
economical channels that can be used.
A 	B 	C 	D
100 mm
t
1.5 kN 1.5 kN
1 m 	0.5 m 	0.5 m
1.5 kN
Fig. P5.79
5.81 Two rolled-steel channels are to be welded back to back and used to
support the loading shown. Knowing that the allowable normal stress
for the steel used is 30 ksi, determine the most economical channels
that can be used.
5.82 Two L4 × 3 rolled-steel angles are bolted together and used to sup-
port the loading shown. Knowing that the allowable normal stress for
the steel used is 24 ksi, determine the minimum angle thickness that
can be used.
A 	E
B 	C 	D
4 @ 0.675 m = 2.7 m
20 kN 20 kN 20 kN
Fig. P5.80
B
2.25 kips/ft
20 kips
A
C
D
12 ft
3 ft 6 ft
Fig. P5.81
B
300 lb/ft
2000 lb
A 	C
3 ft	3 ft
6 in.
4 in.
Fig. P5.82
5.83 Assuming the upward reaction of the ground to be uniformly distrib-
uted and knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 170 MPa, select the most economical wide-flange beam to support
the loading shown.
5.84 Assuming the upward reaction of the ground to be uniformly distrib-
uted and knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 24 ksi, select the most economical wide-flange beam to support the
loading shown.
B 	C
200 kips 	200 kips
A 	D	D
4 ft	4 ft 	4 ft
Fig. P5.84
B 	C
Total load 	2 MN
A 	D
0.75 m 	0.75 m
1 m
D
=
Fig. P5.83

-- 396 of 897 --

382
5.85 and 5.86 	Determine the largest permissible value of P for the beam
and loading shown, knowing that the allowable normal stress is
+80 MPa in tension and −140 MPa in compression.
5.87 Determine the largest permissible value of P for the beam and load-
ing shown, knowing that the allowable normal stress is +8 ksi in
tension and −18 ksi in compression.
5.88 Solve Prob. 5.87, assuming that the T-shaped beam is inverted.
5.89 Beams AB, BC, and CD have the cross section shown and are pin-
connected at B and C. Knowing that the allowable normal stress is
+110 MPa in tension and −150 MPa in compression, determine
(a) the largest permissible value of w if beam BC is not to be over-
stressed, (b) the corresponding maximum distance a for which the
cantilever beams AB and CD are not overstressed.
P
10 in. 	10 in.
60 in. 	60 in.
1 in.
5 in.
1 in.
	7 in.
E
D	C	B
A
P	P
Fig. P5.87
5.90 Beams AB, BC, and CD have the cross section shown and are pin-
connected at B and C. Knowing that the allowable normal stress is
+110 MPa in tension and −150 MPa in compression, determine
(a) the largest permissible value of P if beam BC is not to be over-
stressed, (b) the corresponding maximum distance a for which the
cantilever beams AB and CD are not overstressed.
B 	C
w
D
a 	7.2 m
12.5 mm
12.5 mm
150 mm
200 mm
A
a
Fig. P5.89
P	P
B 	C 	D
a 2.4 m 2.4 m 2.4 m
12.5 mm
12.5 mm
150 mm
200 mm
A
a
Fig. P5.90
0.2 m
12 mm
48 mm
12 mm
96 mm
D	A
C	B
0.2 m
P	P
0.4 m
Fig. P5.85
0.25 m
D	A
C
B
0.15 m
12 mm
48 mm
12 mm
96 mm	P	P
0.5 m
Fig. P5.86

-- 397 of 897 --

383
5.91 Each of the three rolled-steel beams shown (numbered 1, 2, and 3)
is to carry a 64-kip load uniformly distributed over the beam. Each
of these beams has a 12-ft span and is to be supported by the two
24-ft rolled-steel girders AC and BD. Knowing that the allowable
normal stress for the steel used is 24 ksi, select (a) the most eco-
nomical S shape for the three beams, (b) the most economical W shape
for the two girders.
4 ft
4 ft
12 ft
8 ft
1
2
3
8 ft
B
A
C
D
Fig. P5.91
5.92 A 54-kip load is to be supported at the center of the 16-ft span
shown. Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used
is 24 ksi, determine (a) the smallest allowable length l of beam CD
if the W12 × 50 beam AB is not to be overstressed, (b) the most
economical W shape that can be used for beam CD. Neglect the
weight of both beams.
5.93 A uniformly distributed load of 66 kN/m is to be supported over the
6-m span shown. Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the
steel used is 140 MPa, determine (a) the smallest allowable length l
of beam CD if the W460 × 74 beam AB is not to be overstressed,
(b) the most economical W shape that can be used for beam CD.
Neglect the weight of both beams.
B	A
C 	D
l/2 	l/2
L =16 ft
W12 × 50
54 kips
Fig. P5.92
B	A
C 	D
W460 × 74
66 kN/m 	66 kN/m
l
L = 6 m
Fig. P5.93

-- 398 of 897 --

384
*5.94 A roof structure consists of plywood and roofing material supported
by several timber beams of length L = 16 m. The dead load carried
by each beam, including the estimated weight of the beam, can be
represented by a uniformly distributed load wD = 350 N/m. The live
load consists of a snow load, represented by a uniformly distributed
load wL = 600 N/m, and a 6-kN concentrated load P applied at the
midpoint C of each beam. Knowing that the ultimate strength for
the timber used is σU = 50 MPa and that the width of each beam is
b = 75 mm, determine the minimum allowable depth h of the
beams, using LRFD with the load factors γD = 1.2, γL = 1.6 and
the resistance factor ϕ = 0.9.
*5.95 Solve Prob. 5.94, assuming that the 6-kN concentrated load P applied
to each beam is replaced by 3-kN concentrated loads P1 and P2
applied at a distance of 4 m from each end of the beams.
*5.96 A bridge of length L = 48 ft is to be built on a secondary road whose
access to trucks is limited to two-axle vehicles of medium weight.
It will consist of a concrete slab and of simply supported steel beams
with an ultimate strength σU = 60 ksi. The combined weight of the
slab and beams can be approximated by a uniformly distributed load
w = 0.75 kips/ft on each beam. For the purpose of the design, it is
assumed that a truck with axles located at a distance a = 14 ft from
each other will be driven across the bridge and that the resulting
concentrated loads P1 and P2 exerted on each beam could be as large
as 24 kips and 6 kips, respectively. Determine the most economical
wide-flange shape for the beams, using LRFD with the load factors
γD = 1.25, γL = 1.75 and the resistance factor ϕ = 0.9. [Hint: It can
be shown that the maximum value of ∣ML∣ occurs under the larger
load when that load is located to the left of the center of the beam
at a distance equal to aP2∕2(P1 + P2).]
P
wD 	w L
C
b
h	A 	B
L	1
2 	L	1
2
+
Fig. P5.94
*5.97 Assuming that the front and rear axle loads remain in the same ratio
as for the truck of Prob. 5.96, determine how much heavier a truck
could safely cross the bridge designed in that problem.
a
A 	B
x
L
P2	P1
Fig. P5.96

-- 399 of 897 --

*5.4 Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear and Bending Moment 	385
*5.4 	SINGULARITY FUNCTIONS
USED TO DETERMINE
SHEAR AND BENDING
MOMENT
Usually neither the shear nor the bending moment can be described by a
single ordinary analytical function over the entire length of a beam. In the
cantilever beam of Concept Application 5.2 (Fig. 5.8) that supported a
uniformly distributed load w, the shear and bending moment could be rep-
resented by single analytical functions of V = −wx and M = − 1
2 wx 2 . This
was due to the fact that no discontinuity existed in the loading of the beam.
On the other hand, in the simply supported beam of Concept Application 5.1,
which was loaded only at its midpoint C, the load P applied at C repre-
sented a singularity in the beam loading. This singularity resulted in dis-
continuities in the shear and bending moment and required the use of
different analytical functions for V and M in the portions of beam to the
left and right of point C. In Sample Prob. 5.2, the beam had to be divided
into three portions, where different functions were used to represent the
shear and the bending moment. This led to the graphical representation of
the functions V and M provided by the shear and bending-moment diagrams
and, later in Sec. 5.2, to a graphical method of integration to determine
V and M from the distributed load w.
This section shows how the use of singularity functions, instead of
ordinary analytical functions, makes it possible to represent the shear V and
bending moment M with single mathematical expressions.
Consider the simply supported beam AB, with length of 2a, that carries
a uniformly distributed load w0 extending from its midpoint C to its right-hand
support B (Fig. 5.13). First, draw the free-body diagram of the entire beam
(Fig. 5.14a). Replacing the distributed load with an equivalent concentrated
load and summing moments about B,
+⤴ ΣM B = 0: 	(w0a)( 1
2 a) − R A(2a) = 0 	R A = 1
4 w0a
Next, cut the beam at a point D between A and C. From the free-body diagram
of AD (Fig. 5.14b) and over the interval 0 < x < a, the shear and bending
moment are
V1 (x) = 1
4 w0a 	and 	M1 (x) = 1
4 w0ax
Cutting the beam at a point E between C and B, draw the free-body diagram
of portion AE (Fig. 5.14c). Replacing the distributed load by an equivalent
concentrated load,
+↑ΣF y = 0: 	1
4w0a − w0 (x − a) − V2 = 0
+⤴ ΣM E = 0: 	− 1
4 w0ax + w0 (x − a)[ 1
2 (x − a)] + M2 = 0
Over the interval a < x < 2a, the shear and bending moment are
V2 (x) = 1
4 w0a − w0 (x − a) 	and 	M2 (x) = 1
4 w0ax − 1
2 w0 (x − a) 2
(a)
B
RB	RA
C
w0
w0 a
A
2a
a	1
2
(b)
M1
V1
D
x
A
RA 	w0 a	
1
4	=
(c)
M2
V2
C
E
w0 (x 	a)
A
x
a
(x 	a)
x 	a
1
2
RA 	w0 a	
1
4
–
–
–
=
Fig. 5.14 	Free-body diagrams at two
sections required to draw shear and bending-
moment diagrams.
B
C
w0
A
a 	a
Fig. 5.13 	Simply supported beam.

-- 400 of 897 --

386 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
The fact that the shear and bending moment are represented by different
functions of x is due to the discontinuity in the loading of the beam. However,
V1(x) and V2(x) can be represented by the single function
V(x) = 1
4 w0a − w0 ⟨x − a⟩ 	(5.11)
if the second term is included in the computations when x ≥ a and ignored
when x < a. Therefore, the brackets ⟨ ⟩ should be replaced by ordinary
parentheses ( ) when x ≥ a and by zero when x < a. Using this convention,
the bending moment can be represented at any point of the beam by
M(x) = 1
4 w0ax − 1
2 w0 ⟨x − a⟩2 	(5.12)
The function within the brackets ⟨ ⟩ can be differentiated or integrated
as if the brackets were replaced with ordinary parentheses. Instead of calculat-
ing the bending moment from free-body diagrams, the method indicated in
Sec. 5.2 could be used, where the expression obtained for V(x) is integrated
to give
M(x) − M(0) = ∫x
0
V(x) dx = ∫x
0
1
4 w0a dx − ∫x
0
w0 ⟨x − a⟩ dx
After integration and observing that M(0) = 0,
M(x) = 1
4 w0ax − 1
2 w0 ⟨x − a⟩2
Furthermore, using the same convention, the distributed load at any
point of the beam can be expressed as
w(x) = w0 ⟨x − a⟩0 	(5.13)
Indeed, the brackets should be replaced by zero for x < a and by parentheses
for x ≥ a. Thus, w(x) = 0 for x < a, and by defining the zero power of any
number as unity, ⟨x − a⟩0 = (x − a) 0 = 1 and w(x) = w0 for x ≥ a. Recall
that the shear could have been obtained by integrating the function −w(x).
Observing that V = 1
4w0a for x = 0,
V(x) − V(0) = − ∫x
0
w(x) dx = − ∫x
0
w0 ⟨x − a⟩0 dx
V(x) − 1
4 w0a = −w0 ⟨x − a⟩1
Solving for V(x) and dropping the exponent 1,
V(x) = 1
4 w0a − w0 ⟨x − a⟩
The expressions ⟨x − a⟩0 , ⟨x − a⟩, ⟨x − a⟩2 are called singularity func-
tions. For n ≥ 0,
⟨x − a⟩n = {
(x − a)n
0
when x ≥ a
when x < a (5.14)

-- 401 of 897 --

*5.4 Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear and Bending Moment 	387
Also note that whenever the quantity between brackets is positive or zero, the
brackets should be replaced by ordinary parentheses. Whenever that quantity
is negative, the bracket itself is equal to zero.
The three singularity functions corresponding to n = 0, n = 1, and
n = 2 have been plotted in Fig. 5.15. Note that the function ⟨x − a⟩0 is
discontinuous at x = a and is in the shape of a “step.” For that reason, it
is called the step function. According to Eq. (5.14) and using the zero
power of any number as unity,†
⟨x − a⟩0 = {
1
0
when x ≥ a
when x < a (5.15)
†Since (x − a)0 is discontinuous at x − a, it can be argued that this function should be left
undefined for x = a or should be assigned both of the values 0 and 1 for x = a. However,
defining (x − a)0 as equal to 1 when x = a, as stated in Eq. (5.15), has the advantage of
being unambiguous. Thus it is easily applied to computer programming, as is discussed at
the end of this section.
0
(a) n = 0
a 	x 	0
(b) n = 1
a 	x 	0
(c) n = 2
a 	x
< x – a >0 	< x – a > 1 	< x – a >2
Fig. 5.15 	Singularity functions.
It follows from the definition of singularity functions that
∫⟨x − a⟩n dx = 1
n + 1 ⟨x − a⟩n+1 	for n ≥ 0 	(5.16)
and
d
dx ⟨x − a⟩n = n ⟨x − a⟩n−1 	for n ≥ 1 	(5.17)
Most of the beam loadings encountered in engineering practice can be
broken down into the basic loadings shown in Fig. 5.16. When applicable, the
corresponding functions w(x), V(x), and M(x) are expressed in terms of sin-
gularity functions and plotted against a color background. A heavier color
background is used to indicate the expression for each loading that is most
easily obtained or remembered and from which the other functions can be
obtained by integration.
After a given beam loading has been broken down into the basic
loadings of Fig. 5.16, the functions V(x) and M(x) representing the shear
and bending moment at any point of the beam can be obtained by adding
the corresponding functions associated with each of the basic loadings and

-- 402 of 897 --

388 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
reactions. Since all of the distributed loadings shown in Fig. 5.16 are open
ended to the right, a distributed load that does not extend to the right end
of the beam or is discontinuous should be replaced as shown in Fig. 5.17
by an equivalent combination of open-ended loadings. (See also Concept
Application 5.5 and Sample Prob. 5.9.)
As you will see in Chap. 9, the use of singularity functions also
simplifies the determination of beam deflections. It was in connection with
a
a
x 	x	O 	O
V
M0
P
Loading 	Shear 	Bending Moment
(a)
a
x	O
(b)
a
x	O
w
(c) 	w (x) 	w0
V (x) 	P
(d) 	w (x) 	k
(e) 	w (x) 	k
Slope 	k
w0
a
x	O
w
a
x	O
w
a 	x	O
V
P
M (x) 	M0 	x 	a 	0
a 	x	O
M
M0
V (x) 	w0
a 	x	O
V
M (x) 	P
a 	x	O
M
V (x)
a 	x	O
V
k
2
a 	x	O
M
M (x) 	w0
a 	x	O
M
1
2
M (x) 	k
2 3
M (x) 	k
(n 1) (n 2)	
V (x) 	x 	a 	n 1	k
n 1
a 	x	O
V
a 	x	O
M
·
=
−
− 	− 	>	<
x 	a 	1	= − 	− 	>	<
x 	a 	2	= − 	− 	>	<
x 	a 	3	= − 	− 	>	<
x 	a 	0	−	−
−
>	<	=
x 	a 	1	−	− 	>	<	=
x 	a 	2	−	− 	>	<	=
−	− 	>	<	=
x 	a 	0	− 	>	<	=
x 	a 	1	− 	>	<	=
x 	a 	n	− 	>	<	=
=
+ + 	x 	a 	n 2	−	− 	>	<	= 	+
+ 	+
Fig. 5.16 	Basic loadings and corresponding shears and bending moments expressed in terms of singularity functions.

-- 403 of 897 --

*5.4 Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear and Bending Moment 	389
that problem that the approach used in this section was first suggested in
1862 by the German mathematician A. Clebsch (1833–1872). However, the
British mathematician and engineer W. H. Macaulay (1853–1936) is usually
given credit for introducing the singularity functions in the form used here,
and the brackets ⟨ ⟩ are called Macaulay’s brackets.†
x	O
w 	w0
b
L
a
x	O
w 	w0
w0	b
L
a
w(x) 	w0 	x 	a 	0 	w0 	x 	b 	0
−
= 	>	< 	− 	>	< 	−	−
b
L
x	O
w 	w0
w0	b
L
a
w(x) 	w0 	x 	a 	0 	w0 	x 	b 	0
−
= 	>	< 	− 	>	< 	−	−
Fig. 5.17 	Use of open-ended loadings to create a closed-ended loading.
†W. H. Macaulay, “Note on the Deflection of Beams,” Messenger of Mathematics, vol. 48,
pp. 129–130, 1919.
Concept Application 5.5
For the beam and loading shown (Fig. 5.18a) and using singularity functions,
express the shear and bending moment as functions of the distance x from the
support at A.
Determine the reaction at A by drawing the free-body diagram of the
beam (Fig. 5.18b) and writing
→
+ ΣF x = 0: 	A x = 0
+⤴ ΣM B = 0: 	−A y(3.6 m) + (1.2 kN)(3 m)
+(1.8 kN)(2.4 m) + 1.44 kN·m = 0
A y = 2.60 kN
Next, replace the given distributed load by two equivalent open-ended
loads (Fig. 5.18c) and express the distributed load w(x) as the sum of the
corresponding step functions:
w(x) = +w0 ⟨x − 0.6⟩0 − w0 ⟨x − 1.8⟩0
The function V(x) is obtained by integrating w(x), reversing the +
and − signs, and adding to the result the constants Ay and −P⟨x − 0.6⟩0 ,
which represent the respective contributions to the shear of the reaction
at A and of the concentrated load. (No other constant of integration is
required.) Since the concentrated couple does not directly affect the shear,
it should be ignored in this computation.
V(x) = −w0 ⟨x − 0.6⟩1 + w0 ⟨x − 1.8⟩1 + A y − P⟨x − 0.6⟩0
(a)
B
B
D	C
P 	1.2 kN
A
A x
A y
1.8 kN
M0 	1.44 kN·m
3.6 m
3 m
2.4 m
(b)
(c)
E
B	E
D	C
P 	1.2 kN
A
w0 	1.5 kN/m
M0 	1.44 kN·m
0.6 m 	0.8 m 	1.0 m
1.2 m
w
w0 	1.5 kN/m	
A y 	2.6 kN
0.6 m
B x
B
C
D
w0 	1.5 kN/m
P 	1.2 kN
A
M0 	1.44 kN·m
2.6 m
1.8 m
E
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
= 	=	− 	−
Fig. 5.18 	(a) Simply supported beam
with multiple loads. (b) Free-body diagram.
(continued)

-- 404 of 897 --

390 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
In a similar way, the function M(x) is obtained by integrating V(x) and
adding to the result the constant −M0 ⟨x − 2.6⟩0, which represents the con-
tribution of the concentrated couple to the bending moment. We have
M(x) = − 1
2w0 ⟨x − 0.6⟩2 + 1
2w0 ⟨x − 1.8⟩2
+ A y x − P⟨x − 0.6⟩1 − M0 ⟨x − 2.6⟩0
Substituting the numerical values of the reaction and loads into the
expressions for V(x) and M(x) and being careful not to compute any
product or expand any square involving a bracket, the expressions for the
shear and bending moment at any point of the beam are
V(x) = −1.5⟨x − 0.6⟩1 + 1.5⟨x − 1.8⟩1 + 2.6 − 1.2⟨x − 0.6⟩0
M(x) = −0.75⟨x − 0.6⟩2 + 0.75⟨x − 1.8⟩2
+ 2.6x − 1.2⟨x − 0.6⟩1 − 1.44⟨x − 2.6⟩0	
Fig. 5.18 	(cont.) (c) Superposition of
distributed loads.
B
Ax
A y
3.6 m
3 m
2.4 m
(b)
(c)
w
w0 	1.5 kN/m	
A y 	2.6 kN
0.6 m
B x
B
C
D
w0 	1.5 kN/m
P 	1.2 kN
A
M0 	1.44 kN·m
2.6 m
1.8 m
E
=
=
=
= 	=	− 	−
Concept Application 5.6
For the beam and loading of Concept Application 5.5, determine the numeri-
cal values of the shear and bending moment at the midpoint D.
Making x = 1.8 m in the equations found for V(x) and M(x) in Concept
Application 5.5,
V(1.8) = −1.5⟨1.2⟩1 + 1.5⟨0⟩1 + 2.6 − 1.2⟨1.2⟩0
M(1.8) = −0.75⟨1.2⟩2 + 0.75⟨0⟩2 + 2.6(1.8) − 1.2⟨1.2⟩1 − 1.44⟨−0.8⟩0
Recall that whenever a quantity between brackets is positive or zero, the brack-
ets should be replaced by ordinary parentheses, and whenever the quantity is
negative, the bracket itself is equal to zero, so
V(1.8) = −1.5(1.2) 1 + 1.5(0) 1 + 2.6 − 1.2(1.2) 0
= −1.5(1.2) + 1.5(0) + 2.6 − 1.2(1)
= −1.8 + 0 + 2.6 − 1.2
V(1.8) = −0.4 kN
and
M(1.8) = −0.75(1.2) 2 + 0.75(0) 2 + 2.6(1.8) − 1.2(1.2) 1 − 1.44(0)
= −1.08 + 0 + 4.68 − 1.44 − 0
M(1.8) = +2.16 kN·m
Application to Computer Programming. 	Singularity functions are
particularly well suited to computers. First note that the step function ⟨x − a⟩0 ,
which will be represented by the symbol STP, can be defined by an IF/THEN/
ELSE statement as being equal to 1 for X ≥ A and to 0 otherwise. Any other
singularity function ⟨x − a⟩n, with n ≥ 1, can be expressed as the product of
the ordinary algebraic function (x − a)n and the step function ⟨x − a⟩0 .
When k different singularity functions are involved (such as ⟨x − ai⟩n
where i = 1, 2, . . ., k) the corresponding step functions (STP(I), where
I = 1, 2, . . ., K) can be defined by a loop containing a single IF/THEN/
ELSE statement.

-- 405 of 897 --

*5.4 Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear and Bending Moment 	391
Sample Problem 5.9
For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equations defining
the shear and bending moment at any point and (b) the shear and bend-
ing moment at points C, D, and E.
STRATEGY: 	After determining the support reactions, you can write
equations for w, V, and M, beginning from the left end of the beam.
Any abrupt changes in these parameters beyond the left end can be
accommodated by adding appropriate singularity functions.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	The total load is 1
2 w0 L. Due to symmetry, each reaction
is equal to half that value as 1
4 w0 L.
Distributed Load. 	The given distributed loading is replaced by two
equivalent open-ended loadings as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Using a
singularity function to express the second loading,
w(x) = k1x + k2 ⟨x − 1
2L⟩ = 2w0
L x − 4w0
L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩ 	(1)
a. Equations for Shear and Bending Moment. 	V(x) is
obtained by integrating Eq. (1), changing the signs, and adding a constant
equal to R A:
V(x) = − w0
L x2 + 2w0
L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩2 + 1
4w0L 	(2) 	◂
M(x) is obtained by integrating Eq. (2). Since there is no concentrated
couple, no constant of integration is needed, so
M(x) = − w0
3L x3 + 2w0
3L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩3 + 1
4w0Lx 	(3) 	◂
b. Shear and Bending Moment at C, D, and E (Fig. 3)
At Point C: 	Making x = 1
2L in Eqs. (2) and (3) and recalling that
whenever a quantity between brackets is positive or zero, the brackets
can be replaced by parentheses:
VC = − w0
L ( 1
2L) 2 + 2w0
L ⟨0⟩2 + 1
4w0L 	V C = 0 	◂
M C = − w0
3L ( 1
2L) 3 + 2w0
3L ⟨0⟩3 + 1
4w0L( 1
2L) 	MC = 1
12w0L2 	◂
B
w0
A D
L/4 	L/4 	L/4 	L/4
C 	E
w0
2w0
L/2 	L/2
C 	C
A B
2w0
2w0
2w0
L
A B
Slope = +
= − 4w0
L
Slope
Fig. 1 	Modeling the distributed load as the
superposition of two distributed loads.
L/2
x
L/2
C
RB	RA 	w0L
2w0
L
A
w
B
k1
4w0
L
k2
	1
4 −	= 	=
= +
Fig. 2 	Free body of beam with equivalent
distributed load.
x
x
C 	E
D
B
w0L
V
A
M
C 	E	D 	B	A
3
16
w0L	
3
16
11
192
w0L2	1
12
w0L2
w0L	1
4
w0L	
1
4
−
−
Fig. 3 	Shear and bending-moment diagrams. 	(continued)

-- 406 of 897 --

392 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
At Point D: 	Making x = 1
4L in Eqs. (2) and (3) and recalling that a bracket
containing a negative quantity is equal to zero gives
V D = − w0
L ( 1
4L) 2 + 2w0
L ⟨− 1
4L⟩2 + 1
4w0L 	VD = 3
16w0L 	◂
MD = − w0
3L ( 1
4L) 3 + 2w0
3L ⟨− 1
4L⟩3 + 1
4w0L( 1
4L) 	M D = 11
192w0L2 	◂
At Point E: 	Making x = 3
4L in Eqs. (2) and (3) gives
VE = − w0
L ( 3
4L) 2 + 2w0
L ⟨1
4L⟩2 + 1
4w0L 	VE = − 3
16w0L 	◂
ME = − w0
3L ( 3
4L) 3 + 2w0
3L ⟨1
4L⟩3 + 1
4w0L( 3
4L) 	M E = 11
192w0L2 	◂
Sample Problem 5.10
The rigid bar DEF is welded at point D to the steel beam AB. For
the loading shown, determine (a) the equations defining the shear
and bending moment at any point of the beam, (b) the location and
magnitude of the largest bending moment.
STRATEGY: 	You can begin by first finding the support reactions
and replacing the load on appendage DEF with an equivalent
force-couple system. You can then write equations for w, V, and M,
beginning from the left end of the beam. Any abrupt changes in
these parameters beyond the left end can be accommodated by add-
ing appropriate singularity functions.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions. 	Consider the beam and bar as a free body and observe
that the total load is 960 lb. Because of symmetry, each reaction is
equal to 480 lb.
Modified Loading Diagram. 	Replace the 160-lb load applied at
F by an equivalent force-couple system at D (Figs. 1 and 2.). We thus
obtain a loading diagram consisting of a concentrated couple, three
concentrated loads (including the two reactions), and a uniformly dis-
tributed load
w(x) = 50 lb/ft 	(1)
B
50 lb/ft
160 lb
A
F
C 	D
E
8 ft 	5 ft
3 ft
160 lb
MD = 480 lb·ft
P = 160 lb
E
D
F 	E
D
F
Fig. 1 	Modeling the force at F as an
equivalent force-couple at D.
B
RB
MD = 480 lb·ft
RA = 480 lb 	P = 160 lb
w
D
11 ft 	5 ft
x	A
w0 = 50 lb/ft
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of beam, with
equivalent force-couple at D.

-- 407 of 897 --

*5.4 Singularity Functions Used to Determine Shear and Bending Moment 	393
a. Equations for Shear and Bending Moment. 	V(x) is obtained by
integrating Eq. (1), changing the sign, and adding constants representing the
respective contributions of RA and P to the shear. Since P affects V(x) when
x is larger than 11 ft, use a step function to express its contribution.
V(x) = −50x + 480 − 160⟨x − 11⟩0 	(2) 	◂
Obtain M(x) by integrating Eq. (2) and using a step function to represent the
contribution of the concentrated couple MD:
M(x) = −25x2 + 480x − 160⟨x − 11⟩1 − 480⟨x − 11⟩0 	(3) 	◂
b. Largest Bending Moment. 	Since M is maximum or minimum
when V = 0, set V = 0 in Eq. (2) and solve that equation for x to find the
location of the largest bending moment. Considering first values of x less than
11 ft, and noting that for such values the bracket is equal to zero:
−50x + 480 = 0 	x = 9.60 ft
Considering values of x larger than 11 ft, for which the bracket is equal to 1:
−50x + 480 − 160 = 0 	x = 6.40 ft
Since this value is not larger than 11 ft, it must be rejected. Thus, the value
of x corresponding to the largest bending moment is
x m = 9.60 ft 	◂
Substituting this value for x into Eq. (3),
Mmax = −25(9.60) 2 + 480(9.60) − 160⟨−1.40⟩1 − 480⟨−1.40⟩0
and recalling that brackets containing a negative quantity are equal to zero,
Mmax = −25(9.60) 2 + 480(9.60) 	Mmax = 2304 lb·ft 	◂
The bending-moment diagram has been plotted (Fig. 3). Note the discon-
tinuity at point D is due to the concentrated couple applied at that point.
The values of M just to the left and just to the right of D are obtained
by making x = 11 in Eq. (3) and replacing the step function ⟨x − 11⟩0 by
0 and 1, respectively.
x
2255 lb·ft
1775 lb·ft
M
D 	B
A
+
+
2304 lb·ft	+
xm = 9.60 ft
Fig. 3 	Bending-moment diagram.

-- 408 of 897 --

394
5.98 through 5.100 	(a) Using singularity functions, write the equations
defining the shear and bending moment for the beam and loading
shown. (b) Use the equation obtained for M to determine the bending
moment at point C, and check your answer by drawing the free-body
diagram of the entire beam.
Problems
C	A 	B
w0
a 	a
Fig. P5.98
A 	B
w0
a 	a
C
Fig. P5.99
A B 	C
w0
a 	a
Fig. P5.100
5.101 through 5.103 (a) Using singularity functions, write the equations
defining the shear and bending moment for the beam and loading
shown. (b) Use the equation obtained for M to determine the bending
moment at point E and check your answer by drawing the free-body
diagram of the portion of the beam to the right of E.
A 	B 	E 	C
w0
a	a	2a
Fig. P5.101
A 	B D
E	C
w0
a 	a	a	a
Fig. P5.102
A 	B 	E 	C
a	a 	a
P
Fig. P5.103
5.104 and 5.105 (a) Using singularity functions, write the equations for
the shear and bending moment for beam ABC under the loading
shown. (b) Use the equation obtained for M to determine the bending
moment just to the right of point B.
P
A
B 	C
a 	a
Fig. P5.105
P
B
C	A
a 	a
P
Fig. P5.104

-- 409 of 897 --

395
5.106 through 5.109 	(a) Using singularity functions, write the equations
for the shear and bending moment for the beam and loading shown.
(b) Determine the maximum value of the bending moment in the
beam.
48 kN 	60 kN 	60 kN
0.6 m 	0.9 m
A
B 	C 	D
E
1.5 m 	1.5 m
Fig. P5.106
B 	C 	D
20 kips
20 kips	20 kips
A 	E
2 ft 	2 ft 	2 ft 6 ft
Fig. P5.107
25 kN/m
40 kN 	40 kN
0.6 m 	1.8 m 	0.6 m
A 	D
B 	C
Fig. P5.108
3 kips/ft
3 ft 	3 ft
4 ft 	4 ft
8 kips
A 	B
C 	D 	E
3 kips/ft
Fig. P5.109
F
B 	C 	D
24 kN 	24 kN
24 kN
0.75 m
W250 × 28.4
4 @ 0.75 m = 3 m
24 kN
E
A
Fig. P5.110
E
B 	C
10 kips 	10 kips	25 kips
15 in. 	20 in. 	10 in.
S6 × 12.5
25 in.
D
A
Fig. P5.111
C
B	
18 kN·m
40 kN/m
27 kN·m
2.4 m	1.2 m
S310 × 52	A
Fig. P5.112
40 kN/m
1.8 m
A
C 	D
B
1.8 m 0.9 m
W530 × 66
60 kN 	60 kN
Fig. P5.113
5.110 and 5.111 (a) Using singularity functions, write the equations for
the shear and bending moment for the beam and loading shown.
(b) Determine the maximum normal stress due to bending.
5.112 and 5.113 (a) Using singularity functions, find the magnitude and
location of the maximum bending moment for the beam and loading
shown. (b) Determine the maximum normal stress due to bending.

-- 410 of 897 --

396
5.114 and 5.115 	A beam is being designed to be supported and loaded
as shown. (a) Using singularity functions, find the magnitude and
location of the maximum bending moment in the beam. (b) Knowing
that the allowable normal stress for the steel to be used is 24 ksi,
find the most economical wide-flange shape that can be used.
B
C 	D
9 kips 	18 kips
3 ft
4 ft
A
4 ft 	4 ft
E
18 kips
Fig. P5.115
5.116 and 5.117 	A timber beam is being designed to be supported and
loaded as shown. (a) Using singularity functions, find the magnitude
and location of the maximum bending moment in the beam. (b) Know-
ing that the available stock consists of beams with an allowable normal
stress of 12 MPa and a rectangular cross section of 30-mm width and
depth h varying from 80 to 160 mm in 10-mm increments, determine
the most economical cross section that can be used.
A 	C	C
500 N/m
B
1.6 m 	2.4 m
h
30 mm
Fig. P5.117
5.118 through 5.121 	Using a computer and step functions, calculate the
shear and bending moment for the beam and loading shown. Use the
specified increment ΔL, starting at point A and ending at the right-hand
support.
2.4 kips/ft
12 kips 	12 kips
6 ft 	6 ft 	3 ft
A 	D
C	B
Fig. P5.114
480 N/m
A
B
C	C
1.5 m 	2.5 m
h
30 mm
Fig. P5.116
C
16 kN/m
12 kN
A
B
1.2 m 4 m
ΔL = 0.4 m
Fig. P5.118
D
B 	C
120 kN 36 kN/m
A
2 m 	1 m 3 m
ΔL = 0.25 m
Fig. P5.119
1.8 kips/ft
3.6 kips/ft
A
B
C
6 ft 	6 ft
ΔL = 0.5 ft
Fig. P5.120
B 	D	C
3 kips/ft 	4 kips
A
1.5 ft
4.5 ft
ΔL = 0.5 ft
3 ft
Fig. P5.121

-- 411 of 897 --

397
5.122 and 5.123 	For the beam and loading shown and using a computer
and step functions, (a) tabulate the shear, bending moment, and max-
imum normal stress in sections of the beam from x = 0 to x = L, using
the increments ΔL indicated, (b) using smaller increments if necessary,
determine with a 2% accuracy the maximum normal stress in the
beam. Place the origin of the x axis at end A of the beam.
B
5 kN/m
3 kN/m
3 kN
A
C
D
2 m 1.5 m 	1.5 m
W200 × 22.5
ΔL = 0.25 m
L = 5 m
Fig. P5.122
C
A
B
D 	300 mm
2 m 	3 m 1 m
50 mm
20 kN/m
5 kN
ΔL = 0.5 m
L = 6 m
Fig. P5.123
5.124 and 5.125 	For the beam and loading shown and using a computer
and step functions, (a) tabulate the shear, bending moment, and max-
imum normal stress in sections of the beam from x = 0 to x = L, using
the increments ΔL indicated, (b) using smaller increments if necessary,
determine with a 2% accuracy the maximum normal stress in the
beam. Place the origin of the x axis at end A of the beam.
C
A
B
D 	12 in.
1.5 ft 	2 ft 1.5 ft
2 in.	1.2 kips/ft
2 kips/ft
300 lb
L = 5 ft
ΔL = 0.25 ft
Fig. P5.124
C
A
B
D
2.5 ft 2.5 ft
10 ft
3.2 kips/ft
4.8 kips/ft
W12 × 30
L = 15 ft
ΔL = 1.25 ft
Fig. P5.125

-- 412 of 897 --

398 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
*5.5 	NONPRISMATIC BEAMS
Prismatic beams, i.e., beams of uniform cross section, are designed so that
the normal stresses in their critical sections are at most equal to the allow-
able value of the normal stress for the material being used. In all other
sections, the normal stresses will be smaller (possibly much smaller) than
their allowable value. Therefore, a prismatic beam is almost always
overdesigned, and considerable savings can be made by using nonpris-
matic beams. The continuous spans shown in Photo 5.2 are examples of
nonprismatic beams.
Since the maximum normal stresses σm usually control the design of
a beam, the design of a nonprismatic beam is optimum if the section mod-
ulus S = I∕c of every cross section satisfies Eq. (5.3). Solving that equation
for S,
S = ∣M ∣
σall
(5.18)
A beam designed in this manner is a beam of constant strength, where the
section modulus varies along the length of the beam and is just large enough
to satisfy the allowable normal stress at each cross section.
For a forged or cast structural or machine component, it is possible to
vary the cross section of the component along its length and eliminate most
of the unnecessary material (see Concept Application 5.7). For a timber or
rolled-steel beam, it is not possible to vary the cross section of the beam. But
considerable savings of material can be achieved by gluing wooden planks of
appropriate lengths to a timber beam (see Sample Prob. 5.11) and using cover
plates in portions of a rolled-steel beam where the bending moment is large
(see Sample Prob. 5.12).
Photo 5.2 	Bridge supported by nonprismatic beams. ©David Nunuk/Science Source

-- 413 of 897 --

*5.5 Nonprismatic Beams 	399
Concept Application 5.7
A cast-aluminum plate of uniform thickness b is to support a uniformly
distributed load w as shown in Fig. 5.19. (a) Determine the shape of the
plate that will yield the most economical design. (b) Knowing that the allow-
able normal stress for the aluminum used is 72 MPa and that b = 40 mm,
L = 800 mm, and w = 135 kN/m, determine the maximum depth h0 of
the plate.
w
A
B
h 	h0
L
x
Fig. 5.19 	Nonprismatic, cantilevered
beam supporting a uniformly distributed
load.
Bending Moment. 	Measuring the distance x from A and observing that
VA = MA = 0, use Eqs. (5.6) and (5.8) for
V(x) = − ∫x
0
wdx = −wx
M(x) = ∫x
0
V(x)dx = − ∫x
0
wxdx = − 1
2 wx2
a. Shape of Plate. 	Recall that the modulus S of a rectangular cross
section of width b and depth h is S = 1
6 bh2 . Carrying this value into Eq. (5.18)
and solving for h2,
h2 = 6∣M ∣
bσall
(5.19)
and after substituting ∣M ∣ = 1
2 wx2 ,
h2 = 3wx2
bσall
or 	h = (
3w
bσall)
1∕2
x 	(5.20)
Since the relationship between h and x is linear, the lower edge of the plate
is a straight line. Thus, the plate providing the most economical design is of
triangular shape.
b. Maximum Depth h0. 	Making x = L in Eq. (5.20) and substituting
the given data,
h0 = [
3(135 kN/m)
(0.040 m)(72 MPa) ]
1∕2
(800 mm) = 300 mm

-- 414 of 897 --

400 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Sample Problem 5.11
A 12-ft-long beam made of a timber with an allowable normal stress of 2.40 ksi
and an allowable shearing stress of 0.40 ksi is to carry two 4.8-kip loads
located at its third points. As will be shown in Ch. 6, this beam of uniform
rectangular cross section, 4 in. wide and 4.5 in. deep, would satisfy the allow-
able shearing stress requirement. Since such a beam would not satisfy the
allowable normal stress requirement, it will be reinforced by gluing planks of
the same timber, 4 in. wide and 1.25 in. thick, to the top and bottom of the
beam in a symmetric manner. Determine (a) the required number of pairs of
planks and (b) the length of the planks in each pair that will yield the most
economical design.
C
A 	D
B
4 ft
4.8 kips 	4.8 kips
4 ft 	4 ft
STRATEGY: 	Since the moment is maximum and constant between the two
concentrated loads (due to symmetry), you can analyze this region to deter-
mine the total number of reinforcing planks required. You can determine the
cutoff points for each pair of planks by considering the range for which each
reinforcing pair, combined with the rest of the section, meets the specified
allowable normal stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Bending Moment. 	Draw the free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 1) and
find the expressions for the bending moment:
From A to B (0 ≤ x ≤ 48 in.): 	M = (4.80 kips) x
From B to C (48 in. ≤ x ≤ 96 in.):
M = (4.80 kips) x − (4.80 kips)(x − 48 in.) = 230.4 kip·in.
a. Number of Pairs of Planks. 	Determine the required total depth of
the reinforced beam between B and C. Recall from Sec. 5.3 that S = 1
6 bh2 for
a beam with a rectangular cross section of width b and depth h. Substituting
this value into Eq. (5.19),
h2 = 6∣M ∣
bσall
(1)
A
A
A
V M
D
	C	B
B
48 in.
x
4.8 kips
4.8 kips 	4.8 kips
4.8 kips
4.8 kips
4.8 kips
4.8 kips
x
M
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of entire
beam and sections.

-- 415 of 897 --

*5.5 Nonprismatic Beams 	401
Substituting the value obtained for M from B to C and the given values of
b and σall,
h2 = 6(230.4 kip·in.)
(4 in.)(2.40 ksi) = 144 in2 	h = 12.00 in.
Since the original beam has a depth of 4.50 in., the planks must provide
an additional depth of 7.50 in. Recalling that each pair of planks is 2.50 in.
thick,
Required number of pairs of planks = 3 	◂
b. Length of Planks. 	The bending moment was found to be
M = (4.80 kips)x in the portion AB of the beam. Substituting this expres-
sion and the given values of b and σall into Eq. (1) then solving for x, gives
x = (4 in.)(2.40 ksi)
6 (4.80 kips) h2 	x = h2
3 in. (2)
Equation (2) defines the maximum distance x from end A at which a given
depth h of the cross section is acceptable (Fig. 2). Making h = 4.50 in. you
can find the distance x1 from A at which the original prismatic beam is safe:
x1 = 6.75 in. From that point on, the original beam should be reinforced by
the first pair of planks. Making h = 4.50 in. + 2.50 in. = 7.00 in. yields the
distance x2 = 16.33 in. from which the second pair of planks should be used,
and making h = 9.50 in. yields the distance x3 = 30.08 in. from which the
third pair of planks should be used. The length li of the planks of the pair i,
where i = 1, 2, 3, is obtained by subtracting 2xi from the 144-in. length of
the beam.
l1 = 130.5 in., l2 = 111.3 in., l3 = 83.8 in. 	◂
O
x1 	x2
x3
x
y
Fig. 2 	Positions where planks must be
added.
The corners of the various planks lie on the parabola defined by Eq. (2).

-- 416 of 897 --

402 	Analysis and Design of Beams for Bending
Sample Problem 5.12
Two steel plates, each 16 mm thick, are welded as shown to a
W690 × 125 beam to reinforce it. Knowing that σall = 160 MPa for
both the beam and the plates, determine the required value of (a) the
length of the plates, (b) the width of the plates.
l
E b
B	A
C	D
W690 × 125
16
mm
4 m	4 m
1
2	l	
1
2
500 kN
STRATEGY: 	To find the required length of the reinforcing plates,
you can determine the extent of the beam that is not overstressed if
left unreinforced. By considering the point of maximum moment, you
can then size the reinforcing plates.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Bending Moment. 	Find the reactions. From the free-body diagram
in Fig. 1, using a portion of the beam of length x ≤ 4 m, M is found
between A and C as
M = (250 kN) x 	(1)
a. Required Length of Plates. 	Determine the maximum
allowable length xm of the portion AD of the unreinforced beam.
From Appendix E, the section modulus of a W690 × 125 beam
is S = 3490 × 106 mm3 or S = 3.49 × 10−3 m3. Substitute for S
and σall into Eq. (5.17) and solve for M:
M = Sσall = (3.49 × 10−3 m3 )(160 × 103 kN/m2 ) = 558.4 kN·m
Substituting for M in Eq. (1),
558.4 kN·m = (250 kN) x m 	x m = 2.234 m
The required length l of the plates is obtained by subtracting 2xm from
the length of the beam:
l = 8 m − 2(2.234 m) = 3.532 m 	l = 3.53 m 	◂
B
C
V
M
x
A
A
500 kN
250 kN	250 kN
250 kN
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of beam and
section needed to find internal shear force
and bending moment.

-- 417 of 897 --

*5.5 Nonprismatic Beams 	403
b. Required Width of Plates. 	The maximum bending moment occurs
in the midsection C of the beam. Making x = 4 m in Eq. (1), the bending
moment in that section is
M = (250 kN)(4 m) = 1000 kN·m
To use Eq. (5.1), find the moment of inertia of the cross section of the
reinforced beam with respect to a centroidal axis and the distance c from that
axis to the outer surfaces of the plates (Fig. 2). From Appendix E, the moment
of inertia of a W690 × 125 beam is Ib = 1190 × 106 mm4, and its depth is
d = 678 mm. Using t as the thickness of one plate, b as its width, and y as
the distance of its centroid from the neutral axis, the moment of inertia Ip of
the two plates with respect to the neutral axis is
Ip = 2( 1
12 bt 3 + A y 2 ) = ( 1
6 t 3 ) b + 2 bt ( 1
2 d + 1
2 t) 2
Substituting t = 16 mm and d = 678 mm, we obtain Ip = (3.854 × 106 mm3) b.
The moment of inertia I of the beam and plates is
I = Ib + Ip = 1190 × 106 mm4 + (3.854 × 106 mm3 ) b 	(2)
and the distance from the neutral axis to the surface is c = 1
2d + t = 355 mm.
Solving Eq. (5.1) for I and substituting the values of M, σall, and c,
I = ∣M ∣ c
σall
= (1000 kN·m)(355 mm)
160 MPa = 2.219 × 10−3 m4 = 2219 × 106 mm4
Replacing I by this value in Eq. (2) and solving for b,
2219 × 106 mm4 = 1190 × 106 mm4 + (3.854 × 106 mm3 )b
b = 267 mm 	◂
y
b
c
t
d	1
2
d	1
2
N.A.
Fig. 2 	Cross section of beam with plate
reinforcement.

-- 418 of 897 --

404
5.126 and 5.127 The beam AB, consisting of a cast-iron plate of uniform
thickness b and length L, is to support the load shown. (a) Knowing
that the beam is to be of constant strength, express h in terms of x,
L, and h0. (b) Determine the maximum allowable load if L = 36 in.,
h0 = 12 in., b = 1.25 in., and σall = 24 ksi.
A
B
h
L
x
P
h0
Fig. P5.127
5.128 and 5.129 The beam AB, consisting of a cast-iron plate of uni-
form thickness b and length L, is to support the distributed load
w(x) shown. (a) Knowing that the beam is to be of constant
strength, express h in terms of x, L, and h0. (b) Determine the
smallest value of h0 if L = 750 mm, b = 30 mm, w0 = 300 kN/m,
and σall = 200 MPa.
w 	w0 sin 2 L
x
A
B
h 	h0
L
x
π	=
Fig. P5.129
5.130 and 5.131 The beam AB, consisting of an aluminum plate of
uniform thickness b and length L, is to support the load shown.
(a) Knowing that the beam is to be of constant strength, express h
in terms of x, L, and h0 for portion AC of the beam. (b) Determine
the maximum allowable load if L = 800 mm, h0 = 200 mm,
b = 25 mm, and σall = 72 MPa.
L/2 	L/2
x
h
C
A 	B
h0
w 	w0 sin L
= 	π x
Fig. P5.131
Problems
B
h 	h0
L/2 	L/2
x
w
A
Fig. P5.126
w 	w0 L
x
A
B
h 	h0
L
x
=
Fig. P5.128
w0
B
h 	h0
L/2 	L/2
x
A C
Fig. P5.130

-- 419 of 897 --

405
5.132 and 5.133 A preliminary design on the use of a cantilever pris-
matic timber beam indicated that a beam with a rectangular cross
section 2 in. wide and 10 in. deep would be required to safely
support the load shown in part a of the figure. It was then decided
to replace that beam with a built-up beam obtained by gluing
together, as shown in part b of the figure, five pieces of the same
timber as the original beam and of 2 × 2-in. cross section. Deter-
mine the respective lengths l1 and l2 of the two inner and outer
pieces of timber that will yield the same factor of safety as the
original design.
l2
l1
A C D 	B
A 	B
P
6.25 ft
(a)
(b)
Fig. P5.132
5.134 and 5.135 A preliminary design on the use of a simply supported
prismatic timber beam indicated that a beam with a rectangular
cross section 50 mm wide and 200 mm deep would be required
to safely support the load shown in part a of the figure. It was
then decided to replace that beam with a built-up beam obtained
by gluing together, as shown in part b of the figure, four pieces
of the same timber as the original beam and of 50 × 50-mm
cross section. Determine the length l of the two outer pieces of
timber that will yield the same factor of safety as the original
design.
A 	B
A 	B
C
1.2 m 	1.2 m
P
l
(a)
(b)
Fig. P5.134
l2
l1
A C D 	B
A
6.25 ft
(a)
(b)
w
B
B
Fig. P5.133
A 	B
C 	D
w
0.8 m 	0.8 m 	0.8 m
(a)
A 	B
l
(b)
Fig. P5.135

-- 420 of 897 --

406
5.136 and 5.137 A machine element of cast aluminum and in the shape
of a solid of revolution of variable diameter d is being designed to
support the load shown. Knowing that the machine element is to be
of constant strength, express d in terms of x, L, and d0.
w
A 	B
C
x
L/2 	L/2
d 	d0
Fig. P5.137
5.138 A transverse force P is applied as shown at end A of the conical
taper AB. Denoting by d0 the diameter of the taper at A, show that
the maximum normal stress occurs at point H, which is contained in
a transverse section of diameter d = 1.5 d0.
5.139 A cantilever beam AB consisting of a steel plate of uniform depth
h and variable width b is to support the distributed load w along its
centerline AB. (a) Knowing that the beam is to be of constant
strength, express b in terms of x, L, and b0. (b) Determine the max-
imum allowable value of w if L = 15 in., b0 = 8 in., h = 0.75 in.,
and σall = 24 ksi.
5.140 Assuming that the length and width of the cover plates used with the
beam of Sample Prob. 5.12 are, respectively, l = 4 m and b = 285 mm,
and recalling that the thickness of each plate is 16 mm, determine the
maximum normal stress on a transverse section (a) through the center
of the beam, (b) just to the left of D.
5.141 Two cover plates, each 1
2 in. thick, are welded to a W27 × 84 beam
as shown. Knowing that l = 10 ft and b = 10.5 in., determine the
maximum normal stress on a transverse section (a) through the cen-
ter of the beam, (b) just to the left of D.
in.	1
2
B
b
E	D 	C
A
l W27 × 84
9 ft
160 kips
1
2 	l	
1
2
9 ft
Fig. P5.141 and P5.142
5.142 Two cover plates, each 1
2 in. thick, are welded to a W27 × 84 beam
as shown. Knowing that σall = 24 ksi for both the beam and the
plates, determine the required value of (a) the length of the plates,
(b) the width of the plates.
P
A 	B
C
x
L/2 	L/2
d 	d0
Fig. P5.136
P
d0
H
B
A
Fig. P5.138
x
L 	h
A
B
b0
w
b
Fig. P5.139

-- 421 of 897 --

407
5.143 Knowing that σall = 150 MPa, determine the largest concentrated
load P that can be applied at end E of the beam shown.
5.144 Two cover plates, each 7.5 mm thick, are welded to a W460 × 74
beam as shown. Knowing that l = 5 m and b = 200 mm, determine
the maximum normal stress on a transverse section (a) through the
center of the beam, (b) just to the left of D.
B
b 	7.5 mm
E	D
A
l 	W460 × 74
8 m
40 kN/m
Fig. P5.144 and P5.145
5.145 Two cover plates, each 7.5 mm thick, are welded to a W460 × 74
beam as shown. Knowing that σall = 150 MPa for both the beam and
the plates, determine the required value of (a) the length of the
plates, (b) the width of the plates.
5.146 Two cover plates, each 5
8 in. thick, are welded to a W30 × 99 beam
as shown. Knowing that l = 9 ft and b = 12 in., determine the
maximum normal stress on a transverse section (a) through the cen-
ter of the beam, (b) just to the left of D.
5.147 Two cover plates, each 5
8 in. thick, are welded to a W30 × 99 beam
as shown. Knowing that σall = 22 ksi for both the beam and the
plates, determine the required value of (a) the length of the plates,
(b) the width of the plates.
5.148 For the tapered beam shown, knowing that P = 150 kN, determine
(a) the transverse section in which the maximum normal stress occurs,
(b) the corresponding value of the normal stress.
5.149 For the tapered beam shown, determine (a) the transverse section in
which the maximum normal stress occurs, (b) the largest concentrated
load P that can be applied, knowing that σall = 140 MPa.
5.150 For the tapered beam shown, determine (a) the transverse section in
which the maximum normal stress occurs, (b) the largest distributed
load w that can be applied, knowing that σall = 24 ksi.
A 	B
x
30 in.
4 in. 	h	h
30 in.
in.	3
4
8 in.
C
w
Fig. P5.150
5.151 For the tapered beam shown, determine (a) the transverse section in
which the maximum normal stress occurs, (b) the largest concen-
trated load P that can be applied, knowing that σall = 24 ksi.
E
C
A
B 	D
P
W410 × 85
18 × 220 mm
2.25 m 1.25 m
2.2 m
4.8 m
Fig. P5.143
B
b
E	D
A
W30 × 99
16 ft
30 kips/ft
in.	5
8
l
Fig. P5.146 and P5.147
x
30 in.
4 in.
A 	B	C
h	h
30 in.
P
8 in.
in.	3
4
Fig. P5.151
C
x
0.6 m
120 mm
A 	B
h	h
0.6 m
300 mm
20 mm
P
Fig. P5.148 and P5.149

-- 422 of 897 --

408
Design of Prismatic Beams
This chapter was devoted to the analysis and design of beams under transverse
loadings consisting of concentrated or distributed loads. The beams are classified
according to the way they are supported (Fig. 5.20). Only statically determinate
beams were considered, where all support reactions can be determined by statics.
L
(a) Simply supported beam
Statically
Determinate
Beams
Statically
Indeterminate
Beams
L2	L1
(d) Continuous beam
L
(b) Overhanging beam
L
Beam fixed at one end
and simply supported
at the other end
(e)
L
(c) Cantilever beam
L
( f ) Fixed beam
Fig. 5.20 	Common beam support configurations.
Normal Stresses Due to Bending
While transverse loadings cause both bending and shear in a beam, the normal
stresses caused by bending are the dominant criterion in the design of a beam
for strength (Sec. 5.1). Therefore, this chapter dealt only with the determina-
tion of the normal stresses in a beam, the effect of shearing stresses being
examined in the next one.
The flexure formula for the determination of the maximum value σm of
the normal stress in a given section of the beam is
σ m = ∣M∣c
I (5.1)
where I is the moment of inertia of the cross section with respect to a cen-
troidal axis perpendicular to the plane of the bending couple M and c is the
maximum distance from the neutral surface (Fig. 5.21). Introducing the elas-
tic section modulus S = I∕c of the beam, the maximum value σm of the
normal stress in the section can be expressed also as
σ m = ∣M∣
S (5.3)
Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams
From Eq. (5.1) it is seen that the maximum normal stress occurs in the section
where ∣M∣ is largest and at the point farthest from the neutral axis. The determi-
nation of the maximum value of ∣M∣ and of the critical section of the beam in
which it occurs is simplified if shear diagrams and bending-moment diagrams
are drawn. These diagrams represent the variation of the shear and of the bending
moment along the beam and are obtained by determining the values of V and M
at selected points of the beam. These values are found by passing a section
Review and Summary
y
c
Neutral surface σx
σm
Fig. 5.21 	Linear normal stress distribution
for bending.

-- 423 of 897 --

409
through the point and drawing the free-body diagram of either of the portions of
beam. To avoid any confusion regarding the sense of the shearing force V and
of the bending couple M (which act in opposite sense on the two portions of the
beam), we follow the sign convention adopted earlier, as illustrated in Fig. 5.22.
Relationships Between Load, Shear, and Bending Moment
The construction of the shear and bending-moment diagrams is facilitated if
the following relations are taken into account. Denoting by w the distributed
load per unit length (assumed positive if directed downward)
dV
dx = −w 	(5.5)
dM
dx = V 	(5.7)
or in integrated form,
V D − V C = −(area under load curve between C and D) 	(5.6b)
M D − M C = area under shear curve between C and D 	(5.8b)
Equation (5.6b) makes it possible to draw the shear diagram of a beam from
the curve representing the distributed load on that beam and V at one end of
the beam. Similarly, Eq. (5.8b) makes it possible to draw the bending-moment
diagram from the shear diagram and M at one end of the beam. However,
concentrated loads introduce discontinuities in the shear diagram and concen-
trated couples in the bending-moment diagram, none of which is accounted
for in these equations. The points of the beam where the bending moment is
maximum or minimum are also the points where the shear is zero [Eq. (5.7)].
Design of Prismatic Beams
Having determined σall for the material used and assuming that the design of
the beam is controlled by the maximum normal stress in the beam, the mini-
mum allowable value of the section modulus is
Smin = ∣M ∣max
σall
(5.9)
For a timber beam of rectangular cross section, S = 1
6 bh2 , where b is
the width of the beam and h its depth. The dimensions of the section, there-
fore, must be selected so that 1
6 bh2 ≥ Smin.
For a rolled-steel beam, consult the appropriate table in Appendix E.
Of the available beam sections, consider only those with a section modulus
S ≥ Smin. From this group we normally select the section with the smallest
weight per unit length.
Singularity Functions
An alternative method to determine the maximum values of the shear and
bending moment is based on the singularity functions ⟨x − a⟩n. For n ≥ 0,
⟨x − a⟩n = {
(x − a)n 	when x ≥ a
0 	when x < a (5.14)
Step Function
Whenever the quantity between brackets is positive or zero, the brackets
should be replaced by ordinary parentheses, and whenever that quantity is
negative, the bracket itself is equal to zero. Also, singularity functions can be
integrated and differentiated as ordinary binomials. The singularity function
V
M
M'
V'
Fig. 5.22 	Positive sign convention for
internal shear and bending moment.

-- 424 of 897 --

410
corresponding to n = 0 is discontinuous at x = a (Fig. 5.23). This function is
called the step function.
⟨x − a⟩0 = {
1 	when x ≥ a
0 	when x < a (5.15)
Using Singularity Functions to Express Shear and
Bending Moment
The use of singularity functions makes it possible to represent the shear or
the bending moment in a beam by a single expression. This is valid at any
point of the beam. For example, the contribution to the shear of the concen-
trated load P applied at the midpoint C of a simply supported beam (Fig. 5.24)
can be represented by −P ⟨x − 1
2 L⟩0 , since this expression is equal to zero to
the left of C and to −P to the right of C. Adding the reaction R A = 1
2 P at A,
the shear at any point is
V(x) = 1
2 P − P ⟨x − 1
2 L⟩0
The bending moment, obtained by integrating, is
M(x) = 1
2Px − P ⟨x − 1
2L⟩1
Equivalent Open-Ended Loadings
The singularity functions representing the load, shear, and bending moment
corresponding to various basic loadings were given in Fig. 5.16. A distributed
load that does not extend to the right end of the beam or is discontinuous should
be replaced by an equivalent combination of open-ended loadings. For instance,
a uniformly distributed load extending from x = a to x = b (Fig. 5.25) is
w(x) = w0 ⟨x − a⟩0 − w0 ⟨x − b⟩0
The contribution of this load to the shear and bending moment is obtained
through two successive integrations. Care should be used to include for V(x)
the contribution of concentrated loads and reactions, and for M(x) the contri-
bution of concentrated couples.
x	O
w 	w0
b
L
a
x	O
w 	w0
w0	b
L
a
−
x	O
w 	w0
b
L
a
x	O
w 	w0
w0	b
L
a
−
Fig. 5.25 	Use of open-ended loadings to create a closed-ended loading.
Nonprismatic Beams
Nonprismatic beams are beams of variable cross section. By selecting the shape
and size of the cross section so that its elastic section modulus S = I∕c varies
along the beam in the same way as the bending moment M, beams can be
designed where σm at each section is equal to σall. These are called beams of
constant strength, and they provide a more effective use of the material than
prismatic beams. Their section modulus at any section along the beam is
S = M
σall
(5.18)
0
n 	0
x 	a 	0
a 	x
−
=
< 	>
Fig. 5.23 	Step function.
B
C
A
P
L	
1
2 	L	
1
2
Fig. 5.24 	Simply supported beam with a
concentrated load at midpoint C.

-- 425 of 897 --

411
5.152 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam and
loading shown, and determine the maximum absolute value of
(a) the shear, (b) the bending moment.
5.153 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam and
loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due to
bending.
24 kN/m
64 kN·m
B	A
C 	D
2 m 	2 m 	2 m
S250 × 52
Fig. P5.153
5.154 Determine (a) the distance a for which the absolute value of the
bending moment in the beam is as small as possible, (b) the cor-
responding maximum normal stress due to bending. (See hint of
Prob. 5.27.)
B	A
a 	1.5 ft 	1.2 ft 0.9 ft
C 	D 	E
1.2 kips
1.2 kips	0.8 kips
S3 × 5.7
Fig. P5.154
5.155 Determine (a) the equations of the shear and bending-moment curves
for the beam and loading shown, (b) the maximum absolute value
of the bending moment in the beam.
5.156 Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams for the beam and
loading shown and determine the maximum normal stress due to
bending.
A 	B
C
16 kN/m
1 m	1.5 m
S150 × 18.6
Fig. P5.156
Review Problems
250 mm 	250 mm 	250 mm
50 mm 	50 mm
75 N
A
C 	D
B
75 N
Fig. P5.152
w
A
L
B
x
w 	w0 cos 	x
2L
π	=
Fig. P5.155

-- 426 of 897 --

412
5.157 Beam AB, of length L and square cross section of side a, is supported
by a pivot at C and loaded as shown. (a) Check that the beam is in
equilibrium. (b) Show that the maximum normal stress due to bend-
ing occurs at C and is equal to w0L2∕(1.5a)3.
B
a
a	A
2L
3
C
w0
L
3
Fig. P5.157
5.158 For the beam and loading shown, design the cross section of the
beam, knowing that the grade of timber used has an allowable nor-
mal stress of 1750 psi.
1.2 kips/ft
6 ft
a
a
B
A
Fig. P5.158
5.159 Knowing the allowable normal stress for the steel used is 24 ksi, select
the most economical wide-flange beam to support the loading shown.
2.75 kips/ft
24 kips
B
A 	C
9 ft 	15 ft
Fig. P5.159
5.160 Three steel plates are welded together to form the beam shown.
Knowing that the allowable normal stress for the steel used is 22 ksi,
determine the minimum flange width b that can be used.
8 kips 	32 kips 	32 kips
B 	D
A
C
E
b
4.5 ft 14 ft 	14 ft 9.5 ft
in.
1 in.
1 in.
19 in.	3
4
Fig. P5.160

-- 427 of 897 --

413
5.161 (a) Using singularity functions, find the magnitude and location of
the maximum bending moment for the beam and loading shown.
(b) Determine the maximum normal stress due to bending.
B
C
A 	D
1 m 1 m 4 m
80 kN/m
10 kN
W530 × 150
Fig. P5.161
5.162 The beam AB, consisting of an aluminum plate of uniform thick-
ness b and length L, is to support the load shown. (a) Knowing
the beam is to be of constant strength, express h in terms of x,
L, and h0 for portion AC of the beam. (b) Determine the maximum
allowable load if L = 800 mm, h0 = 200 mm, b = 25 mm, and
σall = 72 MPa.
B
h 	h0
L/2 	L/2
x
A C
P
Fig. P5.162
5.163 A cantilever beam AB consisting of a steel plate of uniform depth h
and variable width b is to support the concentrated load P at point
A. (a) Knowing that the beam is to be of constant strength,
express b in terms of x, L, and b0. (b) Determine the smallest
allowable value of h if L = 300 mm, b0 = 375 mm, P = 14.4 kN,
and σall = 160 MPa.
x
L 	h
A
B
b0
b
P
Fig. P5.163

-- 428 of 897 --

414
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
5.C1 Several concentrated loads Pi, (i = 1, 2, . . . , n) can be applied to a
beam as shown. Write a computer program that can be used to calcu-
late the shear, bending moment, and normal stress at any point of the
beam for a given loading of the beam and a given value of its section
modulus. Use this program to solve Probs. 5.18, 5.21, and 5.25.
(Hint: Maximum values will occur at a support or under a load.)
B	A
x1
x2
xn
xi
a 	b	L
P1 	P2 	Pi 	Pn
Fig. P5.C1
5.C2 A timber beam is to be designed to support a distributed load and
up to two concentrated loads as shown. One of the dimensions of its
uniform rectangular cross section has been specified and the other
is to be determined so that the maximum normal stress in the beam
will not exceed a given allowable value σall. Write a computer pro-
gram that can be used to calculate at given intervals ΔL the shear,
the bending moment, and the smallest acceptable value of the
unknown dimension. Apply this program to solve the following prob-
lems, using the intervals ΔL indicated: (a) Prob. 5.65 (ΔL = 0.1 m),
(b) Prob. 5.69 (ΔL = 0.3 m), (c) Prob. 5.70 (ΔL = 0.2 m).
B
t
h
A
x1
x3
x2
x4
a 	b	L
P1
P2
w
Fig. P5.C2
5.C3 Two cover plates, each of thickness t, are to be welded to a wide-
flange beam of length L that is to support a uniformly distributed
load w. Denoting by σall the allowable normal stress in the beam and
in the plates, by d the depth of the beam, and by Ib and Sb, respec-
tively, the moment of inertia and the section modulus of the cross
Computer Problems

-- 429 of 897 --

415
section of the unreinforced beam about a horizontal centroidal axis,
write a computer program that can be used to calculate the required
value of (a) the length a of the plates, (b) the width b of the plates.
Use this program to solve Prob. 5.145.
b	t
E	D
a
L
w
B	A
Fig. P5.C3
5.C4 Two 25-kip loads are maintained 6 ft apart as they are moved slowly
across the 18-ft beam AB. Write a computer program and use it to
calculate the bending moment under each load and at the midpoint C
of the beam for values of x from 0 to 24 ft at intervals Δx = 1.5 ft.
B	C
x
A
18 ft
6 ft
9 ft
25 kips	25 kips
Fig. P5.C4
5.C5 Write a computer program that can be used to plot the shear and
bending-moment diagrams for the beam and loading shown. Apply
this program to solve the following problems, using the intervals ΔL
indicated: (a) Prob. 5.9 (ΔL = 0.1 m), (b) Prob. 5.159 (ΔL = 0.2 ft).
B
w
A
a
b
L
P
Fig. P5.C5
5.C6 Write a computer program that can be used to plot the shear and
bending-moment diagrams for the beam and loading shown. Apply
this program with a plotting interval ΔL = 0.025 m to the beam and
loading of Prob. 5.112.
B
w
A
b
a
L
MA 	MB
Fig. P5.C6

-- 430 of 897 --



-- 431 of 897 --

Shearing Stresses
in Beams and
Thin-Walled
Members
6
A reinforced concrete deck will be attached to each of the thin-
walled steel sections to form a composite box girder bridge. In this
chapter, shearing stresses will be determined in various types of
beams and girders.
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Demonstrate how transverse loads on a beam generate
shearing stresses.
• Determine the stresses and shear flow on a horizontal section
in a beam.
• Determine the shearing stresses in a thin-walled beam.
• Describe the plastic deformations due to shear.
• Recognize cases of symmetric and unsymmetric loading.
• Use shear flow to determine the location of the shear center in
unsymmetric beams.
©David H. Wells/Aurora Photos/Alamy Stock Photo

-- 432 of 897 --

418 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Introduction
6.1 	HORIZONTAL
SHEARING STRESS IN
BEAMS
6.1A Shear on the Horizontal Face
of a Beam Element
6.1B Shearing Stresses in a Beam
6.1C Shearing Stresses τxy in
Common Beam Types
*6.2 	DISTRIBUTION OF
STRESSES IN A NARROW
RECTANGULAR BEAM
6.3 	LONGITUDINAL SHEAR
ON A BEAM ELEMENT
OF ARBITRARY SHAPE
6.4 	SHEARING STRESSES
IN THIN-WALLED
MEMBERS
*6.5 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
*6.6 	UNSYMMETRIC
LOADING OF THIN-
WALLED MEMBERS
AND SHEAR CENTER
Introduction
The design of beams was introduced in the previous chapter, where normal
stress due to bending moment was considered. Shearing stress due to trans-
verse shear is also important, particularly in the design of short, stubby beams.
Their analysis is the subject of the first part of this chapter.
Figure 6.1 graphically expresses the elementary normal and shearing
forces exerted on a transverse section of a prismatic beam with a vertical plane
of symmetry that are equivalent to the bending couple M and the shearing
force V. Six equations can be written to express this. Three of these equations
involve only the normal forces σx dA and have been discussed in Sec. 4.2.
These are Eqs. (4.1), (4.2), and (4.3), which express that the sum of the nor-
mal forces is zero and that the sums of their moments about the y and z axes
are equal to zero and M, respectively. Three more equations involving the
shearing forces τxy dA and τxz dA now can be written. One equation expresses
that the sum of the moments of the shearing forces about the x axis is zero
and can be dismissed as trivial in view of the symmetry of the beam with
respect to the xy plane. The other two involve the y and z components of the
elementary forces and are
y components: 	∫τ xy dA = −V 	(6.1)
z components: 	∫τ xz dA = 0 	(6.2)
x
z
y
x
z
y
M
V	=σx dA
τxy dA
τxz dA
Fig. 6.1 	All the stresses on elemental areas (left) sum to give the resultant
shear V and bending moment M.
Equation (6.1) shows that vertical shearing stresses must exist in a transverse
section of a beam under transverse loading. Equation (6.2) indicates that the
average lateral shearing stress in any section is zero. However, this does not
mean that the shearing stress τxz is zero everywhere.
Now consider a small cubic element located in the vertical plane of
symmetry of the beam (where τxz must be zero) and examine the stresses
exerted on its faces (Fig. 6.2). A normal stress σx and a shearing stress τxy
σx
τ xy
τ yx
Fig. 6.2 	Stress element from
section of a transversely
loaded beam.

-- 433 of 897 --

are exerted on each of the two faces perpendicular to the x axis. But we
know from Chapter 1 that when shearing stresses τxy are exerted on the
vertical faces of an element, equal stresses must be exerted on the hori-
zontal faces of the same element. Thus the longitudinal shearing stresses
must exist in any member subjected to a transverse loading. This is veri-
fied by considering a cantilever beam made of separate planks clamped
together at the fixed end (Fig. 6.3a). When a transverse load P is applied
to the free end of this composite beam, the planks slide with respect to
each other (Fig. 6.3b). In contrast, if a couple M is applied to the free end
of the same composite beam (Fig. 6.3c), the various planks bend into
circular concentric arcs and do not slide with respect to each other. This
verifies the fact that shear does not occur in a beam subjected to pure
bending (see Sec. 4.3).
While sliding does not actually take place when a transverse load P
is applied to a beam made of a homogeneous and cohesive material such
as steel, the tendency to slide exists, showing that stresses occur on hori-
zontal longitudinal planes as well as on vertical transverse planes. In tim-
ber beams, whose resistance to shear is weaker between fibers, failure due
to shear occurs along a longitudinal plane rather than a transverse plane
(Photo 6.1).
In Sec. 6.1A, a beam element of length Δx is considered that is bounded
by one horizontal and two transverse planes. The shearing force ΔH exerted
on its horizontal face will be determined, as well as the shear per unit length q,
which is known as shear flow. An equation for the shearing stress in a
beam with a vertical plane of symmetry is obtained in Sec. 6.1B and used in
Sec. 6.1C to determine the shearing stresses in common types of beams. The
distribution of stresses in a narrow rectangular beam is discussed further in
Sec. 6.2.
The method in Sec. 6.1 is extended in Sec. 6.3 to cover the case of a
beam element bounded by two transverse planes and a curved surface. This
allows us to determine the shearing stresses at any point of a symmetric thin-
walled member, such as the flanges of wide-flange beams and box beams in
Sec. 6.4. The effect of plastic deformations on the magnitude and distribution
of shearing stresses is discussed in Sec. 6.5.
In the Sec. 6.6, the unsymmetric loading of thin-walled members is
considered and the concept of a shear center is introduced to determine the
distribution of shearing stresses in such members.
(a)
(b)
P
M
(c)
Fig. 6.3 	(a) Beam made of planks to
illustrate the role of shearing stresses.
(b) Beam planks slide relative to each
other when transversely loaded.
(c) Bending moment causes deflection
without sliding.
Photo 6.1 	Longitudinal shear failure in timber beam
loaded in the laboratory. Courtesy of John DeWolf
Introduction 	419

-- 434 of 897 --

420 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
6.1 	HORIZONTAL SHEARING
STRESS IN BEAMS
6.1A 	Shear on the Horizontal Face
of a Beam Element
Consider a prismatic beam AB with a vertical plane of symmetry that supports
various concentrated and distributed loads (Fig. 6.4). At a distance x from
end A, we detach from the beam an element CDD′C′ with length of Δx extend-
ing across the width of the beam from the upper surface to a horizontal plane
C	V
x
C 	D
dA	dA
w
σD	σC
ΔH
' 	D	V'
B
P1 	P2 	w
A
x
C
y
z
Fig. 6.4 	Transversely loaded beam with vertical
plane of symmetry.
located at a distance y1 from the neutral axis (Fig. 6.5). The forces exerted on
this element consist of vertical shearing forces V′C and V′D, a horizontal shear-
ing force ΔH exerted on the lower face of the element, elementary horizontal
normal forces σC dA and σD dA, and possibly a load w Δx (Fig. 6.6). The equi-
librium equation for horizontal forces is
→
+ ΣF x = 0: 	ΔH + ∫𝒶
(σ C − σ D) dA = 0
y1 	y1
C
c
x
D
C ' 	D'
N.A.
y
z
Δx 𝒶
Fig. 6.5 	Short segment of beam with stress element CDD′C′ defined.
where the integral extends over the shaded area 𝒶 of the section located
above the line y = y1. Solving this equation for ΔH and using Eq. (5.2),
σ = My∕I, to express the normal stresses in terms of the bending moments
at C and D, provides
ΔH = MD − M C
I ∫𝒶
y dA 	(6.3)	Fig. 6.6 	Forces exerted on
element CCD′C′.

-- 435 of 897 --

6.1 Horizontal Shearing Stress in Beams 	421
The integral in Eq. (6.3) represents the first moment with respect to the neutral
axis of the portion 𝒶 of the cross section of the beam that is located above the
line y = y1 and will be denoted by Q. On the other hand, recalling Eq. (5.7),
the increment MD − MC of the bending moment is
M D − M C = ΔM = (dM∕dx) Δx = V Δx
Substituting into Eq. (6.3), the horizontal shear exerted on the beam
element is
ΔH = VQ
I Δx 	(6.4)
The same result is obtained if a free body the lower element C′D′D″C ″
is used instead of the upper element CDD′C′ (Fig. 6.7), since the shearing
forces ΔH and ΔH′ exerted by the two elements on each other are equal and
opposite. This leads us to observe that the first moment Q of the portion 𝒶′
of the cross section located below the line y = y1 (Fig. 6.7) is equal in mag-
nitude and opposite in sign to the first moment of the portion 𝒶 located above
that line (Fig. 6.5). Indeed, the sum of these two moments is equal to the
moment of the area of the entire cross section with respect to its centroidal
axis and thus must be zero. This property is sometimes used to simplify the
computation of Q. Also note that Q is maximum for y1 = 0, since the elements
of the cross section located above the neutral axis contribute positively to the
integral in Eq. (6.3) that defines Q, while the elements located below that axis
contribute negatively.
y1
c
x
C" 	D"
C' 	D'
y
z 	N.A.
y1
Δx
𝒶'
Fig. 6.7 	Short segment of beam with stress element C′D′D″C″ defined.
Returning now to Eq. (6.4), it was noted that this represents the hori-
zontal shear exerted on the beam element under consideration. The horizontal
shear per unit length, which will be denoted by q, is obtained by dividing
both members of this equation by Δx:
q = ΔH
Δx = VQ
I (6.5)
Recall that Q is the first moment with respect to the neutral axis of the portion
of the cross section located either above or below the point at which q is being
computed and that I is the centroidal moment of inertia of the entire cross-
sectional area. The horizontal shear per unit length q is also called the shear
flow and will be discussed in Sec. 6.4.

-- 436 of 897 --

422 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Concept Application 6.1
A beam is made of three planks, 20 by 100 mm in cross section, and nailed
together (Fig. 6.8a). Knowing that the spacing between nails is 25 mm and
the vertical shear in the beam is V = 500 N, determine the shearing force in
each nail.
Determine the horizontal force per unit length q exerted on the lower face
of the upper plank. Use Eq. (6.5), where Q represents the first moment with
respect to the neutral axis of the shaded area A shown in Fig. 6.8b, and I is
the moment of inertia about the same axis of the entire cross-sectional area
(Fig. 6.8c). Recalling that the first moment of an area with respect to a given
axis is equal to the product of the area and of the distance from its centroid
to the axis,†
Q = A y = (0.020 m × 0.100 m)(0.060 m)
= 120 × 10−6 m3
I = 1
12 (0.020 m)(0.100 m) 3
+2[ 1
12 (0.100 m)(0.020 m) 3
+(0.020 m × 0.100 m)(0.060 m) 2 ]
= 1.667 × 10−6 + 2(0.0667 + 7.2)10−6
= 16.20 × 10−6 m4
Substituting into Eq. (6.5),
q = VQ
I = (500 N)(120 × 10−6 m3 )
16.20 × 10−6 m4 	= 3704 N/m
Since the spacing between the nails is 25 mm, the shearing force in each
nail is
F = (0.025 m)q = (0.025 m)(3704 N/m) = 92.6 N
†See Appendix B.
100 mm
20 mm
100 mm
20 mm
20 mm
(a)
0.100 m
0.020 m
N.A.
y 	0.060 m
C'
0.100 m
N.A.
0.100 m
0.020 m
(b) 	(c)
A
=
Fig. 6.8 	(a) Beam made of three boards
nailed together. (b) Cross section for
computing Q. (c) Cross section for
computing moment of inertia.
6.1B 	Shearing Stresses in a Beam
Consider again a beam with a vertical plane of symmetry that is subjected to
various concentrated or distributed loads applied in that plane. If, through the
two vertical cuts and one horizontal cut shown in Fig. 6.7, an element of
length Δx is detached from the beam (Fig. 6.9), the magnitude ΔH of the
shearing force exerted on the horizontal face of the element can be obtained
from Eq. (6.4). Following the convention of Fig. 6.2, the shearing stress cor-
responding to this shearing force is τyx. The average shearing stress τave is
obtained by dividing ΔH by the area ΔA of the face of the element. Observ-
ing that ΔA = t Δx, where t is the width of the element at the cut, we write
τave = ΔH
ΔA = VQ
I
Δx
t Δx
t
C '
ΔA
Δx
D"2
C"1
1
2
D"1
D'1
D'
D'
C'
2
ΔH'
Fig. 6.9 	Stress element C′D′D″C″ showing
the shear force on a horizontal plane.

-- 437 of 897 --

6.1 Horizontal Shearing Stress in Beams 	423
or
τave = VQ
It (6.6)
Note that since the shearing stresses τxy and τyx exerted on a transverse and a
horizontal plane through D′ are equal, the expression also represents the aver-
age value of τxy along the line D′1D′2 (Fig. 6.10).
Observe that τyx = 0 on the upper and lower faces of the beam, since
no forces are exerted on these faces. It follows that τxy = 0 along the upper
and lower edges of the transverse section (Fig. 6.11). Also note that while
Q is maximum for y = 0 (see Sec. 6.1A), τave may not be maximum along
the neutral axis, since τave depends upon the width t of the section as well
as upon Q.
D'
D'
D''2
C''1
D''1
1
2	D'	τyx
τxy
τave
τave
Fig. 6.10 	Stress element C′D′D″C″ showing
the shearing stress distribution along D′1 D′2.
τyx = 0
τxy = 0
τyx = 0
τxy = 0
Fig. 6.11 	Beam cross section showing
that the shearing stress is zero at the top
and bottom of the beam.
As long as the width of the beam cross section remains small compared
to its depth, the shearing stress varies only slightly along the line D′1D′2
(Fig. 6.10), and Eq. (6.6) can be used to compute τxy at any point along D′1D′2.
Actually, τxy is larger at points D′1 and D′2 than at D′, but the theory of elas-
ticity shows† that, for a beam of rectangular section of width b and depth h,
and as long as b ≤ h∕4, the value of the shearing stress at points C1 and C2
(Fig. 6.12) does not exceed by more than 0.8% the average value of the stress
computed along the neutral axis.
On the other hand, for large values of b∕h, τmax of the stress at C1 and
C2 may be many times larger then the average value τave computed along the
neutral axis, as shown in the following table.
b∕h 	0.25 	0.5 	1 	2 	4 	6 	10 	20 	50
τmax∕τave 	1.008 	1.033 	1.126 	1.396 	1.988 	2.582 	3.770 	6.740 	15.65
τmin∕τave 	0.996 	0.983 	0.940 	0.856 	0.805 	0.800 	0.800 	0.800 	0.800
†See S. P. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, McGraw-Hill, New York,
3d ed., 1970, sec. 124.
h
C1
C2
b
1
2
h	
1
2
N.A.
τmax
Fig. 6.12 	Shearing stress distribution along
neutral axis of rectangular beam cross section.

-- 438 of 897 --

424 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
6.1C 	Shearing Stresses τxy
In Common Beam Types
In the preceding section for a narrow rectangular beam (i.e., a beam of rec-
tangular section of width b and depth h with b ≤ 1
4h), the variation of the
shearing stress τxy across the width of the beam is less than 0.8% of τave.
Therefore, the average shearing stress given by Eq. (6.6) is used in practical
applications to determine the shearing stress at any point of the cross section
of a narrow rectangular beam, and
τ xy = VQ
It (6.7)
where t is equal to the width b of the beam and Q is the first moment with
respect to the neutral axis of the shaded area A′ (Fig. 6.13).
Observing that the distance from the neutral axis to the centroid C′ of A′
is y = 1
2 (c + y) and recalling that Q = A′ y,
Q = A′ y = b(c − y) 1
2 (c + y) = 1
2 b(c2 − y2 ) 	(6.8)
Recalling that I = bh3
∕12 = 2
3 bc3 ,
τ xy = VQ
Ib = 3
4
c2 − y2
bc3 	V
or noting that the cross-sectional area of the beam is A = 2bc,
τxy = 3
2
V
A (1 − y2
c2) (6.9)
Equation (6.9) shows that the distribution of shearing stresses in a trans-
verse section of a rectangular beam is parabolic (Fig. 6.14). As observed in
the preceding section, the shearing stresses are zero at the top and bottom of
the cross section (y = ±c). Making y = 0 in Eq. (6.9), the value of the max-
imum shearing stress in a given section of a narrow rectangular beam is
τmax = 3
2
V
A (6.10)
This relationship shows that the maximum value of the shearing stress in a beam
of rectangular cross section is 50% larger than the value V∕A obtained by
wrongly assuming a uniform stress distribution across the entire cross section.
In an American standard beam (S-beam) or a wide-flange beam
(W-beam), Eq. (6.6) can be used to determine the average value of the shear-
ing stress τxy over a section aa′ or bb′ of the transverse cross section of the
beam (Fig. 6.15a and b). So
τave = VQ
It (6.6)
where V is the vertical shear, t is the width of the section at the elevation
considered, Q is the first moment of the shaded area with respect to the neu-
tral axis cc′, and I is the moment of inertia of the entire cross-sectional area
about cc′. Plotting τave against the vertical distance y provides the curve shown
in Fig. 6.15c. Note the -discontinuities existing in this curve, which reflect
the difference between the values of t corresponding respectively to the flanges
ABGD and A′B′G′D′ and to the web EFF′E′.
h	c
C' 1
2
h
y	y
y
b
z
c 	1
2
A'
=
=
Fig. 6.13 	Geometric terms for rectangular
section used to calculate shearing stress.
y
O
+c
−c
τ
τmax
Fig. 6.14 	Shearing stress distribution on
transverse section of rectangular beam.

-- 439 of 897 --

6.1 Horizontal Shearing Stress in Beams 	425
In the web, the shearing stress τxy varies only very slightly across the
section bb′ and is assumed to be equal to its average value τave. This is not
true, however, for the flanges. For example, considering the horizontal line
DEFG, note that τxy is zero between D and E and between F and G, since
these two segments are part of the free surface of the beam. However, the
value of τxy between E and F is non-zero and can be obtained by making
t = EF in Eq. (6.6). In practice, one usually assumes that the entire shear load
is carried by the web and that a good approximation of the maximum value
of the shearing stress in the cross section can be obtained by dividing V by
the cross-sectional area of the web.
τmax = V
Aweb
(6.11)
However, while the vertical component τxy of the shearing stress in the
flanges can be neglected, its horizontal component τxz has a significant value
that will be determined in Sec. 6.4.
D
C
E 	F 	G
A
a
t
a'
c 	c' 	c'
b'
B
D' 	E' 	F' 	G'
A' 	B'
(a)
b
c
y
y
t
E 	F
E' 	F'
(b) 	(c)
τave
Fig. 6.15 	Wide-flange beam. (a) Area for finding first moment of area in
flange. (b) Area for finding first moment of area in web. (c) Shearing stress
distribution.
Concept Application 6.2
Knowing that the allowable shearing stress for the timber beam of
Sample Prob. 5.7 is τall = 0.250 ksi, check that the design is acceptable
from the point of view of the shearing stresses.
Recall from the shear diagram of Sample Prob. 5.7 that
Vmax = 4.50 kips. The actual width of the beam was given as
b = 3.5 in., and the value obtained for its depth was h = 14.55 in.
Using Eq. (6.10) for the maximum shearing stress in a narrow rec-
tangular beam,
τmax = 3
2
V
A = 3
2
V
bh = 3(4.50 kips)
2(3.5 in.)(14.55 in.) = 0.1325 ksi
Since τmax < τall, the design obtained in Sample Prob. 5.7 is
acceptable.
B
A
V
A
A x
Ay
B
C
8 ft 	4 ft
3.2 kips 4.5 kips
(−18)
(+18)
4.50
kips
−3.85 kips
−0.65
kips
C	B 	x

-- 440 of 897 --

426 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Concept Application 6.3
Knowing that the allowable shearing stress for the steel beam of Sample
Prob. 5.8 is τall = 90 MPa, check that the W360 × 32.9 shape obtained
is acceptable from the point of view of the shearing stresses.
Recall from the shear diagram of Sample Prob. 5.8 that the max-
imum absolute value of the shear in the beam is ∣V ∣max = 58 kN. It
may be assumed that the entire shear load is carried by the web and
that the maximum value of the shearing stress in the beam can be
obtained from Eq. (6.11). From Appendix E, for a W360 × 32.9 shape,
the depth of the beam and the thickness of its web are d = 348 mm
and tw = 5.84 mm. Thus,
Aweb = d tw = (348 mm)(5.84 mm) = 2032 mm2
Substituting ∣V ∣max and Aweb into Eq. (6.11),
τmax = ∣V ∣max
Aweb
= 58 kN
2032 mm2 = 28.5 MPa
Since τmax < τall, the design obtained in Sample Prob. 5.8 is
acceptable.
C	B 	D
1.5 m
52 kN
x = 2.6 m
−58 kN
−8 kN
(67.6)
1.5 m 1 m 	1 m
50 kN
D
A
V
A E 	B 	C 	D x
A x
A y
60 kN
*6.2 	DISTRIBUTION OF
STRESSES IN A NARROW
RECTANGULAR BEAM
Consider a narrow cantilever beam of rectangular cross section with a width
of b and depth of h subjected to a load P at its free end (Fig. 6.16). Since
the shear V in the beam is constant and equal in magnitude to the load P,
Eq. (6.9) yields
τxy = 3
2
P
A (1 − y2
c2) (6.12)
Note from Eq. (6.12) that the shearing stresses depend upon the distance y
from the neutral surface. They are independent of the horizontal distance x
from the point of application of the load. All elements located at the
same distance from the neutral surface undergo the same shear deforma-
tion (Fig. 6.17). While plane sections do not remain plane, the distance
between two corresponding points D and D′ located in different sections
remains the same. This indicates that the normal strains εx, and the normal
stresses σx, are unaffected by the shearing stresses. Thus the assumption
made in Chap. 5 is justified for the loading condition of Fig. 6.16.
We therefore conclude that this analysis of the stresses in a cantilever
beam of rectangular cross section subjected to a concentrated load P at its
L
b
h = 2c
P
Fig. 6.16 	Cantilever beam with rectangular
cross section.
D'	D
P
Fig. 6.17 	Deformation of segment
of cantilever beam.

-- 441 of 897 --

*6.2 Distribution of Stresses in a Narrow Rectangular Beam 	427
free end is valid. The correct values of the shearing stresses in the beam are
given by Eq. (6.12), and the normal stresses at a distance x from the free end
are obtained by making M = −Px in Eq. (5.2). So
σ x = + Pxy
I (6.13)
The validity of the this statement depends upon the end conditions.
If Eq. (6.12) is to apply everywhere, the load P must be distributed para-
bolically over the free-end section. Also, the fixed-end support must allow
the type of shear deformation indicated in Fig. 6.17. The resulting model
(Fig. 6.18) is highly unlikely to be encountered in practice. However, it
P
P
y
τxy
Fig. 6.18 	Deformation of cantilever
beam with concentrated load, with a
parabolic shearing stress distribution.
P3	P2	P1
Fig. 6.19 	Cantilever beam with
multiple loads.
D'2
D'
D1
w
D2
1
Fig. 6.20 	Deformation of cantilever beam
with distributed load.
follows from Saint-Venant’s principle that for other modes of application
of the load and for other types of fixed-end supports, Eqs. (6.12) and (6.13)
provide the correct distribution of stresses, except close to either end of
the beam.
When a beam of rectangular cross section is subjected to several con-
centrated loads (Fig. 6.19), the principle of superposition can be used to deter-
mine the normal and shearing stresses in sections located between the points
of application. However, since the loads P2, P3, etc. are applied on the surface
of the beam and are not assumed to be distributed parabolically throughout
the cross section, the results cease to be valid in the immediate vicinity of the
points of application of the loads.
When the beam is subjected to a distributed load (Fig. 6.20), both
the shear and shearing stress at a given elevation y vary with the distance
from the end of the beam. The shear deformation results show that the
distance between two corresponding points of different cross sections, such
as D1 and D′1, or D2 and D′2, depends upon their elevation. As a result, the
assumption that plane sections remain plane, as in Eqs. (6.12) and (6.13),
must be rejected for the loading condition of Fig. 6.20. However, the
error involved is small for the values of the span-depth ratio encountered
in practice.
In portions of the beam located under a concentrated or distributed load,
normal stresses σy are exerted on the horizontal faces of a cubic element of
material in addition to the stresses τxy shown in Fig. 6.2.

-- 442 of 897 --

428 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Sample Problem 6.1
Beam AB is made of three plates glued together and is subjected, in its
plane of symmetry, to the loading shown. Knowing that the width of each
glued joint is 20 mm, determine the average shearing stress in each joint
at section n–n of the beam. The location of the centroid of the section
is given in Fig. 1 and the centroidal moment of inertia is known to be
I = 8.63 × 10−6 m4.
100 mm
68.3 mm
Joint a
Joint b
C
60 mm
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
80 mm
Fig. 1 	Cross-section dimensions with
location of centroid.
STRATEGY: 	A free-body diagram is first used to determine the shear at
the required section. Eq. (6.7) is then used to determine the average shearing
stress in each joint.
MODELING:
Vertical Shear at Section n–n. 	As shown in the free-body diagram in
Fig. 2, the beam and loading are both symmetric with respect to the center
of the beam. Thus, we have A = B = 1.5 kN ↑.
B
1.5 kN
M
V
A = 1.5 kN 	B = 1.5 kN 	A = 1.5 kN
1.5 kN
A 	n
n
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of beam and segment of beam to left of
section n–n.
Drawing the free-body diagram of the portion of the beam to the left of
section n–n (Fig. 2), we write
+↑ Σ Fy = 0: 	1.5 kN − V = 0 	V = 1.5 kN
B
0.4 m 	0.4 m
0.2 m
1.5 kN	1.5 kN
A 	n
n

-- 443 of 897 --

*6.2 Distribution of Stresses in a Narrow Rectangular Beam 	429
ANALYSIS:
Shearing Stress in Joint a. 	Using Fig. 3, pass the section a–a through
the glued joint and separate the cross-sectional area into two parts. We
choose to determine Q by computing the first moment with respect to the
neutral axis of the area above section a–a.
Q = A y1 = [(0.100 m)(0.020 m)](0.0417 m) = 83.4 × 10−6 m3
Recalling that the width of the glued joint is t = 0.020 m, we use Eq. (6.7)
to determine the average shearing stress in the joint.
τave = VQ
It = (1500 N)(83.4 × 10−6 m3 )
(8.63 × 10−6 m4 )(0.020 m) τave = 725 kPa 	◂
Shearing Stress in Joint b. 	Using Fig. 4, now pass section b–b and
compute Q by using the area below the section.
Q = A y2 = [(0.060 m)(0.020 m)](0.0583 m) = 70.0 × 10−6 m3
τave = VQ
It = (1500 N)(70.0 × 10−6 m3 )
(8.63 × 10−6 m4 )(0.020 m) τave = 608 kPa 	◂
0.100 m
0.020 m
Neutral axis y1 = 0.0417 m
x'
a 	a
Fig. 3 	Using area above section a–a to
find Q.
Neutral axis
0.020 m
0.060 m
y2 = 0.0583 m
x'
C
b 	b
Fig. 4 	Using area below section b–b to
find Q.
Sample Problem 6.2
A timber beam AB of span 10 ft and nominal width 4 in. (actual width =
3.5 in.) is to support the three concentrated loads shown. Knowing that
for the grade of timber used σall = 1800 psi and τall = 120 psi, determine
the minimum required depth d of the beam.
STRATEGY: 	A free-body diagram with the shear and bending-moment
diagrams is used to determine the maximum shear and bending moment.
The resulting design must satisfy both allowable stresses. Start by
assuming that one allowable stress criterion governs, and solve for the
required depth d. Then use this depth with the other criterion to deter-
mine if it is also satisfied. If this stress is greater than the allowable,
revise the design using the second criterion.
(continued)
2.5 kips 	1 kip 	2.5 kips
2 ft 	2 ft
3.5 in.
3 ft
A 	B
d
10 ft
3 ft

-- 444 of 897 --

430 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
MODELING:
Maximum Shear and Bending Moment. 	The free-body diagram is
used to determine the reactions and draw the shear and bending-moment dia-
grams in Fig. 1. We note that
Mmax = 7.5 kip·ft = 90 kip·in.
Vmax = 3 kips
ANALYSIS:
Design Based on Allowable Normal Stress. 	We first express the elas-
tic section modulus S in terms of the depth d (Fig. 2). We have
I = 1
12 bd 3 	S = 1
c = 1
6 bd 2 = 1
6 (3.5)d 2 = 0.5833d2
For Mmax = 90 kip·in. and σall = 1800 psi, we write
S = Mmax
σall
0.5833d 2 = 90 × 103 lb·in.
1800 psi
d2 = 85.7 	d = 9.26 in.
We have satisfied the requirement that σ m ≤ 1800 psi.
Check Shearing Stress. 	For Vmax = 3 kips and d = 9.26 in., we find
τm = 3
2
Vmax
A = 3
2
3000 lb
(3.5 in.)(9.26 in.) τ m = 138.8 psi
Since τall = 120 psi, the depth d = 9.26 in. is not acceptable and we must
redesign the beam on the basis of the requirement that τm ≤ 120 psi.
Design Based on Allowable Shearing Stress. 	Since we now know
that the allowable shearing stress controls the design, we write
τ m = τall = 3
2
Vmax
A 120 psi = 3
2
3000 lb
(3.5 in.)d
d = 10.71 in. 	◂
The normal stress is, of course, less than σall = 1800 psi, and the depth of
10.71 in. is fully acceptable.
REFLECT and THINK: 	Since timber is normally available in nominal
depth increments of 2 in., a 4 × 12-in. standard size timber should be used.
The actual cross section would then be 3.5 × 11.25 in. (Fig. 3).
A 	B	C 	D 	E
2.5 kips 	1 kip 	2.5 kips
3 kips
3 kips
3 kips
0.5 kip
2 ft
V
M
x
x
2 ft	3 ft
(1.5)
(6)
3 kips
0.5 kip
( 1.5) 	( 6)
3 ft
6 kip ft	· 6 kip ft	·
7.5 kip ft	·
− 	−
−
−
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam with
shear and bending-moment diagrams.
b = 3.5 in.
c =
d
d
2
Fig. 2 	Section of
beam having depth d.
3.5 in.
11.25 in.
4 in. × 12 in.
nominal size
Fig. 3 	Design cross section.

-- 445 of 897 --

431
6.1 A square box beam is made of two 3
4 × 3.5-in. planks and two
3
4 × 5-in. planks nailed together as shown. Knowing that the
spacing between the nails is s = 1.25 in. and that the vertical
shear in the beam is V = 250 lb, determine (a) the shearing
force in each nail, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the beam.
s
s
s
5 in.
3.5 in.
in.	3
4
in.	3
4
Fig. P6.1 and P6.2
6.2 A square box beam is made of two 3
4 × 3.5-in. planks and two
3
4 × 5-in. planks nailed together as shown. Knowing that the
spacing between the nails is s = 2 in. and that the allowable
shearing force in each nail is 75 lb, determine (a) the largest
allowable vertical shear in the beam, (b) the corresponding max-
imum shearing stress in the beam.
6.3 Three boards, each 50 mm thick, are nailed together to form a beam
that is subjected to a 1200-N vertical shear. Knowing that the allow-
able shearing force in each nail is 600 N, determine the largest per-
missible spacing s between the nails.
6.4 Three boards are nailed together to form a beam shown, which is
subjected to a vertical shear. Knowing that the spacing between the
nails is s = 75 mm and that the allowable shearing force in each nail
is 400 N, determine the allowable shear when w = 120 mm.
60 mm
200 mm
w
s
s
s
60 mm
60 mm
Fig. P6.4
Problems
50 mm
50 mm
150 mm
s
s
s
50 mm
100 mm
Fig. P6.3

-- 446 of 897 --

432
6.5 The rolled-steel beam shown has been reinforced by attaching to it
two 12 × 175-mm plates, using 18-mm-diameter bolts spaced longi-
tudinally every 125 mm. Knowing that the average allowable shear-
ing stress in the bolts is 85 MPa, determine the largest permissible
vertical shearing force.
W250 × 44.8
Fig. P6.5
6.6 Solve Prob. 6.5, assuming that the reinforcing plates are only 9 mm
thick.
6.7 The column shown is fabricated by connecting two channel shapes
and two plates, using bolts of 3
4 -in. diameter spaced longitudinally
every 5 in. Determine the average shearing stress in the bolts caused
by a shearing force of 30 kips parallel to the y axis.
C10 × 25
14 in. × 	in.
C
z
y 	3
8
Fig. P6.7
6.8 The composite beam shown is fabricated by connecting two
W6 × 20 rolled-steel members, using bolts of 5
8 -in. diameter
spaced longitudinally every 6 in. Knowing that the average
allowable shearing stress in the bolts is 10.5 ksi, determine the
largest allowable vertical shear in the beam.
Fig. P6.8

-- 447 of 897 --

433
6.9 through 6.12 	For the beam and loading shown, consider section n–n
and determine (a) the largest shearing stress in that section, (b) the
shearing stress at point a.
90
120
15	15 	15	15	30
20
20
20
40
20
72 kN
n
n
Dimensions in mm
1.5 m
0.5 m
0.8 m
a
Fig. P6.9
72 mm
72 mm
72 mm
192 mm
600 mm
450 mm a
n
n t t
t = 6 mm
t
125 kN
Fig. P6.10
1 ft
2 ft 	2 ft 	2 ft 	2 ft
0.375 in.
1 in.
0.6 in.
a
0.6 in.
10 in.
10 in.
n
15 kips 20 kips 15 kips
n
Fig. P6.11
8 in.
16 in. 	12 in. 	16 in.
4 in.
4 in.
n
10 kips 10 kips
n
a
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P6.12

-- 448 of 897 --

434
6.13 Two steel plates of 12 × 200-mm rectangular cross section are
welded to the W310 × 52 beam as shown. Determine the largest
allowable vertical shear if the shearing stress in the beam is not to
exceed 90 MPa.
12 mm × 200 mm	W310 × 52
Fig. P6.13
6.14 Solve Prob. 6.13 assuming that the two steel plates are (a) replaced
by 8 × 200-mm plates, (b) removed.
6.15 For a timber beam having the cross section shown, determine the
largest allowable vertical shear if the shearing stress is not to exceed
150 psi.
1.5 in.
2 in.
2 in.
1.5 in.
4 in.
w = 2.5 in.
Fig. P6.15
6.16 For the wide-flange beam with the loading shown, determine the
largest load P that can be applied, knowing that the maximum nor-
mal stress is 160 MPa and the largest shearing stress using the
approximation τm = V∕Aweb is 100 MPa.
0.6 m 	0.6 m
0.6 m
1.8 m
A 	E
B 	C 	D W360 × 122
P	P	P
Fig. P6.16

-- 449 of 897 --

435
6.17 For the wide-flange beam with the loading shown, determine the
largest load P that can be applied, knowing that the maximum nor-
mal stress is 24 ksi and the largest shearing stress using the approx-
imation τm = V∕Aweb is 14.5 ksi.
3 ft
A 	C
B
12 ft
W27 × 146
P
Fig. P6.17
6.18 For the beam and loading shown, determine the minimum required
width b, knowing that for the grade of timber used, σall = 12 MPa
and τall = 825 kPa.
2.4 kN 	4.8 kN 	7.2 kN
1 m 	1 m 	1 m 	0.5 m
150 mm	A 	E
b
B 	C 	D
Fig. P6.18
6.19 A timber beam AB of length L and rectangular cross section carries
a single concentrated load P at its midpoint C. (a) Show that the
ratio τm∕σm of the maximum values of the shearing and normal
stresses in the beam is equal to h∕2L, where h and L are, respectively,
the depth and the length of the beam. (b) Determine the depth h
and the width b of the beam, knowing that L = 2 m, P = 40 kN,
τm = 960 kPa, and σm = 12 MPa.
6.20 A timber beam AB of length L and rectangular cross section carries
a uniformly distributed load w and is supported as shown. (a) Show
that the ratio τm∕σm of the maximum values of the shearing and
normal stresses in the beam is equal to 2h∕L, where h and L are,
respectively, the depth and the length of the beam. (b) Determine
the depth h and the width b of the beam, knowing that L = 5 m,
w = 8 kN/m, τm = 1.08 MPa, and σm = 12 MPa.
B
b
h	A
C 	D
w
L/2 L/4	L/4
Fig. P6.20
B
b
h
C
L/2 	L/2
A
P
Fig. P6.19

-- 450 of 897 --

436
6.21 and 6.22 	For the beam and loading shown, consider section n–n and
determine the shearing stress at (a) point a, (b) point b.
B 	b
a
A
10 in.
20 in. 	20 in.
25 kips 	25 kips
n 7.25 in.
in.
1.5 in.
1.5 in.
3
4
8 in.
in.	3
4
in.	3
4
n
Fig. P6.21 and P6.23
200 kN 	200 kN
A
n
n
B
1.2 m	0.75 m 	0.75 m
50 mm
150 mm
50 mm
50 mm
75 mm 75 mm 75 mm
a
b
Fig. P6.22 and P6.24
6.23 and 6.24 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the largest
shearing stress in section n–n.
6.25 through 6.28 A beam having the cross section shown is subjected to
a vertical shear V. Determine (a) the horizontal line along which the
shearing stress is maximum, (b) the constant k in the following
expression for the maximum shearing stress
τmax = k V
A
where A is the cross-sectional area of the beam.
c
Fig. P6.25
rm
tm
Fig. P6.26
h
h
b
Fig. P6.27
b
h
Fig. P6.28

-- 451 of 897 --

6.3 Longitudinal Shear on a Beam Element of Arbitrary Shape 	437
6.3 	LONGITUDINAL SHEAR ON
A BEAM ELEMENT OF
ARBITRARY SHAPE
Consider a box beam obtained by nailing together four planks, as shown in
Fig. 6.21a. Sec. 6.1A showed how to determine the shear per unit length q
on the horizontal surfaces along which the planks are joined. But could q
be determined if the planks are joined along vertical surfaces, as shown in
Fig. 6.21b? Section 6.1C showed the distribution of the vertical components
τxy of the stresses on a transverse section of a W- or S-beam. These stresses
had a fairly constant value in the web of the beam and were negligible in
its flanges. But what about the horizontal components τxz of the stresses in
the flanges? The procedure developed in Sec. 6.1A to determine the shear
per unit length q applies to the cases just described.
Consider the prismatic beam AB of Fig. 6.4, which has a vertical plane
of symmetry and supports the loads shown. At a distance x from end A, detach
an element CDD′C′ with a length of Δx as shown in Fig. 6.22. However,
unlike the similar element used in Sect. 6.1A (see Fig. 6.5), this element now
extends from two sides of the beam to an arbitrary curved surface as illustrated
in the right portion of Fig. 6.22. The forces exerted on the element include
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 6.21 	Box beam formed by nailing
planks together.
B
P1 	P2 	w
A
x
C
y
z
Fig. 6.4 	(repeated) Beam example.
Δx
C
c
x
D
C' 	D'
y
N.A.
z
𝒶
Fig. 6.22 	Short segment of beam with element CDD′C′ of length Δx.
VC
ΔH
x
C 	D
dA	dA
w
σD	σC
' 	VD
'
Fig. 6.23 	Forces exerted on
element CDD′C′.
vertical shearing forces V′C and V′D, elementary horizontal normal forces σC dA
and σD dA, possibly a load w Δx, and a longitudinal shearing force ΔH, which
represent the resultant of the elementary longitudinal shearing forces exerted
on the curved surface (Fig. 6.23). The equilibrium equation is
+	→ ΣF x = 0: 	ΔH + ∫𝒶
(σ C − σ D) dA = 0
where the integral is to be computed over the shaded area 𝒶 of the section
in Fig. 6.22. This equation is the same as the one in Sec. 6.1A, but the shaded
area 𝒶 now extends to the curved surface.
The longitudinal shear exerted on the beam element is
ΔH = VQ
I Δx 	(6.4)
where I is the centroidal moment of inertia of the entire section, Q is the first
moment of the shaded area 𝒶 with respect to the neutral axis, and V is the
vertical shear in the section. Dividing both members of Eq. (6.4) by Δx, the
horizontal shear per unit length or shear flow is
q = ΔH
Δx = VQ
I (6.5)

-- 452 of 897 --

438 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Concept Application 6.4
A square box beam is made of two 0.75 × 3-in. planks and two 0.75 × 4.5-in.
planks nailed together, as shown (Fig. 6.24a). Knowing that the spacing
between nails is 1.75 in. and that the beam is subjected to a vertical shear
with a magnitude of V = 600 lb, determine the shearing force in each nail.
Isolate the upper plank and consider the total force per unit length q
exerted on its two edges. Use Eq. (6.5), where Q represents the first moment
with respect to the neutral axis of the shaded area A′ shown in Fig. 6.24b and
I is the moment of inertia about the same axis of the entire cross-sectional
area of the box beam (Fig. 6.24c).
Q = A′y = (0.75 in.)(3 in.)(1.875 in.) = 4.22 in3
Recalling that the moment of inertia of a square of side a about a centroidal
axis is I = 1
12 a4 ,
I = 1
12 (4.5 in.) 4 − 1
12 (3 in.) 4 = 27.42 in4
Substituting into Eq. (6.5),
q = VQ
I = (600 lb)(4.22 in3 )
27.42 in4 	= 92.3 lb/in.
Because both the beam and the upper plank are symmetric with respect
to the vertical plane of loading, equal forces are exerted on both edges
of the plank. The force per unit length on each of these edges is thus
1
2q = 1
2 (92.3) = 46.15 lb/in. Since the spacing between nails is 1.75 in., the
shearing force in each nail is
F = (1.75 in.)(46.15 lb/in.) = 80.8 lb
0.75 in. 	0.75 in.
0.75 in.
4.5 in.
3 in.
(a)
0.75 in.
y = 1.875 in.
N.A. 	4.5 in.
4.5 in.
3 in.
3 in.
3 in.
(b) 	(c)
A'
Fig. 6.24 	(a) Box beam made from planks nailed together.
(b) Geometry for finding first moment of area of top plank.
(c) Geometry for finding the moment of inertia of entire cross
section.

-- 453 of 897 --

6.4 Shearing Stresses in Thin-Walled Members 	439
6.4 	SHEARING STRESSES IN
THIN-WALLED MEMBERS
We saw in the preceding section that Eq. (6.4) can be used to determine the
longitudinal shear ΔH exerted on any longitudinal cut of a member subjected
to a transverse loading in its vertical plane of symmetry, and Eq. (6.5) can be
used to determine the corresponding shear flow q. This property of Eqs. (6.4)
and (6.5) is used in this section to calculate both the shear flow and the
average shearing stress in thin-walled members such as the flanges of
wide-flange beams (Photo 6.2), box beams, or the walls of structural
tubes (Photo 6.3).
Photo 6.2 	Wide-flange beams. ©Jake Wyman/The Image Bank/Getty Images Photo 6.3 	Structural tubes. ©Rodho/Shutterstock
Consider a segment of length Δx of a wide-flange beam (Fig. 6.25a)
where V is the vertical shear in the transverse section shown. Detach an ele-
ment ABB′A′ of the upper flange (Fig. 6.25b). The longitudinal shear ΔH
exerted on that element can be obtained from Eq. (6.4):
ΔH = VQ
I Δx 	(6.4)
Dividing ΔH by the area ΔA = t Δx of the cut, the average shearing stress
exerted on the element is the same expression obtained in Sec. 6.1B for a
horizontal cut:
τave = VQ
It (6.6)
Note that τave now represents the average value of the shearing stress τzx
over a vertical cut, but since the thickness t of the flange is small, there
is very little variation of τzx across the cut. Recalling that τxz = τzx
y
B' 	B'
B 	B
ΔH
V
Δx
Δx
A A
A' 	A'	t
x	z
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.25 	(a) Wide-flange beam section with
vertical shear V. (b) Segment of flange with
longitudinal shear ΔH.

-- 454 of 897 --

440 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
(Fig. 6.26), the horizontal component τxz of the shearing stress at any
point of a transverse section of the flange can be obtained from Eq. (6.6),
where Q is the first moment of the shaded area about the neutral axis
(Fig. 6.27a). A similar result was obtained for the vertical component τxy
of the shearing stress in the web (Fig. 6.27b). Equation (6.6) can be used
to determine shearing stresses in box beams (Fig. 6.28), half pipes (Fig. 6.29),
and other thin-walled members, as long as the loads are applied in a
plane of symmetry. In each case, the cut must be perpendicular to the
surface of the member, and Eq. (6.6) will yield the component of the
shearing stress in the direction tangent to that surface. (The other com-
ponent is assumed to be equal to zero, because of the proximity of the
two free surfaces.)
y
x
z
τ zx 	τ xz
Fig. 6.26 	Stress element within flange
segment.
N.A.
y
t
z
(a)
N.A.
y
t
z
(b)
τxz
τxy
Fig. 6.27 	Wide-flange beam sections
showing shearing stress (a) in flange,
(b) in web. Shaded area is that used for
calculating the first moment of area.
N.A. 	N.A.
t
t
z 	z
y	y
(a) 	(b)
τxz 	τxz
τxy 	τ xy
Fig. 6.28 	Box beam showing shearing
stress (a) in flange, (b) in web. Shaded area
is that used for calculating the first moment
of area.
Comparing Eqs. (6.5) and (6.6), the product of the shearing stress τ at
a given point of the section and the thickness t at that point is equal to q.
Since V and I are constant, q depends only upon the first moment Q and
easily can be sketched on the section. For a box beam (Fig. 6.30), q grows
smoothly from zero at A to a maximum value at C and C′ on the neutral axis
and decreases back to zero as E is reached. There is no sudden variation in
the magnitude of q as it passes a corner at B, D, B′, or D′, and the sense of
q in the horizontal portions of the section is easily obtained from its sense in
the vertical portions (the sense of the shear V). In a wide-flange section
(Fig. 6.31), the values of q in portions AB and A′B of the upper flange are
distributed symmetrically. At B in the web, q corresponds to the two halves
of the flange, which must be combined to obtain the value of q at the top of
the web. After reaching a maximum value at C on the neutral axis, q decreases
and splits into two equal parts at D, which corresponds at D to the two halves
of the lower flange. The shear per unit length q is commonly called the shear
flow and reflects the similarity between the properties of q just described and
some of the characteristics of a fluid flow through an open channel or pipe.†
So far, all of the loads were applied in a plane of symmetry of the
member. In the case of members possessing two planes of symmetry
(Fig. 6.27 or 6.30), any load applied through the centroid of a given cross
†Recall that the concept of shear flow was used to analyze the distribution of shearing
stresses in thin-walled hollow shafts (Sec. 3.10). However, while the shear flow in a hollow
shaft is constant, the shear flow in a member under a transverse loading is not.
N.A.
z
y
t
C
τ
Fig. 6.29 	Half pipe section showing
shearing stress, and shaded area for
calculating first moment of area.
B
N.A.
A
q 	q
C 	C'
B'
D 	E 	D'
V
Fig. 6.30 	Shear flow, q, in a box
beam section.

-- 455 of 897 --

*6.5 Plastic Deformations 	441
section can be resolved into components along the two axes of symmetry.
Each component will cause the member to bend in a plane of symmetry, and
the corresponding shearing stresses can be obtained from Eq. (6.6). The prin-
ciple of superposition can then be used to determine the resulting stresses.
However, if the member possesses no plane of symmetry or a single
plane of symmetry and is subjected to a load that is not contained in that
plane, that member is observed to bend and twist at the same time—except
when the load is applied at a specific point called the shear center. The shear
center normally does not coincide with the centroid of the cross section. The
shear center of various thin-walled shapes is discussed in Sec. 6.6.
*6.5 	PLASTIC DEFORMATIONS
Consider a cantilever beam AB with a length of L and a rectangular cross
section subjected to a concentrated load P at its free end A (Fig. 6.32). The
largest bending moment occurs at the fixed end B and is equal to M = PL.
As long as this value does not exceed the maximum elastic moment MY
(i.e., PL ≤ MY), the normal stress σx will not exceed the yield strength σY
anywhere in the beam. However, as P is increased beyond MY∕L, yield is
initiated at points B and B′ and spreads toward the free end of the beam.
Assuming the material is elastoplastic and considering a cross section CC′
located a distance x from the free end A of the beam (Fig. 6.33), the
half-thickness yY of the elastic core in that section is obtained by making
M = Px in Eq. (4.38). Thus,
Px = 3
2 M Y (1 − 1
3
y2
Y
c2) (6.14)
where c is the half-depth of the beam. Plotting yY against x gives the bound-
ary between the elastic and plastic zones.
As long as PL < 3
2M Y, the parabola from Eq. (6.14) intersects the
line BB′, as shown in Fig. 6.33. However, when PL reaches the value 3
2M Y
(PL = Mp) where Mp is the plastic moment, Eq. (6.14) yields yY = 0 for
x = L, which shows that the vertex of the parabola is now located in sec-
tion BB′ and that this section has become fully plastic (Fig. 6.34). Recall-
ing Eq. (4.40), the radius of curvature ρ of the neutral surface at that point
is equal to zero, indicating the presence of a sharp bend in the beam at
its fixed end. Thus, a plastic hinge has developed at that point. The load
P = Mp∕L is the largest load that can be supported by the beam.
The above discussion is based only on the analysis of the normal
stresses in the beam as it exhibits plastic behavior. Now examine the distribution
N.A.
q1
q
q 	q1 	q2
q2
q1 	q2
A
D
B
C
A'
E'	E
V
+	=
Fig. 6.31 	Shear flow, q, in a wide-flange
beam section.
P
A
L
B
B'
Fig. 6.32 	Cantilever beam having
maximum moment PL at section B-B′.
As long as PL ≤ MY, the beam remains
elastic.
A
L
x
C
2y Y
C' 	B'
B
P
Fig. 6.33 	Cantilever beam exhibiting
partial yielding, showing the elastic core
at section C–C′.
A
L
x = L
B yY = 0
B'
P
Fig. 6.34 	Fully plastic cantilever beam
having PL = MP = 1.5MY.

-- 456 of 897 --

442 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
of the shearing stresses in a section that has become partly plastic. Consider the
portion of beam CC″D″D located between the transverse sections CC′ and DD′
and above the horizontal plane D″C″ (Fig. 6.35a). If this portion is located
entirely in the plastic zone, the normal stresses exerted on the faces CC″ and
DD″ will be uniformly distributed and equal to the yield strength σY (Fig. 6.35b).
The equilibrium of the free body CC″D″D requires that the horizontal shearing
force ΔH exerted on its lower face is equal to zero. The average value of the
horizontal shearing stress τyx across the beam at C″ is also zero, as well as the
average value of the vertical shearing stress τxy. Thus the vertical shear V = P
in section CC′ must be distributed entirely over the portion EE′ of the section
located within the elastic zone (Fig. 6.36). The distribution of the shearing
stresses over EE′ is the same as that in an elastic rectangular beam with the
same width b as beam AB and depth equal to the thickness 2yY of the elastic
zone.† The area 2byY of the elastic portion of the cross section A′ gives
τxy = 3
2
P
A′(1 − y2
y2
Y) (6.15)
The maximum value of the shearing stress occurs for y = 0 and is
τmax = 3
2
P
A′ (6.16)
As the area A′ of the elastic portion of the section decreases, τmax
increases and eventually reaches the yield strength in shear τY. Thus, shear
contributes to the ultimate failure of the beam. A more exact analysis of this
mode of failure should take into account the combined effect of the normal
and shearing stresses.
†See Prob. 6.60.
D
D'' D''
C'' C''
C 	D
ΔH
C
D' 	C'
(b)
(a)
σY 	σY
Fig. 6.35 	(a) Beam segment in partially
plastic area. (b) Element DCC″D″ is fully plastic.
C'
E'
E
C
y
2yY
PLASTIC
PLASTIC
ELASTIC
τ xy
τmax
Fig. 6.36 	Parabolic shear distribution
in elastic core.

-- 457 of 897 --

*6.5 Plastic Deformations 	443
Sample Problem 6.3
Knowing that the vertical shear is 50 kips in a W10 × 68 rolled-steel
beam, determine the horizontal shearing stress in the top flange at a
point a located 4.31 in. from the edge of the beam. The dimensions
and other geometric data of the rolled-steel section are given in
Appendix E.
STRATEGY: 	Determine the horizontal shearing stress at the required
section.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
As shown in Fig. 1, we isolate the shaded portion of the flange by
cutting along the dashed line that passes through point a.
Q = (4.31 in.)(0.770 in.)(4.815 in.) = 15.98 in3
τ = VQ
It = (50 kips)(15.98 in3 )
(394 in4 )(0.770 in.) τ = 2.63 ksi 	◂
Sample Problem 6.4
Solve Sample Prob. 6.3, assuming that 0.75 × 12-in. plates have been
attached to the flanges of the W10 × 68 beam by continuous fillet welds
as shown.
a
Welds
0.75 in. × 12 in.
4.31 in.
STRATEGY: 	Calculate the properties for the composite beam and
then determine the shearing stress at the required section.
= 4.815 in.	5.2	5.2 in.
tf = 0.770 in.
I x 	394 in4
a
C
0.770
4.31 in.
10.4 in.
2
−
=
Fig. 1 	Cross section dimensions for
W10 × 68 steel beam.
(continued)

-- 458 of 897 --

444 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
For the composite beam shown in Fig. 1, the centroidal moment of inertia is
I = 394 in4 + 2[ 1
12 (12 in.)(0.75 in.) 3 + (12 in.)(0.75 in.)(5.575 in.) 2 ]
I = 954 in4
12 in.
5.2 in.
0.75 in.
0.770 in.
4.31 in. 	4.31 in.4.815 in.
5.575 in.
a' a
C
Fig. 2 	Dimensions used to find first moment
of area and shearing stress at flange-web
junction.
Since the top plate and the flange are connected only at the welds, the shearing
stress is found at a by passing a section through the flange at a, between the
plate and the flange, and again through the flange at the symmetric point a′
(Fig. 2).
For the shaded area,
t = 2tf = 2(0.770 in.) = 1.540 in.
Q = 2[(4.31 in.)(0.770 in.)(4.815 in.)] + (12 in.)(0.75 in.)(5.575 in.)
= 82.1 in3
τ = VQ
It = (50 kips)(82.1 in3 )
(954 in4 )(1.540 in.) τ = 2.79 ksi 	◂
C
12 in.
5.2 in.
5.575 in.
0.375 in.
10.4 in.
0.75 in.
0.75 in.
Fig. 1 	Cross section dimensions for
calculating moment of inertia.

-- 459 of 897 --

*6.5 Plastic Deformations 	445
Sample Problem 6.5
The thin-walled extruded beam shown is made of aluminum and has a uniform
3-mm wall thickness. Knowing that the shear in the beam is 5 kN, determine
(a) the shearing stress at point A, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the
beam. Note: The dimensions given are to lines midway between the outer and
inner surfaces of the beam.
5 kN
D 	B
A
60 mm
25 mm 25 mm
STRATEGY: 	Determine the location of the centroid and then calculate the
moment of inertia. Calculate the two required stresses.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Centroid. 	Using Fig. 1, we note that AB = AD = 65 mm.
Y = Σ y A
Σ A = 2[(65 mm)(3 mm)(30 mm)]
2[(65 mm)(3 mm)] + (50 mm)(3 mm)
= 21.67 mm
D 	B
A
60 mm
65 mm
cos 	12
13
13
12
5 y	30 mm
25 mm 25 mm
β 	β
β =
Fig. 1 	Section dimensions for finding
centroid.
(continued)

-- 460 of 897 --

446 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Centroidal Moment of Inertia. 	Each side of the thin-walled beam can
be considered as a parallelogram (Fig. 2), and we recall that for the case
shown Inn = bh3∕12, where b is measured parallel to the axis nn. Using
Fig. 3 we write
b = (3 mm)∕cos β = (3 mm)∕(12∕13) = 3.25 mm
I = Σ (I + Ad2 ) = 2[ 1
12 (3.25 mm)(60 mm) 3
+ (3.25 mm)(60 mm)(8.33 mm) 2 ] + [ 1
12 (50 mm)(3 mm) 3
+ (50 mm)(3 mm)(21.67 mm) 2 ]
I = 214.6 × 103 mm4 	I = 0.2146 × 10−6 m4
D
C
B
A
30 mm
21.67 mm	3 mm
8.33 mm
30 mm
30 mm
25 mm 25 mm
β β
Fig. 2 	Dimensions locating
centroid.
h 	h
b 	b
n 	n 	n 	n
3 mm
3.25 mm
β
β
Fig. 3 	Determination of horizontal width
for side elements.
a. Shearing Stress at A. 	If a shearing stress τA occurs at A, the shear
flow will be qA = τAt and must be directed in one of the two ways shown in
Fig 4. But the cross section and the loading are symmetric about a vertical
line through A, and thus the shear flow must also be symmetric. Since neither
of the possible shear flows is symmetric, we conclude that
τA = 0 	◂
b. Maximum Shearing Stress. 	Since the wall thickness is constant,
the maximum shearing stress occurs at the neutral axis, where Q is max-
imum. Since we know that the shearing stress at A is zero, we cut the
section along the dashed line shown and isolate the shaded portion of the
beam (Fig. 5). To obtain the largest shearing stress, the cut at the neutral
axis is made perpendicular to the sides and is of length t = 3 mm.
Q = [(3.25 mm)(38.33 mm)](
38.33 mm
2 	) = 2387 mm3
= 2.387 × 10−6 m3
τ E = VQ
It = (5 kN)(2.387 × 10−6 m3 )
(0.2146 × 10−6 m4 )(0.003 m) τmax = τE = 18.54 MPa 	◂
qA 	qA 	qA 	qA
OR
Fig. 4 	Possible directions
for shear flow at A.
b 	3.25 mm
t 	3 mm	C
A
E	Neutral axis
38.33 mm =
=
Fig. 5 	Section for finding the maximum
shearing stress.

-- 461 of 897 --

447
6.29 The built-up timber beam shown is subjected to a vertical shear
of 1200 lb. Knowing that the allowable shearing force in the
nails is 75 lb, determine the largest permissible spacing s of the
nails.
2 in.
2 in.
2 in.
10 in.
s s s
Fig. P6.29
6.30 Two 20 × 100-mm and two 20 × 180-mm boards are glued
together as shown to form a 120 × 200-mm box beam. Knowing
that the beam is subjected to a vertical shear of 3.5 kN, deter-
mine the average shearing stress in the glued joint (a) at A,
(b) at B.
6.31 The built-up beam shown is made by gluing together five wooden
planks. Knowing that the allowable average shearing stress in the
glued joints is 60 psi, determine the largest permissible vertical
shear in the beam.
2 in.
2 in.
5 in. 	5 in.	2 in.
4 in.
Fig. P6.31
6.32 Several wooden planks are glued together to form the box beam
shown. Knowing that the beam is subjected to a vertical shear of 3 kN,
determine the average shearing stress in the glued joint (a) at A,
(b) at B.
Problems
100 mm
180 mm
20 mm
20 mm
A 	B
D	C
Fig. P6.30
A
B
60 mm 20 mm	20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
30 mm
30 mm
Fig. P6.32

-- 462 of 897 --

448
6.33 The built-up wooden beam shown is subjected to a vertical shear of
8 kN. Knowing that the nails are spaced longitudinally every 60 mm
at A and every 25 mm at B, determine the shearing force in the nails
(a) at A, (b) at B. (Given: Ix = 1.504 × 109 mm4.)
6.34 Knowing that a W360 × 122 rolled-steel beam is subjected to a
250-kN vertical shear, determine the shearing stress (a) at point A,
(b) at the centroid C of the section.
A
C
105 mm
Fig. P6.34
6.35 and 6.36 	An extruded aluminum beam has the cross section shown.
Knowing that the vertical shear in the beam is 150 kN, determine
the shearing stress at (a) point a, (b) point b.
b
12	12
40
80
80
Dimensions in mm
6
6
a
Fig. P6.36
6.37 Knowing that a given vertical shear V causes a maximum shearing
stress of 75 MPa in an extruded beam having the cross section
shown, determine the shearing stress at the three points indicated.
40
30
30
40
10
10
160
120
50 	50
20 	20
c
b
a
Dimensions in mm
Fig. P6.37
300
100
200
400
50
50
50
50
B
B
A
x
A	A
A
C
Dimensions in mm
Fig. P6.33
b
12 	12
40
80
150
Dimensions in mm
6
6
a
Fig. P6.35

-- 463 of 897 --

449
6.38 The vertical shear is 1200 lb in a beam having the cross section
shown. Knowing that d = 4 in., determine the shearing stress at
(a) point a, (b) point b.
b
d 	d
8 in.
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
5 in.
4 in.
a
Fig. P6.38 and P6.39
6.39 The vertical shear is 1200 lb in a beam having the cross section
shown. Determine (a) the distance d for which τa = τb, (b) the cor-
responding shearing stress at points a and b.
6.40 and 6.41 The extruded aluminum beam has a uniform wall thick-
ness of 1
8 in. Knowing that the vertical shear in the beam is 2 kips,
determine the corresponding shearing stress at each of the five
points indicated.
1.25 in.
1.25 in.
1.25 in. 	1.25 in.
b	c
a	e
d
Fig. P6.40
6.42 Knowing that a given vertical shear V causes a maximum shearing
stress of 50 MPa in a thin-walled member having the cross section
shown, determine the corresponding shearing stress at (a) point a,
(b) point b, (c) point c.
40 mm
30 mm
50 mm
30 mm
10 mm
10 mm
12 mm	40 mm
b
c
a
Fig. P6.42
1.25 in.
1.25 in.
1.25 in. 	1.25 in.
b	c
a	e
d
Fig. P6.41

-- 464 of 897 --

450
6.43 A beam consists of three planks connected as shown by bolts of 3
8 -in.
diameter spaced every 12 in. along the longitudinal axis of the beam.
Knowing that the beam is subjected to a 2500-lb vertical shear, deter-
mine the average shearing stress in the bolts.
2 in.
6 in.
6 in.
2 in. 	2 in.
Fig. P6.43
6.44 A beam consists of three planks connected as shown by steel bolts
with a longitudinal spacing of 225 mm. Knowing that the shear in
the beam is vertical and equal to 6 kN and that the allowable average
shearing stress in each bolt is 60 MPa, determine the smallest per-
missible bolt diameter that can be used.
6.45 A beam consists of five planks of 1.5 × 6-in. cross section connected
by steel bolts with a longitudinal spacing of 9 in. Knowing that the
shear in the beam is vertical and equal to 2000 lb and that the allow-
able average shearing stress in each bolt is 7500 psi, determine the
smallest permissible bolt diameter that can be used.
6.46 Three 20 × 450-mm steel plates are bolted to four L152 × 152 ×
19.0 steel angles to form a beam with the cross section shown. The
bolts are of 22-mm diameter and are spaced longitudinally every
125 mm. Knowing that the allowable average shearing stress in the
bolts is 90 MPa, determine the largest permissible vertical shear in
the beam. (Given: Ix = 1901 × 106 mm4.)
C
20 mm
20 mm
20 mm
450 mm
450 mm	x
Fig. P6.46
6.47 A plate of 1
4 -in. thickness is corrugated as shown and then used as
a beam. For a vertical shear of 1.2 kips, determine (a) the maximum
shearing stress in the section, (b) the shearing stress at point B. Also
sketch the shear flow in the cross section.
100 mm
100 mm
50 mm	100 mm	50 mm
25 mm
25 mm
Fig. P6.44
6 in.
1 in.
1 in.
Fig. P6.45
1.6 in.
2 in. 	2 in.
1.2 in. 1.2 in.
A 	B
D
E 	F
Fig. P6.47

-- 465 of 897 --

451
6.48 A plate of 2-mm thickness is bent as shown and then used as a beam.
For a vertical shear of 5 kN, determine the shearing stress at the five
points indicated and sketch the shear flow in the cross section.
6.49 An extruded beam has the cross section shown and a uniform wall
thickness of 3 mm. For a vertical shear of 10 kN, determine (a) the
shearing stress at point A, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the
beam. Also sketch the shear flow in the cross section.
60 mm
16 mm 	16 mm
A
28 mm
30 mm
Fig. P6.49
6.50 Three plates, each 0.5 in. thick, are welded together to form the section
shown. For a vertical shear of 25 kips, determine the shear flow through
the welded surfaces and sketch the shear flow in the cross section.
8 in.
4 in.
2 in.
4 in.
Fig. P6.50
6.51 The design of a beam calls for connecting two vertical rectangular
3
8 × 4-in. plates by welding them to two horizontal 1
2 × 2-in. plates
as shown. For a vertical shear V, determine the dimension a for
which the shear flow through the welded surfaces is maximum.
6.52 The cross section of an extruded beam is a hollow square of side
a = 3 in. and thickness t = 0.25 in. For a vertical shear of 15 kips,
determine the maximum shearing stress in the beam and sketch the
shear flow in the cross section.
a	a
Fig. P6.52
d	a
e
b c
50 mm
10 mm 10 mm
22 mm
Fig. P6.48
2 in.
2 in.
2 in.
a
a
in.	3
8
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
in.	3
8
Fig. P6.51

-- 466 of 897 --

452
6.53 An extruded beam has a uniform wall thickness t. Denoting by V
the vertical shear and by A the cross-sectional area of the beam,
express the maximum shearing stress as τmax = k(V∕A) and determine
the constant k for each of the two orientations shown.
a a
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P6.53
6.54 (a) Determine the shearing stress at point P of a thin-walled pipe of
the cross section shown caused by a vertical shear V. (b) Show that
the maximum shearing stress occurs for θ = 90° and is equal to
2V∕A, where A is the cross-sectional area of the pipe.
6.55 For a beam made of two or more materials with different moduli of
elasticity, show that Eq. (6.6)
τave = VQ
It
remains valid provided that both Q and I are computed by using the
transformed section of the beam (see Sec. 4.4) and provided further
that t is the actual width of the beam where τave is computed.
6.56 A composite beam is made by attaching the timber and steel por-
tions shown with bolts of 5
8 -in. diameter spaced longitudinally
every 8 in. The modulus of elasticity is 1.9 × 106 psi for the wood
and 29 × 106 psi for the steel. For a vertical shear of 4000 lb,
determine (a) the average shearing stress in the bolts, (b) the shear-
ing stress at the center of the cross section. (Hint: Use the method
indicated in Prob. 6.55.)
in.	1
2
3 in. 3 in.
4 in.
4 in.
4 in.
Fig. P6.56
6.57 A composite beam is made by attaching the timber and steel por-
tions shown with bolts of 12-mm diameter spaced longitudinally
every 200 mm. The modulus of elasticity is 10 GPa for the wood
and 200 GPa for the steel. For a vertical shear of 4 kN, determine
(a) the average shearing stress in the bolts, (b) the shearing stress
at the center of the cross section. (Hint: Use the method indicated
in Prob. 6.55.)
150 mm
12 mm
250 mm
12 mm
Fig. P6.57
C
rm 	t
P
θ
Fig. P6.54

-- 467 of 897 --

453
6.58 A steel bar and an aluminum bar are bonded together as shown to
form a composite beam. Knowing that the vertical shear in the
beam is 4 kips and that the modulus of elasticity is 29 × 106 psi
for the steel and 10.6 × 106 psi for the aluminum, determine (a) the
average shearing stress at the bonded surface, (b) the maximum
shearing stress in the beam. (Hint: Use the method indicated in
Prob. 6.55.)
2 in.
1 in.
1.5 in.
Aluminum
Steel
Fig. P6.58
6.59 A steel bar and an aluminum bar are bonded together as shown to
form a composite beam. Knowing that the vertical shear in the beam
is 6 kN and that the modulus of elasticity is 200 MPa for the steel
and 70 MPa for the aluminum, determine (a) the average shearing
stress at the bonded surface, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the
beam. (Hint: Use the method indicated in Prob. 6.55.)
6.60 Consider the cantilever beam AB discussed in Sec. 6.5 and the
portion ACKJ of the beam that is located to the left of the trans-
verse section CC′ and above the horizontal plane JK, where K is
a point at a distance y < yY above the neutral axis (Fig. P6.60).
(a) Recalling that σx = σY between C and E and σx = (σY∕yY)y
between E and K, show that the magnitude of the horizontal
shearing force H exerted on the lower face of the portion of beam
ACKJ is
H = 1
2 bσ Y (2c − yY − y2
y Y)
(b) Observing that the shearing stress at K is
τxy = lim
ΔA→0
ΔH
ΔA = lim
Δx→0
1
b
ΔH
Δx = 1
b
∂H
∂x
and recalling that yY is a function of x defined by Eq. (6.14), derive
Eq. (6.15).
A
J
x
C 	E
K
B
Plastic
Neutral axis
P
E'
C'
y
y Y
Fig. P6.60
Steel
24 mm
8 mm
8 mm 	Aluminum
Fig. P6.59

-- 468 of 897 --

454 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
*6.6 	UNSYMMETRIC LOADING
OF THIN-WALLED MEMBERS
AND SHEAR CENTER
Our analysis of the effects of transverse loadings has been limited to members
possessing a vertical plane of symmetry and to loads applied in that plane.
The members were observed to bend in the plane of loading (Fig. 6.37), and
in any given cross section, the bending couple M and the shear V (Fig. 6.38)
were found to result in normal and shearing stresses:
σx = − My
I (4.16)
and
τave = VQ
It (6.6)
M
N.A.
C'
(V 	P, M 	Px)
V
= 	=
Fig. 6.39 	Load perpendicular to plane of
symmetry.
In this section, the effects of transverse loads on thin-walled members
that do not possess a vertical plane of symmetry are examined. Assume that the
channel member of Fig. 6.37 has been rotated through 90° and that the line of
action of P still passes through the centroid of the end section. The couple
vector M representing the bending moment in a given cross section is still
directed along a principal axis of the section (Fig. 6.39), and the neutral axis
will coincide with that axis (see Sec. 4.8). Equation (4.16) can be used to com-
pute the normal stresses in the section. However, Eq. (6.6) cannot be used to
determine the shearing stresses, since this equation was derived for a member
possessing a vertical plane of symmetry (see Sec. 6.4). Actually, the member
will be observed to bend and twist under the applied load (Fig. 6.40), and the
resulting distribution of shearing stresses will be quite different from that given
by Eq. (6.6).
Thus, if a vertical load P is applied such that its line of action passes
through the centroid, the channel member of Fig. 6.40 will both bend and twist.
Is it possible to apply this vertical load P so that the channel member will bend
without twisting? If so, where should the load P be applied? If the member
bends without twisting, the shearing stress at any point of a given cross section
can be obtained from Eq. (6.6), where Q is the first moment of the shaded area
with respect to the neutral axis (Fig. 6.41a) and the distribution of stresses is
as shown in Fig. 6.41b with τ = 0 at both A and E. The shearing force exerted
on a small element of cross-sectional area dA = t ds is dF = τ dA = τt ds or
C
x
P
Fig. 6.37 	Cantilevered channel
beam with vertical plane of symmetry.
C
P
Fig. 6.40 	Deformation of channel when not
loaded in plane of symmetry.
N.A.
D 	E
A	B
N.A.
D 	E
A	B
(a) 	(b)
τ
Fig. 6.41 	Shearing stress and shear flow as
a result of unsymmetric loading. (a) Shearing
stress. (b) Shear flow q.
M
V
N.A.
C'
(V 	P, M 	Px)	= 	=
Fig. 6.38 	Load applied in
vertical plane of symmetry.

-- 469 of 897 --

*6.6 Unsymmetric Loading of Thin-Walled Members and Shear Center 	455
dF = q ds (Fig. 6.42a), where q is the shear flow q = τt = VQ∕I. The resultant
of the shearing forces exerted on the elements of the upper flange AB of the
channel is a horizontal force F (Fig. 6.42b) of magnitude
F = ∫B
A
q ds 	(6.17)
Because of the symmetry of the channel section about its neutral axis, the
resultant of the shearing forces exerted on the lower flange DE is a force
F′ of the same magnitude as F but of opposite sense. The resultant of the
shearing forces exerted on the web BD must be equal to the vertical shear
V in the section:
V = ∫D
B
q ds 	(6.18)
The forces F and F′ form a couple of moment Fh, where h is the distance
between the centerlines of the flanges AB and DE (Fig. 6.43a). This couple can
be eliminated if the vertical shear V is moved to the left through a distance e
so the moment of V about B is equal to Fh (Fig. 6.43b). Thus, Ve = Fh or
e = Fh
V (6.19)
When the force P is applied at a distance e to the left of the centerline of the
web BD, the member bends in a vertical plane without twisting (Fig. 6.44).
The point O where the line of action of P intersects the axis of sym-
metry of the end section is the shear center of that section. In the case of an
oblique load P (Fig. 6.45a), the member will also be free of twist if the load
P is applied at the shear center of the section. The load P then can be resolved
into two components Pz and Py (Fig. 6.45b) corresponding to the load condi-
tions of Figs. 6.37 and 6.44, neither of which causes the member to twist.
D 	E
A	B
dF 	q ds
F
V
F'
D 	E
A	B
(a) 	(b)
=
Fig. 6.42 	Shear flow in each element results
in a vertical shear and couple. (a) Shear flow q.
(b) Resultant forces on elements.
F
V
V
F'	D 	E
A
e
h
B
D 	E
A	B
(a) Resultant forces
on elements
(b) Placement of V to
eliminate twisting
Fig. 6.43 	Resultant force-couple for bending
without twisting, and relocation of V to create
same effect.
e
O
P
Fig. 6.44 	Placement of load to eliminate
twisting through the use of an attached
bracket.
P
Py
Pz
(a) 	(b)
e
O 	O
Fig. 6.45 	(a) Oblique load applied at shear center will
not cause twist, since (b) it can be resolved into
components that do not cause twist.

-- 470 of 897 --

456 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Concept Application 6.5
Determine the shear center O of a channel section of uniform thickness
(Fig. 6.46a), knowing that b = 4 in., h = 6 in., and t = 0.15 in.
Assuming that the member does not twist, determine the shear flow q in
flange AB at a distance s from A (Fig. 6.46b). Recalling Eq. (6.5) and observ-
ing that the first moment Q of the shaded area with respect to the neutral axis
is Q = (st)(h∕2),
q = VQ
I = Vsth
2 I (6.20)
where V is the vertical shear and I is the moment of inertia of the section
with respect to the neutral axis.
Recalling Eq. (6.17), the magnitude of the shearing force F exerted on
flange AB is found by integrating the shear flow q from A to B
F = ∫b
0
q ds = ∫b
0
Vsth
2 I ds = Vth
2 I ∫b
0
s ds
= Vthb2
4 I (6.21)
The distance e from the centerline of the web BD to the shear center O can
be obtained from Eq. (6.19):
e = Fh
V = Vthb2
4 I
h
V = th2b2
4 I (6.22)
The moment of inertia I of the channel section can be expressed as
I = Iweb + 2Iflange
= 1
12 th3 + 2[
1
12 bt 3 + bt (
h
2)
2
]
Neglecting the term containing t3, which is very small, gives
I = 1
12 th3 + 1
2 tbh2 = 1
12 th2 (6b + h) 	(6.23)
Substituting this expression into Eq. (6.22) gives
e = 3b 2
6b + h = b
2 + h
3b
(6.24)
Note that the distance e does not depend upon t and can vary from 0 to b∕2,
depending upon the value of the ratio h∕3b. For the given channel section,
h
3b = 6 in.
3(4 in.) = 0.5
and
e = 4 in.
2 + 0.5 = 1.6 in.
B
e
O
D 	E
A
t
h
b
(a)
B
N.A.
h/2
t
A
D 	E
s
(b)
Fig. 6.46 	(a) Channel section.
(b) Flange segment used for
calculation of shear flow.

-- 471 of 897 --

*6.6 Unsymmetric Loading of Thin-Walled Members and Shear Center 	457
Concept Application 6.6
For the channel section of Concept Application 6.5, determine the distribution
of the shearing stresses caused by a 2.5-kip vertical shear V applied at the
shear center O (Fig. 6.47a).
Shearing Stresses in Flanges. 	Since V is applied at the shear center,
there is no torsion, and the stresses in flange AB are obtained from
Eq. (6.20), so
τ = q
t = VQ
It = Vh
2I s 	(6.25)
which shows that the stress distribution in flange AB is linear. Letting s = b
and substituting for I from Eq. (6.23), we obtain the value of the shearing
stress at B:
τ B = Vhb
2( 1
12 th2 )(6b + h) = 6Vb
th(6b + h) (6.26)
Letting V = 2.5 kips and using the given dimensions,
τB = 6(2.5 kips)(4 in.)
(0.15 in.)(6 in.)(6 × 4 in. + 6 in.)
= 2.22 ksi
Shearing Stresses in Web. 	The distribution of the shearing stresses in the
web BD is parabolic, as in the case of a W-beam, and the maximum stress
occurs at the neutral axis. Computing the first moment of the upper half of
the cross section with respect to the neutral axis (Fig. 6.47b),
Q = bt ( 1
2 h) + 1
2 ht ( 1
4 h) = 1
8 ht (4b + h) 	(6.27)
Substituting for I and Q from Eqs. (6.23) and (6.27), respectively, into the
expression for the shearing stress,
τmax = VQ
It = V ( 1
8 ht)(4b + h)
1
12 th2 (6b + h)t = 3V (4b + h)
2th(6b + h)
or with the given data,
τmax = 3(2.5 kips)(4 × 4 in. + 6 in.)
2(0.15 in.)(6 in.)(6 × 4 in. + 6 in.)
= 3.06 ksi
Distribution of Stresses Over the Section. 	The distribution of the shear-
ing stresses over the entire channel section has been plotted in Fig. 6.47c.
B
e 	1.6 in.
b 	4 in.
h 	6 in.
t 	0.15 in.
V 	2.5 kips
O
D 	E
A
(a)
=
=
=
=
=
h/2
t
t
A
E
N.A.
D
B
h/4
b
(b)
B
D E
N.A.
A
max 	3.06 ksi
2.22 ksi
D 	2.22 ksi
(c)
τ =
τ 	=
Bτ =
Fig. 6.47 	(a) Channel section loaded
at shear center. (b) Section used to
find the maximum shearing stress.
(c) Shearing stress distribution.

-- 472 of 897 --

458 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Concept Application 6.7
For the channel section of Concept Application 6.5, and neglecting stress
concentrations, determine the maximum shearing stress caused by a 2.5-kip
vertical shear V applied at the centroid C of the section, which is located
1.143 in. to the right of the centerline of the web BD (Fig. 6.48a).
Equivalent Force-Couple System at Shear Center. 	The shear center O
of the cross section was determined in Concept Application 6.5 and found to
be at a distance e = 1.6 in. to the left of the centerline of the web BD. We
replace the shear V (Fig. 6.48b) by an equivalent force-couple system at the
shear center O (Fig. 6.48c). This system consists of a 2.5-kip force V and of
a torque T of magnitude
T = V(OC) = (2.5 kips)(1.6 in. + 1.143 in.)
= 6.86 kip·in.
Stresses Due to Bending. 	The 2.5-kip force V causes the member to
bend, and the corresponding distribution of shearing stresses in the section
(Fig. 6.48d) was determined in Concept Application 6.6. Recall that the max-
imum value of the stress due to this force was found to be
(τmax ) bending = 3.06 ksi
Stresses Due to Twisting. 	The torque T causes the member to twist, and
the corresponding distribution of stresses is shown in Fig. 6.48e. Recall from
Chap. 3 that the membrane analogy shows that in a thin-walled member of
uniform thickness, the stress caused by a torque T is maximum along the edge
of the section. Using Eqs. (3.42) and (3.40) with
a = 4 in. + 6 in. + 4 in. = 14 in.
b = t = 0.15 in. 	b∕a = 0.0107
So,
c1 = 1
3 (1 − 0.630b∕a) = 1
3 (1 − 0.630 × 0.0107) = 0.331
(τmax ) twisting = T
c1ab2 = 6.86 kip·in.
(0.331)(14 in.)(0.15 in.) 2 = 65.8 ksi
Combined Stresses. 	The maximum shearing stress due to the combined
bending and twisting occurs at the neutral axis on the inside surface of the
web and is
τmax = 3.06 ksi + 65.8 ksi = 68.9 ksi
As a practical observation, this exceeds the shearing stress at yield for commonly
available steels. This analysis demonstrates the potentially large effect that torsion
can have on the shearing stresses in channels and similar structural shapes.
B
6 in.
0.15 in.
1.143 in.
4 in.
V 	2.5 kips
C
D E
A
(a)
=
Fig. 6.48 	(a) Channel section
loaded at centroid (not shear
center).

-- 473 of 897 --

*6.6 Unsymmetric Loading of Thin-Walled Members and Shear Center 	459
B
1.143 in.
e 	1.6 in.
V
C
O
D 	E
A 	B
V
T
C
O
D 	E
A 	B
V 	2.5 kips
Bending 	Torsion
O
D 	E
A
a
b 	t
T 	6.86 kip in.
(b) 	(c) 	(d) 	(e)
·
=
= 	=
=
Fig. 6.48 	(cont.) (b) Load at the centroid (c) is equivalent to a force-torque at the shear center, which is the superposition of
shearing stress due to (d) bending and (e) torsion.
We now consider thin-walled members with cross sections that possess
no plane of symmetry. Consider an angle shape subjected to a vertical load
P. If the member is oriented in such a way that the load P is perpendicular
to one of the principal centroidal axes Cz of the cross section, the couple
vector M representing the bending moment in a given section will be directed
along Cz (Fig. 6.49), and the neutral axis will coincide with that axis (see
Sec. 4.8). Equation (4.16) is applicable and can be used to compute the nor-
mal stresses in the section. We will now determine where the load P should
be applied so that Eq. (6.6) can be used to determine the shearing stresses in
the section, i.e., so that the member is to bend without twisting.
Assume that the shearing stresses in the section are defined by Eq. (6.6).
As in the channel member, the elementary shearing forces exerted on the section
can be expressed as dF = q ds, with q = VQ∕I, where Q represents a first moment
with respect to the neutral axis (Fig. 6.50a). The resultant of the shearing forces
exerted on portion OA of the cross section is force F1 directed along OA, and the
resultant of the shearing forces exerted on portion OB is a force F2 along OB
(Fig. 6.50b). Since both F1 and F2 pass through point O at the corner of the angle,
their own resultant, which is the shear V in the section, must also pass through
O (Fig. 6.50c). The member will not be twisted if the line of action of the load
P passes through the corner O of the section in which it is applied.
The same reasoning can be applied when load P is perpendicular to
the other principal centroidal axis Cy of the angle section. Since any load
P applied at the corner O of a cross section also can be resolved into
y
z
M	N.A.
C
A
B
Fig. 6.49 	Beam without plane of
symmetry subject to bending moment.
y
z
dF 	q ds
N.A.
C
A
B
O
(a) Elementary shearing forces 	(b) Resultant forces on elements 	(c) Placement of V to eliminate twisting
V
A
O
B
F1
F2
A
O
B
=
Fig. 6.50 	Determination of shear center, O, in an angle shape.

-- 474 of 897 --

460 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
components perpendicular to the principal axes, the member will not be
twisted if each load is applied at the corner O of a cross section. Thus, O
is the shear center of the section.
Angle shapes with one vertical and one horizontal leg are encountered
in many structures. Such members will not be twisted if vertical loads are
applied along the centerline of their vertical leg. Note from Fig. 6.51 that the
resultant of the elementary shearing forces exerted on the vertical portion OA
of a given section will be equal to the shear V, while the resultant of the
shearing forces on the horizontal portion OB will be zero:
∫A
O
q ds = V 	∫B
O
q ds = 0
This does not mean that there will be no shearing stress in the horizontal leg of
the member. By resolving the shear V into components perpendicular to the
principal centroidal axes of the section and computing the shearing stress at every
point, τ is zero at only one point between O and B (see Sample Prob. 6.6).
Another type of thin-walled member frequently encountered in practice
is the Z shape. While the cross section of a Z shape does not possess any axis
of symmetry, it does possess a center of symmetry O (Fig. 6.52). This means
that any point H of the cross section corresponds another point H′, so that the
segment of straight line HH′ is bisected by O. Clearly, the center of symme-
try O coincides with the centroid of the cross section. As we will now demon-
strate, point O is also the shear center of the cross section.
As for an angle shape, we assume that the loads are applied in a plane
perpendicular to one of the principal axes of the section, so that this axis is
also the neutral axis of the section (Fig. 6.53). We further assume that the
shearing stresses in the section are defined by Eq. (6.6), where the member
is bent without being twisted. Denoting by Q the first moment about the
neutral axis of portion AH of the cross section and by Q′ the first moment of
portion EH′, we note that Q′ = −Q. Thus, the shearing stresses at H and H′
have the same magnitude and the same direction, and the shearing forces
exerted on small elements of area dA located respectively at H and H′ are
equal forces that have equal and opposite moments about O (Fig. 6.54). Since
this is true for any pair of symmetric elements, the resultant of the shearing
forces exerted on the section has a zero moment about O. This means that the
shear V in the section is directed along a line that passes through O. Since
this analysis can be repeated when the loads are applied in a plane perpen-
dicular to the other principal axis, point O is the shear center of the section.
A
H
O
B
D E
H'
Fig. 6.52 	Z section has centroid and shear
center coinciding.
A 	H
O
B
y
z N.A.
D
E	H'
τ
τ
Fig. 6.53 	Neutral axis location for load applied
in a plane perpendicular to principal axis z.
A
dA
dF
dF
dA
H
O
B
D
E	H'
Fig. 6.54 	For member bending without
twisting, equal and opposite moments about
O occur for any pair of symmetric elements.
dF 	q ds
V
A
O 	B
A
O B
=
Fig. 6.51 	Vertically loaded angle section and resulting shear flow.

-- 475 of 897 --

*6.6 Unsymmetric Loading of Thin-Walled Members and Shear Center 	461
Sample Problem 6.6
Determine the distribution of shearing stresses in the thin-walled angle shape
DE of uniform thickness t for the loading shown.
a
a
D
E
P
STRATEGY: 	Locate the centroid of the cross section and determine the two
principal moments of inertia. Resolve the load P into components parallel to
the principal axes, equal to the shear forces. The two sets of shearing stresses
are then calculated at locations along the two angle legs. These are then
superposed to obtain the shearing stress distribution.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Shear Center. 	We recall from Sec. 6.6 that the shear center of the cross
section of a thin-walled angle shape is located at its corner. Since the load P
is applied at D, it causes bending but no twisting of the shape.
Principal Axes. 	We locate the centroid C of a given cross section AOB
(Fig. 1). Since the y′ axis is an axis of symmetry, the y′ and z′ axes are the
principal centroidal axes of the section. We recall that for the parallelogram shown
(Fig. 2), Inn = 1
12 bh3 and Imm = 1
3 bh3 . Considering each leg of the section as a
parallelogram, we now determine the centroidal moments of inertia Iy′ and Iz′:
Iy′ = 2[
1
3 (
t
cos 45°)(a cos 45°) 3
] = 1
3 ta3
Iz′ = 2[
1
12 (
t
cos 45°)(a cos 45°) 3
] = 1
12 ta3
B
y
y'
z
z'
C
A
O
a
45°
1
2
a	
1
2
a
4
a
4
Fig. 1 	Angle section with
principal axes y′ and z′.
1
2 h
h
b 	b
n 	n 	n
m 	m 	m
n
Fig. 2 	Parallelogram and equivalent
rectangle for determining moments of inertia.
(continued)

-- 476 of 897 --

462 	Shearing Stresses in Beams and Thin-Walled Members
Superposition. 	The shear V in the section is equal to the load P. As shown
in Fig. 3, we resolve it into components parallel to the principal axes.
z' 	z'
y' 	y'
A
B
O
y
z C O 	O
V 	P Vz' 	P cos 45° 	Vy' 	P cos 45°
C
=	=
=
Fig. 3 	Resolution of the load into components
parallel to principal axes.
Shearing Stresses Due to Vy′. 	Using Fig. 4, we determine the shearing
stress at point e of coordinate y:
y′ = 1
2 (a + y) cos 45° − 1
2a cos 45° = 1
2 y cos 45°
Q = t(a − y)y′ = 1
2 t(a − y)y cos 45°
τ1 = V y′Q
Iz′t = (P cos 45°)[ 1
2 t(a − y)y cos 45°]
( 1
12 ta3 )t = 3P(a − y)y
ta3
The shearing stress at point f is represented by a similar function of z.
Shearing Stresses Due to Vz′. 	Using Fig. 5, reconsider point e:
z′ = 1
2 (a + y) cos 45°
Q = (a − y)tz′ = 1
2 (a2 − y2 )t cos 45°
τ2 = V z′Q
Iy′t = (P cos 45°)[ 1
2 (a2 − y2 )t cos 45°]
(1
3 ta3 )t = 3P(a2 − y2 )
4ta3
The shearing stress at point f is represented by a similar function of z.
Combined Stresses.
a. Along the Vertical Leg. 	The shearing stress at point e is
τe = τ2 + τ1 = 3P(a2 − y2 )
4ta3 	+ 3P(a − y)y
ta3 	= 3P(a − y)
4ta3 	[(a + y) + 4y]
τe = 3P(a − y)(a + 5y)
4ta3 	◂
b. Along the Horizontal Leg. 	The shearing stress at point f is
τ f = τ2 − τ1 = 3P(a2 − z2 )
4ta3 	− 3P(a − z)z
ta3 	= 3P(a − z)
4ta3 	[(a + z) − 4z]
τf = 3P(a − z)(a − 3z)
4ta3 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	The combined stresses are plotted in Fig. 6.
z'
y'
y'
2
1
z
B
e
a
a y	O
A 	f
Vy' 	P cos 45
y
C
45°
= 	°
τ1 	τ1
Fig. 4 	Load component in plane of
symmetry.
z'
z'
y'
a
z
B
e
O
A
f 	Vz' 	P cos 45°
y
y
C
45° 	=
τ2
τ2
Fig. 5 	Load component
perpendicular to plane of symmetry.
B
A
z O
y
a
3
3
4
P
at
Fig. 6 	Shearing stress distribution.

-- 477 of 897 --

463
6.61 through 6.64 Determine the location of the shear center O of a thin-
walled beam of uniform thickness having the cross section shown.
Problems
D
E 	F
B
10
40
100
10
6 	6 	40
O 	A
G
70
Dimensions in mm
V = 50 kN
e
Fig. P6.66
A
E 	G 	F
B	D
a 	b
h	O
e
Fig. P6.64
E 	F
A
D 	B
G	O
2a
a
a
e
Fig. P6.63
2a
E
F
e
O
A
D 	B
a
a
a
a
G
Fig. P6.62
e
E
F
O
A
a
D
H 	J
B
a
a
a
G
Fig. P6.61
6.65 and 6.66 	An extruded beam has the cross section shown. Determine
(a) the location of the shear center O, (b) the distribution of the
shearing stresses caused by the vertical shearing force V shown
applied at O.
6
6
70
10
D
e
E 	F
O A
G
B
10
Dimensions in mm
40
100
40
V = 50 kN
Fig. P6.65

-- 478 of 897 --

464
6.67 and 6.68 An extruded beam has the cross section shown. Determine
(a) the location of the shear center O, (b) the distribution of the
shearing stresses caused by the vertical shearing force V shown
applied at O.
in.
V 	2.75 kips
t 	1
8
4 in.
2 in.
6 in.
A
B D
O
E
G
e
F
2 in.
=
=
Fig. P6.67
3 in.
B
D 	E
A
8 in.
O C
e
V = 25 kips
in.	1
4
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P6.68
6.69 through 6.74 Determine the location of the shear center O of a
thin-walled beam of uniform thickness having the cross section
shown.
F
E
B
A
r
O
D
4 in.
2 in.
3 in.
3 in.
2 in.	in.	1
4
Fig. P6.69
E
60°
60°
F
e
O 	A
D
B
35 mm
35 mm
6 mm
Fig. P6.70
A
E
e
O
D
B
5 in.
4 in.
3 in.
3 in.
Fig. P6.71
E
40 mm
40 mm
4 mm
30 mm
30 mm
F
e
O
A
D
B
Fig. P6.72
e
O 	A
a 	t
B
Fig. P6.73
t
e
O
A
a
B
Fig. P6.74

-- 479 of 897 --

465
6.75 and 6.76 A thin-walled beam has the cross section shown. Determine
the location of the shear center O of the cross section.
8 in.
in.	3
4
in.	3
4
in.	1
2
6 in.	8 in.
e
O
Fig. P6.75
6.77 and 6.78 A thin-walled beam of uniform thickness has the cross sec-
tion shown. Determine the dimension b for which the shear center
O of the cross section is located at the point indicated.
A
D 	E
O	160 mm 	200 mm
20 mm
20 mm
b 60 mm
G	F
H 	J
B
Fig. P6.77
3 in.
2 in.
A
D
O
E
G
B
b
b
F
Fig. P6.78
6.79 For the angle shape and loading of Sample Prob. 6.6, check that
∫q dz = 0 along the horizontal leg of the angle and ∫q dy = P along
its vertical leg.
6.80 For the angle shape and loading of Sample Prob. 6.6, (a) determine
the points where the shearing stress is maximum and the correspond-
ing values of the stress, (b) verify that the points obtained are located
on the neutral axis corresponding to the given loading.
*6.81 Determine the distribution of the shearing stresses along line D′B′
in the horizontal leg of the angle shape for the loading shown.
The x′ and y′ axes are the principal centroidal axes of the cross
section.
*6.82 For the angle shape and loading of Prob. 6.81, determine the distri-
bution of the shearing stresses along line D′A′ in the vertical leg.
e
40 mm	80 mm
B
E
G
F
D
A
O 	60 mm
6 mm
50 mm 	50 mm
Fig. P6.76
2a
15.8°
Ix' 	1.428ta3
Iy' 	0.1557ta3
0.342a
0.596a
a
A 	B B'
D'
D
A'
A'
D'
x'
y'
x
y
C'
B'
P
a	2
3
a
6
=
=
Fig. P6.81

-- 480 of 897 --

466
*6.83 A steel plate, 160 mm wide and 8 mm thick, is bent to form the
channel shown. Knowing that the vertical load P acts at a point in
the midplane of the web of the channel, determine (a) the torque T
that would cause the channel to twist in the same way that it does
under the load P, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the channel
caused by the load P.
*6.84 Solve Prob. 6.83, assuming that a 6-mm-thick plate is bent to form
the channel shown.
*6.85 The cantilever beam AB, consisting of half of a thin-walled pipe
of 1.25-in. mean radius and 3
8 -in. wall thickness, is subjected to a
500-lb vertical load. Knowing that the line of action of the load
passes through the centroid C of the cross section of the beam,
determine (a) the equivalent force-couple system at the shear cen-
ter of the cross section, (b) the maximum shearing stress in the
beam. (Hint: The shear center O of this cross section was shown
in Prob. 6.74 to be located twice as far from its vertical diameter
as its centroid C.)
*6.86 Solve Prob. 6.85, assuming that the thickness of the beam is reduced
to 1
4 in.
*6.87 The cantilever beam shown consists of a Z shape of 1
4 -in. thickness.
For the given loading, determine the distribution of the shearing
stresses along line A′B′ in the upper horizontal leg of the Z shape.
The x′ and y′ axes are the principal centroidal axes of the cross sec-
tion, and the corresponding moments of inertia are Ix ′ = 166.3 in4
and Iy ′ = 13.61 in4.
12 in.
6 in. 6 in.
22.5°
A'
A'
B'
B'
C'
y
x
x'
y'
A
B
D' D'
E' E'
E	D
3 kips
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P6.87
*6.88 For the cantilever beam and loading of Prob. 6.87, determine the
distribution of the shearing stresses along line B′D′ in the vertical
web of the Z shape.
P 	15 kN
100 mm
B
D
E
30 mm
A
=
Fig. P6.83
1.25 in.
500 lb
A
B
C
Fig. P6.85

-- 481 of 897 --

467
Stresses on a Beam Element
A small element located in the vertical plane of symmetry of a beam under
a transverse loading was considered (Fig. 6.55), and it was found that normal
stresses σx and shearing stresses τxy are exerted on the transverse faces of that
element, while shearing stresses τyx, equal in magnitude to τxy, are exerted on
its horizontal faces.
Horizontal Shear
For a prismatic beam AB with a vertical plane of symmetry supporting
various concentrated and distributed loads (Fig. 6.56), at a distance x from
end A we can detach an element CDD′C′ of length Δx that extends across
Review and Summary
τ xy
τ yx
σx
Fig. 6.55 	Stress element from section of
transversely loaded beam.
B
P1 	P2 	w
A
x
C
y
z
Fig. 6.56 	Transversely loaded beam with vertical
plane of symmetry.
the width of the beam from the upper surface of the beam to a horizontal
plane located at a distance y1 from the neutral axis (Fig. 6.57). The mag-
nitude of the shearing force ΔH exerted on the lower face of the beam
element is
ΔH = VQ
I Δx 	(6.4)
where V = vertical shear in the given transverse section
Q = first moment with respect to the neutral axis of the shaded portion
𝒶 of the section
I = centroidal moment of inertia of the entire cross-sectional area
y1 	y1
Δx
C
c
x
D
C' N.A.
D'
y
z
𝒶
Fig. 6.57 	Short segment of beam with stress element CDD′C′.

-- 482 of 897 --

468
Shear Flow
The horizontal shear per unit length or shear flow, denoted by the letter q, is
obtained by dividing both members of Eq. (6.4) by Δx:
q = ΔH
Δx = VQ
I (6.5)
Shearing Stresses in a Beam
Dividing both members of Eq. (6.4) by the area ΔA of the horizontal face of
the element and observing that ΔA = t Δx, where t is the width of the element
at the cut, the average shearing stress on the horizontal face of the element is
τave = VQ
It (6.6)
Since the shearing stresses τxy and τyx are exerted on a transverse and a hori-
zontal plane through D′ and are equal, Eq. (6.6) also represents the average
value of τxy along the line D′1 D′2 (Fig. 6.58).
D'
D'
D''2
C''1
D''1
1
2	D' 	τave
τave
τ xy
τ yx
Fig. 6.58 	Shearing stress distribution across
horizontal and transverse planes.
Shearing Stresses in a Beam of Rectangular Cross Section
The distribution of shearing stresses in a beam of rectangular cross section
was found to be parabolic, and the maximum stress, which occurs at the center
of the section, is
τmax = 3
2
V
A (6.10)
where A is the area of the rectangular section. For wide-flange beams, a good
approximation of the maximum shearing stress is obtained by dividing the
shear V by the cross-sectional area of the web.
Longitudinal Shear on Curved Surface
Equations (6.4) and (6.5) can be used to determine the longitudinal shearing
force ΔH and the shear flow q exerted on a beam element if the element is
bounded by an arbitrary curved surface instead of a horizontal plane (Fig. 6.59).
Δx
C
c
x
D
C' 	D'
y
N.A.
z
𝒶
Fig. 6.59 	Segment of beam showing element CDD′C′ of length Δx.

-- 483 of 897 --

469
Shearing Stresses in Thin-Walled Members
We found that we could extend the use of Eq. (6.6) to determine the average
shearing stress in both the webs and flanges of thin-walled members, such as
wide-flange beams and box beams (Fig. 6.60).
Plastic Deformations
Once plastic deformation has been initiated, additional loading causes plastic
zones to penetrate into the elastic core of a beam. Because shearing stresses
can occur only in the elastic core of a beam, both an increase in loading and
the resulting decrease in the size of the elastic core contribute to an increase
in shearing stresses.
Unsymmetric Loading and Shear Center
Prismatic members that are not loaded in their plane of symmetry will have
both bending and twisting. Twisting is prevented if the load is applied at the
point O of the cross section. This point is known as the shear center, where
the loads may be applied so the member only bends (Fig. 6.61). If the loads
are applied at that point,
σx = − My
I τave = VQ
It (4.16, 6.6)
The principle of superposition can be used to find the stresses in unsymmet-
ric thin-walled members such as channels, angles, and extruded beams.
N.A.
y
t
z
(a)
N.A.
y
t
z
(b)
τ xy
τ xz
Fig. 6.60 	Wide-flange beam sections
showing shearing stress (a) in flange, (b) in
web. The shaded area is that used for
calculating the first moment of area.
e
O
P
Fig. 6.61 	Placement of load to eliminate
twisting through the use of an attached
bracket.

-- 484 of 897 --

470
6.89 Three full-size 50 × 100-mm boards are nailed together to form a
beam that is subjected to a vertical shear of 1500 N. Knowing that
the allowable shearing force in each nail is 400 N, determine the
largest longitudinal spacing s that can be used between each pair
of nails.
6.90 For the beam and loading shown, consider section n–n and determine
(a) the largest shearing stress in that section, (b) the shearing stress
at point a.
1.5 m
100 mm
200 mm
40 mm
12 mm
12 mm
150 mm
0.3 m
10 kN
n
a
n
Fig. P6.90
6.91 For the wide-flange beam with the loading shown, determine the
largest P that can be applied, knowing that the maximum normal
stress is 24 ksi and the largest shearing stress, using the approxima-
tion τm = V∕Aweb, is 14.5 ksi.
6.92 Two W8 × 31 rolled sections may be welded at A and B in either
of the two ways shown to form a composite beam. Knowing that for
each weld the allowable shearing force is 3000 lb per inch of weld,
determine for each arrangement the maximum allowable vertical
shear in the composite beam.
A
(a) 	(b)
B 	A 	B
Fig. P6.92
6.93 The built-up timber beam is subjected to a 1500-lb vertical shear.
Knowing that the longitudinal spacing of the nails is s = 2.5 in.
and that each nail is 3.5 in. long, determine the shearing force in
each nail.
Review Problems
50 mm
s s
50 mm
50 mm
100 mm
Fig. P6.89
P
6 ft
B
A 	C
9 ft
W24 × 104
Fig. P6.91
4 in.
4 in.
2 in. 	2 in.
2 in.
2 in.
6 in. 	4 in.
2 in.
Fig. P6.93

-- 485 of 897 --

471
6.94 Knowing that a given vertical shear V causes a maximum shearing
stress of 75 MPa in the hat-shaped extrusion shown, determine the
corresponding shearing stress at (a) point a, (b) point b.
60 mm
20 mm 28 mm 20 mm
4 mm
4 mm
14 mm
6 mm 	6 mm
b
a
40 mm
Fig. P6.94
6.95 Three planks are connected as shown by bolts of 14-mm diameter
spaced every 150 mm along the longitudinal axis of the beam. For
a vertical shear of 10 kN, determine the average shearing stress in
the bolts.
6.96 Four L102 × 102 × 9.5 steel angle shapes and a 12 × 400-mm plate
are bolted together to form a beam with the cross section shown.
The bolts are of 22-mm diameter and are spaced longitudinally every
120 mm. Knowing that the beam is subjected to a vertical shear of
240 kN, determine the average shearing stress in each bolt.
12 mm
400 mm
Fig. P6.96
6.97 A plate of thickness t is bent as shown and then used as a beam.
For a vertical shear of 600 lb, determine (a) the thickness t for
which the maximum shearing stress is 300 psi, (b) the correspond-
ing shearing stress at point E. Also sketch the shear flow in the
cross section.
4.8 in.
6 in.
3 in. 	3 in.
2 in.
B 	G
E	D
F	A
Fig. P6.97
125 mm 	125 mm
100 mm
100 mm
250 mm
Fig. P6.95

-- 486 of 897 --

472
6.98 The design of a beam requires welding four horizontal plates to a
vertical 0.5 × 5-in. plate as shown. For a vertical shear V, determine
the dimension h for which the shear flow through the welded sur-
faces is maximum.
2.5 in.
2.5 in. h
h
0.5 in.
0.5 in.
4.5 in.	4.5 in.
0.5 in.
Fig. P6.98
6.99 A thin-walled beam of uniform thickness has the cross section shown.
Determine the dimension b for which the shear center O of the cross
section is located at the point indicated.
b
60 mm
60 mm
60 mm
F
G
E
O
D
B
A
Fig. P6.99
6.100 Determine the location of the shear center O of a thin-walled beam
of uniform thickness having the cross section shown.
E
60°
60°
F
e
O 	A
D
B
in.	1
4
1.5 in.
1.5 in.
Fig. P6.100

-- 487 of 897 --

473
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
6.C1 A timber beam is to be designed to support a distributed load and
up to two concentrated loads as shown. One of the dimensions of
its uniform rectangular cross section has been specified, and the
other is to be determined so that the maximum normal stress and
the maximum shearing stress in the beam will not exceed given
allowable values σall and τall. Measuring x from end A and using
either SI or U.S. customary units, write a computer program to
calculate for successive cross sections, from x = 0 to x = L and
using given increments Δx, the shear, the bending moment, and
the smallest value of the unknown dimension that satisfies in that
section (1) the allowable normal stress requirement and (2) the
allowable shearing stress requirement. Use this program to solve
Prob. 5.65, assuming σall = 12 MPa and τall = 825 kPa and using
Δx = 0.1 m.
B
t
h
A
x1
x3
x2
x4
a 	b	L
P1 	w P2
Fig. P6.C1
6.C2 A cantilever timber beam AB of length L and of uniform rectangu-
lar section shown supports a concentrated load P at its free end
and a uniformly distributed load w along its entire length. Write
a computer program to determine the length L and the width b
of the beam for which both the maximum normal stress and the
maximum shearing stress in the beam reach their largest allowable
values. Assuming σall = 1.8 ksi and τall = 120 psi, use this pro-
gram to determine the dimensions L and b when (a) P = 1000 lb
and w = 0, (b) P = 0 and w = 12.5 lb/in., and (c) P = 500 lb
and w = 12.5 lb/in.
w
P
B
b
8 b
L
A
Fig. P6.C2
Computer Problems

-- 488 of 897 --

474
6.C3 A beam having the cross section shown is subjected to a vertical
shear V. Write a computer program that, for loads and dimensions
expressed in either SI or U.S. customary units, can be used to cal-
culate the shearing stress along the line between any two adjacent
rectangular areas forming the cross section. Use this program to
solve (a) Prob. 6.9, (b) Prob. 6.12, (c) Prob. 6.22.
bn
b2
V
b1
hn
h2
h1
Fig. P6.C3
6.C4 A plate of uniform thickness t is bent as shown into a shape with a
vertical plane of symmetry and is then used as a beam. Write a
computer program that, for loads and dimensions expressed in either
SI or U.S. customary units, can be used to determine the distribution
of shearing stresses caused by a vertical shear V. Use this program
(a) to solve Prob. 6.47, (b) to find the shearing stress at a point E
for the shape and load of Prob. 6.97, assuming a thickness t = 1
4 in.
y1
y
x
y2
x2
x1
xn
Fig. P6.C4

-- 489 of 897 --

475
6.C5 The cross section of an extruded beam is symmetric with respect to
the x axis and consists of several straight segments as shown. Write
a computer program that, for loads and dimensions expressed in
either SI or U.S. customary units, can be used to determine (a) the
location of the shear center O, (b) the distribution of shearing stresses
caused by a vertical force applied at O. Use this program to solve
Prob. 6.70.
x2
x1
y1
t2 t1
yn 	tn
e
y2
O
V
y
x
Fig. P6.C5
6.C6 A thin-walled beam has the cross section shown. Write a computer
program that, for loads and dimensions expressed in either SI or
U.S. customary units, can be used to determine the location of
the shear center O of the cross section. Use the program to solve
Prob. 6.75.
O
b2
t0
t1
t2
ti
tn
a n
ai
ai
a n
a1
a1
a2
a2
e
b i
bn
Fig. P6.C6

-- 490 of 897 --



-- 491 of 897 --

Transformations of
Stress and Strain
The aircraft wing shown is being tested to determine how forces
due to lift are distributed through the wing. This chapter will
examine methods for determining maximum stresses and strains at
any point in a structure such as this, as well as study the stress
conditions necessary to cause failure.
7
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Apply stress transformation equations to plane stress situations
to determine any stress component at a point.
• Apply the alternative Mohr’s circle approach to perform plane
stress transformations.
• Use transformation techniques to identify key components of
stress, such as principal stresses.
• Extend Mohr’s circle analysis to examine three-dimensional
states of stress.
• Examine theories of failure for ductile and brittle materials.
• Analyze plane stress states in thin-walled pressure vessels.
• Extend Mohr’s circle analysis to examine the transformation
of strain.
Source: Tom Tschida/NASA

-- 492 of 897 --

478 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Introduction
7.1 	TRANSFORMATION OF
PLANE STRESS
7.1A Transformation Equations
7.1B Principal Stresses and
Maximum Shearing Stress
7.2 	MOHR’S CIRCLE FOR
PLANE STRESS
7.3 	GENERAL STATE OF
STRESS
7.4 	THREE-DIMENSIONAL
ANALYSIS OF STRESS
*7.5 	THEORIES OF FAILURE
*7.5A Yield Criteria for Ductile
Materials
*7.5B Fracture Criteria for Brittle
Materials Under Plane Stress
7.6 	STRESSES IN THIN-
WALLED PRESSURE
VESSELS
*7.7 	TRANSFORMATION OF
PLANE STRAIN
*7.7A Transformation Equations
*7.7B Mohr’s Circle for Plane Strain
*7.8 	THREE-DIMENSIONAL
ANALYSIS OF STRAIN
*7.9 	MEASUREMENTS OF
STRAIN; STRAIN
ROSETTE
Introduction
The most general state of stress at a given point Q is represented by six com-
ponents (see Sec. 1.4). Three of these components, σx, σy, and σz, are the
normal stresses exerted on the faces of a small cubic element centered at Q
with the same orientation as the coordinate axes (Fig. 7.1a). The other three,
τxy, τyz, and τzx,† are the components of the shearing stresses on this element.
The same state of stress will be represented by a different set of components
if the coordinate axes are rotated (Fig. 7.1b). The first part of this chapter
determines how the components of stress are transformed by such a rotation
of the coordinate axes. The second part of the chapter is devoted to a similar
analysis of the transformation of strain components.
†Recall that τyx = τxy, τzy = τyz, and τxz = τzx (Sec. 1.4).
Q
O
z
y
x
(a)
O
z
z'
y' y
x
x'
(b)
Q
τyz
τzy
τ yx
τ xy
τxz
τzx
σy
σx
σy'
σz
τ y'z'
τy'x'
σx'
σz'
τ x'y'
τ x'z'
τz'x'
τz'y'
Fig. 7.1 	General state of stress at a point: (a) referenced to {xyz}, (b) referenced to {x′y′z′}.
Our discussion of the transformation of stress will deal mainly with
plane stress, i.e., a situation in which two parallel faces of the cubic element
are free of any stress. If the parallel faces free of stress are perpendicular to
the z axis, then σz = τzx = τzy = 0, and the only remaining stress components
are σx, σy, and τxy (Fig. 7.2). This situation occurs in a thin plate subjected to
forces acting in the midplane of the plate (Fig. 7.3). It also occurs on the free
τ yx
τ xy
σy
σx
Fig. 7.2 	Non-zero stress components for
state of plane stress.
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
Fig. 7.3 	Example of plane stress: thin
plate subjected to only in-plane loads.

-- 493 of 897 --

Introduction 	479
surface of a structural element or machine component where any point of the
surface of that element or component is not subjected to an external force
(Fig. 7.4).
In Sec. 7.1A, a state of plane stress at a given point Q is character-
ized by the stress components σx, σy, and τxy associated with the element
shown in Fig. 7.5a. Components σ x′ , σy′ , and τx′y′ associated with that
element after it has been rotated through an angle θ about the z axis
(Fig. 7.5b) will then be determined. In Sec. 7.1B, the value θp of θ will
be found, where the stresses σ x′ and σ y′ are the maximum and minimum
stresses. These values of the normal stress are the principal stresses at
point Q, and the faces of the corresponding element define the principal
planes of stress at that point. The angle of rotation θs for which the shear-
ing stress is maximum also is discussed.
F1
F2
Fig. 7.4 	Example of plane stress: free
surface of a structural component.
Q 	Q
z
x 	x
x'
y 	y'
z' = z
y
θ
(a) 	(b)
σy 	σy'
σx'
σx
τxy
τx'y'
θ
Fig. 7.5 	State of plane stress: (a) referenced to {xyz}, (b) referenced to {x′y′z′}.
In Sec. 7.2, an alternative method to solve problems involving the
transformation of plane stress, based on the use of Mohr’s circle, is
presented.
In Sec. 7.3, the three-dimensional state of stress at a given point is
discussed, and the normal stress on a plane of arbitrary orientation at that
point is determined. In Sec. 7.4, the rotations of a cubic element about each
of the principal axes of stress and the corresponding transformations of stress
are described by three different Mohr’s circles. For a state of plane stress at
a given point, the maximum value of the shearing stress obtained using rota-
tions in the plane of stress does not necessarily represent the maximum shear-
ing stress at that point. This makes it necessary to distinguish in-plane and
out-of-plane maximum shearing stresses.
Yield criteria for ductile materials under plane stress are discussed in
Sec. 7.5A. To predict whether a material yields at some critical point under
given load conditions, the principal stresses σa and σb will be determined at
that point, and then used with the yield strength σY of the material to evaluate
a certain criterion. Two criteria in common use are the maximum-shearing-
strength criterion and the maximum-distortion-energy criterion. In Sec. 7.5B,
fracture criteria for brittle materials under plane stress are developed using
the principal stresses σa and σb at some critical point and the ultimate strength
σU of the material. Two criteria discussed here are the maximum-normal-stress
criterion and Mohr’s criterion.

-- 494 of 897 --

480 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Thin-walled pressure vessels are an important application of the analy-
sis of plane stress. Stresses in both cylindrical and spherical pressure vessels
(Photos 7.1 and 7.2) are discussed in Sec. 7.6.
Photo 7.1 	Cylindrical pressure vessels.
©ChrisVanLennepPhoto/Shutterstock
Photo 7.2 	Spherical pressure vessels. ©noomcpk/Shutterstock
Section 7.7 is devoted to the transformation of plane strain and Mohr’s
circle for plane strain. In Sec. 7.8, the three-dimensional analysis of strain
shows how Mohr’s circles can be used to determine the maximum shearing
strain at a given point. These two particular cases are of special interest and
should not be confused: the case of plane strain and the case of plane stress.
The application of strain gages to measure the normal strain on the
surface of a structural element or machine component is considered in
Sec. 7.9. The components εx, εy, and γxy characterizing the state of strain at
a given point are computed from the measurements made with three strain
gages forming a strain rosette.
7.1 	TRANSFORMATION OF
PLANE STRESS
7.1A 	Transformation Equations
Assume that a state of plane stress exists at point Q (with σz = τzx = τzy = 0)
and is defined by the stress components σx, σy, and τxy associated with the
element shown in Fig. 7.5a. We will now determine the stress components σ x′,
σ y′, and τ x′y′ associated with the element after it has been rotated through an
angle θ about the z axis (Fig. 7.5b). These components are given in terms of
σx, σy, τxy, and θ.
To determine the normal stress σ x′ and shearing stress τx′y′ exerted on
the face perpendicular to the x′ axis, consider a prismatic element with faces
perpendicular to the x, y, and x′ axes (Fig. 7.6a). If the area of the oblique
face is ΔA, the areas of the vertical and horizontal faces are equal to
ΔA cos θ and ΔA sin θ, respectively. The forces exerted on the three faces
are as shown in Fig. 7.6b. (No forces are exerted on the triangular faces of the

-- 495 of 897 --

7.1 Transformation of Plane Stress 	481
element, since the corresponding normal and shearing stresses are assumed
equal to zero.) Using components along the x′ and y′ axes, the equilibrium
equations are
ΣFx′ = 0: 	σ x′ ΔA − σx (ΔA cos θ) cos θ − τxy (ΔA cos θ) sin θ
−σ y (ΔA sin θ) sin θ − τ xy (ΔA sin θ) cos θ = 0
ΣFy′ = 0: 	τ x′y′ ΔA + σ x (ΔA cos θ) sin θ − τ xy (ΔA cos θ) cos θ
−σ y (ΔA sin θ) cos θ + τ xy(ΔA sin θ) sin θ = 0
Solving the first equation for σ x′ and the second for τx′y′,
σ x′ = σ x cos 2 θ + σ y sin2 θ + 2τ xy sin θ cos θ 	(7.1)
τ x′y′ = −(σ x − σ y) sin θ cos θ + τ xy(cos 2 θ − sin2 θ) 	(7.2)
Recalling the trigonometric relations
sin 2θ = 2 sin θ cos θ 	cos 2θ = cos 2 θ − sin2 θ 	(7.3)
and
cos 2 θ = 1 + cos 2θ
2 sin2 θ = 1 − cos 2θ
2 (7.4)
Q 	Q
z
x 	x
x'
y 	y'
z' = z
y
θ
(a) 	(b)
σy 	σy'
σx'
σx
τxy
τx'y'
θ
Fig. 7.5 	(repeated) State of plane stress: (a) referenced to {xyz}, (b) referenced
to {x′y′z′}.
z
x
x'
y' 	y
(a)
ΔA cos θ
ΔA sin θ
ΔA
x
x'
y' 	y
(b)
θ θ
τx'y' ΔA
τxy (ΔA cos θ)
τxy (ΔA sin θ)
σx' ΔA
σx (ΔA cos θ)
σy (ΔA sin θ)
θ
Fig. 7.6 	Stress transformation equations are determined by
considering an arbitrary prismatic wedge element. (a) Geometry
of the element. (b) Free-body diagram.

-- 496 of 897 --

482 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Equation (7.1) is rewritten as
σ x′ = σ x
1 + cos 2θ
2 + σ y
1 − cos 2θ
2 + τ xy sin 2θ
or
σ x′ = σx + σ y
2 + σx − σ y
2 cos 2θ + τ xy sin 2θ 	(7.5)
Using the relationships of Eq. (7.3), Eq. (7.2) is now
τx′y′ = − σx − σ y
2 sin 2θ + τ xy cos 2θ 	(7.6)
The normal stress σ y′ is obtained by replacing θ in Eq. (7.5) by the angle
θ + 90° that the y′ axis forms with the x axis. Since cos (2θ + 180°) =
−cos 2θ and sin (2θ + 180°) = −sin 2θ,
σy′ = σx + σ y
2 − σx − σ y
2 cos 2θ − τ xy sin 2θ 	(7.7)
Adding Eqs. (7.5) and (7.7) member to member,
σ x′ + σ y′ = σ x + σ y 	(7.8)
Since σz = σz′ = 0, we thus verify for plane stress that the sum of the normal
stresses exerted on a cubic element of material is independent of the orienta-
tion of that element.†
7.1B 	Principal Stresses and Maximum
Shearing Stress
Equations (7.5) and (7.6) are the parametric equations of a circle. This
means that, if a set of rectangular axes is used to plot a point M of abscissa
σ x′ and ordinate τ x′y′ for any given parameter θ, all of the points obtained
will lie on a circle. To establish this property, we eliminate θ from Eqs. (7.5)
and (7.6) by first transposing (σx + σy)/2 in Eq. (7.5) and squaring both
members of the equation, then squaring both members of Eq. (7.6), and
finally adding member to member the two equations obtained:
(σ x′ − σx + σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ x′y′
2 	= (
σx − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2 	(7.9)
Setting
σave = σx + σ y
2 and 	R = √(
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2 	(7.10)
the identity of Eq. (7.9) is given as
(σ x′ − σave ) 2 + τ x′y′
2 	= R2 	(7.11)
†This verifies the property of dilatation as discussed in the first footnote of Sec. 2.6.

-- 497 of 897 --

7.1 Transformation of Plane Stress 	483
which is the equation of a circle of radius R centered at the point C of
abscissa σave and ordinate 0 (Fig. 7.7). Due to the symmetry of the circle
about the horizontal axis, the same result is obtained if a point N of abscissa
σ x′ and ordinate −τx′y′ is plotted instead of M (Fig. 7.8). This property will
be used in Sec. 7.2.
†This relationship also can be obtained by differentiating σx′ in Eq. (7.5) and setting the
derivative equal to zero: dσx′∕dθ = 0.
D
E
C
B 	A	O
M
R
τ x'y'
τx'y'
σx'
σx'
σmin
σave
σmax
Fig. 7.7 	Circular relationship of
transformed stresses.
C
O
R
N
τx'y'
− τx'y'
σx'
σave
σx'
Fig. 7.8 	Equivalent formation of stress
transformation circle.
y
Q 	x
y'
x'
σmin
σmin
σmax
σmax
θ p
θ p
Fig. 7.9 	Principal stresses.
The points A and B where the circle of Fig. 7.7 intersects the horizon-
tal axis are of special interest: Point A corresponds to the maximum value of
the normal stress σ x′; point B corresponds to its minimum value. Both points
also correspond to a zero value of the shearing stress τx′y′. Thus the values θp
of the parameter θ which correspond to points A and B can be obtained by
setting τx′y′ = 0 in Eq. (7.6).†
tan 2θp = 2τxy
σ x − σ y
(7.12)
This equation defines two values 2θp that are 180° apart and thus two values
θp that are 90° apart. Either value can be used to determine the orientation of
the corresponding element (Fig. 7.9). The planes containing the faces of the
element obtained in this way are the principal planes of stress at point Q, and
the corresponding values σmax and σmin exerted on these planes are the prin-
cipal stresses at Q. Since both values θp defined by Eq. (7.12) are obtained
by setting τ x′y′ = 0 in Eq. (7.6), it is clear that no shearing stress is exerted
on the principal planes.
From Fig. 7.7,
σmax = σave + R 	and 	σmin = σave − R 	(7.13)
Substituting for σave and R from Eq. (7.10),
σmax, min = σ x + σ y
2 ± √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2 	(7.14)

-- 498 of 897 --

484 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Unless it is possible to tell by inspection which of these principal planes is
subjected to σmax and which is subjected to σmin, it is necessary to substitute
one of the values θp into Eq. (7.5) to determine which corresponds to the
maximum value of the normal stress.
Referring again to Fig. 7.7, points D and E located on the vertical
diameter of the circle correspond to the largest value of the shearing stress
τ x′y′. Since the abscissa of points D and E is σave = (σx + σy)∕2, the values
θs of the parameter θ corresponding to these points are obtained by setting
σ x′ = (σx + σy)∕2 in Eq. (7.5). The sum of the last two terms in that equation
must be zero. Thus, for θ = θs,†
σx − σ y
2 cos 2θs + τ xy sin 2θs = 0
or
tan 2θs = − σx − σ y
2τ xy
(7.15)
This equation defines two values 2θs that are 180° apart, and thus two
values θs that are 90° apart. Either of these values can be used to deter-
mine the orientation of the element corresponding to the maximum shear-
ing stress (Fig. 7.10). Fig. 7.7 shows that the maximum value of the
shearing stress is equal to the radius R of the circle. Recalling the second
of Eqs. (7.10),
τmax = √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2 	(7.16)
As observed earlier, the normal stress corresponding to the condition of max-
imum shearing stress is
σ′ = σave = σx + σ y
2 (7.17)
Comparing Eqs. (7.12) and (7.15), tan 2θs is the negative reciprocal
of tan 2θp. Thus angles 2θs and 2θp are 90° apart, and therefore angles θs
and θp are 45° apart. Thus the planes of maximum shearing stress are at
45° to the principal planes. This confirms the results found in Sec. 1.4
for a centric axial load (Fig. 1.38) and in Sec. 3.1C for a torsional load
(Fig. 3.17).
Be aware that the analysis of the transformation of plane stress has been
limited to rotations in the plane of stress. If the cubic element of Fig. 7.5 is
rotated about an axis other than the z axis, its faces may be subjected to shear-
ing stresses larger than defined by Eq. (7.16). In Sec. 7.3, this occurs when
the principal stresses in Eq. (7.14) have the same sign (i.e., either both tensile
or both compressive). In these cases, the value given by Eq. (7.16) is referred
to as the maximum in-plane shearing stress.
†This relationship also can be obtained by differentiating τx′y′ in Eq. (7.6) and setting the
derivative equal to zero: dτx′y′∕dθ = 0.
y
Q 	x
x'
y'
θ s
θ sθ s
σ'
σ'
σ'
σ'
τmax
τmax
Fig. 7.10 	Maximum shearing stress.

-- 499 of 897 --

7.1 Transformation of Plane Stress 	485
Concept Application 7.1
For the state of plane stress shown in Fig. 7.11a, determine (a) the principal
planes, (b) the principal stresses, (c) the maximum shearing stress and the
corresponding normal stress.
a. Principal Planes. 	Following the usual sign convention, the stress
components are
σ x = +50 MPa 	σ y = −10 MPa 	τ xy = +40 MPa
Substituting into Eq. (7.12),
tan 2θp = 2τxy
σ x − σ y
= 2(+40)
50 − (−10) = 80
60
2θp = 53.1° 	and 	180° + 53.1° = 233.1°
θp = 26.6° 	and 	116.6°
b. Principal Stresses. 	Equation (7.14) yields
σmax, min = σ x + σ y
2 ± √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2
= 20 ± √ (30) 2 + (40) 2
σmax = 20 + 50 = 70 MPa
σmin = 20 − 50 = −30 MPa
The principal planes and principal stresses are shown in Fig. 7.11b. Making
2θ = 53.1° in Eq. (7.5), it is confirmed that the normal stress exerted on face
BC of the element is the maximum stress:
σ x′ = 50 − 10
2 + 50 + 10
2 cos 53.1° + 40 sin 53.1°
= 20 + 30 cos 53.1° + 40 sin 53.1° = 70 MPa = σmax
c. Maximum Shearing Stress. 	Equation (7.16) yields
τmax = √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2 = √ (30) 2 + (40) 2 = 50 MPa
Since σmax and σmin have opposite signs, τmax actually represents the maximum
value of the shearing stress at the point. The orientation of the planes of maxi-
mum shearing stress and the sense of the shearing stresses are determined by
passing a section along the diagonal plane AC of the element of Fig. 7.11b.
Since the faces AB and BC of the element are in the principal planes, the diago-
nal plane AC must be one of the planes of maximum shearing stress (Fig. 7.11c).
Furthermore, the equilibrium conditions for the prismatic element ABC require
that the shearing stress exerted on AC be directed as shown. The cubic element
corresponding to the maximum shearing stress is shown in Fig. 7.11d. The
normal stress on each of the four faces of the element is given by Eq. (7.17):
σ′ = σave = σx + σ y
2 = 50 − 10
2 = 20 MPa
10 MPa
40 MPa
50 MPa
(a)
x
A
B
C
(b)
θ p = 26.6°
σmin = 30 MPa
σmax = 70 MPa
45°	A
C
B
(c)
σmin
σmax
σ′
τmax
θ p = 26.6°
θ s = θ p – 45° = –18.4°
x
(d)
τmax = 50 MPa
σ′ = 20 MPa
σ′ = 20 MPa
θ s = –18.4°
Fig. 7.11 	(a) Plane stress element.
(b) Plane stress element oriented in
principal directions. (c) Plane stress
element showing principal and maximum
shear planes. (d) Plane stress element
showing maximum shear orientation.

-- 500 of 897 --

486 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Sample Problem 7.1
A single horizontal force P with a magnitude of 150 lb is applied to end
D of lever ABD. Knowing that portion AB of the lever has a diameter of
1.2 in., determine (a) the normal and shearing stresses located at point H
and having sides parallel to the x and y axes, (b) the principal planes and
principal stresses at point H.
18 in.
1.2 in.
H
A
D
B
y
z
x
10 in.
4 in. 	P
STRATEGY: 	You can begin by determining the forces and couples acting
on the section containing the point of interest, and then use them to calculate
the normal and shearing stresses acting at that point. These stresses can then
be transformed to obtain the principal stresses and their orientation.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Force-Couple System. 	We replace the force P by an equivalent
force-couple system at the center C of the transverse section containing
point H (Fig. 1):
P = 150 lb 	T = (150 lb)(18 in.) = 2.7 kip·in.
M x = (150 lb)(10 in.) = 1.5 kip·in.
Mx = 1.5 kip·in.
T = 2.7 kip·in.
H
x	z
y
C
P = 150 lb
Fig. 1 	Equivalent force-couple
system acting on transverse section
containing point H.

-- 501 of 897 --

7.1 Transformation of Plane Stress 	487
a. Stresses σx, σy, τxy at Point H. 	Using the sign convention shown
in Fig. 7.2, the sense and the sign of each stress component are found by
carefully examining the force-couple system at point C (Fig. 1):
σx = 0 	◂
σ y = + Mc
I = + (1.5 kip·in.)(0.6 in.)
1
4π (0.6 in.) 4 	σy = + 8.84 ksi 	◂
τ xy = + Tc
J = + (2.7 kip·in.)(0.6 in.)
1
2π (0.6 in.) 4 	τxy = + 7.96 ksi 	◂
We note that the shearing force P does not cause any shearing stress at point H.
The general plane stress element (Fig. 2) is completed to reflect these stress
results (Fig. 3).
b. Principal Planes and Principal Stresses. 	Substituting the val-
ues of the stress components into Eq. (7.12), the orientation of the prin-
cipal planes is
tan 2θp = 2τxy
σ x − σ y
= 2(7.96)
0 − 8.84 = −1.80
2θp = −61.0° 	and 	180° − 61.0° = +119°
θp = − 30.5° 	and 	+ 59.5° 	◂
Substituting into Eq. (7.14), the magnitudes of the principal stresses are
σmax, min = σ x + σ y
2 ± √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ xy
2
= 0 + 8.84
2 ± √ (
0 − 8.84
2 	)
2
+ (7.96) 2 = +4.42 ± 9.10
σmax = + 13.52 ksi 	◂
σmin = − 4.68 ksi 	◂
Considering face ab of the element shown, θp = −30.5° in Eq. (7.5) and
σx′ = −4.68 ksi. The principal stresses are as shown in Fig. 4.
H a
b
σmax = 13.52 ksi
σmin = 4.68 ksi
θp = −30.5°
Fig. 4 	Stress element at point
H oriented in principal directions.
σy
σx
τ xy
Fig. 2 	General plane
stress element (showing
positive directions).
σy = 8.84 ksi
σx = 0
τ xy = 7.96 ksi
Fig. 3 	Stress element at
point H.

-- 502 of 897 --

488
Problems
7.1 through 7.4 	For the given state of stress, determine the normal and
shearing stresses exerted on the oblique face of the shaded triangular
element shown. Use a method of analysis based on the equilibrium
of that element, as was done in the derivations of Sec. 7.1A.
7.5 through 7.8 	For the given state of stress, determine (a) the principal
planes, (b) the principal stresses.
48 MPa
16 MPa
60 MPa
Fig. P7.5 and P7.9
20 ksi
4 ksi
6 ksi
Fig. P7.6 and P7.10
60 MPa
25 MPa
40 MPa
Fig. P7.7 and P7.11
6 ksi
4 ksi
9 ksi
Fig. P7.8 and P7.12
7.9 through 7.12 	For the given state of stress, determine (a) the orienta-
tion of the planes of maximum in-plane shearing stress, (b) the max-
imum in-plane shearing stress, (c) the corresponding normal stress.
7.13 through 7.16 	For the given state of stress, determine the normal and
shearing stresses after the element shown has been rotated through
(a) 25° clockwise, (b) 10° counterclockwise.
16 ksi
10 ksi
Fig. P7.13
60 MPa
20 MPa
40 MPa
Fig. P7.14
12 ksi
6 ksi
8 ksi
Fig. P7.15
80 MPa
50 MPa
Fig. P7.16
12 ksi
6 ksi
55°
Fig. P7.1
60 MPa
45 MPa
120 MPa
70°
Fig. P7.2
10 ksi
6 ksi
4 ksi
75°
Fig. P7.3 	Fig. P7.4
50°
30 MPa
40 MPa

-- 503 of 897 --

489
7.17 and 7.18 	The grain of a wooden member forms an angle of 15° with
the vertical. For the state of stress shown, determine (a) the in-plane
shearing stress parallel to the grain, (b) the normal stress perpen-
dicular to the grain.
7.19 Two wooden members of 80 × 120-mm uniform rectangular cross
section are joined by the simple glued scarf splice shown. Knowing
that β = 22° and that the maximum allowable stresses in the joint
are, respectively, 400 kPa in tension (perpendicular to the splice) and
600 kPa in shear (parallel to the splice), determine the largest centric
load P that can be applied.
7.20 Two wooden members of 80 × 120-mm uniform rectangular cross
section are joined by the simple glued scarf splice shown. Knowing
that β = 25° and that centric loads of magnitude P = 10 kN are applied
to the members as shown, determine (a) the in-plane shearing stress
parallel to the splice, (b) the normal stress perpendicular to the splice.
7.21 The centric force P is applied to a short post as shown. Knowing
that the stresses on plane a-a are σ = −15 ksi and τ = 5 ksi,
determine (a) the angle β that plane a-a forms with the horizontal,
(b) the maximum compressive stress in the post.
250 psi
15°
Fig. P7.17
1.8 MPa
3 MPa
15°
Fig. P7.18
P'
P
80 mm
120 mm
β
Fig. P7.19 and P7.20
P
a
a
β
Fig. P7.21
7.22 A steel pipe of 300-mm outer diameter is fabricated from 8-mm-
thick plate by welding along a helix that forms an angle of 20° with
a plane perpendicular to the axis of the pipe. Knowing that a 250-kN
axial force P and a 12-kN·m torque T, each directed as shown, are
applied to the pipe, determine the normal and in-plane shearing
stresses in directions, respectively, normal and tangential to the weld.
8 mm
P
T
Weld
20°
Fig. P7.22

-- 504 of 897 --

490
7.23 The axle of an automobile is acted upon by the forces and couple
shown. Knowing that the diameter of the solid axle is 32 mm, deter-
mine (a) the principal planes and principal stresses at point H located
on top of the axle, (b) the maximum shearing stress at the same point.
3 kN
3 kN
350 N·m
0.15 m
H
0.2 m
Fig. P7.23
7.24 A 400-lb vertical force is applied at D to a gear attached to the
solid 1-in. diameter shaft AB. Determine the principal stresses and
the maximum shearing stress at point H located as shown on top
of the shaft.
6 in.
2 in.
D
A
B
H
C
400 lb
Fig. P7.24
7.25 A mechanic uses a crowfoot wrench to loosen a bolt at E. Knowing
that the mechanic applies a vertical 24-lb force at A, determine the
principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at point H located
as shown on top of the 3
4 -in-diameter shaft.
24 lb
10 in.
6 in.	E
B
A
H
Fig. P7.25

-- 505 of 897 --

491
7.26 The steel pipe AB has a 102-mm outer diameter and a 6-mm wall
thickness. Knowing that arm CD is rigidly attached to the pipe,
determine the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress
at point K.
7.27 For the state of plane stress shown, determine the largest value of σy
for which the maximum in-plane shearing stress is equal to or less
than 75 MPa.
7.28 For the state of plane stress shown, determine (a) the largest value
of τxy for which the maximum in-plane shearing stress is equal to or
less than 12 ksi, (b) the corresponding principal stresses.
7.29 For the state of plane stress shown, determine (a) the value of τxy
for which the in-plane shearing stress parallel to the weld is zero,
(b) the corresponding principal stresses.
7.30 Determine the range of values of σx for which the maximum in-plane
shearing stress is equal to or less than 10 ksi.
200 mm
6 mm
150 mm
51 mm
z 	x
A
y
D
K	H
10 kN
A
B
C
Fig. P7.26
60 MPa
20 MPa
σy
Fig. P7.27
8 ksi
10 ksi
τ xy
Fig. P7.28
12 MPa
2 MPa
75°
τ xy
Fig. P7.29
15 ksi
8 ksi
σx
Fig. P7.30

-- 506 of 897 --

492 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
7.2 	MOHR’S CIRCLE FOR
PLANE STRESS
The circle used in the preceding section to derive the equations relating to the
transformation of plane stress was introduced by the German engineer Otto
Mohr (1835–1918) and is known as Mohr’s circle for plane stress. This circle
can be used to obtain an alternative method for the solution of the problems
considered in Sec. 7.1. This method is based on simple geometric consider-
ations and does not require the use of specialized equations. While originally
designed for graphical solutions, a calculator may also be used.
Consider a square element of a material subjected to plane stress
(Fig. 7.12a), and let σx, σy, and τxy be the components of the stress exerted
on the element. A point X of coordinates σx and −τxy and a point Y of
coordinates σy and +τxy are plotted (Fig. 7.12b). If τxy is positive, as
assumed in Fig. 7.12a, point X is located below the σ axis and point Y
above, as shown in Fig. 7.12b. If τxy is negative, X is located above the
σ axis and Y below. Joining X and Y by a straight line, the point C is at
the intersection of line XY with the σ axis, and the circle is drawn with
its center at C and having a diameter XY. The abscissa of C and the radius
of the circle are respectively equal to σave and R in Eqs. (7.10). The circle
obtained is Mohr’s circle for plane stress. Thus, the abscissas of points A
and B where the circle intersects the σ axis represent the principal stresses
σmax and σmin at the point considered.
Since tan (XCA) = 2τxy∕(σx − σy), the angle XCA is equal in magnitude
to one of the angles 2θp that satisfy Eq. (7.12). Thus, the angle θp in Fig. 7.12a
defines the orientation of the principal plane corresponding to point A in
Fig. 7.12b and can be obtained by dividing the angle XCA measured on Mohr’s
circle in half. If σx > σy and τxy > 0, as in the case considered here, the rota-
tion that brings CX into CA is counterclockwise. But, in that case, the angle
θp obtained from Eq. (7.12) and defining the direction of the normal Oa to
the principal plane is positive; thus, the rotation bringing Ox into Oa is also
counterclockwise. Therefore, the senses of rotation in both parts of Fig. 7.12
are the same. So, if a counterclockwise rotation through 2θp is required to
bring CX into CA on Mohr’s circle, a counterclockwise rotation through θp
will bring Ox into Oa in Fig. 7.12a.†
Since Mohr’s circle is uniquely defined, the same circle can be obtained
from the stress components σ x′, σy′, and τx′y′, which correspond to the x′ and
y′ axes shown in Fig. 7.13a. Point X′ of coordinates σ x′ and −τ x′y′ and point
Y′ of coordinates σy′ and +τx′y′ are located on Mohr’s circle, and the angle
X′CA in Fig. 7.13b must be equal to twice the angle x′Oa in Fig. 7.13a. Since
the angle XCA is twice the angle xOa, the angle XCX′ in Fig. 7.13b is twice
the angle xOx′ in Fig. 7.13a. Thus the diameter X′Y′ defining the normal and
shearing stresses σ x′, σy′, and τx′y′ is obtained by rotating the diameter XY
through an angle equal to twice the angle θ formed by the x′and x axes in
Fig. 7.13a. The rotation that brings the diameter XY into the diameter X′Y′ in
Fig. 7.13b has the same sense as the rotation that brings the xy axes into the
x′y′ axes in Fig. 7.13a.
This property can be used to verify that planes of maximum shearing
stress are at 45° to the principal planes. Indeed, points D and E on Mohr’s
O 	x
a
b
y
(a)
σy
σx
σmax 	σmax
σmin
σmin
τxy
θp
(b)
O
B 	A
Y
C
X(σx , – τ xy)
(σx – σy)
σ
(σy , + τxy)
1
2
σmax
σmin
τ
τxy
2θp
Fig. 7.12 	(a) Plane stress element and the
orientation of principal planes. (b) Corresponding
Mohr’s circle.
†This is due to the fact that we are using the circle of Fig 7.8 rather than the circle of
Fig. 7.7 as Mohr’s circle.

-- 507 of 897 --

7.2 Mohr’s Circle for Plane Stress 	493
circle correspond to the planes of maximum shearing stress, while A and B
correspond to the principal planes (Fig. 7.14b). Since the diameters AB and
DE of Mohr’s circle are at 90° to each other, the faces of the corresponding
elements are at 45° to each other (Fig. 7.14a).
O
y'
x'
x
a
b
y
(a) 	(b)
X
A	B	O 	C
Y
X'(σ x', – τx'y')
Y'(σ y',+ τx'y')
τ
σy
σmin
σmax
σx 	σ
σ y'
σ x'
τxy
τx'y'
θ
2θ
Fig. 7.13 	(a) Stress element referenced to xy axes, transformed to obtain components referenced to
x′y′ axes. (b) Corresponding Mohr’s circle.
(a) 	(b)
O
O
B 	C 	A
D
E
45°
90°
b
d
a
e
σmin
σmax
σ' σ'
σ' = σave
σ
τmax	τmax
τ
τmax
Fig. 7.14 	(a) Stress elements showing orientation of planes of maximum
shearing stress relative to principal planes. (b) Corresponding Mohr’s circle.
The construction of Mohr’s circle for plane stress is simplified if each
face of the element used to define the stress components is considered sepa-
rately. From Figs. 7.12 and 7.13, when the shearing stress exerted on a given
face tends to rotate the element clockwise, the point on Mohr’s circle corre-
sponding to that face is located above the σ axis. When the shearing stress on
a given face tends to rotate the element counterclockwise, the point corre-
sponding to that face is located below the σ axis (Fig. 7.15).† As far as the
normal stresses are concerned, the usual convention holds, so that a tensile
stress is positive and is plotted to the right, while a compressive stress is
considered negative and is plotted to the left.
†To remember this convention, think “In the kitchen, the clock is above, and the counter
is below.”
(a) Clockwise 	Above
(b) Counterclockwise 	Below
σ
σ
τ
τ
σ
σ
τ
τ
Fig. 7.15 	Convention for plotting
shearing stress on Mohr’s circle.

-- 508 of 897 --

494 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Concept Application 7.2
For the state of plane stress considered in Concept Application 7.1,
(a) construct Mohr’s circle, (b) determine the principal stresses,
(c) determine the maximum shearing stress and the corresponding
normal stress.
a. Construction of Mohr’s Circle. 	Note from Fig. 7.16a that the nor-
mal stress exerted on the face oriented toward the x axis is tensile (positive)
and the shearing stress tends to rotate the element counterclockwise. There-
fore, point X of Mohr’s circle is plotted to the right of the vertical axis and
below the horizontal axis (Fig. 7.16b). A similar inspection of the normal
and shearing stresses exerted on the upper face of the element shows that
point Y should be plotted to the left of the vertical axis and above the hori-
zontal axis. Drawing the line XY, the center C of Mohr’s circle is found.
Its abscissa is
σave = σx + σ y
2 = 50 + (−10)
2 = 20 MPa
Since the sides of the shaded triangle are
CF = 50 − 20 = 30 MPa 	and 	FX = 40 MPa
the radius of the circle is
R = CX = √ (30) 2 + (40) 2 = 50 MPa
b. Principal Planes and Principal Stresses. 	The principal stresses are
σmax = OA = OC + CA = 20 + 50 = 70 MPa
σmin = OB = OC − BC = 20 − 50 = −30 MPa
O 	x
y
B
G
Y
C 	F 	A
(MPa)
O
R
X
(b)
10 MPa
40 MPa
50 MPa
40
20
10
50
40
(a)
τ
τ
σ (MPa)
Fig. 7.16 	(a) Plane stress element. (b) Corresponding Mohr’s circle.

-- 509 of 897 --

7.2 Mohr’s Circle for Plane Stress 	495
Recalling that the angle ACX represents 2θp (Fig. 7.16b),
tan 2 θp = FX
CF = 40
30
2 θp = 53.1° 	θp = 26.6°
Since the rotation that brings CX into CA in Fig. 7.16d is counterclockwise,
the rotation that brings Ox into the axis Oa corresponding to σmax in Fig. 7.16c
is also counterclockwise.
c. Maximum Shearing Stress. 	Since a further rotation of 90° counter-
clockwise brings CA into CD in Fig. 7.16d, a further rotation of 45° counter-
clockwise will bring the axis Oa into the axis Od corresponding to the
maximum shearing stress in Fig. 7.16d. Note from Fig. 7.16d that τmax = R =
50 MPa and the corresponding normal stress is σ′ = σave = 20 MPa. Since
point D is located above the σ axis in Fig. 7.16c, the shearing stresses exerted
on the faces perpendicular to Od in Fig. 7.16d must be directed so that they
will tend to rotate the element clockwise.
O
B
Y
C
D
A
O
X
(d)
= 53.1°
90°
R = 50	E
45°
x
y
b
a
(c)
e
d
θp
2θp
σmin = 30 MPa
σmin = − 30
σmax = 70 MPa
τmax = 50 MPa
τmax = 50
τ (MPa)
σmax = 70
σ (MPa)
σ′ = 20 MPa 	σ′ = 20 MPa σ′ = σave = 20
τ
Fig. 7.16 	(cont.) (c) Stress element orientations for principal and maximum shearing stresses.
(d) Mohr’s circle used to determine principal and maximum shearing stresses.

-- 510 of 897 --

496 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Mohr’s circle provides a convenient way of checking the results
obtained earlier for stresses under a centric axial load (Sec. 1.4) and
under a torsional load (Sec. 3.1C). In the first case (Fig. 7.17a), σx =
P∕A, σy = 0, and τxy = 0. The corresponding points X and Y define a
circle of radius R = P∕2A that passes through the origin of coordinates
(Fig. 7.17b). Points D and E yield the orientation of the planes of maxi-
mum shearing stress (Fig. 7.17c), as well as τmax and the corresponding
normal stresses σ′:
τmax = σ′ = R = P
2 A (7.18)
P'
σx = P/A
D
E
C
Y
x
y 	e 	d
X
R
(b)	(a) 	(c)
P	P' 	P
σ x 	τmax
τ
σ
σ'
Fig. 7.17 	(a) Member under centric axial load. (b) Mohr’s circle. (c) Element showing planes of maximum
shearing stress.
In the case of torsion (Fig. 7.18a), σx = σy = 0 and τxy = τmax = Tc∕J.
Therefore, points X and Y are located on the τ axis, and Mohr’s circle has a
radius of R = Tc∕J centered at the origin (Fig. 7.18b). Points A and B define
the principal planes (Fig. 7.18c) and the principal stresses:
σmax, min = ± R = ± Tc
J (7.19)
T'
T
y
x
T'
T
b 	a
Y
X
C	B 	A
R
Tc
J
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
τmax
τmax =
τ
σ
σmax
σmin
Fig. 7.18 	(a) Member under torsional load. (b) Mohr’s circle. (c) Element showing orientation of
principal stresses.

-- 511 of 897 --

7.2 Mohr’s Circle for Plane Stress 	497
Sample Problem 7.2
For the state of plane stress shown determine (a) the principal planes and the
principal stresses, (b) the stress components exerted on the element obtained
by rotating the given element counterclockwise through 30°.
STRATEGY: 	Since the given state of stress represents two points on Mohr’s
circle, you can use these points to generate the circle. The state of stress on
any other plane, including the principal planes, can then be readily determined
through the geometry of the circle.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Construction of Mohr’s Circle (Fig. 1). 	On a face perpendicular to
the x axis, the normal stress is tensile, and the shearing stress tends to rotate
the element clockwise. Thus, X is plotted at a point 100 units to the right of the
vertical axis and 48 units above the horizontal axis. By examining the stress
components on the upper face, point Y(60, −48) is plotted. Join points X and
Y by a straight line to define the center C of Mohr’s circle. The abscissa
of C, which represents σave, and the radius R of the circle, can be measured
directly or calculated as
σave = OC = 1
2 (σ x + σ y) = 1
2 (100 + 60) = 80 MPa
R = √ (CF) 2 + (FX) 2 = √ (20) 2 + (48) 2 = 52 MPa
2
O 	B
X(100, 48)
R
F
C
Y(60, –48)
A 	(MPa)
min =
28 MPa
m =
52 MPa
ave = 80 MPa
p
max = 132 MPa
(MPa)
σ
σ
σ
σ	θ
τ
τ
Fig. 1 	Mohr’s circle for given stress state.
a. Principal Planes and Principal Stresses. 	We rotate the diameter
XY clockwise through 2θp until it coincides with the diameter AB. Thus,
tan 2θp = XF
CF = 48
20 = 2.4 	2θp = 67.4°⤸ 	θp = 33.7°⤸ 	◂
60 MPa
100 MPa
48 MPa
y
x
(continued)

-- 512 of 897 --

498 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
The principal stresses are represented by the abscissas of points A
and B:
σmax = OA = OC + CA = 80 + 52 	σmax = +132 MPa 	◂
σmin = OB = OC − BC = 80 − 52 	σmin = +28 MPa 	◂
Since the rotation that brings XY into AB is clockwise, the rotation that
brings Ox into the axis Oa corresponding to σmax is also clockwise; we
obtain the orientation shown in Fig. 2 for the principal planes.
x	O
a
θp = 33.7°
σmin = 28 MPa
σmax = 132 MPa
Fig. 2 	Orientation of principal stress element.
b. Stress Components on Element Rotated 30°⤴. 	Points X′
and Y′ on Mohr’s circle that correspond to the stress components on the
rotated element are obtained by rotating X Y counterclockwise through
2θ = 60° (Fig. 3). We find
ϕ = 180° − 60° − 67.4° 	ϕ = 52.6° 	◂
σ x′ = OK = OC − KC = 80 − 52 cos 52.6° 	σ x′ = +48.4 MPa 	◂
σy′ = OL = OC + CL = 80 + 52 cos 52.6° 	σy′ = +111.6 MPa 	◂
τ x′y′ = KX′ = 52 sin 52.6° 	τ x′y′ = 	41.3 MPa 	◂
Since X′ is located above the horizontal axis, the shearing stress on the
face perpendicular to O x′ tends to rotate the element clockwise. The
stresses, along with their orientation, are shown in Fig. 4.
x	O
= 30°
y' = 111.6 MPa
x' = 48.4 MPa
x'y' = 41.3 MPa
x'
σ
σ
τ
θ
Fig. 4 	Stress components obtained by rotating
original element 30° counterclockwise.
2 = 60°
O B
K
X
L	C 	A
Y Y'
(MPa)
= 180° – 60° – 67.4°
= 52.6°
2 p = 67.4°
(MPa)
X'	x'
y'
x'y'
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
θ θ
ϕ
Fig. 3 	Mohr’s circle analysis for element
rotation of 30° counterclockwise.

-- 513 of 897 --

7.2 Mohr’s Circle for Plane Stress 	499
Sample Problem 7.3
A state of plane stress consists of a tensile stress σ0 = 8 ksi exerted on
vertical surfaces and of unknown shearing stresses. Determine (a) the
magnitude of the shearing stress τ0 for which the largest normal stress
is 10 ksi, (b) the corresponding maximum shearing stress.
STRATEGY: 	You can use the normal stresses on the given element
to determine the average normal stress, thereby establishing the center
of Mohr’s circle. Knowing that the given maximum normal stress is
also a principal stress, you can use this to complete the construction of
the circle.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Construction of Mohr’s Circle (Fig. 1). 	Assume that the shearing
stresses act in the senses shown. Thus the shearing stress τ0 on a face
perpendicular to the x axis tends to rotate the element clockwise, and point
X of coordinates 8 ksi and τ0 is plotted above the horizontal axis. Consid-
ering a horizontal face of the element, σy = 0 and τ0 tends to rotate the
element counterclockwise. Thus, Y is plotted at a distance τ0 below O.
The abscissa of the center C of Mohr’s circle is
σave = 1
2 (σ x + σ y) = 1
2 (8 + 0) = 4 ksi
The radius R of the circle is found by observing that σmax = 10 ksi and
is represented by the abscissa of point A:
σmax = σave + R
10 ksi = 4 ksi + R 	R = 6 ksi
a. Shearing Stress τ0. 	Considering the right triangle CFX,
cos 2 θp = CF
CX = CF
R = 4 ksi
6 ksi 2 θp = 48.2° ⤸ 	θp = 24.1°⤸
τ0 = FX = R sin 2 θp = (6 ksi) sin 48.2° 	τ0 = 4.47 ksi 	◂
b. Maximum Shearing Stress. 	The coordinates of point D of
Mohr’s circle represent the maximum shearing stress and the corre-
sponding normal stress.
τmax = R = 6 ksi 	τmax = 6 ksi 	◂
2 θs = 90° − 2 θp = 90° − 48.2° = 41.8°⤴ 	θx = 2 0.9°⤴
The maximum shearing stress is exerted on an element that is oriented
as shown in Fig. 2. (The element upon which the principal stresses are
exerted is also shown.)
REFLECT and THINK: 	If our original assumption regarding the
sense of τ0 was reversed, we would obtain the same circle and the
same answers, but the orientation of the elements would be as shown
in Fig. 3.
0 	0 = 8 ksi
0
0
y
x	O
σ	σ
τ
τ
x	O
24.1°
20.9°
0
0
min = 2 ksi
max = 10 ksi
max = 6 ksi
ave = 4 ksi	σ
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
Fig. 3 	Orientation of principal and maximum
shearing stress planes for opposite sense of τ0.
2 p
2
2 ksi
s
(ksi)
min =
4 ksi 	4 ksi
8 ksi
ave =
max = 10 ksi
D
R
C	O
E
Y
F 	A
X
B
0
0
max
(ksi)
σ
σ 	σ
σ
τ
τ
τ
τ
θ
θ
Fig. 1 	Mohr’s circle for given state of stress.
x
d
a
O
s= 20.9°
p= 24.1°
0
0
ave = 4 ksi
max = 6 ksi
min = 2 ksi
max = 10 ksi	σ
σ
σ
σ τ	τ
θ
θ
Fig. 2 	Orientation of principal and maximum
shearing stress planes for assumed sense of τ0.

-- 514 of 897 --

500
7.31 Solve Probs. 7.5 and 7.9, using Mohr’s circle.
7.32 Solve Probs. 7.7 and 7.11, using Mohr’s circle.
7.33 Solve Prob. 7.10, using Mohr’s circle.
7.34 Solve Prob. 7.12, using Mohr’s circle.
7.35 Solve Prob. 7.13, using Mohr’s circle.
7.36 Solve Prob. 7.14, using Mohr’s circle.
7.37 Solve Prob. 7.15, using Mohr’s circle.
7.38 Solve Prob. 7.16, using Mohr’s circle.
7.39 Solve Prob. 7.17, using Mohr’s circle.
7.40 Solve Prob. 7.18, using Mohr’s circle.
7.41 Solve Prob. 7.19, using Mohr’s circle.
7.42 Solve Prob. 7.20, using Mohr’s circle.
7.43 Solve Prob. 7.21, using Mohr’s circle.
7.44 Solve Prob. 7.22, using Mohr’s circle.
7.45 Solve Prob. 7.23, using Mohr’s circle.
7.46 Solve Prob. 7.24, using Mohr’s circle.
7.47 Solve Prob. 7.25, using Mohr’s circle.
7.48 Solve Prob. 7.26, using Mohr’s circle.
7.49 Solve Prob. 7.27, using Mohr’s circle.
7.50 Solve Prob. 7.28, using Mohr’s circle.
7.51 Solve Prob. 7.29, using Mohr’s circle.
7.52 Solve Prob. 7.30, using Mohr’s circle.
7.53 Solve Prob. 7.29, using Mohr’s circle and assuming that the weld
forms an angle of 60° with the horizontal.
Problems

-- 515 of 897 --

501
7.54 and 7.55 	Determine the principal planes and the principal stresses
for the state of plane stress resulting from the superposition of the
two states of stress shown.
14 ksi
12 ksi
8 ksi 8 ksi	+
45°
Fig. P7.54
50 MPa
70 MPa
80 MPa
+ 30°
Fig. P7.55
7.56 and 7.57 	Determine the principal planes and the principal stresses
for the state of plane stress resulting from the superposition of the
two states of stress shown.
30°
30°
σ0
σ0 	σ0
σ0
Fig. P7.56
+
30°
30°
τ0	τ0
Fig. P7.57
7.58 For the element shown, determine the range of values of τxy for
which the maximum tensile stress is equal to or less than 60 MPa.
120 MPa
20 MPa
τ xy
Fig. P7.58 and P7.59
7.59 For the element shown, determine the range of values of τxy for
which the maximum in-plane shearing stress is equal to or less than
150 MPa.

-- 516 of 897 --

502
7.60 For the state of stress shown, determine the range of values of θ for
which the magnitude of the shearing stress τx′y′ is equal to or less
than 40 MPa.
80 MPa
30 MPa
σy'
σ x'
θ
τ x'y'
Fig. P7.60
7.61 For the state of stress shown, determine the range of values of θ for
which the normal stress σx′ is equal to or less than 20 ksi.
18 ksi
12 ksi
θ
σy'
σ x'
τx'y'
Fig. P7.61 and P7.62
7.62 For the state of stress shown, determine the range of values of θ for
which the normal stress σx′ is equal to or less than 10 ksi.
7.63 For the state of stress shown, it is known that the normal and shear-
ing stresses are directed as shown and that σx = 14 ksi, σy = 9 ksi,
and σmin = 5 ksi. Determine (a) the orientation of the principal
planes, (b) the principal stress σmax, (c) the maximum in-plane
shearing stress.
7.64 The Mohr’s circle shown corresponds to the state of stress given
in Fig. 7.5a and b. Noting that σ x′ = OC + (CX′) cos (2θp − 2θ)
and that τ x′y′ = (CX′) sin (2θp − 2θ), derive the expressions for σ x′
and τx′y′ given in Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6), respectively. [Hint: Use
sin (A + B) = sin A cos B + cos A sin B and cos (A + B) =
cos A cos B − sin A sin B.]
7.65 (a) Prove that the expression σ x ′ σ y ′ − τ2
x ′y ′, where σ x ′, σ y ′, and τ x ′y ′
are components of the stress along the rectangular axes x′ and y′, is
independent of the orientation of these axes. Also, show that the
given expression represents the square of the tangent drawn from the
origin of the coordinates to Mohr’s circle. (b) Using the invariance
property established in part a, express the shearing stress τxy in terms
of σx, σy, and the principal stresses σmax and σmin.
σy
σx
τ xy
Fig. P7.63
X'
Y
Y'
O C
X
2θ
2θ p
τ
τ xy
τx'y'
σy
σx
σ
σy'
σx'
Fig. P7.64

-- 517 of 897 --

7.3 General State of Stress 	503
7.3 	GENERAL STATE OF STRESS
In the preceding sections, we have assumed a state of plane stress with
σz = τzx = τzy = 0, and have considered only transformations of stress
associated with a rotation about the z axis. We will now consider the
general state of stress represented in Fig. 7.1a and the transformation of
stress associated with the rotation of axes shown in Fig. 7.1b. Our analy-
sis will be limited to the determination of the normal stress σn on a plane
ABC of arbitrary orientation, as illustrated in Fig. 7.19.
Three of the faces in the tetrahedron shown in Fig. 7.19 are parallel to
the coordinate planes, while the fourth face, ABC, is perpendicular to the line
QN. Denoting the area of face ABC as ΔA and the direction cosines of line
QN as λx, λy, λz, the areas of the faces perpendicular to the x, y, and z axes
are (ΔA)λx, (ΔA)λy, and (ΔA)λz. If the state of stress at point Q is defined by
the stress components σx, σy, σz, τxy, τyz, and τzx, the forces exerted on the
faces parallel to the coordinate planes are obtained by multiplying the appro-
priate stress components by the area of each face (Fig. 7.20). On the other
hand, the forces exerted on face ABC consist of a normal force of magnitude
σn ΔA directed along QN and a shearing force with a magnitude τ ΔA per-
pendicular to QN but of unknown direction. Since QBC, QCA, and QAB face
the negative x, y, and z axes respectively, the forces exerted must be shown
with negative senses.
The sum of the components along QN of all the forces acting on the
tetrahedron is zero. The component along QN of a force parallel to the x axis
is obtained by multiplying the magnitude of that force by the direction cosine λx.
The components of forces parallel to the y and z axes are obtained in a sim-
ilar way. Thus,
ΣF n = 0: 	σnΔA − (σ x ΔA λ x)λ x − (τ xy ΔA λ x)λ y − (τ xz ΔA λ x)λ z
−(τ yx ΔA λ y)λ x − (σ y ΔA λ y)λ y − (τ yz ΔA λ y)λ z
−(τzx ΔA λ z)λ x − (τ zy ΔA λ z)λ y − (σ z ΔA λ z)λ z = 0
Dividing through by ΔA and solving for σn gives
σn = σ x λ2
x + σ y λ2
y + σ zλ2
z + 2τ xy λ x λ y + 2τ yzλ y λ z + 2τ zx λ zλ x 	(7.20)
Note that the equation for the normal stress σn is a quadratic form in
λx, λy, and λz. The coordinate axes are found when the right-hand member of
Eq. (7.20) reduces to the three terms containing the squares of the direction
cosines.† Calling these axes a, b, and c, the corresponding normal stresses σa,
σb, and σc, and the direction cosines of QN with respect to these axes λa, λb,
and λc, gives
σ n = σ aλ2
a + σ b λ2
b + σ c λ2
c 	(7.21)
†In Sec. 9.6A of F. P. Beer and E. R. Johnston, Vector Mechanics for Engineers, 12th ed.,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 2019, a similar quadratic form is found to represent the
moment of inertia of a rigid body with respect to an arbitrary axis. It is shown in Sec. 9.6B
that this form is associated with a quadric surface and reducing the quadratic form to terms
containing only the squares of the direction cosines is equivalent to determining the principal
axes of that surface.
x
z
y
O
C
B
Q
N
A
(ΔA)λz	(ΔA)λx
(ΔA)λy
ΔA
Fig. 7.19 	Stress tetrahedron at point Q with
three faces parallel to the coordinate planes.
x
z
y
O
C
B
Q
N
A
τzy Δ A λ z
τxy Δ A λx
τxz Δ A λx
τyz Δ A λy
τyx Δ A λy
τΔ A
τzx Δ A λz
σx Δ A λx
σy Δ A λ yt
σn Δ A
σz Δ A λz
Fig. 7.20 	Free-body diagram of stress
tetrahedron at point Q.

-- 518 of 897 --

504 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
The coordinate axes a, b, and c are the principal axes of stress. Since
their orientation depends upon the state of stress at Q and thus upon the position
of Q, these axes are represented in Fig. 7.21 as attached to Q. The correspond-
ing coordinate planes are known as the principal planes of stress, and the cor-
responding normal stresses σa, σb, and σc are the principal stresses at Q.†
7.4 	THREE-DIMENSIONAL
ANALYSIS OF STRESS
If the element in Fig. 7.21 is rotated about one of the principal axes at Q, say
the c axis (Fig. 7.22), the corresponding transformation of stress can be ana-
lyzed using Mohr’s circle as if it were a transformation of plane stress. This
is because the shearing stresses exerted on the faces perpendicular to the
c axis remain equal to zero, and the normal stress σc is perpendicular to the
plane ab where the transformation takes place and does not affect this trans-
formation. Therefore, the circle of diameter AB is used to determine the nor-
mal and shearing stresses exerted on the faces of the element as it is rotated
about the c axis (Fig. 7.23). Similarly, circles of diameter BC and CA can be
used to determine the stresses on the element as it is rotated about the a and
b axes, respectively. While this analysis is limited to rotations about the prin-
cipal axes, it could be shown that any other transformation of axes would lead
to stresses represented in Fig. 7.23 by a point located within the shaded area.
†For a discussion of the determination of the principal planes of stress and of the principal
stresses, see S. P. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, 3d ed., McGraw-Hill
Book Company, 1970, Sec. 77.
Q
a
c
b
σc
σc
σa
σa
σb
σb
Fig. 7.21 	General stress element
oriented to principal axes.
b	y
Q
c
x
a
σc
σy σx
τ xy
Fig. 7.22 	Stress element
rotated about c axis.
O
C 	B 	A
τmax
τ
σ
σmin
σmax
Fig. 7.23 	Mohr’s circles for general state
of stress.
Thus the radius of the largest circle yields the maximum value of the shearing
stress at point Q. Noting that the diameter of that circle is equal to the differ-
ence between σmax and σmin,
τmax = 1
2 ∣σmax − σmin∣ 	(7.22)
where σmax and σmin represent the algebraic values of the maximum and min-
imum stresses at point Q.

-- 519 of 897 --

7.4 Three-Dimensional Analysis of Stress 	505
Recall that in plane stress, if the x and y axes are selected, we have
σz = τzx = τzy = 0. This means that the z axis (i.e., the axis perpendicular to the
plane of stress) is one of the three principal axes of stress. In a Mohr’s circle,
this axis corresponds to the origin O, where σ = τ = 0. The other two prin-
cipal axes correspond to points A and B where Mohr’s circle for the xy plane
intersects the σ axis. If A and B are located on opposite sides of the origin O
(Fig. 7.24), the corresponding principal stresses represent the maximum and
minimum normal stresses at point Q, and the maximum shearing stress is
equal to the maximum “in-plane” shearing stress. Recall that in Sec. 7.1B the
planes of maximum shearing stress correspond to points D and E of Mohr’s
circle and are at 45° to the principal planes corresponding to points A and B.
These are shown in the shaded diagonal planes of Fig. 7.25a and b.
However, if A and B are on the same side of O, where σa and σb have
the same sign, the circle defining σmax, σmin, and τmax is not the circle corre-
sponding to a transformation of stress within the xy plane. If σa > σb > 0, as
assumed in Fig. 7.26, σmax = σa, σmin = 0, and τmax is equal to the radius of
the circle defined by points O and A. Thus, τmax = 1
2 σmax . The normals Qd′
and Qe′ to the planes of maximum shearing stress are obtained by rotating
the axis Qa through 45° within the za plane. These planes of maximum shear-
ing stress are shown in the shaded diagonal planes of Fig. 7.27a and b.
Z = O	B
D
E
A
τmax
τ
σ
σmin 	σmax
Fig. 7.24 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles
for state of plane stress where σa > 0 > σb.
Q
a
z
b
(a)
σa
σa
σb
σb
Q
a
z
b
(b)
σa
σa
σb
σb
Fig. 7.25 	In-plane maximum shearing stress
for an element having a principal axis aligned
with the z axis, (a) 45° clockwise from
principal axis a, (b) 45° counterclockwise from
principal axis a.
Z = O 	B 	A
0
=
=
=
D'
E'
D
1
2	
τmax
τ
σmin
σmax 	σ a
σ
σa
Fig. 7.26 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles
for state of plane stress where σa > σb > 0.	Q
a
b
z
45°
Q
a
b
e'
z
(b)	(a)
45°
d'
σ a
σ a
σa
σ a
σ b
σ b 	σ b
σb
Fig. 7.27 	Out-of-plane of maximum shearing stress for plane stress
element, (a) 45° counterclockwise from principal axis a, (b) 45° clockwise
from principal axis a.

-- 520 of 897 --

506 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Concept Application 7.3
For the state of plane stress shown in Fig. 7.28a, determine (a) the three
principal planes and principal stresses, (b) the maximum shearing stress.
a. Principal Planes and Principal Stresses. 	Construct Mohr’s circle
for the transformation of stress in the xy plane (Fig. 7.28b). Point X is plot-
ted 6 units to the right of the τ axis and 3 units above the σ axis (since the
corresponding shearing stress tends to rotate the element clockwise). Point Y
is plotted 3.5 units to the right of the τ axis and 3 units below the σ axis.
Drawing the line XY, the center C of Mohr’s circle is found for the xy plane.
Its abscissa is
σave = σx + σ y
2 = 6 + 3.5
2 = 4.75 ksi
Since the sides of the right triangle CFX are CF = 6 − 4.75 = 1.25 ksi and
FX = 3 ksi, the radius of the circle is
R = CX = √ (1.25) 2 + (3) 2 = 3.25 ksi
The principal stresses in the plane of stress are
σ a = OA = OC + CA = 4.75 + 3.25 = 8.00 ksi
σ b = OB = OC − BC = 4.75 − 3.25 = 1.50 ksi
Since the faces of the element perpendicular to the z axis are free of
stress, they define one of the principal planes, and the corresponding principal
stress is σz = 0. The other two principal planes are defined by points A and
B on Mohr’s circle. The angle θp through which the element should be rotated
about the z axis to bring its faces to coincide with these planes (Fig. 7.28c)
is half the angle ACX.
tan 2θp = FX
CF = 3
1.25
2θp = 67.4° ⤸ 	θp = 33.7° ⤸
b. Maximum Shearing Stress. 	Now draw the circles of diameter OB
and OA that correspond to rotations of the element about the a and b axes
(Fig. 7.28d). Note that the maximum shearing stress is equal to the radius of
the circle of diameter OA. Thus,
τmax = 1
2 σ a = 1
2 (8.00 ksi) = 4.00 ksi
Since points D′ and E′, which define the planes of maximum shearing stress,
are located at the ends of the vertical diameter of the circle corresponding to
a rotation about the b axis, the faces of the element of Fig. 7.28c can be
brought to coincide with the planes of maximum shearing stress through a
rotation of 45° about the b axis.
Q
z
x
y
3.5 ksi
3 ksi
6 ksi
(a)
O 	B
X
F
C
Y
A
3 ksi
3.5 ksi
6 ksi
(b)
σ
τ
τ
b
x
a	z
1.50 ksi
1.50 ksi
8.00 ksi
8.00 ksi
(c)
θp
O 	B 	A
E′
D′
(d)
τ
σ
σa = 8.00 ksi
τmax
Fig. 7.28 	(a) Plane stress element.
(b) Mohr’s circle for stress transformation in
xy plane. (c) Orientation of principal stresses.
(d) Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles.

-- 521 of 897 --

*7.5 Theories of Failure 	507
*7.5 	THEORIES OF FAILURE
*7.5A 	Yield Criteria for Ductile
Materials
Structural elements and machine components made of a ductile material are
usually designed so that the material will not yield under the expected loading
conditions. When the element or component is under uniaxial stress (Fig. 7.29),
the value of the normal stress σx that causes the material to yield is obtained
from a tensile test of the same material, since the test specimen and the struc-
tural element or machine component are in the same state of stress. Thus,
regardless of the actual mechanism that causes the material to yield, the ele-
ment or component will be safe as long as σx < σY, where σY is the yield
strength of the test specimen.
On the other hand, when a structural element or machine component is
in a state of plane stress (Fig. 7.30a), it is convenient to use one of the meth-
ods developed earlier to determine the principal stresses σa and σb at any given
point (Fig. 7.30b). The material can then be considered to be in a state of
biaxial stress at that point. Since this state is different from the state of uni-
axial stress, it is not possible to predict from such a test whether the structural
element or machine component under investigation will fail. Some criterion
regarding the actual mechanism of failure of the material must be established
that will make it possible to compare the effects of both states of stress. The
purpose of this section is to present the two failure criteria most frequently
used for ductile materials, both of which are based on yield characteristics.
Maximum-Shearing-Stress Criterion. 	This criterion is based on the
observation that yield in ductile materials is caused by slippage of the mate-
rial along oblique surfaces and is due primarily to shearing stresses (see
Sec. 2.1B). According to this criterion, a structural component is safe as long
as the maximum value τmax of the shearing stress in that component remains
smaller than the corresponding shearing stress in a test specimen of the same
material as the specimen starts to yield.
Recalling from Sec. 1.3 that the maximum value of the shearing stress
under a centric axial load is equal to half the value of the corresponding
normal stress, we conclude that the maximum shearing stress in a tensile-test
specimen is 1
2 σ Y as the specimen starts to yield. On the other hand, Sec. 7.4
showed, for plane stress, that τmax of the shearing stress is equal to 1
2 ∣σmax ∣ if
the principal stresses are either both positive or both negative and to
1
2 ∣σmax − σmin∣ if the maximum stress is positive and the minimum stress is
negative. Thus, if the principal stresses σa and σb have the same sign, the
maximum-shearing-stress criterion gives
∣σ a∣ < σ Y 	∣σ b∣ < σ Y 	(7.23)
If the principal stresses σa and σb have opposite signs, the maximum-shearing-
stress criterion yields
∣σ a − σ b∣ < σ Y 	(7.24)
These relationships have been represented graphically in Fig. 7.31. Any given
state of stress is represented by a point of coordinates σa and σb, where σa and
σb are the two principal stresses. If this point falls within the area shown, the
structural component is safe. If it falls outside this area, the component fails
O	–σY
–σY
+σ Y
+σY
σ a
σ b
Fig. 7.31 	Tresca’s hexagon for
maximum-shearing-stress criterion.
P	P'
σ x 	σx
Fig. 7.29 	Structural element under uniaxial
stress.
(b)
P
a
b
(a)
P
σ
σ
Fig. 7.30 	Structural element in a
state of plane stress. (a) Stress
element referenced to coordinate
axes. (b) Stress element referenced to
principal axes.

-- 522 of 897 --

508 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
as a result of yield in the material. The hexagon associated with the initiation
of yield is known as Tresca’s hexagon after the French engineer Henri Edouard
Tresca (1814–1885).
Maximum-Distortion-Energy Criterion. 	This criterion is based on
the determination of the distortion energy in a given material. This is the
energy associated with changes in shape in that material (as opposed to the
energy associated with changes in volume in the same material). This criterion
is also known as the von Mises criterion after the German-American applied
mathematician Richard von Mises (1883–1953). Here, a given structural com-
ponent is safe as long as the maximum value of the distortion energy per unit
volume in that material remains smaller than the distortion energy per unit
volume required to cause yield in a tensile-test specimen of the same material.
The distortion energy per unit volume in an isotropic material under plane
stress is
ud = 1
6G (σ2
a − σ aσ b + σ2
b) 	(7.25)
where σa and σb are the principal stresses and G is the modulus of rigidity.
In a tensile-test specimen that is starting to yield, σa = σY, σb = 0, and
(ud)Y = σ Y
2∕6G. Thus, the maximum-distortion-energy criterion indicates that
the structural component is safe as long as ud < (ud)Y, or
σ2
a − σ aσ b + σ2
b < σ2
Y 	(7.26)
where the point of coordinates σa and σb falls within the area shown in
Fig. 7.32. This area is bounded by the ellipse
σ2
a − σ aσ b + σ2
b = σ2
Y 	(7.27)
which intersects the coordinate axes at σ a = ±σ Y and σ b = ±σ Y. The major
axis of the ellipse bisects the first and third quadrants and extends from
A (σa = σb = σY) to B (σa = σb = −σY), while its minor axis extends from
C (σa = −σb = −0.577σY) to D (σa = −σb = 0.577σY).
The maximum-shearing-stress criterion and the maximum-distortion-
energy criterion are compared in Fig. 7.33. The ellipse passes through the
vertices of the hexagon. Thus, for the states of stress represented by these
six points, the two criteria give the same results. For any other state of
stress, the maximum-shearing-stress criterion is more conservative than the
maximum-distortion-energy criterion, since the hexagon is located within
the ellipse.
A state of stress of particular interest is associated with yield in a tor-
sion test. Recall from Fig. 7.18 that, for torsion, σmin = −σmax. Thus the cor-
responding points in Fig. 7.33 are located on the bisector of the second and
fourth quadrants. It follows that yield occurs in a torsion test when
σ a = −σ b = ± 0.5σ Y according to the maximum-shearing-stress criterion and
σ a = −σ b = ±0.577σY according to the maximum-distortion-energy criterion.
But again recalling Fig. 7.18, σa and σb must be equal in magnitude to τmax,
which is obtained from a torsion test for the yield strength τY of the material.
Since the yield strength σY in tension and τY in shear are given for various
ductile materials in Appendix D, the ratio τY∕σY can be determined for these
materials where the range is from 0.55 to 0.60. Thus the maximum-distortion-
energy criterion appears somewhat more accurate than the maximum-shearing-
stress criterion for predicting yield in torsion.
O
A
B
D
C
+σ Y
+σ Y
σb
σ a
–σY
–σY
Fig. 7.32 	Von Mises surface based on
maximum-distortion-energy criterion.
O
A
Torsion
σb
σ a
+σ Y
–σY
–σY
+σ Y
0.5 σY 	0.577σY
Fig. 7.33 	Comparison of Tresca and von
Mises criteria.

-- 523 of 897 --

*7.5 Theories of Failure 	509
*7.5B 	Fracture Criteria for Brittle
Materials Under Plane Stress
When brittle materials are subjected to a tensile test, they fail suddenly through
rupture—or fracture—without prior yielding. When a structural element or
machine component made of a brittle material is under uniaxial tensile stress,
the normal stress that causes it to fail is equal to the ultimate strength σU as
determined from a tensile test, since both the specimen and the element or
component are in the same state of stress. However, when a brittle structural
element or machine component is in a state of plane stress, it is convenient
to determine the principal stresses σa and σb at any given point and then use
one of the criteria presented in this section to predict whether the structural
element or machine component will fail.
Maximum-Normal-Stress Criterion. 	According to this criterion, a
given structural component fails when the maximum normal stress reaches the
ultimate strength σU obtained from the tensile test of a specimen of the same
material. Thus the structural component will be safe as long as the absolute
values of the principal stresses σa and σb are both less than σU:
∣σ a∣ < σ U 	∣σ b∣ < σ U 	(7.28)
The maximum-normal-stress criterion is shown graphically in Fig. 7.34. If the
point obtained by plotting the values σa and σb of the principal stresses falls
within the square area shown, the structural component is safe. If it falls
outside that area, the component will fail.
The maximum-normal-stress criterion is known as Coulomb’s criterion
after the French physicist Charles Augustin de Coulomb (1736–1806). This
criterion suffers from an important shortcoming: It is based on the assump-
tion that the ultimate strength of the material is the same in tension and in
compression. As noted in Sec. 2.1B, this is seldom the case because the
presence of flaws in the material, such as microscopic cracks or cavities,
tends to weaken the material in tension, while not appreciably affecting its
resistance to compressive failure. This criterion also makes no allowance for
effects other than those of the normal stresses on the failure mechanism of
the material.†
–
–
σb
σU
σU	σU
σU
σa
Fig. 7.34 	Coulomb’s surface for
maximum-normal-stress criterion.
†Another failure criterion known as the maximum-normal-strain criterion, or Saint-Venant’s
criterion, was widely used during the 19th century. According to this criterion, a given
structural component is safe as long as the maximum value of the normal strain in that
component remains smaller than the value εU of the strain at which a tensile-test specimen
of the same material will fail. But, as will be shown in Sec. 7.8, the strain is maximum
along one of the principal axes of stress, if the deformation is elastic and the material
homogeneous and isotropic. Thus, denoting by εa and εb the values of the normal strain
along the principal axes in the plane of stress, we write
∣ε a∣ < ε U 	∣ε b∣ < ε U 	(7.29)
Making use of the generalized Hooke’s law (Sec. 2.5), we could express these relations in
terms of the principal stresses σa and σb and the ultimate strength σU of the material. We
would find that, according to the maximum-normal-strain criterion, the structural component
is safe as long as the point obtained by plotting σa and σb falls within the area shown in
Fig. 7.35, where ν is Poisson’s ratio for the given material.
1 +
ν 1 –
ν	σU
σU 	σU
σb
σa	σU	–σ U
–σ U
Fig. 7.35 	Saint-Venant’s surface for
maximum-normal-strain criterion.

-- 524 of 897 --

510 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Mohr’s Criterion. 	Suggested by the German engineer Otto Mohr, this
criterion is used to predict the effect of a given state of plane stress on a
brittle material when the results of various types of tests are available.
Assume that tensile compressive tests have been conducted on a given
material and that σUT and σUC of the ultimate strength in tension and compres-
sion have been determined. The state of stress corresponding to the rupture
of the tensile-test specimen is represented on a Mohr’s circle where the circle
intersects the horizontal axis at O and σUT (Fig. 7.36a). Similarly, the state of
stress corresponding to the failure of the compressive-test specimen is repre-
sented by the circle intersecting the horizontal axis at O and σUC. Clearly, a
state of stress represented by a circle entirely contained in either of these
circles will be safe. Thus, if both principal stresses are positive, the state of
stress is safe as long as σa < σUT and σb < σUT. If both principal stresses are
negative, the state of stress is safe as long as ∣σa∣ < ∣σUC∣ and ∣σb∣ < ∣σUC∣.
Plotting the point of coordinates σa and σb (Fig. 7.36b), the state of stress
is safe as long as that point falls within one of the square areas shown in
that figure.
To analyze σa and σb when they have opposite signs, assume that a
torsion test has been conducted on the material and that its ultimate strength
in shear, τU, has been determined. Drawing the circle centered at O repre-
senting the state of stress corresponding to the failure of the torsion-test
specimen (Fig. 7.37a), observe that any state of stress represented by a
circle entirely contained in that circle is also safe. According to Mohr’s
criterion, a state of stress is safe if it is represented by a circle located
entirely within the area bounded by the envelope of the circles correspond-
ing to the available data. The remaining portions of the principal-stress dia-
gram are obtained by drawing various circles tangent to this envelope,
determining the corresponding values of σa and σb, and plotting the points
of coordinates σa and σb (Fig. 7.37b).
O
(a)
(b)
σUC
σUC
σUC
σUT
σUT
σUT σa
σa
σb 	σb
σb
σa σ
τ
Fig. 7.36 	Mohr’s criterion for brittle
materials having different ultimate
strengths in tension and compression.
(a) Mohr’s circles for uniaxial
compression (left) and tension (right)
tests at rupture. (b) Safe stress states
when σa and σb have the same sign.
Fig. 7.37 	Mohr’s criterion for brittle materials. (a) Mohr’s circles
for uniaxial compression (left), torsion (middle), and uniaxial
tension (right) tests at rupture. (b) Envelope of safe stress states.
O
O
(a)
(b)
τ
τ U
σUT	σUC
σUT
σUT	σUC
σUC
σb
σa
σ

-- 525 of 897 --

*7.5 Theories of Failure 	511
More accurate diagrams can be drawn when test results corresponding
to various states of stress are available. If the only available data consist of
the ultimate strengths σUT and σUC, the envelope in Fig. 7.37a is replaced
by the tangents AB and A′B′ to the circles corresponding to failure in tension
and compression (Fig. 7.38a). From the similar triangles in Fig. 7.38, the
abscissa of the center C of a circle tangent to AB and A′B′ is linearly related
to its radius R. Since σa = OC + R and σb = OC − R, σa and σb are also
related linearly. Thus the shaded area corresponding to this simplified
Mohr’s criterion is bounded by straight lines in the second and fourth quad-
rants (Fig. 7.38b).
To determine whether a structural component is safe under a given load,
the state of stress should be calculated at all critical points of the component
(i.e., where stress concentrations are likely to occur). This can be done by
using the stress-concentration factors given in Figs. 2.52, 3.28, 4.24, and 4.25.
However, there are many instances when the theory of elasticity must be used
to determine the state of stress at a critical point.
Special care should be taken when macroscopic cracks are detected in
a structural component. While it can be assumed that the test specimen used
to determine the ultimate tensile strength of the material contained the same
type of flaws (i.e., microscopic cracks or cavities) as the structural compo-
nent, the specimen was certainly free of any noticeable macroscopic cracks.
When a crack is detected in a structural component, it is necessary to deter-
mine whether that crack will propagate under the expected load and cause
the component to fail or will remain stable. This requires an analysis involv-
ing the energy associated with the growth of the crack. Such an analysis is
beyond the scope of this text and should be carried out using the methods
of fracture mechanics.
Fig. 7.38 	Simplified Mohr’s criterion
for brittle materials. (a) Mohr’s circles for
uniaxial compression (left), torsion (middle),
and uniaxial tension (right) tests at rupture.
(b) Envelope of safe stress states.
C
A
B
R O
B'
A'
(a)
(b)
τ
σ a
σ b σUT
σUC 	σ
σ UT
σ UT	σ UC
σ UC
σ b
σ a

-- 526 of 897 --

512 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Sample Problem 7.4
The state of plane stress shown occurs at a critical point of a steel machine
component. As a result of several tensile tests, the tensile yield strength is
σY = 250 MPa for the grade of steel used. Determine the factor of safety with
respect to yield using (a) the maximum-shearing-stress criterion, (b) the
maximum-distortion-energy criterion.
STRATEGY: 	Draw Mohr’s circle from the given state of plane stress. Ana-
lyzing this circle to obtain the principal stresses and the maximum shearing
stress, you can then apply the maximum-shearing-stress and maximum-
distortion-energy criteria.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Mohr’s Circle. 	We construct Mohr’s circle (Fig. 1) for the given state of
stress and find
σave = OC = 1
2 (σ x + σ y) = 1
2 (80 − 40) = 20 MPa
τ m = R = √ (CF) 2 + (FX) 2 = √ (60) 2 + (25) 2 = 65 MPa
Principal Stresses.
σ a = OC + CA = 20 + 65 = + 85 MPa
σ b = OC − BC = 20 − 65 = − 45 MPa
a. Maximum-Shearing-Stress Criterion. 	Since the tensile strength
is σY = 250 MPa, the corresponding shearing stress at yield is
τ Y = 1
2 σ Y = 1
2 (250 MPa) = 125 MPa
For τ m = 65 MPa, 	F.S. = τY
τ m
= 125 MPa
65 MPa F.S. = 1.92 	◂
y
x
40 MPa
80 MPa
25 MPa
40 MPa
25 MPa
25 MPa
80 MPa
20 MPa
D
Y
B 	O
C
R
F
X
A
m
b 	aσ
σ
σ
τ
τ
Fig. 1 	Mohr’s circle for given stress element.

-- 527 of 897 --

*7.5 Theories of Failure 	513
b. Maximum-Distortion-Energy Criterion. 	Introducing a factor of
safety into Eq. (7.26) gives
σ2
a − σ aσ b + σ2
b = (
σ Y
F.S.)
2
For σa = +85 MPa, σb = −45 MPa, and σY = 250 MPa, we have
(85) 2 − (85)(−45) + (45) 2 = (
250
F.S.)
2
114.3 = 250
F.S. F.S. = 2.19 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	For a ductile material with σY = 250 MPa, we
have drawn the hexagon associated with the maximum-shearing-stress crite-
rion and the ellipse associated with the maximum-distortion-energy criterion
(Fig. 2). The given state of plane stress is represented by point H with coor-
dinates σa = 85 MPa and σb = −45 MPa. The straight line drawn through
points O and H intersects the hexagon at point T and the ellipse at point M.
For each criterion, F.S. is verified by measuring the line segments indicated
and computing their ratios:
(a) F.S. = OT
OH = 1.92 	(b) F.S. = OM
OH = 2.19
85
45
O
T
H
M
Y = 250 MPa
Y = 250 MPa
a
b
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 2 	Tresca and von Mises envelopes
and given stress state (point H).

-- 528 of 897 --

514
Problems
7.66 For the state of plane stress shown, determine the maximum
shearing stress when (a) σx = 0 and σy = 10 ksi, (b) σx = 18 ksi
and σy = 8 ksi. (Hint: Consider both in-plane and out-of-plane
shearing stresses.)
7 ksi
y
z
x
σy
σ x
Fig. P7.66 and P7.67
7.67 For the state of plane stress shown, determine the maximum shear-
ing stress when (a) σx = 5 ksi and σy = 15 ksi, (b) σx = 12 ksi and
σy = 2 ksi. (Hint: Consider both in-plane and out-of-plane shearing
stresses.)
7.68 For the state of stress shown, determine the maximum shearing stress
when (a) σy = 40 MPa, (b) σy = 120 MPa. (Hint: Consider both
in-plane and out-of-plane shearing stresses.)
80 MPa
y
z
x
140 MPa
σy
Fig. P7.68 and P7.69
7.69 For the state of stress shown, determine the maximum shearing stress
when (a) σy = 20 MPa, (b) σy = 140 MPa. (Hint: Consider both
in-plane and out-of-plane shearing stresses.)

-- 529 of 897 --

515
7.70 and 7.71 	For the state of stress shown, determine the maximum shear-
ing stress when (a) σz = +24 MPa, (b) σz = −24 MPa, (c) σz = 0.
36 MPa
30 MPa
σz
z
x
60 MPa
y
Fig. P7.70
36 MPa
42 MPa
σz
z
12 MPa
y
x
Fig. P7.71
x
15 ksi
y
20 ksi
4 ksi
σz
z
Fig. P7.72
x
15 ksi
y
30 ksi
14 ksi
σz
z
Fig. P7.73
7.72 and 7.73 	For the state of stress shown, determine the maximum
shearing stress when (a) σz = 0, (b) σz = +9 ksi, (c) σz = −9 ksi.
7.74 For the state of stress shown, determine the value of τxy for which
the maximum shearing stress is (a) 9 ksi, (b) 12 ksi.
6 ksi
15 ksi
y
z
x
τ xy
Fig. P7.74
70 MPa
120 MPa
y
z
x
τ xy
Fig. P7.75
7.75 For the state of stress shown, determine the value of τxy for which
the maximum shearing stress is 80 MPa.

-- 530 of 897 --

516
7.76 For the state of stress shown, determine two values of σy for which
the maximum shearing stress is 75 MPa.
y
z
x
40 MPa
70 MPa
σ y
Fig. P7.76
σy
y
z
x
6 ksi
10 ksi
Fig. P7.77
z
y
x
72 MPa
48 MPa
σy
Fig. P7.78
σ y = 150 MPa
z
y
x
90 MPa
τ xz
Fig. P7.79
7.77 For the state of stress shown, determine two values of σy for which
the maximum shearing stress is 7.5 ksi.
7.78 For the state of stress shown, determine two values of σy for which
the maximum shearing stress is 64 MPa.
7.79 For the state of stress shown, determine the range of values of τxz for
which the maximum shearing stress is equal to or less than 90 MPa.

-- 531 of 897 --

517
*7.80 For the state of stress of Prob. 7.69, determine (a) the value of σy for
which the maximum shearing stress is as small as possible, (b) the
corresponding value of the shearing stress.
7.81 The state of plane stress shown occurs in a machine component made
of a steel with σY = 325 MPa. Using the maximum-distortion-energy
criterion, determine whether yield will occur when (a) σ0 = 200 MPa,
(b) σ0 = 240 MPa, (c) σ0 = 280 MPa. If yield does not occur, deter-
mine the corresponding factor of safety.
7.82 Solve Prob. 7.81, using the maximum-shearing-stress criterion.
7.83 The state of plane stress shown occurs in a machine component made
of a steel with σY = 36 ksi. Using the maximum-distortion-energy
criterion, determine whether yield will occur when (a) τxy = 15 ksi,
(b) τxy = 18 ksi, (c) τxy = 21 ksi. If yield does not occur, determine
the corresponding factor of safety.
7.84 Solve Prob. 7.83, using the maximum-shearing-stress criterion.
7.85 The 38-mm-diameter shaft AB is made of a grade of steel for which
the yield strength is σY = 250 MPa. Using the maximum-shearing-
stress criterion, determine the magnitude of the torque T for which
yield occurs when P = 240 kN.
12 ksi
3 ksi
τ xy
Fig. P7.83
d = 38 mm
P
T
B
A
Fig. P7.85
1.5 in.
T 	A
B
P
Fig. P7.87
7.86 Solve Prob. 7.85, using the maximum-distortion-energy criterion.
7.87 The 1.5-in.-diameter shaft AB is made of a grade of steel with a
42-ksi tensile yield stress. Using the maximum-shearing-stress crite-
rion, determine the magnitude of the torque T for which yield occurs
when P = 60 kips.
7.88 Solve Prob. 7.87, using the maximum-distortion-energy criterion.
100 MPa
σ0
σ0
Fig. P7.81

-- 532 of 897 --

518
7.89 and 7.90 The state of plane stress shown is expected to occur in
an aluminum casting. Knowing that for the aluminum alloy used
σUT = 80 MPa and σUC = 200 MPa and using Mohr’s criterion,
determine whether rupture of the casting will occur.
100 MPa
60 MPa
10 MPa
Fig. P7.89
75 MPa
32 MPa
Fig. P7.90
7 ksi
8 ksi
Fig. P7.91
9 ksi
15 ksi
2 ksi
Fig. P7.92
8 ksi
τ0
Fig. P7.93
7.91 and 7.92 The state of plane stress shown is expected to occur in
an aluminum casting. Knowing that for the aluminum alloy used
σUT = 10 ksi and σUC = 30 ksi and using Mohr’s criterion, deter-
mine whether rupture of the casting will occur.
7.93 The state of plane stress shown will occur at a critical point in an
aluminum casting that is made of an alloy for which σUT = 10 ksi
and σUC = 25 ksi. Using Mohr’s criterion, determine the shearing
stress τ0 for which failure should be expected.

-- 533 of 897 --

519
80 MPa
τ0
Fig. P7.94
7.94 The state of plane stress shown will occur at a critical point in a
pipe made of an aluminum alloy for which σUT = 75 MPa and
σUC = 150 MPa. Using Mohr’s criterion, determine the shearing
stress τ0 for which failure should be expected.
7.95 The cast-aluminum rod shown is made of an alloy for which
σUT = 70 MPa and σUC = 175 MPa. Knowing that the magnitude
T of the applied torques is slowly increased and using Mohr’s
criterion, determine the shearing stress τ0 that should be expected
at rupture.
T'
T
τ0
Fig. P7.95
26 kN
32 mm
T
A
B
Fig. P7.96
1
2
1
2
1
2
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σ0
σ0
σ0
σ0
σ0
σ0
Fig. P7.97
7.96 The cast-aluminum rod shown is made of an alloy for which
σUT = 60 MPa and σUC = 120 MPa. Using Mohr’s criterion, deter-
mine the magnitude of the torque T for which failure should be
expected.
7.97 A machine component is made of a grade of cast iron for which
σUT = 8 ksi and σUC = 20 ksi. For each of the states of stress shown
and using Mohr’s criterion, determine the normal stress σ0 at which
rupture of the component should be expected.

-- 534 of 897 --

520 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
7.6 	STRESSES IN THIN-WALLED
PRESSURE VESSELS
Thin-walled pressure vessels provide an important application of the analysis
of plane stress. Since their walls offer little resistance to bending, it can be
assumed that the internal forces exerted on a given portion of wall are tangent
to the surface of the vessel (Fig. 7.39). The resulting stresses on an element
of wall will be contained in a plane tangent to the surface of the vessel.
The analysis of stresses considered here is limited to two types of thin-
walled pressure vessels: cylindrical and spherical (Photos 7.3 and 7.4).
Photo 7.3 	Cylindrical pressure vessels for liquid
propane. ©Ingram Publishing
Photo 7.4 	Spherical pressure vessels at a chemical
plant. ©sezer66/Shutterstock
Cylindrical Pressure Vessels. 	Consider a cylindrical vessel with an
inner radius r and a wall thickness t containing a fluid under pressure (Fig. 7.40).
The stresses exerted on a small element of wall with sides respectively paral-
lel and perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder will be determined. Because
of the axisymmetry of the vessel and its contents, no shearing stress is exerted
on the element. The normal stresses σ1 and σ2 shown in Fig. 7.40 are therefore
principal stresses. The stress σ1 is called the hoop stress, because it is the type
of stress found in hoops used to hold together the various slats of a wooden
barrel. Stress σ2 is called the longitudinal stress.
To determine the hoop stress σ1, detach a portion of the vessel and its
contents bounded by the xy plane and by two planes parallel to the yz plane
at a distance Δx from each other (Fig. 7.41). The forces parallel to the z axis
acting on the free body consist of the elementary internal forces σ1 dA on the
wall sections and the elementary pressure forces p dA exerted on the portion
of fluid included in the free body. Note that the gage pressure of the fluid p
is the excess of the inside pressure over the outside atmospheric pressure. The
resultant of the internal forces σ1 dA is equal to the product of σ1 and the
cross-sectional area 2t Δx of the wall, while the resultant of the pressure forces
p dA is equal to the product of p and the area 2r Δx. The equilibrium equation
ΣFz = 0 gives
ΣF z = 0: 	σ1 (2t Δx) − p(2r Δx) = 0
and solving for the hoop stress σ1,
σ1 = pr
t (7.30)
Fig. 7.39 	Assumed stress distribution
in thin-walled pressure vessels.
z
y
x
t
r
σ1
σ1
σ2
σ2
Fig. 7.40 	Pressurized cylindrical vessel.
r
r
x
p dA
t
t
z
y
x
Δ
σ1 dA
σ1 dA
Fig. 7.41 	Free-body diagram to
determine hoop stress in a cylindrical
pressure vessel.

-- 535 of 897 --

7.6 Stresses in Thin-Walled Pressure Vessels 	521
To determine the longitudinal stress σ2, pass a section perpendicular to
the x axis and consider the free body consisting of the portion of the vessel
and its contents located to the left of the section (Fig. 7.42). The forces act-
ing on this free body are the elementary internal forces σ2dA on the wall
section and the elementary pressure forces p dA exerted on the portion of
fluid included in the free body. Noting that the area of the fluid section is
πr2 and that the area of the wall section can be obtained by multiplying the
circumference 2πr of the cylinder by its wall thickness t, the equilibrium
equation is:†
ΣF x = 0: 	σ2 (2πrt) − p(πr2
) = 0
and solving for the longitudinal stress σ2,
σ2 = pr
2 t (7.31)
Note from Eqs. (7.30) and (7.31) that the hoop stress σ1 is twice as large
as the longitudinal stress σ2:
σ1 = 2σ2 	(7.32)
Drawing Mohr’s circle through the points A and B that correspond to
the principal stresses σ1 and σ2 (Fig. 7.43), and recalling that the maximum
in-plane shearing stress is equal to the radius of this circle, we obtain
τmax(in plane) = 1
2 σ2 = pr
4t (7.33)
†Using the mean radius of the wall section, r m = r + 1
2 t, to compute the resultant of the
forces, a more accurate value of the longitudinal stress is
σ2 = pr
2t
1
1 + t
2r
However, for a thin-walled pressure vessel, the term t∕2r is sufficiently small to allow the
use of Eq. (7.31) for engineering design and analysis. If a pressure vessel is not thin walled
(i.e., if t∕2r is not small), the stresses σ1 and σ2 vary across the wall and must be determined
by the methods of the theory of elasticity.
y
z 	x
r
t
p dA
σ2 dA
Fig. 7.42 	Free-body diagram to determine
longitudinal stress.
B
E
A	O
D'
D
E'
1
2
τmax = σ2
τ
σ
σ2
σ2
σ1 = 2σ2
σ2
Fig. 7.43 	Mohr’s circle for element of
cylindrical pressure vessel.

-- 536 of 897 --

522 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
This stress corresponds to points D and E and is exerted on an element
obtained by rotating the original element of Fig. 7.40 through 45° within
the plane tangent to the surface of the vessel. However, the maximum shear-
ing stress in the wall of the vessel is larger. It is equal to the radius of the
circle of diameter OA and corresponds to a rotation of 45° about a longitudi-
nal axis and out of the plane of stress.†
τmax = σ2 = pr
2t (7.34)
Spherical Pressure Vessels. 	Now consider a spherical vessel of inner
radius r and wall thickness t, containing a fluid under a gage pressure p. For
reasons of symmetry, the stresses exerted on the four faces of a small element
of wall must be equal (Fig. 7.44).
σ1 = σ2 	(7.35)
To determine the stress, pass a section through the center C of the vessel and
consider the free body consisting of the portion of the vessel and its contents
located to the left of the section (Fig. 7.45). The equation of equilibrium for
this free body is the same as for the free body of Fig. 7.42. So for a spher-
ical vessel,
σ1 = σ2 = pr
2t (7.36)
Since the principal stresses σ1 and σ2 are equal, Mohr’s circle for trans-
formations of stress within the plane tangent to the surface of the vessel
reduces to a point (Fig. 7.46). The in-plane normal stress is constant, and the
in-plane maximum shearing stress is zero. However, the maximum shearing
stress in the wall of the vessel is not zero; it is equal to the radius of the
circle with the diameter OA and corresponds to a rotation of 45° out of the
plane of stress. Thus,
τmax = 1
2 σ1 = pr
4t (7.37)
†While the third principal stress is zero on the outer surface of the vessel, it is equal to −p
on the inner surface and is represented by a point C(−p, 0) on a Mohr’s circle. Thus, close
to the inside surface of the vessel, the maximum shearing stress is equal to the radius of a
circle of diameter CA, or
τmax = 1
2 (σ1 + p) = pr
2t (1 + t
r)
However, for a thin-walled vessel, t/r is small, and the variation of τmax across the wall sec-
tion can be neglected. This also applies to spherical pressure vessels.
σ2
σ1
σ1
σ2 = σ1
Fig. 7.44 	Pressurized
spherical vessel.
r
x
p dA
t
C
σ2 dA
Fig. 7.45 	Free-body diagram to
determine spherical pressure
vessel stress.
B A
τ
τmax =
O
D'
1
2
σ1 = σ2
σ1
σ
Fig. 7.46 	Mohr’s circle for element of
spherical pressure vessel.

-- 537 of 897 --

7.6 Stresses in Thin-Walled Pressure Vessels 	523
Sample Problem 7.5
A compressed-air tank is supported by two cradles as shown. One of the
cradles is designed so that it does not exert any longitudinal force on the tank.
The cylindrical body of the tank has a 30-in. outer diameter and is made of
a 3
8 -in. steel plate by butt welding along a helix that forms an angle of 25°
with a transverse plane. The end caps are spherical and have a uniform wall
thickness of 5
16 in. For an internal gage pressure of 180 psi, determine (a) the
normal stress and the maximum shearing stress in the spherical caps, (b) the
stresses in directions perpendicular and parallel to the helical weld.
STRATEGY: 	Using the equations for thin-walled pressure vessels, you can
determine the state of plane stress at any point within the spherical end cap
and within the cylindrical body. You can then plot the corresponding Mohr’s
circles and use them to determine the stress components of interest.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Spherical Cap. 	The state of stress within any point in the spherical
cap is shown in Fig. 1. Using Eq. (7.36), we write
p = 180 psi, t = 5
16 in. = 0.3125 in., r = 15 − 0.3125 = 14.688 in.
σ1 = σ2 = pr
2 t = (180 psi)(14.688 in.)
2(0.3125 in.) σ = 4230 psi 	◂
We note that for stresses in a plane tangent to the cap, Mohr’s circle reduces
to a point (A, B) on the horizontal axis, and that all in-plane shearing stresses
are zero (Fig. 2). On the surface of the cap, the third principal stress is zero
and corresponds to point O. On a Mohr’s circle with a diameter of AO, point
D′ represents the maximum shearing stress that occurs on planes at 45° to the
plane tangent to the cap.
τmax = 1
2 (4230 psi) 	τmax = 2115 psi 	◂
8 ft
30 in.
25°
1
2
a
b
σ = 0
σ
σ
Fig. 1 	State of stress at any
point in spherical cap.
1
max
2	= 	= 4230 psi
C 	A, B
O
D'
σ
σ	σ
τ
τ
Fig. 2 	Mohr’s circle for stress
element in spherical cap.
(continued)

-- 538 of 897 --

524 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
b. Cylindrical Body of the Tank. 	The state of stress within any point
in the cylindrical body is as shown in Fig. 3. We determine the hoop stress
σ1 and the longitudinal stress σ2 using Eqs. (7.30) and (7.32). We write
p = 180 psi, t = 3
8 in. = 0.375 in., r = 15 − 0.375 = 14.625 in.
σ1 = pr
t = (180 psi)(14.625 in.)
0.375 in. = 7020 psi 	σ2 = 1
2σ1 = 3510 psi
σave = 1
2 (σ1 + σ2 ) = 5265 psi 	R = 1
2 (σ1 − σ2 ) = 1755 psi
Stresses at the Weld. 	Noting that both the hoop stress and the
longitudinal stress are principal stresses, we draw Mohr’s circle as shown
in Fig. 4.
1 = 7020 psi
ave = 5265 psi
2
w
= 3510 psi
= 1755 psi
X'
2 = 50°
A	C	B	O
R
R 	w
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
τ
τ
θ
Fig. 4 	Mohr’s circle for stress element in
cylindrical body.
An element having a face parallel to the weld is obtained by rotating
the face perpendicular to the axis Ob (Fig. 3) counterclockwise through 25°.
Therefore, on Mohr’s circle (Fig. 4), point X′ corresponds to the stress
components on the weld by rotating radius CB counterclockwise through
2θ = 50°.
σ w = σave − R cos 50° = 5265 − 1755 cos 50° 	σ w = +4140 psi 	◂
τ w = R sin 50° = 1755 sin 50° 	τ w = 1344 psi 	◂
Since X′ is below the horizontal axis, τw tends to rotate the element counter-
clockwise. The stress components on the weld are shown in Fig. 5.
b
1
1
2
2 = 3510 psi
= 7020 psi
a
O
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 3 	State of stress at any point
in cylindrical body.
x'
w = 4140 psi
w = 1344 psi
Weld
σ
τ
Fig. 5 	Stress components
on the weld.

-- 539 of 897 --

525
7.98 A spherical pressure vessel has an outer diameter of 3 m and a
wall thickness of 12 mm. Knowing that for the steel used
σall = 80 MPa, E = 200 GPa, and ν = 0.29, determine (a) the
allowable gage pressure, (b) the corresponding increase in the
diameter of the vessel.
7.99 A spherical gas container having an outer diameter of 15 ft and a wall
thickness of 0.90 in. is made of steel for which E = 29 × 106 psi and
ν = 0.29. Knowing that the gage pressure in the container is increased
from zero to 250 psi, determine (a) the maximum normal stress in
the container, (b) the corresponding increase in the diameter of the
container.
7.100 The maximum gage pressure is known to be 10 MPa in a spherical
steel pressure vessel having a 200-mm outer diameter and a 6-mm
wall thickness. Knowing that the ultimate stress in the steel used is
σU = 400 MPa, determine the factor of safety with respect to tensile
failure.
7.101 A spherical pressure vessel of 1.2-m outer diameter is to be fabri-
cated from a steel having an ultimate stress σU = 450 MPa. Knowing
that a factor of safety of 4.0 is desired and that the gage pressure
can reach 3 MPa, determine the smallest wall thickness that should
be used.
7.102 A spherical gas container made of steel has an 18-ft outer diameter
and a wall thickness of 3
8 in. Knowing that the internal pressure is
60 psi, determine the maximum normal stress and the maximum
shearing stress in the container.
7.103 A basketball has a 300-mm outer diameter and a 3-mm wall thick-
ness. Determine the normal stress in the wall when the basketball is
inflated to a 120-kPa gage pressure.
7.104 The unpressurized cylindrical storage tank shown has a 5-mm wall
thickness and is made of steel having a 400-MPa ultimate strength
in tension. Determine the maximum height h to which it can be filled
with water if a factor of safety of 4.0 is desired. (Density of water =
1000 kg/m3.)
7.105 For the storage tank of Prob. 7.104, determine the maximum normal
stress and the maximum shearing stress in the cylindrical wall when
the tank is filled to capacity (h = 14.5 m).
7.106 Each bulk storage tank shown in Photo 7.3 has an outer diameter of
3.5 m and a wall thickness of 20 mm. At a time when the internal
pressure of a tank is 1.2 MPa, determine the maximum normal stress
and the maximum shearing stress in the tank.
Problems
8 m
14.5 m h
Fig. P7.104

-- 540 of 897 --

526
7.107 A standard-weight steel pipe of 12-in. nominal diameter carries
water under a pressure of 400 psi. (a) Knowing that the outside
diameter is 12.75 in. and the wall thickness is 0.375 in., determine
the maximum tensile stress in the pipe. (b) Solve part a, assuming
an extra-strong pipe is used, of 12.75-in. outside diameter and 0.5-in.
wall thickness.
7.108 A cylindrical storage tank contains liquefied propane under a pres-
sure of 210 psi at a temperature of 100°F. Knowing that the tank
has an outer diameter of 12.6 in. and a wall thickness of 0.11 in.,
determine the maximum normal stress and the maximum shearing
stress in the tank.
7.109 Determine the largest internal pressure that can be applied to a cylin-
drical tank of 1.75-m outer diameter and 16-mm wall thickness if
the ultimate normal stress of the steel used is 450 MPa and a factor
of safety of 5.0 is desired.
7.110 A steel penstock has a 36-in. outer diameter, a 0.5-in. wall thickness,
and connects a reservoir at A with a generating station at B. Know-
ing that the specific weight of water is 62.4 lb/ft3, determine the
maximum normal stress and the maximum shearing stress in the
penstock under static conditions.
A
B
36 in.
500 ft
Fig. P7.110 and P7.111
7.111 A steel penstock has a 36-in. outer diameter and connects a reservoir
at A with a generating station at B. Knowing that the specific weight
of water is 62.4 lb/ft3 and that the allowable normal stress in the
steel is 12.5 ksi, determine the smallest thickness that can be used
for the penstock.
7.112 The cylindrical portion of the compressed-air tank shown is fabri-
cated of 8-mm-thick plate welded along a helix forming an angle
β = 30° with the horizontal. Knowing that the allowable stress nor-
mal to the weld is 75 MPa, determine the largest gage pressure that
can be used in the tank.
7.113 For the compressed-air tank of Prob. 7.112, determine the gage pres-
sure that will cause a shearing stress parallel to the weld of 30 MPa.
600 mm
1.8 m
β
Fig. P7.112

-- 541 of 897 --

527
7.114 The steel pressure tank shown has a 30-in. inner diameter and a
0.375-in. wall thickness. Knowing that the butt-welded seams form
an angle β = 50° with the longitudinal axis of the tank and that the
gage pressure in the tank is 200 psi, determine (a) the normal stress
perpendicular to the weld, (b) the shearing stress parallel to the weld.
β
Fig. P7.114 and P7.115
7.115 The pressurized tank shown was fabricated by welding strips of plate
along a helix forming an angle β with a transverse plane. Determine
the largest value of β that can be used if the normal stress perpen-
dicular to the weld is not to be larger than 85% of the maximum
stress in the tank.
7.116 Square plates, each of 16-mm thickness, can be bent and welded
together in either of the two ways shown to form the cylindrical
portion of a compressed-air tank. Knowing that the allowable normal
stress perpendicular to the weld is 65 MPa, determine the largest
allowable gage pressure in each case.
7.117 The pressure tank shown has a 0.375-in. wall thickness and butt-
welded seams forming an angle β = 20° with a transverse plane. For
a gage pressure of 85 psi, determine (a) the normal stress perpen-
dicular to the weld, (b) the shearing stress parallel to the weld.
7.118 For the tank of Prob. 7.117, determine the largest allowable gage
pressure, knowing that the allowable normal stress perpendicular to
the weld is 18 ksi and the allowable shearing stress parallel to the
weld is 10 ksi.
7.119 For the tank of Prob. 7.117, determine the range of values of β that
can be used if the shearing stress parallel to the weld is not to exceed
1350 psi when the gage pressure is 85 psi.
7.120 A pressure vessel of 250-mm inner diameter and 6-mm wall thick-
ness is fabricated from a 1.2-m section of spirally welded pipe AB
and is equipped with two rigid end plates. The gage pressure inside
the vessel is 2 MPa, and 45-kN centric axial forces P and P′ are
applied to the end plates. Determine (a) the normal stress perpen-
dicular to the weld, (b) the shearing stress parallel to the weld.
3 m
1.6 m
β
Fig. P7.117
1.2 m
P
P'
35° B
A
Fig. P7.120
Fig. P7.116
8 m
5 m 	5 m
45°
(a) 	(b)
7.121 Solve Prob. 7.120, assuming that the magnitude P of the two forces
is increased to 120 kN.

-- 542 of 897 --

528
7.122 A torque of magnitude T = 12 kN·m is applied to the end of a tank
containing compressed air under a pressure of 8 MPa. Knowing that
the tank has a 180-mm inner diameter and a 12-mm wall thickness,
determine the maximum normal stress and the maximum shearing
stress in the tank.
7.123 The tank shown has a 180-mm inner diameter and a 12-mm wall
thickness. Knowing that the tank contains compressed air under a
pressure of 8 MPa, determine the magnitude T of the applied torque
for which the maximum normal stress is 75 MPa.
7.124 The cylindrical tank AB has an 8-in. inner diameter and a 0.32-in.
wall thickness. It is fitted with a collar by which a 9-kip force is
applied at D in the horizontal direction. Knowing that the gage pres-
sure inside the tank is 600 psi, determine the maximum normal stress
and the maximum shearing stress at point K.
7.125 Solve Prob. 7.124, assuming that the 9-kip force applied at point D
is directed vertically downward.
7.126 A brass ring of 5-in. outer diameter and 0.25-in. thickness fits exactly
inside a steel ring of 5-in. inner diameter and 0.125-in. thickness
when the temperature of both rings is 50°F. Knowing that the tem-
perature of both rings is then raised to 125°F, determine (a) the
tensile stress in the steel ring, (b) the corresponding pressure exerted
by the brass ring on the steel ring.
D
15 in.
10 in.
9 kips
B	K
A
Fig. P7.124
STEEL
ts =
E s = 29 × 10 6 psi
a s = 6.5 × 10 –6/°F
in.
	1
8
BRASS
tb =
E b = 15 × 106 psi
as = 11.6 × 10–6/°F
in.
	1
4
1.5 in.
5 in.
αs
αb
Fig. P7.126
7.127 Solve Prob. 7.126, assuming that the brass ring is 0.125 in. thick and
the steel ring is 0.25 in. thick.
T
Fig. P7.122 and P7.123

-- 543 of 897 --

*7.7 Transformation of Plane Strain 	529
*7.7 	TRANSFORMATION OF
PLANE STRAIN
*7.7A 	Transformation Equations
Transformations of strain under a rotation of the coordinate axes will now be
considered. Our analysis will first be limited to states of plane strain. These
are situations where all of the deformations of the material take place within
parallel planes and the resulting state of strain is the same in each of these
planes. If the z axis is chosen perpendicular to the planes in which the defor-
mations take place, εz = γzx = γzy = 0, and the only remaining strain compo-
nents are εx, εy, and γxy. This occurs in a plate subjected to uniformly
distributed loads along its edges and restrained from expanding or contracting
laterally by smooth, rigid, and fixed supports (Fig. 7.47). It is also found in
a bar of infinite length subjected to uniformly distributed loads on its sides,
because by reason of symmetry, the elements located in a transverse plane
cannot move out of that plane. This idealized model shows that a long bar
subjected to uniformly distributed transverse loads (Fig. 7.48) is in a state of
plane strain in any given transverse section that is not located too close to
either end of the bar.†
†A state of plane strain and a state of plane stress do not occur simultaneously, except for
ideal materials with a Poisson’s ratio equal to zero. The constraints placed on the elements
of the plate of Fig. 7.47 and of the bar of Fig. 7.48 result in a stress σz different from zero.
On the other hand, in the case of the plate of Fig. 7.3, the absence of any lateral restraint
results in σz = 0 and εz ≠ 0.
Fixed support
Fixed support
y
z 	x
Fig. 7.47 	Plane strain example: laterally
restrained by fixed supports.
y
z x
Fig. 7.48 	Plane strain example: bar of
infinite length in z direction.
Assume that a state of plane strain exists at point Q (with εz = γzx =
γzy = 0) and that it is defined by the strain components εz, εy, and γxy associ-
ated with the x and y axes. Recalling Secs. 2.5 and 2.7, a square element of
center Q with sides of a length Δs and parallel to the x and y axes is deformed
into a parallelogram where the sides are now equal to Δs (1 + εx) and Δs (1 + εy),
forming angles of π
2 − γ xy and π
2 + γ xy with each other (Fig. 7.49). As a result
of the deformations of the other elements located in the xy plane, the element
can also undergo a rigid-body motion, but such a motion is irrelevant to the
strains at point Q and will be ignored in this analysis. Our goal now is to
determine in terms of εx, εy, γxy, and θ the strain components ε x′, ε y′, and γ x′y′
associated with the frame of reference x′y′ obtained by rotating the x and y
axes through angle θ. As shown in Fig. 7.50, these new strain components
define the parallelogram into which a square with sides parallel to the x′ and
y′ axes is deformed.
Q Q
Δs
Δs
Δs (1 + ε y)
Δs (1 + εx)
y
x	O
y
x	O
–	2 	+	γxy
π 2
π 	γxy
Fig. 7.49 	Plane strain element: undeformed
and deformed.
Q
Q
Δs
Δs
Δs (1 + ε y')
Δs (1 + ε x')
y
x	O 	x	O
–
+
y' 	y'
x'
x'
θ
θ 	θ
γx'y'
γ x'y'	2
π
2
π
Fig. 7.50 	Transformation of plane strain
element in undeformed and deformed
orientations.

-- 544 of 897 --

530 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
To begin, we will derive the normal strain ε(θ) along a line AB that
forms an arbitrary angle θ with the x axis. This strain is determined by using
the right triangle ABC, which has AB for hypothenuse (Fig. 7.51a), and the
oblique triangle A′B′C′ into which triangle ABC is deformed (Fig. 7.51b).
With the length of AB denoted as Δs, the length of A′B′ is Δs [1 + ε(θ)].
Similarly, using Δx and Δy as the lengths of sides AC and CB, the lengths
of A′C′ and C′B′ are Δx (1 + εx) and Δy (1 + εy), respectively. Recall from
Fig. 7.49 that the right angle at C in Fig. 7.51a deforms into an angle equal
to π
2 + γ xy in Fig. 7.51b, and apply the law of cosines to triangle A′B′C′ to
obtain
(A′B′) 2 = (A′C′) 2 + (C′B′) 2 − 2(A′C′)(C′B′) cos (
π
2 + γ xy)
(Δs) 2 [1 + ε(θ)] 2 = (Δx) 2 (1 + ε x) 2 + (Δy) 2 (1 + ε y) 2
−2(Δx)(1 + εx)(Δy)(1 + ε y) cos (
π
2 + γ xy) (7.38)
But from Fig. 7.51a,
Δx = (Δs) cos θ 	Δy = (Δs) sin θ 	(7.39)
and since γxy is very small,
cos (
π
2 + γ xy) = −sin γ xy ≈ −γ xy 	(7.40)
Substituting from Eqs. (7.39) and (7.40) into Eq. (7.38), recalling that cos2 θ
+ sin2 θ = 1, and neglecting second-order terms in ε(θ), εx, εy, and γxy gives
ε(θ) = ε x cos 2 θ + ε y sin2 θ + γ xy sin θ cos θ 	(7.41)
Equation (7.41) enables us to determine the normal strain ε(θ) in any
direction AB in terms of the strain components εx, εy, γxy, and the angle θ that
AB forms with the x axis. We check that for θ = 0, Eq. (7.41) yields ε(0) =
εx and for θ = 90°, it yields ε(90°) = εy. On the other hand, making θ = 45°
in Eq. (7.41), we obtain the normal strain in the direction of the bisector OB
of the angle formed by the x and y axes (Fig. 7.52). Denoting this strain by
εOB, we write
εOB = ε(45°) = 1
2 (ε x + ε y + γ xy) 	(7.42)
Solving Eq. (7.42) for γxy,
γxy = 2ε OB − (ε x + ε y) 	(7.43)
This relationship makes it possible to express the shearing strain associated
with a given pair of rectangular axes in terms of the normal strains measured
along these axes and their bisector. It plays a fundamental role in the present
derivation and will also be used in Sec. 7.9 for the experimental determination
of shearing strains.
The main purpose of this section is to express the strain components
associated with the frame of reference x′y′ of Fig. 7.50 in terms of the angle
θ and the strain components εx, εy, and γxy associated with the x and y axes.
Thus, we first note that the normal strain ε x′ along the x′ axis can be expressed
Δs
Δs [1 + ε(θ)]
Δx (1 + ε x)
Δx
Δy
Δy (1 + 	)
y
A
B
C
x	O
+
(a)
y
A'
B'
C'
x	O
(b)
θ
εy
γxy	2
π
Fig. 7.51 	Evaluating strain along line
AB. (a) Undeformed; (b) deformed.
O
y
x
B
45°
45°
Fig. 7.52 	Bisector OB.

-- 545 of 897 --

*7.7 Transformation of Plane Strain 	531
using Eq. (7.41). Then, using the trigonometric relationships in Eqs. (7.3) and
(7.4), the alternative form of Eq. (7.41) is
εx′ = εx + ε y
2 + εx − ε y
2 cos 2θ + γxy
2 sin 2θ 	(7.44)
The normal strain along the y′ axis is obtained by replacing θ with θ + 90°.
Since cos (2θ + 180°) = −cos 2θ and sin (2θ + 180°) = −sin 2θ,
εy′ = εx + ε y
2 − εx − ε y
2 cos 2θ − γxy
2 sin 2θ 	(7.45)
Adding Eqs. (7.44) and (7.45) member to member gives
εx′ + ε y′ = ε x + ε y 	(7.46)
Since εz = εz′ = 0, the sum of the normal strains associated with a cubic ele-
ment of material is independent of the orientation of that element in plane
strain.†
Replacing θ by θ + 45° in Eq. (7.44), an expression is obtained for the
normal strain along the bisector OB′ of the angle formed by the x′ and y′
axes. Since cos (2θ + 90°) = −sin 2θ and sin (2θ + 90°) = cos 2θ,
εOB′ = εx + ε y
2 − εx − ε y
2 sin 2θ + γxy
2 cos 2θ 	(7.47)
Writing Eq. (7.43) with respect to the x′ and y′ axes, the shearing strain γx′y′
is expressed in terms of the normal strains measured along the x′ and y′ axes
and the bisector OB′:
γ x′y′ = 2ε OB′ − (ε x′ + ε y′ ) 	(7.48)
Substituting from Eqs. (7.46) and (7.47) into Eq. (7.48) gives
γ x′y′ = −(ε x − ε y) sin 2θ + γ xy cos 2θ 	(7.49a)
Equations (7.44), (7.45), and (7.49a) are the desired equations defining
the transformation of plane strain under a rotation of axes in the plane of
strain. Dividing all terms in Eq. (7.49a) by 2, the alternative form is
γx′y′
2 = − εx − ε y
2 sin 2θ + γxy
2 cos 2θ 	(7.49b)
Observe that Eqs. (7.44), (7.45), and (7.49b) for the transformation of plane
strain closely resemble those for the transformation of plane stress (Sec 7.1).
While the former can be obtained from the latter by replacing the normal
stresses by the corresponding normal strains, it should be noted that the shear-
ing stresses τxy and τx′y′ should be replaced by half of the corresponding
shearing strains (i.e., by 1
2 γ xy and 1
2 γ x′y′).
†Cf. first footnote in Sect. 2.6.

-- 546 of 897 --

532 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
*7.7B 	Mohr’s Circle for Plane Strain
Since, as demonstrated in the previous section, the equations for the transfor-
mation of plane strain are of the same form as those for plane stress, Mohr’s
circle can also be used for analysis of plane strain. Given the strain compo-
nents εx, εy, and γxy defining the deformation in Fig. 7.49, point X(ε x,− 1
2 γ xy)
of abscissa equal to the normal strain εx and of ordinate equal to minus half
the shearing strain γxy, and point Y(ε y, + 1
2 γ xy) are plotted (Fig. 7.53). Draw-
ing the diameter XY, the center C of Mohr’s circle for plane strain is defined.
The abscissa of C and the radius R of the circle are
εave = εx + ε y
2 and 	R = √ (
ε x − ε y
2 	)
2
+ (
γ xy
2 )
2
(7.50)
If γxy is positive, as assumed in Fig. 7.49, points X and Y are plotted
below and above the horizontal axis in Fig. 7.53. But in the absence of any
overall rigid-body rotation, the side of the element in Fig. 7.49 that is associ-
ated with εx rotates counterclockwise, while the side associated with εy rotates
clockwise. Thus, if the shear deformation causes a given side to rotate clock-
wise, the corresponding point on Mohr’s circle for plane strain is plotted above
the horizontal axis, and if the deformation causes the side to rotate counter-
clockwise, the corresponding point is plotted below the horizontal axis. This
convention matches the convention used to draw Mohr’s circle for plane stress.
Points A and B where Mohr’s circle intersects the horizontal axis cor-
respond to the principal strains εmax and εmin (Fig. 7.54a). Thus,
εmax = εave + R 	and 	εmin = εave − R 	(7.51)
where εave and R are defined by Eqs. (7.50). The corresponding value θp of
angle θ is obtained by observing that the shearing strain is zero for A and B.
Setting γ x′y′ = 0 in Eq. (7.49a),
tan 2θp = γxy
ε x − ε y
(7.52)
The corresponding axes a and b in Fig. 7.54b are the principal axes of strain.
Angle θp, which defines the direction of the principal axis Oa in Fig. 7.54b
corresponding to point A in Fig. 7.54a, is equal to half of the angle XCA
( 	)	Y
C	O
xy	+ 2
1
( 	)	X 	– 2
1
1
2 γ
1
2 γ
γ
ε
εy ,
xy	γ	εx ,
Fig. 7.53 	Mohr’s circle for plane strain.
C	O
max (in plane)	2
1
X
2θp A	B
Y
D
E
1
2
(a)
ε
εmin
εave
εmax
γ
γ
Δs (1 + εmin)
Δs (1 + εmax )
Δs
θp
θp
b
a
y
x
(b)
O
Fig. 7.54 	(a) Mohr’s circle for plane strain, showing principal strains and maximum
in-plane shearing strain. (b) Strain element oriented to principal directions.

-- 547 of 897 --

*7.7 Transformation of Plane Strain 	533
measured on Mohr’s circle, and the rotation that brings Ox into Oa has the
same sense as the rotation that brings the diameter XY of Mohr’s circle into
the diameter AB.
Recall from Sec. 2.7 that in the elastic deformation of a homogeneous,
isotropic material, Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain applies and
yields τxy = Gγxy for any pair of rectangular x and y axes. Thus, γxy = 0
when τxy = 0, which indicates that the principal axes of strain coincide with
the principal axes of stress.
The maximum in-plane shearing strain is defined by points D and E in
Fig. 7.54a. This is equal to the diameter of Mohr’s circle. From the second
of Eqs. (7.50),
γmax (in plane) = 2R = √ (ε x − ε y) 2 + γ2
xy 	(7.53)
Finally, points X′ and Y′, which define the components of strain cor-
responding to a rotation of the coordinate axes through an angle θ (Fig. 7.50),
are obtained by rotating the diameter XY of Mohr’s circle in the same sense
through an angle 2θ (Fig. 7.55).
Q
Q
Δs
Δs
Δs (1 + ε y')
Δs (1 + ε x')
y
x	O 	x	O
–
+
y' 	y'
x'
x'
θ
θ 	θ
γx'y'
γ x'y'	2
π
2
π
Fig. 7.50 	(repeated) Transformation of plane
strain element in undeformed and deformed
orientations.
C	O
X 2θ
Y
Y'
X'
1
2 γ
ε
Fig. 7.55 	Strains on arbitrary planes X′ and Y′
referenced to original planes X and Y on Mohr’s circle.
Concept Application 7.4
For a material in a state of plane strain, it is found that the horizontal side of
a 10 × 10-mm square elongates by 4 μm, its vertical side remains unchanged,
and the angle at the lower-left corner increases by 0.4 × 10−3 rad (Fig. 7.56a).
Determine (a) the principal axes and principal strains, (b) the maximum shear-
ing strain and the corresponding normal strain.
a. Principal Axes and Principal Strains. 	Determine the coordinates of
points X and Y on Mohr’s circle for strain.
ε x = +4 × 10−6 m
10 × 103 m = +400 μ 	εy = 0 	∣ γxy
2 ∣ = 200 μ
Since the side of the square associated with εx rotates clockwise, point X of
coordinates εx and ∣γxy∕2∣ is plotted above the horizontal axis. Since εy = 0
and the corresponding side rotates counterclockwise, point Y is plotted directly
(continued)
+ 0.4 × 10–3 rad	2
10 mm
10 mm 10 mm + 4 μm x	x
y	y
(a)
π
Fig. 7.56 	Analysis of plane strain state.
(a) Strain element: undeformed and
deformed.

-- 548 of 897 --

534 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
*7.8 	THREE-DIMENSIONAL
ANALYSIS OF STRAIN
We saw in Sec. 7.3 that, in the most general case of stress, we can deter-
mine three coordinate axes a, b, and c, called the principal axes of stress.
A small cubic element with faces perpendicular to these axes is free of
shearing stresses (Fig. 7.21), as τab = τbc = τca = 0. Hooke’s law for shear-
ing stress and strain applies when the deformation is elastic and the mate-
rial homogeneous and isotropic. Thus, γab = γbc = γca = 0, so the axes a,
b, and c are also principal axes of strain. A small cube with sides equal to
unity, centered at Q, and with faces perpendicular to the principal axes is
below the origin (Fig. 7.56b). Drawing the diameter XY, determine the center
C of Mohr’s circle and its radius R.
OC = εx + ε y
2 = 200 μ 	OY = 200 μ
R = √ (OC) 2 + (OY) 2 = √ (200 μ) 2 + (200 μ) 2 = 283 μ
The principal strains are defined by the abscissas of points A and B.
ε a = OA = OC + R = 200 μ + 283 μ = 483 μ
ε b = OB = OC − R = 200 μ − 283 μ = −83 μ
The principal axes Oa and Ob are shown in Fig. 7.56c. Since OC = OY, the
angle at C in triangle OCY is 45°. Thus the angle 2θp that brings XY into AB
is 45°⤸ and angle θp bringing Ox into Oa is 22.5°⤸.
b. Maximum Shearing Strain. 	Points D and E define the maximum
in-plane shearing strain which, since the principal strains have opposite signs,
is also the actual maximum shearing strain (see Sec. 7.8).
γmax
2 = R = 283 μ 	γmax = 566 μ
The corresponding normal strains are both equal to
ε′ = OC = 200 μ
The axes of maximum shearing strain are shown in Fig. 7.56d.
X(400, 200)
Y(0, – 200)
C	O
2θp
A	B
D
E
1
2
(b)
γ (μ)
ε(μ)
O
y
x
b
a
(c)
θp = 22.5°
O
22.5°
y
d
e
x
(d)
Fig. 7.56 	(cont.) (b) Mohr’s circle for given plane strain element. (c) Undeformed and
deformed principal strain elements. (d) Undeformed and deformed maximum shearing
strain elements.
Q
a
c
b
σc
σc
σa
σa
σb
σb
Fig. 7.21 	(repeated) General stress
element oriented to principal axes.

-- 549 of 897 --

*7.8 Three-Dimensional Analysis of Strain 	535
If the element of Fig. 7.57 is rotated about one of the principal axes at
Q, say the c axis (Fig. 7.58), the method of analysis for the transformation of
plane strain also can be used to determine the strain components εx, εy, and
γxy associated with the faces perpendicular to the c axis, since this method did
not involve any of the other strain components.† Therefore, Mohr’s circle is
drawn through the points A and B corresponding to the principal axes a and
b (Fig. 7.59). Similarly, circles of diameters BC and CA are used to analyze
the transformation of strain as the element is rotated about the a and b axes,
respectively.
Q
c
a
b
1 + ε b
1 + ε c
1 + εa
Fig. 7.57 	Strain element oriented
to directions of principal axes.
z = c
Q
a
b
y 	x	1 + ε y
1 + ε c
1 + εx
2 + γxy
π
Fig. 7.58 	Strain element having one axis
coincident with a principal strain axis.
deformed into a rectangular parallelepiped with sides 1 + εa, 1 + εb, and
1 + εc (Fig. 7.57).
†The other four faces of the element remain rectangular, and the edges parallel to the c axis
remain unchanged.
O 	C 	B 	A
1
2
1
2
εmin
εmax
γ
γmax
ε
Fig. 7.59 	Mohr’s circle for three-dimensional
analysis of strain.
The three-dimensional analysis of strain using Mohr’s circle is limited
here to rotations about principal axes (as for the analysis of stress) and is used
to determine the maximum shearing strain γmax at point Q. Since γmax is equal
to the diameter of the largest of the three circles shown in Fig. 7.59,
γmax = ∣εmax − εmin∣ 	(7.54)

-- 550 of 897 --

536 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
where εmax and εmin represent the algebraic values of the maximum and min-
imum strains at point Q.
Returning to the particular case of plane strain, and selecting the x
and y axes in the plane of strain, we have εz = γzx = γzy = 0. Thus the
z axis is one of the three principal axes at Q, and the corresponding point
in the Mohr’s circle diagram is the origin O, where ε = γ = 0. If points
A and B defining the principal axes within the plane of strain fall on
opposite sides of O (Fig. 7.60a), the corresponding principal strains rep-
resent the maximum and minimum normal strains at point Q, and the
maximum shearing strain is equal to the maximum in-plane shearing strain
corresponding to points D and E. However, if A and B are on the same
side of O (Fig. 7.60b), so that εa and εb have the same sign, the maximum
shearing strain is defined by points D′ and E′ on the circle of diameter
OA, and γmax = εmax.
Now consider the particular case of plane stress encountered in a thin
plate or on the free surface of a structural element or machine component.
Selecting the x and y axes in the plane of stress, σz = τzx = τzy = 0, and the
z axis is a principal axis of stress. If the deformation is elastic and the mate-
rial is homogeneous and isotropic, Hooke’s law shows that γzx = γzy = 0. Thus,
the z axis is also a principal axis of strain, and Mohr’s circle can be used to
analyze the transformation of strain in the xy plane. However, as we shall see
presently, Hooke’s law does not show that εz = 0; indeed, a state of plane
stress does not, in general, result in a state of plane strain.
Using a and b as the principal axes within the plane of stress and c
as the principal axis perpendicular to that plane, we let σx = σa, σy = σb,
and σz = 0 in Eqs. (2.20) for the generalized Hooke’s law (Sec. 2.5), and
obtain
ε a = σa
E − νσb
E (7.55)
ε b = − νσa
E + σb
E (7.56)
ε c = − ν
E (σ a + σ b) 	(7.57)
Adding Eqs. (7.55) and (7.56) member to member gives
εa + ε b = 1 − ν
E (σ a + σ b) 	(7.58)
Solving Eq. (7.58) for σa + σb and substituting into Eq. (7.57), we write
εc = − ν
1 − ν (ε a + ε b) 	(7.59)
The relationship obtained defines the third principal strain in terms of the
in-plane principal strains. If B is located between A and C on the Mohr’s
circle diagram (Fig. 7.61), the maximum shearing strain is equal to the diam-
eter CA of the circle corresponding to a rotation about the b axis, out of the
plane of stress.
Z = O	B
D
E
A
1
2
1
2
(a)
Z = O 	B
E
D
D'
E'
A
(b)
γ
1
2 γ
γmax
1
2 γmax
ε
ε
εmin 	εmax
εmin = 0
εmax = εa
Fig. 7.60 	Possible configurations of
Mohr’s circle for plane strain. (a) Principal
strains having mixed signs. (b) Principal
strains having positive signs.
O	C 	B
E
D
D'
E'
A
1
2
1
2
ε
γ
γmax
Fig. 7.61 	Mohr’s circle strain analysis
for plane stress.

-- 551 of 897 --

*7.8 Three-Dimensional Analysis of Strain 	537
Concept Application 7.5
As a result of measurements made on the surface of a machine component
with strain gages oriented in various ways, it has been established that
the principal strains on the free surface are εa = +400 × 10−6 in./in. and
εb = −50 × 10−6 in./in. Knowing that Poisson’s ratio for the given material
is ν = 0.30, determine (a) the maximum in-plane shearing strain, (b) the true
value of the maximum shearing strain near the surface of the component.
a. Maximum In-Plane Shearing Strain. 	Draw Mohr’s circle through
points A and B corresponding to the given principal strains (Fig. 7.62a). The
maximum in-plane shearing strain is defined by points D and E and is equal
to the diameter of Mohr’s circle:
γmax (in plane) = 400 × 10−6 + 50 × 10−6 = 450 × 10−6 rad
b. Maximum Shearing Strain. 	Determine the third principal strain εc.
Since a state of plane stress is on the surface of the machine component,
Eq. (7.59) gives
ε c = − ν
1 − ν (ε a + ε b)
= − 0.30
0.70 (400 × 10−6 − 50 × 10−6 ) = −150 × 10−6 in./in.
Draw Mohr’s circles through A and C and through B and C (Fig. 7.62b),
and find that the maximum shearing strain is equal to the diameter of the
circle CA:
γmax = 400 × 10−6 + 150 × 10−6 = 550 × 10−6 rad
Note that even though εa and εb have opposite signs, the maximum in-
plane shearing strain does not represent the true maximum shearing
strain.
O
B
450
+400	–50
(10–6 rad)
E
D
A
1
2
1
2
(a)
γ
γ max (in plane)
ε (10–6 in./in.) 	B
D′
E′
A	O	C
max
1
2
+400	–150
550
(10–6 rad)	1
2
(b)
γ
γ
ε (10–6 in./in.)
Fig. 7.62 	Using Mohr’s circle to determine maximum shearing strain. (a) Mohr’s circle for the plane of the given strains.
(b) Three-dimensional Mohr’s circle for strain.

-- 552 of 897 --

538 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
*7.9 	MEASUREMENTS OF STRAIN;
STRAIN ROSETTE
The normal strain can be determined in any given direction on the surface
of a structural element or machine component by scribing two gage marks A
and B across a line drawn in the desired direction and measuring the length
of the segment AB before and after the load has been applied. If L is the
undeformed length of AB and δ its deformation, the normal strain along AB
is εAB = δ∕L.
A more convenient and accurate method for measuring normal strains
is provided by electrical strain gages. A typical electrical strain gage consists
of a length of thin wire arranged as shown in Fig. 7.63 and cemented to two
pieces of paper. To measure the strain εAB of a given material in the direction
AB, the gage is cemented to the surface of the material with the wire folds
running parallel to AB. As the material elongates, the wire increases in length
and decreases in diameter, causing the electrical resistance of the gage to
increase. By measuring the current passing through a properly calibrated gage,
the strain εAB can be determined accurately and continuously as the load is
increased.
The strain components εx and εy can be determined at a given point of
the free surface of a material by simply measuring the normal strain along
the x and y axes drawn through that point. Recalling Eq. (7.43), we note that
a third measurement of normal strain, made along the bisector OB of the angle
formed by the x and y axes, enables us to determine the shearing strain γxy as
well (Fig. 7.64):
γ xy = 2ε OB − (ε x + ε y) 	(7.43)
The strain components εx, εy, and γxy at a given point also can be
obtained from normal strain measurements made along any three lines drawn
through that point (Fig. 7.65). Denoting respectively by θ1, θ2, and θ3 the angle
each of the three lines forms with the x axis, by ε1, ε2, and ε3 the correspond-
ing strain measurements, and substituting into Eq. (7.41), we write the three
equations
ε1 = ε x cos 2 θ1 + ε y sin2 θ1 + γ xy sin θ1 cos θ1
ε2 = ε x cos 2 θ2 + ε y sin2 θ2 + γ xy sin θ2 cos θ2 	(7.60)
ε3 = ε x cos 2 θ3 + ε y sin2 θ3 + γ xy sin θ3 cos θ3
These can be solved simultaneously for εx, εy, and γxy.†
The arrangement of strain gages used to measure the three normal
strains ε1, ε2, and ε3 is called a strain rosette. The rosette used to measure
normal strains along the x and y axes and their bisector is referred to as a 45°
rosette (Fig. 7.64). Another rosette frequently used is the 60° rosette (see
Sample Prob. 7.7).
A
B
Fig. 7.63 	Electrical strain gage.
45°
B
O
y
x
45°
εOB
εx
εy
Fig. 7.64 	Strain rosette that
measures normal strains in
direction of x, y, and bisector OB.
L1
L2
L3
O 	x
ε3
ε2
ε1
θ1
θ2
θ3
Fig. 7.65 	Generalized strain gage
rosette arrangement.
†It should be noted that the free surface on which the strain measurements are made is in a
state of plane stress, while Eqs. (7.41) and (7.43) were derived for a state of plane strain.
As observed earlier, however, the direction normal to the free surface is a principal axis of
strain, and the derivations given in Sec. 7.7A remain valid.

-- 553 of 897 --

*7.9 Measurements of Strain; Strain Rosette 	539
Sample Problem 7.6
A cylindrical storage tank used to transport gas under pressure has an inner
diameter of 24 in. and a wall thickness of 3
4 in. Strain gages attached to
the surface of the tank in transverse and longitudinal directions indicate
strains of 255 × 10−6 and 60 × 10−6 in./in., respectively. Knowing that a
torsion test has shown that the modulus of rigidity of the material used in
the tank is G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine (a) the gage pressure inside the
tank, (b) the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress in the
wall of the tank.
STRATEGY: 	You can use the given measured strains to plot Mohr’s circle
for strain, and use this circle to determine the maximum in-plane shearing
strain. Applying Hooke’s law to obtain the corresponding maximum in-plane
shearing stress, you can then determine the gage pressure in the tank through
the appropriate thin-walled pressure vessel equation, as well as develop Mohr’s
circle for stress to determine the principal stresses and the maximum shearing
stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Gage Pressure Inside Tank. 	The given strains are the principal
strains at the surface of the tank. Plotting the corresponding points A and B,
draw Mohr’s circle for strain (Fig. 1). The maximum in-plane shearing strain
is equal to the diameter of the circle.
γmax (in plane) = ε1 − ε2 = 255 × 10−6 − 60 × 10−6 = 195 × 10−6 rad
From Hooke’s law for shearing stress and strain,
τmax (in plane) = Gγmax (in plane)
= (11.2 × 106 psi)(195 × 10−6 rad)
= 2184 psi = 2.184 ksi
24 in.
1
2
A
C	B
1 = 255
(10 –6 in./in.)
(10–6 rad)
2 D
E
O
max (in plane)
2 =
60
1
2 γ
γ
ε
ε
ε
Fig. 1 	Mohr’s circle for measured strains.
(continued)

-- 554 of 897 --

540 	Transformations of Stress and Strain
Substituting this and the given data in Eq. (7.33),
τmax (in plane) = pr
4t 2184 psi = p(12 in.)
4(0.75 in.)
Solving for the gage pressure p,
p = 546 psi 	◂
b. Principal Stresses and Maximum Shearing Stress. 	Recall-
ing that for a thin-walled cylindrical pressure vessel σ1 = 2σ2, we draw
Mohr’s circle for stress (Fig. 2) and obtain
σ2 = 2τmax (in plane) = 2(2.184 ksi) = 4.368 ksi 	σ2 = 4.37 ksi 	◂
σ1 = 2σ2 = 2(4.368 ksi) 	σ1 = 8.74 ksi 	◂
The maximum shearing stress is equal to the radius of the circle of
diameter OA and corresponds to a rotation of 45° about a longitudinal
axis.
τmax = 1
2 σ1 = σ2 = 4.368 ksi 	τmax = 4.37 ksi 	◂
2 	2
A
E
B
1 = 2
D
= 2.184 ksi	D'
O
max
1 – 2 	2
2
2
max (in plane)
=
σ
σ	σ	σ
σ	σ
σ
τ
τ
τ
Fig. 2 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles for
vessel stress components.
Sample Problem 7.7
Using a 60° rosette, the following strains have been measured at point Q on
the surface of a steel machine base:
ε1 = 40 μ 	ε2 = 980 μ 	ε3 = 330 μ
Using the coordinate axes shown, determine at point Q (a) the strain compo-
nents εx, εy, and γxy, (b) the principal strains, (c) the maximum shearing strain.
(Use ν = 0.29.)
STRATEGY: 	From the given strain rosette measurements, you can find the
strain components εx, εy, and γxy using Eq. (7.60). Using these strains, you can
plot Mohr’s circle for strain to determine the principal strains and the maxi-
mum shearing strain.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
a. Strain Components εx, εy, γxy. 	For the coordinate axes shown
θ1 = 0 	θ2 = 60° 	θ3 = 120°
60°
60°
1
Q
O
x
z
y
2
3

-- 555 of 897 --

*7.9 Measurements of Strain; Strain Rosette 	541
Substituting these into Eqs. (7.60), gives
ε1 = εx(1) 	+ ε y(0) 	+ γ xy(0)(1)
ε2 = ε x(0.500) 2 	+ ε y(0.866) 2 + γ xy(0.866)(0.500)
ε3 = ε x(−0.500) 2 + ε y(0.866) 2 + γ xy(0.866)(−0.500)
Solving these equations for εx, εy, and γxy,
ε x = ε1 	ε y = 1
3 (2ε2 + 2ε3 − ε1 ) 	γ xy = ε2 − ε3
0.866
Substituting for ε1, ε2, and ε3,
ε x = 40 μ 	ε y = 1
3 [2(980) + 2(330) − 40] 	εy = +860 μ 	◂
γ xy = (980 − 330)∕0.866 	γ xy = 750 μ 	◂
These strains are indicated on the element shown in Fig. 1.
b. Principal Strains. 	The side of the element associated with εx
rotates counterclockwise; thus, point X is plotted below the horizontal axis,
as X(40, −375). Then Y(860, +375) is plotted and Mohr’s circle is drawn
(Fig. 2).
εave = 1
2 (860 μ + 40 μ) = 450 μ
R = √ (375 μ) 2 + (410 μ) 2 = 556 μ
tan 2θp = 375 μ
410 μ 2θp = 42.4°⤸ 	θp = 21.2°⤸
Points A and B correspond to the principal strains,
ε a = εave − R = 450 μ − 556 μ 	ε a = −106 μ 	◂
ε b = εave + R = 450 μ + 556 μ 	ε b = +1006 μ 	◂
These strains are indicated on the element shown in Fig. 3. Since σz = 0 on
the surface, Eq. (7.59) is used to find the principal strain εc:
ε c = − ν
1 − ν (ε a + ε b) = − 0.29
1 − 0.29 (−106 μ + 1006 μ) 	ε c = −368 μ ◂
c. Maximum Shearing Strain. 	Plotting point C and drawing
Mohr’s circle through points B and C (Fig. 4), we obtain point D′ and
write
1
2 γmax = 1
2 (1006 μ + 368 μ) 	γmax = 1374 μ 	◂
B
D'
A	C
1006 μ
368 μ
1
2
1
2 max
γ
γ
ε
ε a
Fig. 4 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles
used to determine maximum shearing strain.
y
x
xy
y
x
1
1
90° – γ
ε
ε
Fig. 1 	Undeformed and
deformed strain elements at Q.
2
Y
O
F	A
X
R
B
C
375
410
450
40
860
375
p
1
2
μ
μ
μ
μ 	μ
μ
γ
θ
ε
Fig. 2 	Mohr’s circle used to determine
principal strains.
b
a
1
1 21.2°
εa
εb
Fig. 3 	Undeformed and deformed
principal strain element at Q.

-- 556 of 897 --

542
Problems
7.128 through 7.131 	For the given state of plane strain, use the method
of Sec. 7.7A to determine the state of plane strain associated with
axes x′ and y′ rotated through the given angle θ.
εx 	εy 	γxy 	θ
7.128 and 7.132 	−800 μ 	+450 μ 	+200 μ 	25°⤶
7.129 and 7.133 	+240 μ 	+160 μ 	+150 μ 	60°⤶
7.130 and 7.134 	−500 μ 	+250 μ 	0 	15°⤴
7.131 and 7.135 	0 	+320 μ 	−100 μ 	30°⤴
y
y'
x'
x θ
Fig. P7.128 through P7.135
7.132 through 7.135 	For the given state of plane strain, use Mohr’s cir-
cle to determine the state of plane strain associated with axes x′ and
y′ rotated through the given angle θ.
7.136 through 7.139 	The following state of strain has been measured on
the surface of a thin plate. Knowing that the surface of the plate is
unstressed, determine (a) the direction and magnitude of the princi-
pal strains, (b) the maximum in-plane shearing strain, (c) the maxi-
mum shearing strain. (Use ν = 1
3 .)
εx 	εy 	γxy
7.136 	−260 μ 	−60 μ 	+480 μ
7.137 	−600 μ 	−400 μ 	+350 μ
7.138 	+160 μ 	−480 μ 	−600 μ
7.139 	+30 μ 	+570 μ 	+720 μ
εx 	εy 	γxy
7.140 	+60 μ 	+240 μ 	−50 μ
7.141 	+400 μ 	+200 μ 	+375 μ
7.142 	+300 μ 	+60 μ 	+100 μ
7.143 	−180 μ 	−260 μ 	+315 μ
7.140 through 7.143 	For the given state of plane strain, use Mohr’s
circle to determine (a) the orientation and magnitude of the princi-
pal strains, (b) the maximum in-plane strain, (c) the maximum
shearing strain.

-- 557 of 897 --

543
7.144 Determine the strain εx, knowing that the following strains have been
determined by use of the rosette shown:
ε1 = +480 μ 	ε2 = −120 μ 	ε3 = +80 μ
7.145 The strains determined by the use of the rosette shown during the
test of a machine element are
ε1 = +600 μ 	ε2 = +450 μ 	ε3 = −75 μ
Determine (a) the in-plane principal strains, (b) the in-plane maxi-
mum shearing strain.
x
30°
45°
15°
2
3
1
Fig. P7.144
y
x
30°
30°
1
3 2
Fig. P7.145
x
45° 	45°
45°
2
3
4
1
Fig. P7.146
7.146 The rosette shown has been used to determine the following strains
at a point on the surface of a crane hook:
ε1 = +420 × 10−6 in./in. 	ε2 = −45 × 10−6 in./in.
ε4 = +165 × 10−6 in./in.
(a) What should be the reading of gage 3? (b) Determine the prin-
cipal strains and the maximum in-plane shearing strain.
7.147 Using a 45° rosette, the strains ε1, ε2, and ε3 have been determined
at a given point. Using Mohr’s circle, show that the principal
strains are:
εmax, min = 1
2 (ε1 + ε3 ) ± 1
√2[(ε1 − ε2 ) 2 + (ε2 − ε3 ) 2 ] 1
2
(Hint: The shaded triangles are congruent.)
O A
C
B
2
45°
45°
2
3
1
ε
εmax
εmin
ε1
ε3
ε2
γ
Fig. P7.147

-- 558 of 897 --

544
7.148 Show that the sum of the three strain measurements made with a 60°
rosette is independent of the orientation of the rosette and equal to
ε1 + ε2 + ε3 = 3εavg
where εavg is the abscissa of the center of the corresponding
Mohr’s circle.
x
60°
60°
2
3
1
θ
Fig. P7.148
75°
75°
3
x
1
2
Fig. P7.149
7.149 The strains determined by the use of the rosette attached as shown
during the test of a machine element are
ε1 = −93.1 × 10−6 in./in. 	ε2 = +385 × 10−6 in./in.
ε3 = +210 × 10−6 in./in.
Determine (a) the orientation and magnitude of the principal strains
in the plane of the rosette, (b) the maximum in-plane shearing strain.
1 in.
y
C
A
P
Qx
12 in.
3 in.
3 in.
3 	2
45°
1
x
Fig. P7.150
7.150 A centric axial force P and a horizontal force Qx are both applied at
point C of the rectangular bar shown. A 45° strain rosette on the
surface of the bar at point A indicates the following strains:
ε1 = −60 × 10−6 in./in. 	ε2 = +240 × 10−6 in./in.
ε3 = +200 × 10−6 in./in.
Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi and ν = 0.30, determine the mag-
nitudes of P and Qx.
7.151 Solve Prob. 7.150, assuming that the rosette at point A indicates the
following strains:
ε1 = −30 × 10−6 in./in. 	ε2 = +250 × 10−6 in./in.
ε3 = +100 × 10−6 in./in.

-- 559 of 897 --

545
7.152 A single strain gage is cemented to a solid 4-in.-diameter steel shaft
at an angle β = 25° with a line parallel to the axis of the shaft.
Knowing that G = 11.5 × 106 psi, determine the torque T indicated
by a gage reading of 300 × 10−6 in./in.
2 in.
T
T' β
Fig. P7.152
β
Fig. P7.154
150 MPa
75 MPa
Fig. P7.156
7.153 Solve Prob. 7.152, assuming that the gage forms an angle β = 35°
with a line parallel to the axis of the shaft.
7.154 A single strain gage forming an angle β = 18° with a horizontal
plane is used to determine the gage pressure in the cylindrical steel
tank shown. The cylindrical wall of the tank is 6 mm thick, has a
600-mm inside diameter, and is made of a steel with E = 200 GPa
and ν = 0.30. Determine the pressure in the tank indicated by a strain
gage reading of 280 μ.
7.155 Solve Prob. 7.154, assuming that the gage forms an angle β = 35°
with a horizontal plane.
7.156 The given state of plane stress is known to exist on the surface of a
machine component. Knowing that E = 200 GPa and G = 77.2 GPa,
determine the direction and magnitude of the three principal strains
(a) by determining the corresponding state of strain [use Eq. (2.34)
and Eq. (2.29)] and then using Mohr’s circle for strain, (b) by using
Mohr’s circle for stress to determine the principal planes and prin-
cipal stresses and then determining the corresponding strains.
7.157 The following state of strain has been determined on the surface of
a cast-iron machine part:
εx = −720 μ 	εy = −400 μ 	γxy = +660 μ
Knowing that E = 69 GPa and G = 28 GPa, determine the princi-
pal planes and principal stresses (a) by determining the correspond-
ing state of plane stress [use Eq. (2.27), Eq. (2.34), and the first
two equations of Prob. 2.73] and then using Mohr’s circle for stress,
(b) by using Mohr’s circle for strain to determine the orientation
and magnitude of the principal strains and then determining the
corresponding stresses.

-- 560 of 897 --

546
Transformation of Plane Stress
A state of plane stress at a given point Q has nonzero values for σx, σy, and
τxy . The stress components associated with the element are shown in
Fig. 7.66a. The equations for the components σ x′, σ y′, and τ x′y′ associated with
that element after being rotated through an angle θ about the z axis
(Fig. 7.66b) are
σ x′ = σx + σ y
2 + σx − σ y
2 cos 2θ + τ xy sin 2θ 	(7.5)
σ y′ = σx + σ y
2 − σx − σ y
2 cos 2θ − τ xy sin 2θ 	(7.7)
τ x′y′ = − σx − σ y
2 sin 2θ + τ xy cos 2θ 	(7.6)
Review and Summary
Q 	Q
z
x 	x
x'
y 	y'
z' = z
y
(a) 	(b)
σy
σx
σy'
σx'
τxy
τ x'y'
θ
θ
Fig. 7.66 	State of plane stress: (a) referenced to {x y z}, (b) referenced to {x’y’z’}.
The values θp of the angle of rotation that correspond to the maximum
and minimum values of the normal stress at point Q are
tan 2θp = 2τxy
σ x − σ y
(7.12)
Principal Planes and Principal Stresses
The two values obtained for θp are 90° apart (Fig. 7.67) and define the prin-
cipal planes of stress at point Q. The corresponding values of the normal
stress are called the principal stresses at Q:
σmax, min = σ x + σ y
2 ± √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ2
xy 	(7.14)
The corresponding shearing stress is zero.
y
Q 	x
y'
x'
σmax
σmax
σmin
σmin
θ p
θp
Fig. 7.67 	Principal stresses.

-- 561 of 897 --

547
Maximum In-Plane Shearing Stress
The angle θ for the largest value of the shearing stress θs is found using
tan 2θs = − σx − σ y
2τ xy
(7.15)
The two values obtained for θs are 90° apart (Fig. 7.68). However, the planes
of maximum shearing stress are at 45° to the principal planes. The maximum
value of the shearing stress in the plane of stress is
τmax = √ (
σ x − σ y
2 	)
2
+ τ2
xy 	(7.16)
and the corresponding value of the normal stresses is
σ′ = σave = σx + σ y
2 (7.17)
Mohr’s Circle for Stress
Mohr’s circle provides an alternative method for the analysis of the trans-
formation of plane stress based on simple geometric considerations. Given
the state of stress shown in the left element in Fig. 7.69a, point X of
y
Q 	x
x'
y'
σ'
σ'
σ'
σ'
τmax
τmax
θ s
θ s
Fig. 7.68 	Maximum shearing
stress.
(b)
O
B 	A
Y
C
X
1
2
O 	x
a
b
y
(a)
σ y
σ x
σmax 	σmax
σmin
σmin 	σmin
σmax
(σy ,+ τ xy)
(σx ,– τ xy)
σ
(σx – σ y)
τxy
τ
τxy
θp
2θp
(b)
O
B 	A
Y
C
X
1
2
O 	x
a
b
y
(a)
σ y
σ x
σmax 	σmax
σmin
σmin 	σmin
σmax
(σy ,+ τ xy)
(σx ,– τ xy)
σ
(σx – σ y)
τxy
τ
τ xy
θp
2θp
Fig. 7.69 	(a) Plane stress element, and the orientation of principal planes.
(b) Corresponding Mohr’s circle.
coordinates σx, −τxy and point Y of coordinates σy, +τxy are plotted in
Fig. 7.69b. Drawing the circle of diameter XY provides Mohr’s circle. The
abscissas of the points of intersection A and B of the circle with the hor-
izontal axis represent the principal stresses, and the angle of rotation
bringing the diameter XY into AB is twice the angle θp defining the prin-
cipal planes, as shown in the right element of Fig. 7.69a. The diameter
DE defines the maximum shearing stress and the orientation of the cor-
responding plane (Fig. 7.70).
O 	B 	C 	A
D
E
90°
σ
σ' = σave
τmax
τ
Fig. 7.70 	Maximum shearing stress is oriented
±45° from principal directions.

-- 562 of 897 --

548
General State of Stress
A general state of stress is characterized by six stress components, where the
normal stress on a plane of arbitrary orientation can be expressed as a qua-
dratic form of the direction cosines of the normal to that plane. This proves
the existence of three principal axes of stress and three principal stresses at
any given point. Rotating a small cubic element about each of the three prin-
cipal axes was used to draw the corresponding Mohr’s circles that yield the
values of σmax, σmin, and τmax (Fig. 7.71). In the case of plane stress when the
O
C 	B 	A
τmax
τ
σ
σmax
σmin
Fig. 7.71 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s circles
for general state of stress.
Z = O 	B 	A
=
D'
E'
D
1
2	
τmax
τ
σa
σ
σmin = 0
σmax = σa
Fig. 7.72 	Three-dimensional Mohr’s
circles for plane stress having two positive
principal stresses.
x and y axes are selected in the plane of stress, point C coincides with the
origin O. If A and B are located on opposite sides of O, the maximum shear-
ing stress is equal to the maximum in-plane shearing stress. If A and B are
located on the same side of O, this is not the case. For instance if σa > σb > 0,
the maximum shearing stress is equal to 1
2 σ a and corresponds to a rotation
out of the plane of stress (Fig. 7.72).
Yield Criteria for Ductile Materials
To predict whether a structural or machine component will fail at some criti-
cal point due to yield in the material, the principal stresses σa and σb at that
point for the given loading condition are determined. The point of coordinates
σa and σb is plotted, and if this point falls within a certain area, the component
is safe. If it falls outside, the component will fail. The area used with the
maximum-shearing-stress criterion is shown in Fig. 7.73, and the area used
with the maximum-distortion-energy criterion in Fig. 7.74. Both areas depend
upon the value of the yield strength σY of the material.
O
+σ Y
+σ Y
σb
σ a
–σY
–σY
Fig. 7.73 	Tresca’s hexagon for
maximum-shearing-stress criterion.
O
A
B
D
C
σb
σ a
+σ Y
–σY
–σY
σY	+σY
Fig. 7.74 	Von Mises surface based on
maximum-distortion-energy criterion.

-- 563 of 897 --

549
z
y
x
t
r
σ1
σ1
σ2
σ2
Fig. 7.76 	Pressurized cylindrical vessel.
Fracture Criteria for Brittle Materials
The most commonly used method to predict failure of brittle materials is
the fracture-based Mohr’s criterion, which uses the results of various tests
for a given material. The shaded area shown in Fig. 7.75 is used when the
ultimate strengths σUT and σUC have been determined, respectively, from a
tension and a compression test. The principal stresses σa and σb are deter-
mined at a given point, and if the corresponding point falls within the
shaded area, the component is safe, and if it falls outside, the component
will rupture.
Cylindrical Pressure Vessels
The stresses in thin-walled pressure vessels and equations relating to the
stresses in the walls and the gage pressure p in the fluid were discussed. For
a cylindrical vessel of inside radius r and thickness t (Fig. 7.76), the hoop
stress σ1 and the longitudinal stress σ2 are
σ1 = pr
t σ2 = pr
2 t (7.30, 7.31)
The maximum shearing stress occurs out of the plane of stress and is
τmax = σ2 = pr
2 t (7.34)
Spherical Pressure Vessels
For a spherical vessel of inside radius r and thickness t (Fig. 7.77), the two
principal stresses are equal:
σ1 = σ2 = pr
2 t (7.36)
Again, the maximum shearing stress occurs out of the plane of stress and is
τmax = 1
2 σ1 = pr
4t (7.37)
Transformation of Plane Strain
The last part of the chapter was devoted to the transformation of strain. We
discussed the transformation of plane strain and introduced Mohr’s circle
for plane strain. The discussion was similar to the corresponding discussion
of the transformation of stress, except that, where the shearing stress τ was
used, we now used 1
2 γ, that is, half the shearing strain. The formulas
obtained for the transformation of strain under a rotation of axes through an
angle θ were
ε x′ = εx + ε y
2 + εx − ε y
2 cos 2θ + γxy
2 sin 2θ 	(7.44)
ε y′ = εx + ε y
2 − εx − ε y
2 cos 2θ − γxy
2 sin 2θ 	(7.45)
γx′y′ = −(ε x − ε y) sin 2θ + γ xy cos 2θ 	(7.49)
σ2
σ2 = σ1
σ1
σ1
Fig. 7.77 	Pressurized spherical vessel.
σUC
σUT
σUC
σUT
σb
σa
Fig. 7.75 	Simplified Mohr’s criterion for
brittle materials.

-- 564 of 897 --

550
Mohr’s Circle for Strain
Using Mohr’s circle for strain (Fig. 7.78), the relationships defining the angle
of rotation θp corresponding to the principal axes of strain and the values of
the principal strains εmax and εmin are
tan 2θp = γxy
ε x − ε y
(7.52)
εmax = εave + R 	and 	εmin = εave − R 	(7.51)
where
εave = εx + ε y
2 and 	R = √ (
ε x − ε y
2 	)
2
+ (
γ xy
2 )
2
(7.50)
The maximum shearing strain for a rotation in the plane of strain is
γmax (in plane) = 2R = √ (ε x − ε y) 2 + γ2
xy 	(7.53)
In plane stress, the principal strain εc in a direction perpendicular to
the plane of stress is expressed in terms of the in-plane principal strains εa
and εb:
ε c = − ν
1 − ν (ε a + ε b) 	(7.59)
Strain Gages and Strain Rosette
Strain gages are used to measure the normal strain on the surface of a
structural element or machine component. A strain rosette consists of
three gages aligned along lines forming angles θ1, θ2, and θ3 with the x
axis (Fig. 7.79). The relationships among the measurements ε1, ε2, ε3 of
the gages and the components εx, εy, γxy characterizing the state of strain
at that point are
ε1 = ε x cos 2 θ1 + ε y sin2 θ1 + γ xy sin θ1 cos θ1
ε2 = ε x cos 2 θ2 + ε y sin2 θ2 + γ xy sin θ2 cos θ2 	(7.60)
ε3 = ε x cos 2 θ3 + ε y sin2 θ3 + γ xy sin θ3 cos θ3
These equations can be solved for εx, εy, and γxy once ε1, ε2, and ε3
have been determined.
Δs (1 + εmin)
Δs (1 + εmax )
Δs
C	O
max (in plane)
εmin
εave
εmax
2
1
X
2θp
θp
θp
A
b
a
B
Y
y
x
D
E
1
2
(a)
(b)
O
γ
γ
ε
Fig. 7.78 	(a) Mohr’s circle for plane strain,
showing principal strains and maximum in-plane
shearing strain. (b) Strain element oriented to
principal directions.
Fig. 7.79 	Generalized strain gage
rosette arrangement.
L1
L2
L3
O 	x
ε2
ε1
ε3
θ3
θ2
θ1

-- 565 of 897 --

551
Review Problems
7.158 Two members of uniform cross section 50 × 80 mm are glued
together along plane a-a that forms an angle of 25° with the hori-
zontal. Knowing that the allowable stresses for the glued joint are
σ = 800 kPa and τ = 600 kPa, determine the largest centric load P
that can be applied.
7.159 Two steel plates of uniform cross section 10 × 80 mm are welded
together as shown. Knowing that centric 100-kN forces are applied
to the welded plates and that β = 25°, determine (a) the in-plane
shearing stress parallel to the weld, (b) the normal stress perpen-
dicular to the weld.
P
a 	25°
50 mm
a
Fig. P7.158
100 kN
100 kN
80 mm
β
Fig. P7.159 and P7.160
7.160 Two steel plates of uniform cross section 10 × 80 mm are welded
together as shown. Knowing that centric 100-kN forces are applied
to the welded plates and that the in-plane shearing stress parallel to
the weld is 30 MPa, determine (a) the angle β, (b) the corresponding
normal stress perpendicular to the weld.
7.161 Determine the principal planes and the principal stresses for the state
of plane stress resulting from the superposition of the two states of
stress shown.
30°
+
τ0
τ0
Fig. P7.161
Fig. P7.162
z
x
3 ksi	12 ksi
y
τyz
7.162 For the state of stress shown, determine the maximum shearing stress
when (a) τyz = 17.5 ksi, (b) τyz = 8 ksi, (c) τyz = 0.

-- 566 of 897 --

552
7.163 For the state of stress shown, determine two values of σy for which
the maximum shearing stress is 73 MPa.
τ xy
21 ksi
36 ksi
Fig. P7.164
600 mm
150 mm
A
B
150 mm
P
x
y
z
K 	L
Fig. P7.165
Fig. P7.163
48 MPa
50 MPa
y
z
x
σy
7.164 The state of plane stress shown occurs in a machine component made
of a steel with σY = 45 ksi. Using the maximum-distortion-energy
criterion, determine whether yield will occur when (a) τxy = 9 ksi,
(b) τxy = 18 ksi, (c) τxy = 20 ksi. If yield does not occur, determine
the corresponding factor of safety.
7.165 The compressed-air tank AB has a 250-mm outside diameter and an
8-mm wall thickness. It is fitted with a collar by which a 40-kN force
P is applied at B in the horizontal direction. Knowing that the gage
pressure inside the tank is 5 MPa, determine the maximum normal
stress and the maximum shearing stress at point K.
7.166 In Prob. 7.165, determine the maximum normal stress and the max-
imum shearing stress at point L.

-- 567 of 897 --

553
7.167 The brass pipe AD is fitted with a jacket used to apply a hydrostatic
pressure of 500 psi to portion BC of the pipe. Knowing that the
pressure inside the pipe is 100 psi, determine the maximum normal
stress in the pipe.
D
2 in.
4 in.
A
B
C
0.12 in.
0.15 in.
Fig. P7.167
x
45° 	45°
2
3
1
Fig. P7.169
7.168 For the assembly of Prob. 7.167, determine the normal stress in the
jacket (a) in a direction perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the
jacket, (b) in a direction parallel to that axis.
7.169 Determine the largest in-plane normal strain, knowing that the fol-
lowing strains have been obtained by the use of the rosette shown:
ε1 = −50 × 10−6 in./in. 	ε2 = +360 × 10−6 in./in.
ε3 = +315 × 10−6 in./in.

-- 568 of 897 --

554
The following problems are to be solved with a computer.
7.C1 A state of plane stress is defined by the stress components σx, σy,
and τxy associated with the element shown in Fig. P7.C1a. (a) Write
a computer program that can be used to calculate the stress compo-
nents σ x′, σ y′, and τ x′y′ associated with the element after it has rotated
through an angle θ about the z axis (Fig. P7.C1b). (b) Use this pro-
gram to solve Probs. 7.13 through 7.16.
Computer Problems
Q 	Q
z
x 	x
x'
y 	y'
z
y
(a) 	(b)
σy 	σy'
σx'
σx
τxy
τ x'y'
θ
θ
Fig. P7.C1
7.C2 A state of plane stress is defined by the stress components σx, σy,
and τxy associated with the element shown in Fig. P7.C1a. (a) Write
a computer program that can be used to calculate the principal axes,
the principal stresses, the maximum in-plane shearing stress, and the
maximum shearing stress. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.68
and 7.69.
7.C3 (a) Write a computer program that, for a given state of plane stress
and a given yield strength of a ductile material, can be used to
determine whether the material will yield. The program should use
both the maximum-shearing-stress criterion and the maximum-
distortion-energy criterion. It should also print the values of the
principal stresses and, if the material does not yield, calculate the
factor of safety. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.81 and 7.82.
7.C4 (a) Write a computer program based on Mohr’s fracture criterion for
brittle materials that, for a given state of plane stress and given
values of the ultimate stress of the material in tension and compres-
sion, can be used to determine whether rupture will occur. The pro-
gram should also print the values of the principal stresses. (b) Use
this program to solve Probs. 7.91 and 7.92 and to check the answers
to Probs. 7.93 and 7.94.

-- 569 of 897 --

555
7.C5 A state of plane strain is defined by the strain components εx, εy, and
γxy associated with the x and y axes. (a) Write a computer program
that can be used to calculate the strain components ε x′, ε y′, and γ x′y′
associated with the frame of reference x′y′ obtained by rotating the x and
y axes through an angle θ. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.129
and 7.131.
y
y'
x'
x θ
Fig. P7.C5
7.C6 A state of strain is defined by the strain components εx, εy, and γxy
associated with the x and y axes. (a) Write a computer program that
can be used to determine the orientation and magnitude of the prin-
cipal strains, the maximum in-plane shearing strain, and the maxi-
mum shearing strain. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.136
through 7.139.
7.C7 A state of plane strain is defined by the strain components εx, εy, and
γxy measured at a point. (a) Write a computer program that can be
used to determine the orientation and magnitude of the principal
strains, the maximum in-plane shearing strain, and the magnitude of
the shearing strain. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.140
through 7.143.
7.C8 A rosette consisting of three gages forming angles of θ1, θ2, and θ3
with the x axis is attached to the free surface of a machine component
made of a material with a given Poisson’s ratio ν. (a) Write a com-
puter program that, for given readings ε1, ε2, and ε3 of the gages, can
be used to calculate the strain components associated with the x and
y axes and to determine the orientation and magnitude of the three
principal strains, the maximum in-plane shearing strain, and the max-
imum shearing strain. (b) Use this program to solve Probs. 7.144,
7.145, 7.146, and 7.169.

-- 570 of 897 --



-- 571 of 897 --

Principal Stresses Under
a Given Loading
Due to gravity and wind load, the signpost support column is
subjected simultaneously to compression, bending, and torsion.
This chapter will examine the stresses resulting from such
combined loadings.
8
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Describe how stress components vary throughout a beam.
• Identify key stress analysis locations in an I-shaped beam.
• Design transmission shafts subject to transverse loads and
torques.
• Describe the stresses throughout a member arising from
combined loads.
©NYPARK∕Shutterstock

-- 572 of 897 --

558 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Introduction
8.1 	PRINCIPAL STRESSES
IN A BEAM
8.2 	DESIGN OF
TRANSMISSION SHAFTS
8.3 	STRESSES UNDER
COMBINED LOADS
Introduction
In the first part of this chapter, you will apply to the design of beams and
shafts the knowledge that you acquired in Chap. 7 on the transformation of
stresses. In the second part of the chapter, you will learn how to determine
the principal stresses in structural members and machine elements under given
loading conditions.
The maximum normal stress σm that occurs in a beam under a
transverse load (Fig. 8.1a) and whether this value exceeds the allowable
stress σall for the given material has been studied in Chap. 5. If the allow-
able stress is exceeded, the design of the beam is not acceptable. While
the danger for a brittle material is actually to fail in tension, the danger
for a ductile material is to fail in shear (Fig. 8.1b). Thus, a situation where
σm > σall indicates that ∣M∣max is too large for the cross section selected,
(a) 	(b)
σm σ'
σm
τmax
Fig. 8.1 	Stress elements where normal
stress is maximum in a transversely loaded
beam. (a) Element showing maximum
normal stress. (b) Element showing
corresponding maximum shearing stress.
but it does not provide any information on the actual mechanism of fail-
ure. Similarly, τm > τall indicates that ∣V∣max is too large for the cross
section selected. While the danger for a ductile material is actually to fail
in shear (Fig. 8.2a), the danger for a brittle material is to fail in tension
under the principal stresses (Fig. 8.2b). The distribution of the principal
stresses in a beam is discussed in Sec. 8.1.
Depending on the shape of the beam’s cross section and the value of
the shear V in the critical section where ∣M∣ = ∣M∣max, the largest value of the
normal stress may not necessarily occur at the top or bottom, but at some
other point within the section. In Sec. 8.1, a combination of large values of
σx and τxy near the junction of the web and the flanges of a W- or S-beam
can result in a value of the principal stress σmax (Fig. 8.3) that is larger than
the value of σm on the surface of the beam.
Section 8.2 covers the design of transmission shafts subjected to trans-
verse loads and torques. The effects of both normal stresses due to bending
and shearing stresses due to torsion are discussed.
In Sec. 8.3, the stresses are determined at a given point K of a body of
arbitrary shape subjected to combined loading. First, the given load is reduced
(a) 	(b)
σ'
σ'	τm
Fig. 8.2 	Stress elements where shearing
stress is maximum in a transversely loaded
beam. (a) Element showing maximum
shearing stress. (b) Element showing
corresponding maximum normal stress.
σmax
Fig. 8.3 	Principal stress element
at the junction of a flange and web
in an I-shaped beam.

-- 573 of 897 --

8.1 Principal Stresses in a Beam 	559
to forces and couples in the section containing K. Next, the normal and shear-
ing stresses at K are calculated. Finally, the principal planes, principal stresses,
and maximum shearing stress are found, using one of the methods for trans-
formation of stresses (Chap. 7).
8.1 	PRINCIPAL STRESSES
IN A BEAM
Consider a prismatic beam AB subjected to some arbitrary transverse loads
(Fig. 8.4). The shear and bending moment in a section through a given point C
B
w
A
C
D
P
Fig. 8.4 	Transversely loaded prismatic
beam.
are denoted by V and M, respectively. Recall from Chaps. 5 and 6 that, within
the elastic limit, the stresses on a small element with faces perpendicular to the
x and y axes reduce to the normal stresses σm = Mc∕I if the element is at the
free surface of the beam and to the shearing stresses τm = VQ∕It if the element
is at the neutral surface (Fig. 8.5).
At any other point of the cross section, an element is subjected simul-
taneously to the normal stresses
σx = − My
I (8.1)
where y is the distance from the neutral surface and I is the centroidal moment
of inertia of the section, and to the shearing stresses
τxy = − VQ
It (8.2)
where Q is the first moment about the neutral axis of the portion of the cross-
sectional area located above the point where the stresses are computed, and
t is the width of the cross section at that point. The stresses from Eqs. (8.1)
and (8.2) can be used with either method of analysis presented in Chap. 7 to
determine the principal stresses at any point of the cross section (Fig. 8.6).
The following question now arises: Can the maximum normal stress
σmax at some point within the cross section be larger than σm = Mc∕I at the
surface of the beam? If it can, then determining the largest normal stress in
the beam involves more than the computation of ∣M ∣max and the use of
Eq. (8.1). An answer to this question is obtained by investigating the distribu-
tion of the principal stresses in a narrow rectangular cantilever beam subjected
to a concentrated load P at its free end (Fig. 8.7). Recall from Sec. 6.2 that
the normal and shearing stresses at a distance x from the load P and at a
distance y above the neutral surface are given, respectively, by Eqs. (6.13) and
(6.12). Since the moment of inertia of the cross section is
I = bh3
12 = (bh)(2c) 2
12 = Ac 2
3
c
y
y
x	O
c
σm	σm
σm 	σm
σx	σx
τ m
τ xy
Fig. 8.5 	Stress elements at selected
points of a beam.
c
y
y
x	O
c
σm
σm 	σm
σmax
σmax
σmin
σmin
σm
Fig. 8.6 	Principal stress elements
at selected points of a beam.
c
c
b x
y
P
σx 	τxy
Fig. 8.7 	Narrow rectangular cantilever beam
supporting a single concentrated load.

-- 574 of 897 --

560 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
where A is the cross-sectional area and c the half-depth of the beam,
σx = Pxy
I = Pxy
1
3 Ac2 = 3 P
A
xy
c2 	(8.3)
and
τxy = 3
2
P
A (1 − y2
c2) (8.4)
Using the methods of Sec. 7.1B or Sec. 7.2, σmax can be determined at
any point of the beam. Figure 8.8 shows the results of the computation of the
ratios σmax∕σm and σmin∕σm in two sections of the beam, corresponding respec-
tively to x = 2c and x = 8c. In each section, these ratios have been determined
at 11 different points, and the orientation of the principal axes has been indi-
cated at each point.†
It is clear that σmax is smaller than σm in both of the two sections in
Fig. 8.8. If it does exceed σm elsewhere, it is in sections close to load P,
where σm is small compared to τm.‡ But for sections close to load P, Saint-
Venant’s principle does not apply, and Eqs. (8.3) and (8.4) cease to be
†See Prob. 8.C2, which refers to a program that can be written to obtain the results in
Fig. 8.8.
‡As will be verified in Prob. 8.C2, σmax exceeds σm if x ≤ 0.544c.
y 	c
x 	2c 	x 	8c
y 	c
y 	0
P
=
=
=
= 	=
+
−
1.0
y/c
x = 2c 	x = 8c
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
− 0.2
− 0.4
− 0.6
− 0.8
− 1.0
0
0
−0.010
−0.040
−0.090
−0.160
−0.360
−0.490
−0.640
−0.810
−1.000
−0.250
1.000
0.810
0.640
0.490
0.360
0.160
0.090
0.040
0.010
0
0.250
0
−0.001
−0.003
−0.007
−0.017
−0.217
−0.407
−0.603
−0.801
−1.000
−0.063
1.000
0.801
0.603
0.407
0.217
0.017
0.007
0.003
0.001
0
0.063
σmin /σ m 	σmax /σ m 	σmin /σ m 	σmax/σm
Fig. 8.8 	Distribution of principal stresses in two transverse sections of a rectangular cantilever beam supporting a single
con centrated load.

-- 575 of 897 --

8.1 Principal Stresses in a Beam 	561
valid—except in the very unlikely case of a load distributed parabolically
over the end section (see. Sec. 6.2), where advanced methods of analysis are
used to account for the effect of stress concentrations. It can thus be con-
cluded that, for beams of rectangular cross section, and within the scope of
the theory presented in this text, the maximum normal stress can be obtained
from Eq. (8.1).
In Fig. 8.8, the directions of the principal axes are found at 11 points
in both of the sections considered. If this analysis is extended to a larger
number of sections and points in each section, it possible to draw two
orthogonal systems of curves on the side of the beam (Fig. 8.9). One system
Tensile
Compressive
P
Fig. 8.9 	Stress trajectories in a
rectangular cantilevered beam
supporting a single concentrated load.
consists of curves tangent to the principal axes corresponding to σmax and
the other to σmin. These curves are known as the stress trajectories. A trajec-
tory of the first group (solid lines) defines the direction of the largest tensile
stress at each of its points, while the second group (dashed lines) defines
the direction of the largest compressive stress.†
The conclusion we have reached for beams of rectangular cross sec-
tion, that the maximum normal stress in the beam can be obtained from
Eq. (8.1), remains valid for many beams of nonrectangular cross section.
However, when the width of the cross section varies so that large shearing
stresses τxy occur at points close to the surface of the beam (where σx is also
large), the principal stress σmax may be larger than σm at such points. This
is a distinct possibility when selecting W-beams or S-beams, where we
should calculate the principal stress σmax at the junctions b and d of the web
with the flanges of the beam (Fig. 8.10). This is done by determining σx
and τxy at that point from Eqs. (8.1) and (8.2), and by using either of the
methods of analysis in Chap. 7 to obtain σmax (see Sample Prob. 8.1). An
alternative procedure for selecting an acceptable section uses the approxima-
tion τmax = V∕Aweb [Eq. (6.11)]. This leads to a slightly larger and conserva-
tive value of the principal stress σmax at the junction of the web with the
flanges of the beam (see Sample Prob. 8.2).
†A brittle material, such as concrete, fails in tension along planes that are perpendicular to
the tensile-stress trajectories. Thus, to be effective, steel reinforcing bars should be placed
so that they intersect these planes. On the other hand, stiffeners attached to the web of a
plate girder are effective in preventing buckling only if they intersect planes perpendicular
to the compressive-stress trajectories.
a
b
c
d
e
Fig. 8.10 	Key stress
analysis locations in
I-shaped beams.

-- 576 of 897 --

562 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
8.2 	DESIGN OF TRANSMISSION
SHAFTS
The design of transmission shafts in Sec. 3.4 considered only the stresses
due to torques exerted on the shafts. However, if the power is transferred
to and from the shaft by means of gears or sprocket wheels (Fig. 8.11a),
the forces on the gear teeth or sprockets are equivalent to force-couple
systems applied at the centers of the corresponding cross sections for shaft
AB (Fig. 8.11b). Thus the shaft is subjected to both transverse and tor-
sional loads.
C
A
B
P1
P2
P3
C
(a)
C
Ay
Az
P2
P3
T3
T2
T1
P1
C
(b)
y
z
Bz
By
x
Fig. 8.11 	Loadings on gear-shaft systems. (a) Forces applied to gear teeth.
(b) Free-body diagram of shaft, with gear forces replaced by equivalent
force-couple systems applied to shaft.
The shearing stresses produced in the shaft by the transverse loads are
usually much smaller than those produced by the torques and will be neglected
in this analysis.† However, the normal stresses due to transverse loads may be
quite large, and their contribution to the maximum shearing stress τmax should
be taken into account.
Consider the cross section of the shaft at some point C. The torque T
and the bending couples My and Mz acting in a horizontal and a vertical plane
are represented by the couple vectors shown (Fig. 8.12a). Since any diameter
of the section is a principal axis of inertia for the section, we can replace My
and Mz by their resultant M (Fig. 8.12b) to compute the normal stresses σx.
†For an application where the shearing stresses produced by the transverse loads must be
considered, see Probs. 8.21 and 8.22.
C
Mz
My
C
M
(a) 	(b)
T	T
Fig. 8.12 	(a) Torque and bending couples
acting on shaft cross section. (b) Bending
couples replaced by their resultant M.

-- 577 of 897 --

8.2 Design of Transmission Shafts 	563
Thus σx is maximum at the end of the diameter perpendicular to the vector
representing M (Fig. 8.13). Recalling that the values of the normal stresses at
that point are σm = Mc∕I and zero and the shearing stress is τm = Tc∕J, plot
the corresponding values as points X and Y on a Mohr’s circle (Fig. 8.14).
The maximum shearing stress is found to be
τmax = R = √ (
σ m
2 )
2
+ (τ m) 2 = √ (
Mc
2I )
2
+ (
Tc
J )
2
M
T
σm
σm
τm
Fig. 8.13 	Maximum
stress element.
A	C
X
Y
O	B
D
σm
τmax	τ m
τ
σ
Fig. 8.14 	Mohr’s circle for shaft loading.
Recalling that 2I = J for a circular or annular cross section,
τmax = c
J √M2 + T 2 	(8.5)
It follows that the minimum allowable value of the ratio J∕c for the
cross section of the shaft is
J
c = (√M2 + T 2 ) max
τall
(8.6)
where the numerator in the right-hand member represents the maximum value
of √M2 + T 2 in the shaft and τall is the allowable shearing stress. Expressing
the bending moment M in terms of its components in the two coordinate
planes, we obtain:
J
c = (√M y
2 + M z
2 + T 2 ) max
τall
(8.7)
Equations (8.6) and (8.7) can be used to design both solid and hollow circu-
lar shafts and should be compared to Eq. (3.21), which was obtained under
the assumption of torsional loading only.
The maximum value of √M y
2 + M z
2 + T 2 is easier to find if both
bending-moment diagrams corresponding to My and Mz and a third dia-
gram representing the values of T along the shaft are drawn (see Sample
Prob. 8.3).

-- 578 of 897 --

564 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Sample Problem 8.1
A 160-kN force is applied as shown at the end of a W200 × 52 rolled-steel
beam. Neglecting the effect of fillets and of stress concentrations, determine
whether the normal stresses in the beam satisfy a design specification that
they be equal to or less than 150 MPa at section A–A′.
STRATEGY: 	To determine the maximum normal stress, you should perform
a beam stress analysis at the surface of the flange as well as at the junction
of the web and flange. A Mohr’s circle analysis will also be necessary at the
web-flange junction to determine this maximum normal stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Shear and Bending Moment. 	Referring to Fig. 1, at section A–A′,
we have
M A = (160 kN)(0.375 m) = 60 kN·m
V A = 160 kN
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam,
with section at A–A′
VA
MA
0.375 m
160 kN
Normal Stresses on Transverse Plane. 	Referring to the table of Prop-
erties of Rolled-Steel Shapes in Appendix E to obtain the data shown, deter-
mine the stresses σa and σb (Fig. 2).
12.6 mm 206 mm
c = 103 mm
206 mm
y b = 90.4 mm
7.87 mm
I = 52.9 × 10–6m 4
S = 511 × 10–6m3
a
b
c
σa
σb
Fig. 2 	Cross-section dimensions and normal
stress distribution.
At point a,
σ a = MA
S = 60 kN·m
511 × 10−6 m3 = 117.4 MPa
At point b,
σb = σ a
yb
c = (117.4 MPa) 90.4 mm
103 mm = 103.0 MPa
A
A'
160 kN
L = 375 mm

-- 579 of 897 --

8.2 Design of Transmission Shafts 	565
Note that all normal stresses on the transverse plane are less than
150 MPa.
Shearing Stresses on Transverse Plane. Referring to Fig. 3, we
obtain the data necessary to evaluate Q and then determine the stresses τa
and τb.
At point a,
Q = 0 	τ a = 0
At point b,
Q = (206 × 12.6)(96.7) = 251.0 × 103 mm3 = 251.0 × 10−6 m3
τ b = V A Q
It = (160 kN)(251.0 × 10−6 m3 )
(52.9 × 10−6 m4 )(0.00787 m) = 96.5 MPa
Principal Stress at Point b. 	The state of stress at point b consists of the
normal stress σb = 103.0 MPa and the shearing stress τb = 96.5 MPa. Draw
Mohr’s circle (Fig. 4) and find
σmax = 1
2 σ b + R = 1
2 σ b + √ (
1
2 σ b)
2
+ τ b
2
= 103.0
2 + √ (
103.0
2 	)
2
+ (96.5) 2
= 160.9 MPa
The specification, σmax ≤ 150 MPa, is not satisfied. 	◂
Y
X
A 	O 	C
R
2
B
τb
τb
τ
σb
σmax
σmax
σ
σb
σb
σmin
Fig. 4 	Stress element for coordinate and principal
orientations at point b; Mohr’s circle for point b.
REFLECT and THINK: 	For this beam and loading, the principal stress at
point b is 36% larger than the normal stress at point a. For L ≥ 881 mm
(Fig. 5), the maximum normal stress would occur at point a.
12.6 mm 206 mm
96.7 mm	103 mm
a
b
c
Fig. 3 	Dimensions to evaluate Q
at point b.
a
b 	c
L = 881 mm
W200 × 52
P
Fig. 5 	Condition where maximum
principal stress at point a begins to
exceed that at point b.

-- 580 of 897 --

566 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Sample Problem 8.2
The overhanging beam AB supports a uniformly distributed load of 3.2 kips/ft
and a concentrated load of 20 kips at C. Knowing that the grade of steel to
be used has σall = 24 ksi and τall = 14.5 ksi, select the wide-flange shape
that should be used.
STRATEGY: 	Draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams to determine
their maximum values. From the maximum bending moment, you can find
the required section modulus and use this to select the lightest available
wide-flange shape. You can then check to ensure that the maximum shearing
stress in the web and the maximum principal stress at the web-flange junction
do not exceed the given allowable stresses.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Reactions at A and D. 	Draw the free-body diagram (Fig. 1) of the beam.
From the equilibrium equations ΣMD = 0 and ΣMA = 0, the values of RA and
RD are as shown.
Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams. 	Using the methods discussed
in Secs. 5.1 and 5.2, draw the diagrams (Fig. 1) and observe that
∣M∣max = 239.4 kip·ft = 2873 kip·in. 	∣V∣max = 43 kips
Section Modulus. 	For ∣M ∣max = 2873 kip·in. and σall = 24 ksi, the mini-
mum acceptable section modulus of the rolled-steel shape is
Smin = ∣M∣max
σall
= 2873 kip·in.
24 ksi = 119.7 in3
Selection of Wide-Flange Shape. 	Choose from the table of Properties
of Rolled-Steel Shapes in Appendix E the lightest shapes of a given depth
that have a section modulus larger than Smin.
Shape 	S (in3)
W24 × 68 	154
W21 × 62 	127
W18 × 76 	146
W16 × 77 	134
W14 × 82 	123
W12 × 96 	131
The lightest shape available is W21 × 62 	◂
B
D	C
20 kips
3.2 kips/ft
9 ft
20 ft 5 ft
A
D	C 59 kips	41 kips
41 kips
12.2 kips 16 kips
– 7.8 kips
239.4 kip·ft
– 43 kips
– 40 kip·ft
(– 279.4)
(239.4)
(40)
9 ft 	11 ft 5 ft
V
x
x
M
B
20 kips
3.2 kips/ft
A
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of beam; shear
and bending-moment diagrams.

-- 581 of 897 --

8.2 Design of Transmission Shafts 	567
Shearing Stress. 	For the beam design, assume that the maximum shear
is uniformly distributed over the web area of a W21 × 62 (Fig. 2). Write
τ m = Vmax
Aweb
= 43 kips
8.40 in2 = 5.12 ksi < 14.5 ksi 	(OK)
Principal Stress at Point b. 	The maximum principal stress at point b in
the critical section where M is maximum should not exceed σall = 24 ksi.
Referring to Fig. 3, we write
σ a = Mmax
S = 2873 kip·in.
127 in3 	= 22.6 ksi
σ b = σ a
yb
c = (22.6 ksi) 9.88 in.
10.50 in. = 21.3 ksi
Conservatively, τb = V
Aweb
= 12.2 kips
8.40 in2 = 1.45 ksi
22.6 ksi
21.3 ksi	10.5 in.
9.88 in.
a
b
t f 	0.615 in.
σb
σa
=
= 	=
Fig. 3 	Key stress analysis locations and normal
stress distribution.
Draw Mohr’s circle (Fig. 4) and find
σmax = 1
2 σ b + R = 21.3 ksi
2 + √ (
21.3 ksi
2 	)
2
+ (1.45 ksi) 2
σmax = 21.4 ksi ≤ 24 ksi 	(OK) 	◂
tw = 0.400 in.
Aweb = t wd = 8.40 in2
W21 × 62
S = 127 in3	
d = 21 in.
Fig. 2 	I-shape cross-section properties.
A
C 	O B
Y
X
1.45 ksi
1.45 ksi
21.3 ksi
21.3 ksi
21.4 ksi
σb
σ
σmax
τb
τ
σb
τb
=
=
=
=
=
Fig. 4 	Stress element at point b and
Mohr’s circle for point b.

-- 582 of 897 --

568 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Sample Problem 8.3
The solid shaft AB rotates at 480 rpm and transmits 30 kW from the motor
M to machine tools connected to gears G and H; 20 kW is taken off at gear
G and 10 kW at gear H. Knowing that τall = 50 MPa, determine the smallest
permissible diameter for shaft AB.
STRATEGY: 	After determining the forces and couples exerted on the
shaft, you can obtain its bending-moment and torque diagrams. Using these
diagrams to aid in identifying the critical transverse section, you can then
determine the required shaft diameter.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the shaft and gears (Fig. 1).
Observing that f = 480 rpm = 8 Hz, the torque exerted on gear E is
TE = P
2πf = 30 kW
2π(8 Hz) = 597 N·m
The corresponding tangential force acting on the gear is
FE = TE
r E
= 597 N·m
0.16 m = 3.73 kN
A similar analysis of gears C and D yields
TC = 20 kW
2π(8 Hz) = 398 N·m 	F C = 6.63 kN
TD = 10 kW
2π(8 Hz) = 199 N·m 	F D = 2.49 kN
Now replace the forces on the gears by equivalent force-couple systems as
shown in Fig. 2.
200
G
A
H
C
B
M
D 	E
r E = 160
rC = 60 	r D = 80
200
Dimensions in mm
200 	200
A 	C 	D 	E
rC = 0.060 m
r E = 0.160 m
FE = 3.73 kN
FC = 6.63 kN FD = 2.49 kN
r D = 0.080 m
B
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of shaft AB and
its gears.
A C 	D 	E
y
FE = 3.73 kN
FD = 2.49 kN
FC = 6.63 kN
TD = 199 N·m
TE = 597 N·m
TC = 398 N·m
B x
z
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of shaft AB, with
gear forces replaced by equivalent force-
couple systems.

-- 583 of 897 --

8.2 Design of Transmission Shafts 	569
ANALYSIS:
Bending-Moment and Torque Diagrams (Fig. 3)
Critical Transverse Section. 	By computing √M 2
y + M 2
z + T 2 at all
potentially critical sections (Fig. 4), the maximum value occurs just to the
right of D:
( √M 2
y + M 2
z + T 2 ) max = √ (1160) 2 + (373) 2 + (597) 2 = 1357 N·m
Diameter of Shaft. 	For τall = 50 MPa, Eq. (7.32) yields
J
c = ( √M 2
y + M 2
z + T 2 ) max
τall
= 1357 N·m
50 MPa = 27.14 × 10−6 m3
For a solid circular shaft of radius c,
J
c = π
2 c 3 = 27.14 × 10−6 	c = 0.02585 m = 25.85 mm
Diameter = 2c = 51.7 mm 	◂
FE = 3.73 kN
FC = 6.63 kN
1244 N·m 1160 N·m
580 N·m
FD = 2.49 kN 	TE = 597 N·m
597 N·m	398 N·m
TD = 199 N·m
TC = 398 N·m
2.80 kN	0.932 kN
0.6 m
373 N·m 	560 N·m
	186 N·m
0.2 m
A 	E
y
B x
z
M z
A 	C 	D 	E 	B
6.22 kN 	2.90 kN	0.2 m
0.4 m
A
A
y
B	C
C
D
D
x
z
My C 	D
E 	B
A
A
y
T
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
x
z
Fig. 3 	Analysis of free-body diagram of shaft AB alone with equivalent force-couple loads is equivalent to superposition
of bending moments from vertical loads, horizontal loads, and applied torques.
My
Mz
y
x
T
Fig. 4 	Bending-moment components
and torque at critical section.

-- 584 of 897 --

570
8.1 A W10 × 39 rolled-steel beam supports a load P as shown. Knowing
that P = 45 kips, a = 10 in., and σall = 18 ksi, determine (a) the
maximum value of the normal stress σm in the beam, (b) the maxi-
mum value of the principal stress σmax at the junction of the flange
and web, (c) whether the specified shape is acceptable as far as these
two stresses are concerned.
8.2 Solve Prob. 8.1, assuming that P = 22.5 kips and a = 20 in.
8.3 An overhanging W920 × 449 rolled-steel beam supports a load P as
shown. Knowing that P = 700 kN, a = 2.5 m, and σall = 100 MPa,
determine (a) the maximum value of the normal stress σm in the
beam, (b) the maximum value of the principal stress σmax at the
junction of the flange and web, (c) whether the specified shape is
acceptable as far as these two stresses are concerned.
8.4 Solve Prob. 8.3, assuming that P = 850 kN and a = 2.0 m.
8.5 and 8.6 	(a) Knowing that σall = 160 MPa and τall = 100 MPa, select
the most economical metric wide-flange shape that should be used
to support the loading shown. (b) Determine the values to be expected
for σm, τm, and the principal stress σmax at the junction of a flange
and the web of the selected beam.
Problems
A 	D
C	B
a 	a	
10 ft
P 	P
Fig. P8.1
P
B
C	A
a 	a
Fig. P8.3
A 	B 	C 	D 	E
0.9 m 	0.9 m 	0.9 m 	0.9 m
250 kN 250 kN	250 kN
Fig. P8.5
D
B 	C
A
1.5 m 3.6 m 1.5 m
275 kN
275 kN
Fig. P8.6
A 	B 	C D
10 ft 30 ft 10 ft
20 kips 	20 kips
2 kips/ft
Fig. P8.7
A
B 	E
F
C 	D
2 ft 2 ft 	2 ft 2 ft
6 ft
11 kips/ft 	20 kips	20 kips
Fig. P8.8
8.7 and 8.8 	(a) Knowing that σall = 24 ksi and τall = 14.5 ksi, select the
most economical wide-flange shape that should be used to support
the loading shown. (b) Determine the values to be expected for σm,
τm, and the principal stress σmax at the junction of a flange and the
web of the selected beam.

-- 585 of 897 --

571
8.9 through 8.14 	Each of the following problems refers to a rolled-steel
shape selected in a problem of Chap. 5 to support a given loading
at a minimal cost while satisfying the requirement σm ≤ σall. For the
selected design, determine (a) the actual value of σm in the beam,
(b) the maximum value of the principal stress σmax at the junction of
a flange and the web.
8.9 Loading of Prob. 5.73 and selected W410 × 60 shape.
8.10 Loading of Prob. 5.74 and selected W250 × 28.4 shape.
8.11 Loading of Prob. 5.75 and selected S12 × 31.8 shape.
8.12 Loading of Prob. 5.76 and selected S15 × 42.9 shape.
8.13 Loading of Prob. 5.77 and selected S510 × 98.2 shape.
8.14 Loading of Prob. 5.78 and selected S310 × 47.3 shape.
8.15 Determine the smallest allowable diameter of the solid shaft
ABCD, knowing that τall = 60 MPa and that the radius of disk B
is r = 80 mm.
150 mm
T = 600 N·m
P B
C
A
D
150 mm
r
Fig. P8.15 and P8.16
D
100 mm
60 mm
90 mm
4 kN
Q	B
C
A
y
z
x
80 mm
140 mm
Fig. P8.18
8.16 Determine the smallest allowable diameter of the solid shaft
ABCD, knowing that τall = 60 MPa and that the radius of disk B
is r = 120 mm.
8.17 Using the notation of Sec. 8.2 and neglecting the effect of shearing
stresses caused by transverse loads, show that the maximum normal
stress in a circular shaft can be expressed as follows:
σmax = c
J[(M 2
y + M 2
z ) 1
2 + (M 2
y + M 2
z + T 2 )
1
2
]max
8.18 The 4-kN force is parallel to the x axis, and the force Q is parallel
to the z axis. The shaft AD is hollow. Knowing that the inner diam-
eter is half the outer diameter and that τall = 60 MPa, determine the
smallest permissible outer diameter of the shaft.

-- 586 of 897 --

572
8.19 Neglecting the effects of fillets and of stress concentrations, deter-
mine the smallest permissible diameters of the solid rods AB and BD.
Use τall = 8 ksi.
B
D
A
8 in.
1200 lb·in.
120 lb
300 lb
10 in.
Fig. P8.19 and P8.20
8.20 Knowing that rods AB and BD are of diameter 1.25 in. and 1.75 in.,
respectively, determine the maximum shearing stress in each rod.
Neglect the effect of fillets and of stress concentrations.
8.21 It was stated in Sec. 8.2 that the shearing stresses produced in a shaft
by the transverse loads are usually much smaller than those produced
by the torques. In the preceding problems their effect was ignored,
and it was assumed that the maximum shearing stress in a given
section occurred at point H (see Fig. P8.21a) and was equal to the
expression obtained in Eq. (8.5), namely,
τH = c
J √M2 + T2
Show that the maximum shearing stress at point K (see Fig. P8.21b),
where the effect of the shear V is greatest, can be expressed as
τ K = c
J √ (M cos β) 2 + (
2
3 cV + T)
2
where β is the angle between the vectors V and M. It is clear that
the effect of the shear V cannot be ignored when τK ≥ τH. (Hint:
Only the component of M along V contributes to the shearing stress
at K.)
Fig. P8.21
H
90°
O
V
M
T
(a)
M
β
H
90°
O
V
M
T
90°
(a)
(b)
O
M
T
K
β

-- 587 of 897 --

573
8.22 Assuming that the magnitudes of the forces applied to disks A and C
are, respectively, P1 = 1080 lb and P2 = 810 lb, and using the expres-
sions given in Prob. 8.21, determine the values of τH and τK in a
section (a) just to the left of B, (b) just to the left of C.
8.23 The solid shaft AB rotates at 720 rpm and transmits 50 kW from the
motor M to machine tools connected to gears E and F. Knowing that
τall = 50 MPa and assuming that 20 kW is taken off at gear E and
30 kW is taken off at gear F, determine the smallest permissible
diameter of shaft AB.
90 mm
150 mm
150 mm
200 mm	M
A
C
D
F
E
B
Fig. P8.23
8.24 Solve Prob. 8.23, assuming that 25 kW is taken off at each gear.
8.25 The solid shafts ABC and DEF and the gears shown are used to
transmit 20 hp from the motor M to a machine tool connected to
shaft DEF. Knowing that the motor rotates at 240 rpm and that
τall = 7.5 ksi, determine the smallest permissible diameter of
(a) shaft ABC, (b) shaft DEF.
M
A B
3.5 in. 	D
6 in.
8 in.
4 in.
E
F
C
Fig. P8.25
8.26 Solve Prob. 8.25, assuming that the motor rotates at 360 rpm.
A
3 in. 10 in.
10 in.
8 in.
B
C D
6 in.
P1
P2
Fig. P8.22

-- 588 of 897 --

574
8.27 The solid shaft ABC and the gears shown are used to transmit 10 kW
from the motor M to a machine tool connected to gear D. Knowing
that the motor rotates at 240 rpm and that τall = 60 MPa, determine
the smallest permissible diameter of shaft ABC.
90 mm
100 mm M
C
B
D
E
C
A
Fig. P8.27
M
A
3 in.
C
F
B
4 in.
6 in.
6 in.
8 in.
C
D
H
G
4 in.
4 in.
E
Fig. P8.29
8.28 Assuming that shaft ABC of Prob. 8.27 is hollow and has an outer
diameter of 50 mm, determine the largest permissible inner diameter
of the shaft.
8.29 The solid shaft AE rotates at 600 rpm and transmits 60 hp from the
motor M to machine tools connected to gears G and H. Knowing
that τall = 8 ksi and that 40 hp is taken off at gear G and 20 hp is
taken off at gear H, determine the smallest permissible diameter of
shaft AE.
8.30 Solve Prob. 8.29, assuming that 30 hp is taken off at gear G and
30 hp is taken off at gear H.

-- 589 of 897 --

8.3 Stresses Under Combined Loads 	575
8.3 	STRESSES UNDER
COMBINED LOADS
In Chaps. 1 and 2 you learned to determine the stresses caused by a centric
axial load. In Chap. 3, you analyzed the distribution of stresses in a cylindri-
cal member subjected to a twisting couple. In Chap. 4, you determined the
stresses caused by bending couples and, in Chaps. 5 and 6, the stresses pro-
duced by transverse loads. In this section, we will determine the principal
stresses in slender structural members or machine components under fairly
general loading conditions, i.e., when there is more than a single type of load-
ing. For example, the bent member ABDE of circular cross section is subjected
to several forces (Fig. 8.15). To determine the stresses at points H or K, we
first pass a section through these points and determine the force-couple system
at the centroid C of the section that is required to maintain the equilibrium
of portion ABC.† This system represents the internal forces in the section and
consists of three force components and three couple vectors that are assumed
to be directed as shown in Fig. 8.16.
†The force-couple system at C can also be defined as equivalent to the forces acting on the
portion of the member located to the right of the section (see Concept Application 8.1).
F3
F4
F6
F5
F2
F1
B
D
E
K
H
A
Fig. 8.15 	Member ABDE subjected to
several forces.
My
T
P
Mz
Vz	
F3
F2
F1 	Vy
B
y
x
z
C
A
Fig. 8.16 	Free-body diagram of segment ABC to determine
the internal forces and couples at cross section C.
Force P is a centric axial force that produces normal stresses in the
section. The couple vectors My and Mz cause the member to bend and also
produce normal stresses in the section. These have been grouped in Fig. 8.17a,
and the sums σx of the normal stresses produced at points H and K are shown
in Fig. 8.18a. These stresses can be determined as shown in Sec. 4.9.
My 	Vy
Vz
P
Mz
C
T
(a) 	(b)
C
Fig. 8.17 	Internal forces and couple vectors
separated into (a) those causing normal stresses
and (b) those causing shearing stresses.
C
H
K
(a) 	(b)
C	K 	C
H
C	K
σx
σx
τ xy
τ xz
Fig. 8.18 	Normal and shearing stresses
at points H and K.

-- 590 of 897 --

576 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
On the other hand, the twisting couple T and the shearing forces Vy and
Vz as shown in Fig. 8.17b produce shearing stresses in the section. The sums τxy
and τxz of the components of the shearing stresses produced at points H and K
are shown in Fig. 8.18b and can be determined as indicated in Secs. 3.1C and
6.1B.† The normal and shearing stresses shown in parts a and b are now com-
bined and displayed at points H and K on the surface of the member (Fig. 8.19).
The principal stresses and the orientation of the principal planes at points
H and K are determined from σx, τxy, and τxz at each of these points by one of
the methods presented in Chap. 7 (Fig. 8.20). The maximum shearing stress at
each of these points and the corresponding planes can be found in a similar way.
The results in this section are valid only if the conditions of applicabil-
ity of the superposition principle (Sec. 2.5) and of Saint-Venant’s principle
(Sec. 2.10) are met:
1. The stresses involved must not exceed the proportional limit of the
material.
2. The deformations due to one of the loadings must not affect the deter-
mination of the stresses due to the others.
3. The section used in your analysis must not be too close to the points
of application of the given forces.
The first of these requirements shows that the method presented here cannot
be applied to plastic deformations.
†Note that your present knowledge allows you to determine the effect of the twisting couple
T only in circular shafts, members with a rectangular cross section (Sec. 3.9), or thin-walled
hollow members (Sec. 3.10).
K
H
σx
τ xy
σx
τ xz
Fig. 8.19 	Elements at points H and K
showing combined stresses.
K
H
θp
θp
Fig. 8.20 	Elements at points H and K
showing principal stresses.
Concept Application 8.1
Two forces P1 and P2, with a magnitude of P1 = 15 kN and P2 = 18 kN,
are applied as shown in Fig. 8.21a to the end A of bar AB, which is welded
to a cylindrical member BD of radius c = 20 mm. Knowing that the dis-
tance from A to the axis of member BD is a = 50 mm and assuming that
all stresses remain below the proportional limit of the material, determine
(a) the normal and shearing stresses at point K of the transverse section
of member BD located at a distance b = 60 mm from end B, (b) the principal
axes and principal stresses at K, and (c) the maximum shearing stress at K.
H	D
K
B
A P1 = 15 kN
P2 = 18 kN
b = 60 mm 	a = 50 mm
(a)
Fig. 8.21 	Cylindrical member under combined
loading. (a) Dimensions and loading.

-- 591 of 897 --

8.3 Stresses Under Combined Loads 	577
Internal Forces in Given Section. 	Replace the forces P1 and P2 by an
equivalent system of forces and couples applied at the center C of the section
containing point K (Fig. 8.21b). This system represents the internal forces in
the section and consists of the following forces and couples:
1. A centric axial force F equal to the force P1 with the magnitude
F = P1 = 15 kN
2. A shearing force V equal to the force P2 with the magnitude
V = P2 = 18 kN
3. A twisting couple T of torque T equal to the moment of P2 about the
axis of member BD:
T = P2 a = (18 kN)(50 mm) = 900 N·m
4. A bending couple My of moment My equal to the moment of P1 about a
vertical axis through C:
My = P1a = (15 kN)(50 mm) = 750 N·m
5. A bending couple Mz of moment Mz equal to the moment of P2 about a
transverse, horizontal axis through C:
M z = P2 b = (18 kN)(60 mm) = 1080 N·m
The results are shown in Fig. 8.21c.
a. Normal and Shearing Stresses at Point K. 	Each of the forces and
couples shown in Fig. 8.21c produce a normal or shear stress at point K.
Compute each of these stresses separately and then add the normal stresses
and add the shearing stresses.
Geometric Properties of the Section. 	For the given data, we have
A = πc 2 = π(0.020 m) 2 = 1.257 × 10−3 m2
Iy = Iz = 1
4 πc4 = 1
4 π(0.020 m) 4 = 125.7 × 10−9 m4
J C = 1
2 πc4 = 1
2 π(0.020 m) 4 = 251.3 × 10−9 m4
Also determine the first moment Q and the width t of the area of the cross
section located above the z axis. Recall that y = 4c∕3π for a semicircle of
radius c, giving
Q = A′y = (
1
2 πc 2
)(
4c
3π) = 2
3 c 3 = 2
3 (0.020 m) 3
= 5.33 × 10−6 m3
and
t = 2c = 2(0.020 m) = 0.040 m
(continued)
K
D H
C
Mz
My
V
F
T
(b)
T = 900 N·m
y
3π
4c
x
C
K
z
V = 18 kN
F = 15 kN
y =
Mz
My = 750 N·m
(c)
τxy 	σx
Fig. 8.21 	(cont.) (b) Internal forces
and couples at section containing points
H and K. (c) Values of forces and couples
that produce stresses at point K, as well
as the dimension needed to compute
the first moment of area.

-- 592 of 897 --

578 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Normal Stresses. 	Normal stresses are produced at K by the centric force
F and the bending couple My. However, the couple Mz does not produce any
stress at K, since K is located on the neutral axis corresponding to that couple.
Determining each sign from Fig. 8.21c gives
σx = − F
A + My c
Iy
= −11.9 MPa + (750 N·m)(0.020 m)
125.7 × 10−9 m4
= −11.9 MPa + 119.3 MPa
= +107.4 MPa
Shearing Stresses. 	The shearing stress (τxy)V is due to the vertical shear V,
and the shearing stress (τxy)twist is caused by the torque T. Using the values
for Q, t, Iz, and JC,
(τ xy)V = + VQ
Iz t = + (18 × 103 N)( 5.33 × 10−6 m3 )
(125.7 × 10−9 m4 )(0.040 m)
= +19.1 MPa
(τ xy) twist = − Tc
J C
= − (900 N·m)(0.020 m)
251.3 × 10−9 m4 	= −71.6 MPa
Adding these provides τxy at point K.
τ xy = (τ xy)V + (τ xy) twist = +19.1 MPa − 71.6 MPa
= −52.5 MPa
In Fig. 8.21d, the normal stress σx and the shearing stresses τxy are acting on
a square element located at K on the surface of the cylindrical member. Note
that shearing stresses acting on the longitudinal sides of the element also are
included.
D
A
15 kN
18 kN
(d)
τxy = −52.5 MPa
σx = +107.4 MPa
Fig. 8.21 	(cont.) (d) Element showing combined
stresses at point K.

-- 593 of 897 --

8.3 Stresses Under Combined Loads 	579
b. Principal Planes and Principal Stresses at Point K. 	Either of
the two methods from Chap. 7 can be used to determine the principal planes
and principal stresses at K. Selecting Mohr’s circle, plot point X with coor-
dinates σx = +107.4 MPa and −τxy = +52.5 MPa and point Y with coordinates
σy = 0 and +τxy = −52.5 MPa and draw the circle with the diameter XY
(Fig. 8.21e). Observing that
OC = CD = 1
2 (107.4) = 53.7 MPa 	DX = 52.5 MPa
we determine the orientation of the principal planes:
tan 2θp = DX
CD = 52.5
53.7 = 0.97765 	2θp = 44.4° ⤸
θp = 22.2° ⤸
The radius of the circle is
R = √ (53.7) 2 + (52.5) 2 = 75.1 MPa
and the principal stresses are
σmax = OC + R = 53.7 + 75.1 = 128.8 MPa
σmin = OC − R = 53.7 − 75.1 = −21.4 MPa
The results are shown in Fig. 8.21f.
c. Maximum Shearing Stress at Point K. 	This stress corresponds to
points E and F in Fig. 8.21e.
τmax = CE = R = 75.1 MPa
Observing that 2θs = 90° − 2θp = 90° − 44.4° = 45.6°, the planes of maxi-
mum shearing stress form an angle θs = 22.8°⤴ with the horizontal. The
corresponding element is shown in Fig. 8.21g. Note that the normal stresses
acting on this element are represented by OC in Fig. 8.21e and are equal to
+53.7 MPa.
A
F
X
Y
O	B
D
E
(MPa)
2θs
2θp
52.5
53.7 	53.7
107.4
(MPa)	
C
(e)
σ
τ
Fig. 8.21 	(cont.) (e) Mohr’s circle for
stresses at point K.
D
A
15 kN
18 kN
B
( f )
θp = 22.2°
σmin = −21.4 MPa
σmax = 128.8 MPa
D
A
15 kN
18 kN
θ s = 22.8°
σ = 53.7 MPa
B
= 75.1 MPa
(g)
τmax
Fig. 8.21 	(cont.) (f ) Principal stress element at point K. (g) Maximum shearing stress element at point K.

-- 594 of 897 --

580 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Sample Problem 8.4
A horizontal 500-lb force acts at point D of crankshaft AB held in static
equilibrium by a twisting couple T and reactions at A and B. Knowing
that the bearings are self-aligning and exert no couples on the shaft, deter-
mine the normal and shearing stresses at points H, J, K, and L located at
the ends of the vertical and horizontal diameters of a transverse section
located 2.5 in. to the left of bearing B.
STRATEGY: 	Begin by determining the internal forces and couples act-
ing on the transverse section containing the points of interest, and then
evaluate the stresses at these points due to each internal action. Combining
these results will provide the total state of stress at each point.
MODELING: 	Draw the free-body diagram of the crankshaft (Fig. 1). Find
A = B = 250 lb.
+⤴ΣM x = 0: 	−(500 lb)(1.8 in.) + T = 0 	T = 900 lb·in.
A
D
B
z
y
x
4.5 in. 4.5 in.
2.5 in.
1.8 in. 500 lb
A = 250 lb
B = 250 lb
T
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of crankshaft.
ANALYSIS:
Internal Forces in Transverse Section. 	Replace reaction B and the
twisting couple T by an equivalent force-couple system at the center C of
the transverse section containing H, J, K, and L (Fig. 2).
V = B = 250 lb 	T = 900 lb·in.
My = (250 lb)(2.5 in.) = 625 lb·in.
4.5 in.
0.90 in.	A
E
D
K
G
H
J
B 	T
4.5 in.
2.5 in.
1.8 in.
500 lb
E
J 	C
G
K
H
L
My = 625 lb·in.
T = 900 lb·in.
0.9-in. diameter
V = 250 lb
Fig. 2 	Resultant force-couple system at
section containing points H, J, K, and L.

-- 595 of 897 --

8.3 Stresses Under Combined Loads 	581
The geometric properties of the 0.9-in.-diameter section are
A = π(0.45 in.) 2 = 0.636 in2 	I = 1
4 π(0.45 in.) 4 = 32.2 × 10−3 in4
J = 1
2π(0.45 in.) 4 = 64.4 × 10−3 in4
Stresses Produced by Twisting Couple T. 	Using Eq. (3.10), deter-
mine the shearing stresses at points H, J, K, and L and show them in
Fig. 3.
τ = Tc
J = (900 lb·in.)(0.45 in.)
64.4 × 10−3 in4 	= 6290 psi
Stresses Produced by Shearing Force V. 	The shearing force V
produces no shearing stresses at points J and L. At points H and K, com-
pute Q for a semicircle about a vertical diameter and then determine the
shearing stress produced by the shear force V = 250 lb. These stresses are
shown in Fig. 4.
Q = (
1
2 πc2
)(
4c
3π) = 2
3 c3 = 2
3 (0.45 in.) 3 = 60.7 × 10−3 in3
τ = VQ
It = (250 lb)(60.7 × 10−3 in3 )
(32.2 × 10−3 in4 )(0.9 in.) = 524 psi
Stresses Produced by the Bending Couple My. 	Since the bending
couple My acts in a horizontal plane, it produces no stresses at H and K. Use
Eq. (4.15) to determine the normal stresses at points J and L and show them
in Fig. 5.
σ = ∣My∣c
I = (625 lb·in.)(0.45 in.)
32.2 × 10−3 in4 	= 8730 psi
Summary. 	Add the stresses shown to obtain the total normal and shearing
stresses at points H, J, K, and L (Fig. 6).
J
K
H
L
τ = 6290 psi
τ = 6290 psi
τ = 6290 psi
τ = 6290 psi
Fig. 3 	Shearing stresses resulting
from torque T.
J
K
H
L
τ = 0
τ = 524 psi
τ = 524 psi
Fig. 4 	Shearing stresses resulting
from shearing force V.
J
K
H
L
σ = 0
σ = 0
σ = 8730 psi
σ = 8730 psi
Fig. 5 	Normal stresses resulting
from bending couple My.
J
K
H
L
τ = 5770 psi
τ = 6290 psi
σ = 8730 psi
σ = 8730 psi
τ = 6810 psi
τ = 6290 psi
Fig. 6 	Stress components at points H,
J, K, and L from combining all loads.

-- 596 of 897 --

582 	Principal Stresses Under a Given Loading
Sample Problem 8.5
Three forces are applied as shown at points A, B, and D of a short steel post.
Knowing that the horizontal cross section of the post is a 40 × 140-mm rect-
angle, determine the principal stresses, principal planes, and maximum shear-
ing stress at point H.
STRATEGY: 	Begin by determining the forces and couples acting on the
section containing the point of interest, and then use these to calculate the
normal and shearing stresses acting at the point. Using Mohr’s circle, these
stresses can then be transformed to obtain the principal stresses, principal
planes, and maximum shearing stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Internal Forces in Section EFG. 	Replace the three applied forces by
an equivalent force-couple system at the center C of the rectangular section
EFG (Fig. 1).
V x = −30 kN 	P = 50 kN 	V z = −75 kN
M x = (50 kN)(0.130 m) − (75 kN)(0.200 m) = −8.5 kN·m
My = 0 	M z = (30 kN)(0.100 m) = 3 kN·m
Fig. 1 	Equivalent force-couple
system at section containing points E,
F, G, and H.
E 	C
F
H
G
z
y
Mx 	8.5 kN· m
Vx 	30 kN P 	50 kN
Vz 	75 kN
Mz 	3 kN· m 	x
=
=
=
=
=
Note that there is no twisting couple about the y axis. The geometric
properties of the rectangular section are
A = (0.040 m)(0.140 m) = 5.6 × 10−3 m2
Ix = 1
12 (0.040 m)(0.140 m) 3 = 9.15 × 10−6 m4
Iz = 1
12 (0.140 m)(0.040 m) 3 = 0.747 × 10−6 m4
70 mm
100 mm
25 mm
200 mm
130 mm
75 kN
50 kN
30 kN
20 mm	40 mm
z 	x
E
A
B
y
G
D
F
H
140 mm

-- 597 of 897 --

8.3 Stresses Under Combined Loads 	583
Normal Stress at H. 	The normal stresses σy are produced by the centric
force P and by the bending couples Mx and Mz. The sign of each stress is
determined by carefully examining the force-couple system at C (Fig. 2).
σ y = + P
A + ∣Mz∣a
Iz
− ∣Mx∣b
Ix
= 50 kN
5.6 × 10−3 m2 + (3 kN·m)(0.020 m)
0.747 × 10−6 m4 	− (8.5 kN·m)(0.025 m)
9.15 × 10−6 m4
= 8.93 MPa + 80.3 MPa − 23.2 MPa 	σy = 66.0 MPa 	◂
Shearing Stress at H. 	Considering the shearing force Vx, we note that
Q = 0 with respect to the z axis, since H is on the edge of the cross section.
Thus, Vx produces no shearing stress at H. The shearing force Vz does pro-
duce a shearing stress at H (Fig. 3).
Q = A1y1 = [(0.040 m)(0.045 m)](0.0475 m) = 85.5 × 10−6 m3
τ yz = VzQ
Ix t = (75 kN)(85.5 × 10−6 m3 )
(9.15 × 10−6 m4 )(0.040 m) τyz = 17.52 MPa 	◂
Principal Stresses, Principal Planes, and Maximum Shearing
Stress at H. 	Draw Mohr’s circle for the stresses at point H (Fig. 4).
tan 2θp = 17.52
33.0 2θp = 27.96° 	θp = 13.98° 	◂
R = √ (33.0) 2 + (17.52) 2 = 37.4 MPa 	τmax = 37.4 MPa 	◂
σmax = OA = OC + R = 33.0 + 37.4 	σmax = 70.4 MPa 	◂
σmin = OB = OC − R = 33.0 − 37.4 	σmin = −7.4 MPa 	◂
E
C
G
H 	b = 0.025 m
0.040 m
a = 0.020 m
0.140 m
F
	z
Mz 	8.5 kN·m
Mz 	3 kN·m
=
=
Fig. 2 	Dimensions and bending couples
used to determine normal stresses.
H
C
A1
Vz
t = 0.040 m
0.045 m
0.025 m y1 = 0.0475 m
z
τ yz
Fig. 3 	Dimensions and shearing force
used to determine the transverse
shearing stress.
C	O
B
33.0 	33.0
13.98°
A	D
R
Y
Z
2θ p
66.0 MPa
17.52 MPa
(MPa)
(MPa)
σmin
σmin
σmax
σmax
σ
σy
σy τyz
τ yz
τmax
τ
=
=
Fig. 4 	Mohr’s circle at point H used for
finding principal stresses and maximum
shearing stress and their orientation.

-- 598 of 897 --

584
Problems
8.31 A 6-kip force is applied to the machine element AB as shown. Know-
ing that the uniform thickness of the element is 0.8 in., determine the
normal and shearing stresses at (a) point a, (b) point b, (c) point c.
6 kips	8 in. 	8 in.
35°
8 in.
1.5 in.
1.5 in.
B 	a
b
c
d
A
e
f
Fig. P8.31 and P8.32
8.32 A 6-kip force is applied to the machine element AB as shown.
Knowing that the uniform thickness of the element is 0.8 in., deter-
mine the normal and shearing stresses at (a) point d, (b) point e,
(c) point f.
8.33 The cantilever beam AB has a rectangular cross section of 150 ×
200 mm. Knowing that the tension in the cable BD is 10.4 kN and
neglecting the weight of the beam, determine the normal and shear-
ing stresses at the three points indicated.
8.34 through 8.36 	Member AB has a uniform rectangular cross section
of 10 × 24 mm. For the loading shown, determine the normal and
shearing stresses at (a) point H, (b) point K.
0.75 m
200 mm
14 kN
150 mm
0.3 m 0.6 m
0.9 m
100 mm
100 mm
A
D
E 	B
b
b
c
a
c
a
Fig. P8.33
30°
60 mm
60 mm
K	H
G
B
A
12 mm
12 mm
40 mm
9 kN
Fig. P8.34
30°
60 mm
60 mm
K	H
G
B
A
12 mm
12 mm
40 mm
9 kN
Fig. P8.35
30°
60 mm
60 mm
K	H
G
B
A
12 mm
12 mm
40 mm
9 kN
Fig. P8.36

-- 599 of 897 --

585
8.37 The axle of a small truck is acted upon by the forces and couple shown.
Knowing that the diameter of the axle is 1.42 in., determine the normal
and shearing stresses at point H located on the top of the axle.
8.38 Several forces are applied to the pipe assembly shown. Knowing that
each section of pipe has inner and outer diameters equal to 36 and
42 mm, respectively, determine the normal and shearing stresses at
point H located at the top of the outer surface of the pipe.
8 in.
10 in.
H	750 lb
750 lb
3500 lb·in.
Fig. P8.37
300
175
250
225
Dimensions in mm
225
150 N
150 N
100 N
100 N
x
y
H
z
Fig. P8.38
4 in.
6 in.
4 in.
H
y
z
K
150 lb
50 lb
x
10 in.
150 lb
200 lb
D
Fig. P8.39
50 mm
225 mm
20 mm
A
H E
D
B
z
x
y
t = 8 mm
60°
Fig. P8.40
8.40 The steel pile AB has a 100-mm outer diameter and an 8-mm wall
thickness. Knowing that the tension in the cable is 40 kN, determine
the normal and shearing stresses at point H.
8.39 Several forces are applied to the pipe assembly shown. Knowing that
the pipe has inner and outer diameters equal to 1.61 in. and 1.90 in.,
respectively, determine the normal and shearing stresses at (a) point H,
(b) point K.

-- 600 of 897 --

586
8.41 Forces are applied at points A and B of the solid cast-iron bracket
shown. Knowing that the bracket has a diameter of 0.8 in., determine
the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at (a) point H,
(b) point K.
8.42 The steel pipe AB has a 72-mm outer diameter and a 5-mm wall
thickness. Knowing that the arm CDE is rigidly attached to the pipe,
determine the principal stresses, principal planes, and the maximum
shearing stress at point H.
H
B
A
z
y
x
K
600 lb
3.5 in.
2.5 in.
1 in.
2500 lb
Fig. P8.41
120 mm
120 mm
150 mm
9 kN
3 kN
x
z
y
E
D
C
A
B
H
K
Fig. P8.42 and P8.43
8.43 The steel pipe AB has a 72-mm outer diameter and a 5-mm wall
thickness. Knowing that arm CDE is rigidly attached to the pipe,
determine the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at
point K.
8.44 A vertical force P of magnitude 60 lb is applied to the crank at point A.
Knowing that the shaft BDE has a diameter of 0.75 in., determine
the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at point H
located at the top of the shaft, 2 in. to the right of support D.
60°
8 in.
2 in.
5 in.
1 in.
z
E
D
H
A
x
B
y
P
Fig. P8.44

-- 601 of 897 --

587
8.45 Three forces are applied to the bar shown. Determine the normal and
shearing stresses at (a) point a, (b) point b, (c) point c.
4 in.
3 kips
H
K
C
3 in.
2 in.
15 in.
7 in.
5 in.
4 in.
6 in.
2 kips
24 kips
Fig. P8.49
h = 10.5 in.
0.9 in.
4.8 in.
1.8 in.
0.9 in. 	2.4 in.
50 kips
2 kips
6 kips
2 in.
1.2 in.
1.2 in.
a b c
C
Fig. P8.45
24 mm
15 mm
32 mm
60 mm
180 mm
a b c
C
40 mm
30 mm
500 N
750 N
10 kN
16 mm
Fig. P8.47
8.46 Solve Prob. 8.45, assuming that h = 12 in.
8.47 Three forces are applied to the bar shown. Determine the normal and
shearing stresses at (a) point a, (b) point b, (c) point c.
8.48 Solve Prob. 8.47, assuming that the 750-N force is directed vertically
upward.
8.49 Three forces are applied to the cantilever beam shown. Determine
the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at point H.
8.50 For the beam and loading of Prob. 8.49, determine the principal
stresses and maximum shearing stress at point K.

-- 602 of 897 --

588
8.51 Three forces are applied to the machine component ABD as shown.
Knowing that the cross section containing point H is a 20 × 40-mm
rectangle, determine the principal stresses and the maximum shear-
ing stress at point H.
50 mm
150 mm
160 mm
40 mm
3 kN
0.5 kN
2.5 kN
20 mm
z
x
y
A
B
D
H
Fig. P8.51
C
C
x
y
a b d e
400 mm	60 mm
30 mm
60 mm 	75 mm
9 kN
13 kN
150 mm
t = 13 mm
Fig. P8.53 and P8.54
y
a
0.6 m
1.2 m
75 mm
W310 × 60
P1
P2
a
b 	b
x
Fig. P8.55 and P8.56
8.52 Solve Prob. 8.51, assuming that the magnitude of the 2.5-kN force
is increased to 10 kN.
8.53 Three steel plates, each 13 mm thick, are welded together to form a
cantilever beam. For the loading shown, determine the normal and
shearing stresses at points a and b.
8.54 Three steel plates, each 13 mm thick, are welded together to form a
cantilever beam. For the loading shown, determine the normal and
shearing stresses at points d and e.
8.55 Two forces P1 and P2 are applied as shown in directions perpen-
dicular to the longitudinal axis of a W310 × 60 beam. Knowing that
P1 = 25 kN and P2 = 24 kN, determine the principal stresses and
the maximum shearing stress at point a.
8.56 Two forces P1 and P2 are applied as shown in directions perpen-
dicular to the longitudinal axis of a W310 × 60 beam. Knowing that
P1 = 25 kN and P2 = 24 kN, determine the principal stresses and
the maximum shearing stress at point b.

-- 603 of 897 --

589
8.57 Two forces are applied to a W8 × 28 rolled-steel beam as shown.
Determine the principal stresses and maximum shearing stress at
point a.
y
a
a
b
b
90 kips
24 in.
4 in.
W8 × 28
20 kips
x
Fig. P8.57 and P8.58
A
a
B
C
b
h
P
l
β
Fig. P8.59
W250 × 44.8
l = 1.25 m 	a
A
B
P
β
Fig. P8.60
8.58 Two forces are applied to a W8 × 28 rolled-steel beam as shown.
Determine the principal stresses and maximum shearing stress at
point b.
8.59 A force P is applied to a cantilever beam by means of a cable
attached to a bolt located at the center of the free end of the beam.
Knowing that P acts in a direction perpendicular to the longitudinal
axis of the beam, determine (a) the normal stress at point a in terms
of P, b, h, l, and β, (b) the values of β for which the normal stress
at a is zero.
8.60 A vertical force P is applied at the center of the free end of cantilever
beam AB. (a) If the beam is installed with the web vertical (β = 0)
and with its longitudinal axis AB horizontal, determine the magnitude
of the force P for which the normal stress at point a is +120 MPa.
(b) Solve part a, assuming that the beam is installed with β = 3°.

-- 604 of 897 --

590
*8.61 A 5-kN force P is applied to a wire that is wrapped around bar AB
as shown. Knowing that the cross section of the bar is a square of
side d = 40 mm, determine the principal stresses and the maximum
shearing stress at point a.
d
P
d
2
A
a
B
Fig. P8.61
H
K
3 in.
2 in.
10 in. 0.15 in.
9 kips
4 in.
6 in.
Fig. P8.62
3 in.
10 in.
15 kips
4 in.
2 in.
1.5 in.
a
A
b
Fig. P8.63
*8.62 Knowing that the structural tube shown has a uniform wall thickness
of 0.3 in., determine the principal stresses, principal planes, and
maximum shearing stress at (a) point H, (b) point K.
*8.63 The structural tube shown has a uniform wall thickness of 0.3 in.
Knowing that the 15-kip load is applied 0.15 in. above the base of
the tube, determine the shearing stress at (a) point a, (b) point b.
*8.64 For the tube and loading of Prob. 8.63, determine the principal
stresses and the maximum shearing stress at point b.

-- 605 of 897 --

591
Normal and Shearing Stresses in a Beam
The two fundamental relationships for the normal stress σx and the shearing
stress τxy at any given point of a cross section of a prismatic beam are
σx = − My
I (8.1)
and
τxy = − VQ
It (8.2)
where 	V = shear in the section
M = bending moment in the section
y = distance of the point from the neutral surface
I = centroidal moment of inertia of the cross section
Q = first moment about the neutral axis of the portion of the
cross section located above the given point
t = width of the cross section at the given point
Principal Planes and Principal Stresses in a Beam
Using one of the methods of Ch. 7 for the transformation of stresses, the
principal planes and principal stresses were obtained at various points
(Fig. 8.22).
We investigated the distribution of principal stresses in a narrow rectan-
gular cantilever beam subjected to a concentrated load P at its free end, and
found that in any given transverse section—except close to the point of applica-
tion of the load—the maximum principal stress σmax did not exceed the deter-
mination of the maximum normal stress σm occurring at the surface of the beam.
While this is true for many beams of nonrectangular cross section, it
may not hold for W-beams or S-beams, where σmax at the junctions b and d
of the web with the flanges of the beam (Fig. 8.23) may exceed the value
of σm occurring at points a and e. Therefore, the design of a rolled-steel
beam should include the determination of the maximum principal stress at
these points.
Review and Summary
c
y
y
x	O
c
σmax
σmax
σmin
σmin
σm
σm	σm
σm
Fig. 8.22 	Principal stress elements
at selected points of beam.
a
b
c
d
e
Fig. 8.23 	Key locations for
determination of principal
stresses in I-shaped beams.

-- 606 of 897 --

592
Design of Transmission Shafts Under Transverse Loads
The design of transmission shafts subjected to transverse loads and torques
should include consideration of both the normal stresses due to the bending
moment M and the shearing stresses due to the torque T. At any given trans-
verse section of a cylindrical shaft (either solid or hollow), the minimum
allowable value of the ratio J∕c for the cross section is:
J
c = (√M 2 + T 2 ) max
τall
(8.6)
Stresses Under General Loading Conditions
In preceding chapters, you learned to determine the stresses in prismatic mem-
bers caused by axial loadings (Chaps. 1 and 2), torsion (Chap. 3), bending
(Chap. 4), and transverse loadings (Chaps. 5 and 6). In the second part of this
chapter (Sec. 8.3), we combined this knowledge to determine stresses under
more general loading conditions.
F3
F4
F6
F5
F2
F1
B
D
E
K
H
A
Fig. 8.24 	Member ABCD subjected to several loads.
My
T
P
Mz
Vz	
F3
F2
F1 	Vy
B
y
x
z
C
A
Fig. 8.25 	Free-body diagram of segment ABC to determine
the internal forces and couples at cross section C.
For instance, to determine the stresses at point H or K of the bent
member shown in Fig. 8.24, a section is passed through these points and the
applied loads are replaced by an equivalent force-couple system at the centroid
C of the section (Fig. 8.25). The normal and shearing stresses produced at
H or K by each of the forces and couples applied at C are determined and
then combined to obtain the resulting normal stress σx and the resulting shear-
ing stresses τxy and τxz at H or K. The principal stresses, the orientation of the
principal planes, and the maximum shearing stress at point H or K are then
determined using one of the methods presented in Chap. 7.

-- 607 of 897 --

593
Review Problems
8.65 (a) Knowing that σall = 24 ksi and τall = 14.5 ksi, select the most
economical wide-flange shape that should be used to support the
loading shown. (b) Determine the values to be expected for σm, τm,
and the principal stress σmax at the junction of a flange and the web
of the selected beam.
8.66 Neglecting the effect of fillets and of stress concentrations, deter-
mine the smallest permissible diameters of the solid rods BC and
CD. Use τall = 60 MPa.
A
B
C
12 ft 	6 ft
1.5 kips/ft
Fig. P8.65
D
1250 N	500 N
B
C
A
160 mm
200 mm
180 mm
Fig. P8.66
8.67 A 10-kN force and a 1.4-kN·m couple are applied at the top of the
65-mm-diameter brass post shown. Determine the principal stresses
and maximum shearing stress at (a) point H, (b) point K.
8.68 The solid shaft AB rotates at 450 rpm and transmits 20 kW from the
motor M to machine tools connected to gears F and G. Knowing that
τall = 55 MPa and assuming that 8 kW is taken off at gear F and
12 kW is taken off at gear G, determine the smallest permissible
diameter of shaft AB.
M
A
F
150 mm
225 mm
60 mm
225 mm
D 	100 mm 60 mm
150 mm
G
E
B
Fig. P8.68
Fig. P8.67
C
240 mm
1.4 kN·m
10 kN
H 	K

-- 608 of 897 --

594
8.69 The billboard shown weighs 8000 lb and is supported by a structural
tube that has a 15-in. outer diameter and a 0.5-in. wall thickness. At
a time when the resultant of the wind pressure is 3 kips, located at
the center C of the billboard, determine the normal and shearing
stresses at point H.
2 ft
8 ft
H
x
x
z	H
z
3 ft
6 ft 3 ft
9 ft
3 ft
3 kips
8 kips
C
y
Fig. P8.69
A
B
300 mm
6 kN
600 N·m
Fig. P8.70
P 	P
T
V
R
r
P'
R
Fig. P8.71
8.70 Using τall = 50 MPa, design a conical taper for the loading shown
by determining the required diameter (a) at A, (b) at B.
8.71 A close-coiled spring is made of a circular wire of radius r that is
formed into a helix of radius R. Determine the maximum shearing stress
produced by the two equal and opposite forces P and P′. (Hint: First
determine the shear V and the torque T in a transverse cross section.)
8.72 The two 500-lb forces are vertical and the force P is parallel to the
z axis. Knowing that τall = 8 ksi, determine the smallest permissible
diameter of the solid shaft AE.
B
7 in.
7 in.
7 in.
7 in.
4 in.
4 in.
y
A
E
x
z 	B
C
500 lb
P
6 in. D
500 lb
Fig. P8.72

-- 609 of 897 --

595
8.73 Knowing that the bracket AB has a uniform thickness of 5
8 in., deter-
mine (a) the principal planes and principal stresses at point K, (b)
the maximum shearing stress at point K.
8.74 For the post and loading shown, determine the principal stresses,
principal planes, and maximum shearing stress at point H.
30°
2 in.
5 in.
K
A
3 kips
2.5 in.
B
Fig. P8.73
50 mm
50 mm 75 mm
75 mm
50 kN
120 kN
y
z 	x
30°
C
375 mm
H 	K
Fig. P8.74
2.75 in.
b c
1500 lb
1500 lb
5 in.
6 in.	3 in.
600 lb
600 lb
20 in.
0.25 in.
3 in.
a
Fig. P8.75
300 mm
600 N
A
B
b
a
C
40 mm
60 mm
β
Fig. P8.76
8.76 The cantilever beam AB will be installed so that the 60-mm side
forms an angle β between 0 and 90° with the vertical. Knowing
that the 600-N vertical force is applied at the center of the free
end of the beam, determine the normal stress at point a when
(a) β = 0, (b) β = 90°. (c) Also, determine the value of β for
which the normal stress at point a is a maximum and the corre-
sponding value of that stress.
8.75 Knowing that the structural tube shown has a uniform wall thickness
of 0.25 in., determine the normal and shearing stresses at the three
points indicated.

-- 610 of 897 --

596
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
8.C1 Let us assume that the shear V and the bending moment M have been
determined in a given section of a rolled-steel beam. Write a com-
puter program to calculate in that section, from the data available in
Appendix E, (a) the maximum normal stress σm, (b) the principal
stress σmax at the junction of a flange and the web. Use this program
to solve parts a and b of the following problems:
(1) 	Prob. 8.1 (Use V = 45 kips and M = 450 kip·in.)
(2) 	Prob. 8.2 (Use V = 22.5 kips and M = 450 kip·in.)
(3) 	Prob. 8.3 (Use V = 700 kN and M = 1750 kN·m)
(4) 	Prob. 8.4 (Use V = 850 kN and M = 1700 kN·m)
8.C2 A cantilever beam AB with a rectangular cross section of width b and
depth 2c supports a single concentrated load P at its end A. Write a
computer program to calculate, for any values of x∕c and y∕c, (a) the
ratios σmax∕σm and σmin∕σm, where σmax and σmin are the principal stresses
at point K(x, y) and σm the maximum normal stress in the same transverse
section, (b) the angle θp that the principal planes at K form with a trans-
verse and a horizontal plane through K. Use this program to check the
values shown in Fig. 8.8 and to verify that σmax exceeds σm if x ≤ 0.544c.
8.C3 Disks D1, D2, . . . , Dn are attached as shown in Fig. 8.C3 to the solid
shaft AB of length L, uniform diameter d, and allowable shearing
stress τall. Forces P1, P2, . . . , Pn of known magnitude (except for one
of them) are applied to the disks, either at the top or bottom of its
vertical diameter, or at the left or right end of its horizontal diameter.
Denoting by ri the radius of disk Di and by ci its distance from the
support at A, write a computer program to calculate (a) the magnitude
of the unknown force Pi, (b) the smallest permissible value of the
diameter d of shaft AB. Use this program to solve Prob. 8.18.
Computer Problems
c
c
b x
y
K
A
B
P
θp
	σmax
σmin
Fig. P8.C2
Fig. P8.C3
A
D1
ci
y
z
D2 	Di
P1
Pi
Pn
L
Dn
x
B
P2
ri

-- 611 of 897 --

597
8.C4 The solid shaft AB of length L, uniform diameter d, and allowable
shearing stress τall rotates at a given speed expressed in rpm (Fig. 8.C4).
Gears G1, G2, . . . , Gn are attached to the shaft and each of these gears
meshes with another gear (not shown), either at the top or bottom of
its vertical diameter, or at the left or right end of its horizontal diam-
eter. One of these gears is connected to a motor and the rest of them
to various machine tools. Denoting by ri the radius of disk Gi, by ci its
distance from the support at A, and by Pi the power transmitted to that
gear (+ sign) or taken off that gear (− sign), write a computer program
to calculate the smallest permissible value of the diameter d of shaft AB.
Use this program to solve Probs. 8.27 and 8.68.
A
z
x
y
B
ci
G1
G2 	Gi
Gn
L
ri
Fig. P8.C4
8.C5 Write a computer program that can be used to calculate the normal
and shearing stresses at points with given coordinates y and z located
on the surface of a machine part having a rectangular cross section.
The internal forces are known to be equivalent to the force-couple
system shown. Write the program so that the loads and dimensions
can be expressed in either SI or U.S. customary units. Use this pro-
gram to solve (a) Prob. 8.45b, (b) Prob. 8.47a.
8.C6 Member AB has a rectangular cross section of 10 × 24 mm. For the
loading shown, write a computer program that can be used to deter-
mine the normal and shearing stresses at points H and K for values
of d from 0 to 120 mm, using 15-mm increments. Use this program
to solve Prob. 8.35.
*8.C7 The structural tube shown has a uniform wall thickness of 0.3 in. A
9-kip force is applied at a bar (not shown) that is welded to the end
of the tube. Write a computer program that can be used to determine,
for any given value of c, the principal stresses, principal planes, and
maximum shearing stress at point H for values of d from −3 in. to
3 in., using 1-in. increments. Use this program to solve Prob. 8.62a.
z
h
b
y
x
C
My
Vy
Vz
Mz
P
Fig. P8.C5
H
x
z
c
y
d 	3 in.
3 in.
9 kips
4 in.
10 in.
Fig. P8.C7
30°
120 mm
K	H
d
B
A
12 mm
12 mm
40 mm
9 kN
Fig. P8.C6

-- 612 of 897 --



-- 613 of 897 --

Deflection of Beams
In addition to strength considerations, the design of this bridge is
also based on deflection evaluations.
9
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Develop the governing differential equation for the elastic curve,
the basis for the several techniques considered in this chapter
for determining beam deflections.
• Use direct integration to obtain slope and deflection equations
for beams of simple constraints and loadings.
• Use singularity functions to determine slope and deflection
equations for beams of more complex constraints and loadings.
• Use the method of superposition to determine slope and
deflection in beams by combining tabulated formulae.
• Use the moment-area theorems as an alternate technique to
determine slope and deflection at specific points in a beam.
• Apply direct integration, singularity functions, superposition, and
the moment-area theorems to analyze statically indeterminate
beams.
©Jetta Productions/Getty Images

-- 614 of 897 --

600 	Deflection of Beams
Introduction
In the preceding chapters, we learned to design beams for strength. This chap-
ter discusses another aspect in the design of beams: the determination of the
deflection. The maximum deflection of a beam under a given load is of par-
ticular interest, since the design specifications of a beam will generally include
a maximum allowable value for its deflection. A knowledge of deflections is
also required to analyze indeterminate beams, in which the number of reac-
tions at the supports exceeds the number of equilibrium equations available
to determine the reactions.
Recall from Sec. 4.2 that a prismatic beam subjected to pure bending
is bent into a circular arc and, within the elastic range, the curvature of the
neutral surface is
1
ρ = M
EI (4.21)
where M is the bending moment, E is the modulus of elasticity, and I is the
moment of inertia of the cross section about its neutral axis.
When a beam is subjected to a transverse loading, Eq. (4.21) remains
valid for any transverse section, provided that Saint-Venant’s principle applies.
However, both the bending moment and the curvature of the neutral surface
vary from section to section. Denoting by x the distance from the left end of
the beam, we write
1
ρ = M(x)
EI (9.1)
Knowing the curvature at various points of the beam will help us to draw
some general conclusions about the deformation of the beam under loading
(Sec. 9.1).
To determine the slope and deflection of the beam at any given point,
the second-order linear differential equation, which governs the elastic curve
characterizing the shape of the deformed beam (Sec. 9.1A), is given as
d 2y
dx2 = M(x)
EI
If the bending moment can be represented for all values of x by a
single function M(x), as shown in Fig. 9.1, the slope θ = dy∕dx and the
deflection y at any point of the beam can be obtained through two successive
Introduction
9.1 	DEFORMATION UNDER
TRANSVERSE LOADING
9.1A Equation of the Elastic Curve
*9.1B Determination of the Elastic
Curve from the Load
Distribution
9.2 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE
BEAMS
*9.3 	SINGULARITY
FUNCTIONS TO
DETERMINE SLOPE
AND DEFLECTION
9.4 	METHOD OF
SUPERPOSITION
9.4A Statically Determinate Beams
9.4B Statically Indeterminate
Beams
*9.5 	MOMENT-AREA
THEOREMS
*9.5A General Principles
*9.5B Cantilever Beams and Beams
with Symmetric Loadings
*9.5C Bending-Moment Diagrams
by Parts
*9.6 	MOMENT-AREA
THEOREMS APPLIED
TO BEAMS WITH
UNSYMMETRIC
LOADINGS
*9.6A General Principles
*9.6B Maximum Deflection
*9.6C Statically Indeterminate
Beams
B
x	A
y
(a)
[yA 	0]
[ A 	0]
=
=	θ
B
	A
y
(b)
[yA = 0] 	[yB = 0]
x
Fig. 9.1 	Situations where bending moment can be expressed by a single function
M(x). (a) Uniformly loaded cantilever beam. (b) Uniformly loaded simply supported
beam.

-- 615 of 897 --

Introduction 	601
integrations. The two constants of integration introduced in the process are
determined from the boundary conditions.
However, if different analytical functions are required to represent the
bending moment in various portions of the beam, different differential equa-
tions are also required, leading to different functions defining the elastic curve
in various portions of the beam. For the beam and loading of Fig. 9.2, for
B
	A
D
y
[ x = 0, y1 = 0 ] 	x
x = L, 1 = 2
1
4	[	[
x = L, y1 = y2
1
4	[	[
x = L, y2 = 0	[	[
P
θ	θ
Fig. 9.2 	Situation where two sets of equations
are required.
example, two differential equations are required: one for the portion AD and
the other for the portion DB. The first equation yields functions θ1 and y1,
and the second functions θ2 and y2. Altogether, four constants of integration
must be determined; two will be obtained with the deflection being zero at
A and B, and the other two by expressing that the portions AD and DB have
the same slope and the same deflection at D.
Sec. 9.1B shows that, in a beam supporting a distributed load w(x), the
elastic curve can be obtained directly from w(x) through four successive inte-
grations. The constants introduced in this process are determined from the
boundary values of V, M, θ, and y.
Section 9.2 discusses statically indeterminate beams where the reactions
at the supports involve four or more unknowns. The three equilibrium equa-
tions must be supplemented with equations obtained from the boundary con-
ditions that are imposed by the supports.
Determining the elastic curve when several functions are required for
the bending moment M can be quite complex, since it requires matching slopes
and deflections at every transition point. Section 9.3 uses singularity functions
to simplify the determination of θ and y at any point of the beam.
The method of superposition consists of separately determining and then
adding the slope and deflection caused by the various loads applied to a beam
(Sec. 9.4). This procedure can be facilitated by the use of the table in Appendix F,
which gives the slopes and deflections of beams for various loadings and
types of support.
In Sec. 9.5, certain geometric properties of the elastic curve are used
to determine the deflection and slope of a beam at a given point. Instead of
expressing the bending moment as a function M(x) and integrating it ana-
lytically, a diagram representing a variation of M∕EI over the length of the
beam is drawn, and two moment-area theorems are derived. The first moment-
area theorem enables the calculation of the angle between the tangents to the
beam at two different points. The second moment-area theorem is used to
calculate the vertical distance from a point on the beam to a tangent through
a second point.
The moment-area theorems are used in Sec. 9.5B to determine the slope
and deflection at selected points of cantilever beams and beams with sym-
metric loads. Section 9.5C shows that the areas and moments of areas defined

-- 616 of 897 --

602 	Deflection of Beams
by the M∕EI diagram can be determined more easily if we draw the bending-
moment diagram by parts. This method is particularly effective for beams of
variable cross section.
Beams with unsymmetric loads and overhanging beams are considered
in Sec. 9.6A. Since in beams with unsymmetric loads the maximum deflection
does not occur at the center of a beam, Sec. 9.6B shows how to locate the
point where the tangent is horizontal to determine the maximum deflection.
Section 9.6C is devoted to the solution of problems involving statically inde-
terminate beams.
9.1 	DEFORMATION UNDER
TRANSVERSE LOADING
Recall that Eq. (4.21) relates the curvature of the neutral surface to the bend-
ing moment in a beam in pure bending—that is, where the bending moment
is constant over the beam’s length. This equation is also valid for any indi-
vidual transverse section of a beam subjected to a transverse loading, provided
that Saint-Venant’s principle applies. However, because the bending moment
and the curvature of the neutral surface vary from section to section in this
case, Eq. (4.21) must now be written in a more general form. Denoting by x
the distance of the section from the left end of the beam,
1
ρ = M(x)
EI (9.1)
Consider, for example, a cantilever beam AB of length L subjected to a
concentrated load P at its free end A (Fig. 9.3a). We have M(x) = −Px, and
substituting into Eq. (9.1) gives
1
ρ = − Px
EI
which shows that the curvature of the neutral surface varies linearly with x from
zero at A, where ρA itself is infinite, to −PL∕EI at B, where ∣ρB∣ = EI∕PL
(Fig. 9.3b).
Now consider the overhanging beam AD of Fig. 9.4a that supports two
concentrated loads. From the free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 9.4b), the
reactions at the supports are RA = 1 kN and RC = 5 kN. The corresponding
B
A 	x
A = ∞
(a)
P
L
A
(b)
P
B
B
ρ
ρ
Fig. 9.3 	(a) Cantilever beam with concentrated
load. (b) Deformed beam showing curvature at
ends.
D
B 	C
A
(a)
(b)
4 kN 	2 kN
3 m 	3 m 	3 m
D	A
B 	C
4 kN 	2 kN
RC = 5 kN	RA = 1 kN
3 m 	3 m 	3 m
Fig. 9.4 	(a) Overhanging beam with two concentrated loads. (b) Free-body
diagram showing reaction forces.

-- 617 of 897 --

9.1 Deformation Under Transverse Loading 	603
bending-moment diagram is shown in Fig. 9.5a. Note from the diagram that
M and the curvature of the beam are both zero at each end and at a point E
located at x = 4 m. Between A and E, the bending moment is positive, and
the beam is concave upward. Between E and D, the bending moment is neg-
ative and the beam is concave downward (Fig. 9.5b). The largest value of the
curvature (i.e., the smallest value of the radius of curvature) occurs at support C,
where ∣M∣ is maximum.
The shape of the deformed beam is obtained from the information about
its curvature. However, the analysis and design of a beam usually requires
more precise information on the deflection and the slope at various points. Of
particular importance is the maximum deflection of the beam. Equation (9.1)
will be used in the next section to find the relationship between the deflection
y measured at a given point Q on the axis of the beam and the distance x of
that point from some fixed origin (Fig. 9.6). This relationship is the equation
of the elastic curve, into which the axis of the beam is transformed under the
given load (Fig. 9.6b).†
9.1A 	Equation of the Elastic Curve
Recall from elementary calculus that the curvature of a plane curve at a
point Q(x,y) is
1
ρ =
d2y
dx 2
[1 + (
dy
dx)
2
]
3∕2 	(9.2)
where dy∕dx and d 2y∕dx2 are the first and second derivatives of the function y(x)
represented by that curve. For the elastic curve of a beam, however, the slope
dy∕dx is very small, and its square is negligible compared to unity. Therefore,
1
ρ = d2y
dx2 	(9.3)
Substituting for 1∕ρ from Eq. (9.3) into Eq. (9.1),
d2y
dx2 = M(x)
EI (9.4)
This equation is a second-order linear differential equation; it is the governing
differential equation for the elastic curve.
(a)
M
A B
E 	C 	D
4 m
3 kN·m
– 6 kN·m
x
(b)
C
D
4 kN 	2 kN
B 	E
A
Fig. 9.5 	Beam of Fig. 9.4. (a) Bending-moment diagram. (b) Deformed shape.
D
C	Q
A
(a)
(b)
C
y
x
y
A
D
Q
x
Elastic
curve
P2	P1
Fig. 9.6 	Beam of Fig. 9.4. (a) Undeformed.
(b) Deformed.
†In this chapter, y represents a vertical displacement. It was used in previous chapters to represent
the distance of a given point in a transverse section from the neutral axis of that section.

-- 618 of 897 --

604 	Deflection of Beams
The product EI is called the flexural rigidity, and if it varies along the
beam, as in the case of a beam of varying depth, it must be expressed as a
function of x before integrating Eq. (9.4). However, for a prismatic beam, the
flexural rigidity is constant. Multiply both members of Eq. (9.4) by EI and
integrate in x to obtain
EI dy
dx = ∫x
0
M(x)dx + C1 	(9.5a)
where C1 is a constant of integration. Denoting by θ(x) the angle, measured
in radians, that the tangent to the elastic curve at Q forms with the horizontal
(Fig. 9.7), and recalling that this angle is very small,
dy
dx = tan θ ≃ θ(x)
Thus, Eq. (9.5a) in the alternative form is
EI θ(x) = ∫x
0
M(x) dx + C1 	(9.5b)
Integrating Eq. (9.5) in x,
EI y = ∫x
0 [ ∫x
0
M(x) dx + C1] dx + C2
EI y = ∫x
0
dx ∫x
0
M(x) dx + C1x + C2 	(9.6)
where C2 is a second constant and where the first term in the right-hand
member represents the function of x obtained by integrating the bending
moment M(x) twice in x. Although the constants C1 and C2 are as yet
undetermined, Eq. (9.6) defines the deflection of the beam at any given
point Q, and Eqs. (9.5a) or (9.5b) similarly define the slope of the beam
at Q.
The constants C1 and C2 are determined from the boundary condi-
tions or, more precisely, from the conditions imposed on the beam by its
supports. Limiting this analysis to statically determinate beams, which are
supported so that the reactions at the supports can be obtained by the
methods of statics, only three types of beams need to be considered here
(Fig. 9.8): (a) the simply supported beam, (b) the overhanging beam, and
(c) the cantilever beam.
In Fig. 9.8a and b, the supports consist of a pin and bracket at A and
a roller at B and require that the deflection be zero at each of these points.
Letting x = xA, y = yA = 0 in Eq. (9.6) and then setting x = xB, y = yB = 0
in the same equation, two equations are obtained that can be solved for C1
and C2. For the cantilever beam (Fig. 9.8c), both the deflection and the
slope at A must be zero. Letting x = xA, y = yA = 0 in Eq. (9.6) and x = xA,
θ = θA = 0 in Eq. (9.5b), two equations are again obtained that can be
solved for C1 and C2.
y
y(x) 	(x)
x
O
Q
x
θ
Fig. 9.7 	Slope θ(x) of tangent to the elastic
curve.
P
P
B
	A
y
y
y
(a) Simply supported beam
yA = 0 	yB = 0
x
yA = 0
B
B
x	A
A 	x
(c) Cantilever beam
(b) Overhanging beam
yA = 0
yB = 0
θ A = 0
Fig. 9.8 	Known boundary conditions for
statically determinate beams.

-- 619 of 897 --

9.1 Deformation Under Transverse Loading 	605
Concept Application 9.1
The cantilever beam AB is of uniform cross section and carries a load P
at its free end A (Fig. 9.9a). Determine the equation of the elastic curve
and the deflection and slope at A.
Using the free-body diagram of the portion AC of the beam
(Fig. 9.9b), where C is located at a distance x from end A,
M = −Px 	(1)
Substituting for M into Eq. (9.4) and multiplying both members by the
constant EI gives
EI d 2y
dx2 = −Px
Integrating in x,
EI dy
dx = − 1
2 Px2 + C1 	(2)
Now observe the fixed end B where x = L and θ = dy∕dx = 0 (Fig. 9.9c).
Substituting these values into Eq. (2) and solving for C1 gives
C1 = 1
2 PL2
which we carry back into Eq. (2):
EI dy
dx = − 1
2Px2 + 1
2 PL2 	(3)
Integrating both members of Eq. (3),
EI y = − 1
6Px3 + 1
2PL2x + C2 	(4)
But at B, x = L, y = 0. Substituting into Eq. (4),
0 = − 1
6PL3 + 1
2PL3 + C2
C2 = − 1
3PL3
Carrying the value of C2 back into Eq. (4), the equation of the elastic
curve is
EI y = − 1
6Px3 + 1
2PL2x − 1
3PL3
or
y = P
6EI (−x3 + 3L2x − 2L3 ) 	(5)
The deflection and slope at A are obtained by letting x = 0 in Eqs. (3)
and (5).
yA = − PL3
3EI and 	θA = (
dy
dx)A
= PL2
2EI
P
V
M	A
x
C
(b)
L
P
B	A
(a)
B	O
y
yA
A
L
x
[x = L, 	= 0]
[x = L, y = 0]
(c)
θ
Fig. 9.9 	(a) Cantilever beam with end
load. (b) Free-body diagram of section AC.
(c) Deformed shape and boundary
conditions.

-- 620 of 897 --

606 	Deflection of Beams
Concept Application 9.2
The simply supported prismatic beam AB carries a uniformly distributed load
w per unit length (Fig. 9.10a). Determine the equation of the elastic curve and
the maximum deflection of the beam.
Draw the free-body diagram of the portion AD of the beam (Fig. 9.10b)
and take moments about D for
M = 1
2 wL x − 1
2 wx2 	(1)
Substituting for M into Eq. (9.4) and multiplying both members of this
equation by the constant EI gives
EI d 2y
dx2 = − 1
2 wx2 + 1
2 wL x 	(2)
Integrating twice in x,
EI dy
dx = − 1
6 wx3 + 1
4 wL x2 + C1 	(3)
EI y = − 1
24 wx4 + 1
12 wLx3 + C1x + C2 	(4)
Observing that y = 0 at both ends of the beam (Fig. 9.10c), let x = 0
and y = 0 in Eq. (4) and obtain C2 = 0. Then make x = L and y = 0 in the
same equation, so
0 = − 1
24 wL4 + 1
12 wL4 + C1L
C1 = − 1
24 wL3
Carrying the values of C1 and C2 back into Eq. (9.4), the elastic curve is
EI y = − 1
24 wx4 + 1
12 wL x3 − 1
24 wL3x
or
y = w
24EI(−x4 + 2Lx3 − L3x) 	(5)
Substituting the value for C1 into Eq. (3), we check that the slope of the
beam is zero for x = L∕2 and thus that the elastic curve has a minimum at
the midpoint C (Fig. 9.10d). Letting x = L∕2 in Eq. (5),
y C = w
24EI(− L4
16 + 2L L3
8 − L3 L
2) = − 5wL4
384EI
The maximum deflection (the maximum absolute value) is
∣y∣max = 5wL4
384EI
B
w
A
L
(a)
A
2
x
D
M
V
wx
RA = wL
x
2
1
(b)
B	A
L
y
x
[x = L, y = 0]	[x = 0, y = 0]
(c)
B
C
L/2
A
y
x
(d)
Fig. 9.10 	(a) Simply supported
beam with a uniformly distributed
load. (b) Free-body diagram of
segment AD. (c) Boundary conditions.
(d) Point of maximum deflection.

-- 621 of 897 --

9.1 Deformation Under Transverse Loading 	607
In Concept Applications 9.1 and 9.2, only one free-body diagram
was required to determine the bending moment in the beam. As a result,
a single function of x was used to represent M throughout the beam. How-
ever, concentrated loads, reactions at supports, or discontinuities in a dis-
tributed load make it necessary to divide the beam into several portions
and to represent the bending moment by a different function M(x) in each.
As an example, Photo 9.1 shows an elevated roadway supported by beams,
which in turn will be subjected to concentrated loads from vehicles cross-
ing the completed bridge. Each of the functions M(x) leads to a different
expression for the slope θ(x) and the deflection y(x). Since each expression
must contain two constants of integration, a large number of constants will
have to be determined. As shown in Concept Application 9.3, the required
additional boundary conditions can be obtained by observing that, while
the shear and bending moment can be discontinuous at several points in a
beam, the deflection and the slope of the beam cannot be discontinuous
at any point.
Photo 9.1 	A different function M(x) would be
required in each portion of the beams when a
vehicle crosses the completed bridge.
©Brad Ingram/Shutterstock
Concept Application 9.3
For the prismatic beam and load shown (Fig. 9.11a), determine the slope and
deflection at point D.
Divide the beam into two portions, AD and DB, and determine the func-
tion y(x) that defines the elastic curve for each of these portions.
1. From A to D (x < L∕4). 	Draw the free-body diagram of a portion of
beam AE of length x < L∕4 (Fig. 9.11b). Take moments about E to obtain
M1 = 3P
4 x 	(1)
and recalling Eq. (9.4), we write
EI d 2y1
dx2 = 3
4Px 	(2)
where y1(x) is the function that defines the elastic curve for portion AD of the
beam. Integrating in x,
EI θ1 = EI dy1
dx = 3
8 Px2 + C1 	(3)
EI y1 = 1
8Px3 + C1x + C2 	(4)
2. From D to B (x > L∕4). 	Now draw the free-body diagram of a por-
tion of beam AE of the length x > L∕4 (Fig. 9.11c) and write
M2 = 3P
4 x − P(x − L
4) (5)
P
B
D
A
3L/4
L/4
(a)
A
E
M1
V1
x
3
4 P
(b)
x – 	L	1
4
V2
M2	A
D
x
E
P
3
4 P
(c)
(continued)
Fig. 9.11 	(a) Simply supported beam
with transverse load P. (b) Free-body
diagram of portion AE to find moment left
of load P. (c) Free-body diagram of
portion AE to find moment right of load P.

-- 622 of 897 --

608 	Deflection of Beams
and recalling Eq. (9.4) and rearranging terms, we have
EI d 2y2
dx2 = − 1
4 Px + 1
4 PL 	(6)
where y2(x) is the function that defines the elastic curve for portion DB
of the beam. Integrating in x,
EI θ2 = EI dy2
dx = − 1
8 Px2 + 1
4 PLx + C3 	(7)
EI y2 = − 1
24 Px3 + 1
8 PLx2 + C3x + C4 	(8)
Determination of the Constants of Integration. 	The conditions satis-
fied by the constants of integration are summarized in Fig. 9.11d. At the
support A, where the deflection is defined by Eq. (4), x = 0 and y1 = 0. At
the support B, where the deflection is defined by Eq. (8), x = L and y2 = 0.
Also, the fact that there can be no sudden change in deflection or in slope
at point D requires that y1 = y2 and θ1 = θ2 when x = L∕4. Therefore,
[x = 0, y1 = 0], Eq. (4): 	0 = C2 	(9)
[x = L, y2 = 0], Eq. (8): 	0 = 1
12 PL3 + C3L + C4 	(10)
[x = L∕4, θ1 = θ2 ], Eqs. (3) and (7):
3
128 PL2 + C1 = 7
128 PL2 + C3 	(11)
[x = L∕4, y1 = y2 ], Eqs. (4) and (8):
PL3
512 + C1
L
4 = 11PL3
1536 + C3
L
4 + C4 	(12)
Solving these equations simultaneously,
C1 = − 7PL2
128 , 	C2 = 0, 	C3 = − 11PL2
128 , 	C4 = PL3
384
Substituting for C1 and C2 into Eqs. (3) and (4), x ≤ L∕4 is
EI θ1 = 3
8 Px2 − 7PL2
128 (13)
EI y1 = 1
8Px3 − 7PL2
128 x 	(14)
Letting x = L∕4 in each of these equations, the slope and deflection at
point D are
θD = − PL2
32EI and 	y D = − 3PL3
256EI
Note that since θD ≠ 0, the deflection at D is not the maximum deflection
of the beam.
D
B	A
y
x
[x = L, y2 = 0]
[x = 0, y1 = 0]
x = L, 1 =	1
4	[	[
x = L, y1 = y2
2
1
4	[	[
P
(d)
θ	θ
Fig. 9.11 	(cont.) (d ) Boundary conditions.

-- 623 of 897 --

9.1 Deformation Under Transverse Loading 	609
*9.1B Determination of the Elastic Curve
from the Load Distribution
Section 9.1A showed that the equation of the elastic curve can be obtained
by integrating twice the differential equation
d2y
dx2 = M(x)
EI (9.4)
where M(x) is the bending moment in the beam. Now recall from Sec. 5.2
that, when a beam supports a distributed load w(x), we have dM∕dx = V and
dV∕dx = −w at any point of the beam. Differentiating both members of
Eq. (9.4) with respect to x and assuming EI to be constant,
d3y
dx3 = 1
EI
dM
dx = V(x)
EI (9.7)
and differentiating again,
d 4y
dx4 = 1
EI
dV
dx = − w(x)
EI
Thus, when a prismatic beam supports a distributed load w(x), its elastic curve
is governed by the fourth-order linear differential equation
d 4y
dx4 = − w(x)
EI (9.8)
Then, if we begin with a specified load w(x), we can multiply both
members of Eq. (9.8) by the constant EI and integrate four times to
obtain
EI d 4y
dx4 = −w(x)
EI d3y
dx3 = V(x) = −∫w(x)dx + C1
EI d2y
dx2 = M(x) = −∫dx ∫ w(x)dx + C1x + C2 	(9.9)
EI dy
dx = EI θ(x) = − ∫dx ∫dx ∫w(x)dx + 1
2 C1x2 + C2x + C3
EI y(x) = −∫ dx ∫dx ∫ dx ∫ w(x)dx + 1
6 C1x3 + 1
2 C2x2 + C3x + C4
The four constants of integration are determined from the boundary condi-
tions. These conditions include (a) the conditions imposed on the deflection
or slope of the beam by its supports (see. Sec. 9.1A) and (b) the condition
that V and M be zero at the free end of a cantilever beam or that M be zero
at both ends of a simply supported beam (see. Sec. 5.2). This has been illus-
trated in Fig. 9.12.
B
B
x	A
A
y
y
[yA = 0]
x
[yA = 0]
[θA = 0]
[V B = 0]
[MB = 0]
[yB = 0]
[MB = 0]	[M A = 0]
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.12 	Boundary conditions for
(a) cantilever beam, (b) simply supported
beam.

-- 624 of 897 --

610 	Deflection of Beams
This method can be used effectively with cantilever or simply supported
beams carrying a distributed load. In the case of overhanging beams, the
reactions at the supports cause discontinuities in the shear (i.e., in the third
derivative of y), and different functions are required to define the elastic curve
over the entire beam.
Concept Application 9.4
The simply supported prismatic beam AB carries a uniformly distributed load
w per unit length (Fig. 9.13a). Determine the equation of the elastic curve and
the maximum deflection of the beam. (This is the same beam and load as in
Concept Application 9.2.)
Since w = constant, the first three of Eqs. (9.9) yield
EI d 4y
dx4 = −w
EI d 3y
dx3 = V(x) = −wx + C1
EI d 2y
dx2 = M(x) = − 1
2 wx2 + C1x + C2 	(1)
Noting that the boundary conditions require that M = 0 at both ends of the
beam (Fig. 9.13b), let x = 0 and M = 0 in Eq. (1) and obtain C2 = 0. Then
make x = L and M = 0 in the same equation and obtain C1 = 1
2wL.
Carry the values of C1 and C2 back into Eq. (1) and integrate twice to
obtain
EI d 2y
dx2 = − 1
2 wx2 + 1
2 wLx
EI dy
dx = − 1
6 wx3 + 1
4 wLx2 + C3
EI y = − 1
24wx4 + 1
12wLx3 + C3 x + C4 	(2)
But the boundary conditions also require that y = 0 at both ends of the beam.
Letting x = 0 and y = 0 in Eq. (2), C4 = 0. Letting x = L and y = 0 in the
same equation gives
0 = − 1
24 wL4 + 1
12 wL4 + C3L
C3 = − 1
24 wL3
Carrying the values of C3 and C4 back into Eq. (2) and dividing both members
by EI, the equation of the elastic curve is
y = w
24EI (−x4 + 2L x3 − L3x) 	(3)
The maximum deflection is obtained by making x = L∕2 in Eq. (3).
∣y∣max = 5wL4
384EI
B	A
L
w
(a)
w
L
B
	A
y
x
[x = 0, M = 0] 	[x = L, M = 0]
[x = L, y = 0]	[x = 0, y = 0]
(b)
Fig. 9.13 	(a) Simply supported
beam with a uniformly distributed
load. (b) Boundary conditions.

-- 625 of 897 --

9.2 Statically Indeterminate Beams 	611
9.2 	STATICALLY INDETERMINATE
BEAMS
In the preceding sections, our analysis was limited to statically determinate
beams. Now consider the prismatic beam AB (Fig. 9.14a), which has a fixed
end at A and is supported by a roller at B. Drawing the free-body diagram of
the beam (Fig. 9.14b), the reactions involve four unknowns, but only three
equilibrium equations are available:
ΣF x = 0 	ΣF y = 0 	ΣM A = 0 	(9.10)
Since only Ax can be determined from these equations, the beam is statically
indeterminate.
B	A A
L
(a)
B
wL
Ax
Ay
L
L /2
(b)
MA
B
w
Fig. 9.14 	(a) Statically indeterminate beam with a uniformly distributed load.
(b) Free-body diagram with four unknown reactions.
Recall from Chaps. 2 and 3 that, in a statically indeterminate problem,
the reactions can be obtained by considering the deformations of the structure.
Therefore, we proceed with the computation of the slope and deflection along
the beam. Following the method used in Sec. 9.1A, the bending moment M(x)
at any given point AB is expressed in terms of the distance x from A, the given
load, and the unknown reactions. Integrating in x, expressions for θ and y are
found. These contain two additional unknowns: the constants of integration
C1 and C2. Altogether, six equations are available to determine the reactions
and constants C1 and C2; they are the three equilibrium equations of Eq. (9.10)
and the three equations expressing that the boundary conditions are satisfied
(i.e., that the slope and deflection at A are zero and that the deflection at B
is zero [Fig. 9.15]). Thus the reactions at the supports can be determined, and
the equation of the elastic curve can be obtained.
Concept Application 9.5
Determine the reactions at the supports for the prismatic beam of Fig. 9.14a.
Equilibrium Equations. 	From the free-body diagram of Fig. 9.14b,
+
→ΣFx = 0: 	Ax = 0
+↑ΣFy = 0: 	Ay + B − wL = 0 	(1)
+⤴ΣMA = 0: 	MA + BL − 1
2wL2 = 0
(continued)
w
B x
[x = 0, θ = 0] [x = L, y = 0]
[x = 0, y = 0]
A
y
Fig. 9.15 	Boundary conditions for beam
of Fig. 9.14.

-- 626 of 897 --

612 	Deflection of Beams
Equation of Elastic Curve. 	Draw the free-body diagram of a portion of
beam AC (Fig. 9.16) to obtain
+⤴ΣMC = 0: 	M + 1
2wx2 + M A − A y x = 0 	(2)
Solving Eq. (2) for M and carrying into Eq. (9.4),
EI d2y
dx2 = − 1
2wx2 + A y x − M A
Integrating in x gives
EI θ = EI dy
dx = − 1
6 wx3 + 1
2A y x2 − MA x + C1 	(3)
EI y = − 1
24 wx4 + 1
6A y x3 − 1
2 M A x2 + C1x + C2 	(4)
Referring to the boundary conditions indicated in Fig. 9.15, we set x = 0,
θ = 0 in Eq. (3), x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (4), and conclude that C1 = C2 = 0.
Thus, Eq. (4) is rewritten as
EI y = − 1
24 wx4 + 1
6 A y x3 − 1
2 M A x2 	(5)
But the third boundary condition requires that y = 0 for x = L. Carrying these
values into Eq. (5),
0 = − 1
24 wL4 + 1
6 A y L3 − 1
2M A L2
or
3M A − A y L + 1
4 wL2 = 0 	(6)
Solving this equation simultaneously with the three equilibrium equations of
Eq. (1), the reactions at the supports are
A x = 0 	A y = 5
8 wL 	M A = 1
8 wL2 	B = 3
8 wL
A
MA
x/2
C
M
V
wx
Ay
Ax
x
Fig. 9.16 	Free-body diagram
of beam portion AC.
In Concept Application 9.5, there was one redundant reaction (i.e., one more
than could be determined from the equilibrium equations alone). The cor-
responding beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree. Another
example of a beam indeterminate to the first degree is provided in Sample
Prob. 9.3. If the beam supports are such that two reactions are redundant
(Fig. 9.17a), the beam is indeterminate to the second degree. While there are
now five unknown reactions (Fig. 9.17b), four equations can be obtained
from the boundary conditions (Fig. 9.17c). Thus, seven equations are avail-
able to determine the five reactions and the two constants of integration.
L
w
A 	B
(a)
Fixed end
Frictionless
surface
w
MB
MA
A B
Ax
Ay 	B
(b)
L
w
y
x	A B
(c)
[x = 0, θ = 0] 	[x = L, θ = 0]
[x = L, y = 0]	[x = 0, y = 0]
Fig. 9.17 	(a) Beam statically indeterminate to the second degree. (b) Free-body diagram. (c) Boundary conditions.

-- 627 of 897 --

9.2 Statically Indeterminate Beams 	613
Sample Problem 9.1
The overhanging steel beam ABC carries a concentrated load P at end C.
For portion AB of the beam, (a) derive the equation of the elastic curve,
(b) determine the maximum deflection, (c) evaluate ymax for the following data:
W14 × 68 	I = 722 in4 	E = 29 × 106 psi
P = 50 kips 	L = 15 ft = 180 in. 	a = 4 ft = 48 in.
STRATEGY: 	You should begin by determining the bending-moment equa-
tion for the portion of interest. Substituting this into the differential equation
of the elastic curve, integrating twice, and applying the boundary conditions,
you can then obtain the equation of the elastic curve. Use this equation to
find the desired deflections.
MODELING: 	Using the free-body diagram of the entire beam (Fig. 1) gives
the reactions: RA = Pa∕L↓, RB = P(1 + a∕L)↑. The free-body diagram of the
portion of beam AD of length x (Fig. 1) gives
M = −P a
L x 	(0 < x < L)
RA = P V
B
D
y
P
M
RA 	RB
C
x
L 	a
A
A
L
a
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagrams of beam
and portion AD.
ANALYSIS:
Differential Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Using Eq. (9.4) gives
EI d 2y
dx2 = −P a
L x
Noting that the flexural rigidity EI is constant, integrate twice and find
EI dy
dx = −1
2 P a
L x2 + C1 	(1)
EI y = − 1
6 P a
L x3 + C1x + C2 	(2)
B
P
C
A
L 	a
(continued)

-- 628 of 897 --

614 	Deflection of Beams
Determination of Constants. 	For the boundary conditions shown
(Fig. 2),
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	From Eq. (2), 	C2 = 0
[x = L, y = 0]: 	Again using Eq. (2),
EI(0) = − 1
6 P a
L L3 + C1L 	C1 = + 1
6 PaL
a. Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Substituting for C1 and C2 into
Eqs. (1) and (2),
EI dy
dx = − 1
2 P a
L x2 + 1
6 PaL dy
dx = PaL
6EI [1 − 3(
x
L)
2
] (3)
EI y = − 1
6 P a
L x3 + 1
6 PaL x 	y = PaL2
6EI [
x
L − (
x
L)
3
] (4) 	◂
b. Maximum Deflection in Portion AB. 	The maximum deflection
ymax occurs at point E where the slope of the elastic curve is zero (Fig. 3).
Setting dy∕dx = 0 in Eq. (3), the abscissa xm of point E is
0 = PaL
6EI [1 − 3(
x m
L )
2
] x m = L
√3 = 0.577L
C
x
xm
ymax
A
B
E
y
Fig. 3 	Deformed elastic curve with
location of maximum deflection.
Substitute xm∕L = 0.577 into Eq. (4):
ymax = PaL2
6EI [(0.577) − (0.577) 3 ] 	ymax = 0.0642 PaL2
EI ◂
c. Evaluation of ymax. 	For the data given, the value of ymax is
ymax = 0.0642 (50 kips)(48 in.)(180 in.) 2
(29 × 106 psi)(722 in4 ) ymax = 0.238 in. 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Because the maximum deflection is positive, it
is upward. As a check, we see that this is consistent with the deflected shape
anticipated for this loading (Fig. 3).
B
C
x
L 	a
A
y
[x = 0, y = 0] 	[x = L, y = 0]
Fig. 2 	Boundary conditions.

-- 629 of 897 --

9.2 Statically Indeterminate Beams 	615
Sample Problem 9.2
For the beam and loading shown determine (a) the equation of the elastic
curve, (b) the slope at end A, (c) the maximum deflection.
STRATEGY: 	Determine the elastic curve directly from the load distribu-
tion using Eq. (9.8), applying the appropriate boundary conditions. Use this
equation to find the desired slope and deflection.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Differential Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	From Eq. (9.8),
EI d 4y
dx4 = −w(x) = −w0 sin πx
L (1)
Integrate Eq. (1) twice:
EI d 3y
dx3 = V = +w0
L
π cos πx
L + C1 	(2)
EI d2y
dx2 = M = +w0
L2
π2 sin πx
L + C1x + C2 	(3)
Boundary Conditions: 	Refer to Fig. 1.
[x = 0, M = 0]: 	From Eq. (3), 	C2 = 0
[x = L, M = 0]: 	Again using Eq. (3),
0 = w0
L2
π2 sin π + C1L 	C1 = 0
Thus,
EI d 2y
dx2 = +w0
L2
π2 sin πx
L (4)
Integrate Eq. (4) twice:
EI dy
dx = EI θ = −w0
L3
π3 cos πx
L + C3 	(5)
EI y = −w0
L4
π4 sin πx
L + C3 x + C4 	(6)
Boundary Conditions: 	Refer to Fig. 1.
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	Using Eq. (6), 	C4 = 0
[x = L, y = 0]: 	Again using Eq. (6), 	C3 = 0
B
w = w0 sin
A
x
L
x
y
L
π
B x
L
A
y
[x = 0, M = 0]
[x = 0, y = 0]
[x = L, M = 0]
[x = L, y = 0]
Fig. 1 	Boundary conditions.
(continued)

-- 630 of 897 --

616 	Deflection of Beams
a. Equation of Elastic Curve. 	EIy = −w0
L4
π4 sin πx
L ◂
b. Slope at End A. 	Refer to Fig. 2. For x = 0,
EI θA = −w0
L3
π3 cos 0 	θA = w0 L3
π3EI ⦪ 	◂
c. Maximum Deflection. 	Referring to Fig. 2, for x = 1
2 L,
ELymax = −w0
L4
π4 sin π
2 ymax = w0 L4
π4EI ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	As a check, we observe that the directions of
the slope at end A and the maximum deflection are consistent with the
deflected shape anticipated for this loading (Fig. 1).
L/2 	L/2
A 	B
y
x
ymax	A	θ
Fig. 2 	Deformed elastic curve showing
slope at A and maximum deflection.
Sample Problem 9.3
For the uniform beam AB (a) determine the reaction at A, (b) derive the
equation of the elastic curve, (c) determine the slope at A. (Note that the
beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree.)
STRATEGY: 	The beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree.
Treating the reaction at A as the redundant, write the bending-moment
equation as a function of this redundant reaction and the existing load.
After substituting the bending-moment equation into the differential equa-
tion of the elastic curve, integrating twice, and applying the boundary
conditions, the reaction can be determined. Use the equation for the elastic
curve to find the desired slope.
MODELING: 	Using the free body shown in Fig. 1, obtain the bending
moment diagram:
+⤸ΣMD = 0: 	R A x − 1
2(
w0 x2
L )
x
3 − M = 0 	M = R A x − w0 x3
6L
A 	B
L
w0
A
w = w0
x	1
3 	x
L
D
x
M
V
RA
x
L	(w0 ) x	1
2
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of portion
AD of beam.

-- 631 of 897 --

9.2 Statically Indeterminate Beams 	617
ANALYSIS:
Differential Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Use Eq. (9.4) for
EI d2y
dx2 = R A x − w0 x3
6L
Noting that the flexural rigidity EI is constant, integrate twice and find
EI dy
dx = EI θ = 1
2 R A x2 − w0 x4
24L + C1 	(1)
EI y = 1
6 R A x3 − w0x5
120L + C1x + C2 	(2)
Boundary Conditions. 	The three boundary conditions that must be
satisfied are shown in Fig. 2.
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	C2 = 0 	(3)
[x = L, θ = 0]: 1
2 R A L2 − w0L3
24 + C1 = 0 	(4)
[x = L, y = 0]: 1
6 R A L3 − w0L4
120 + C1L + C2 = 0 	(5)
a. Reaction at A. 	Multiplying Eq. (4) by L, subtracting Eq. (5)
member by member from the equation obtained, and noting that C2 = 0,
give
1
3 R A L3 − 1
30 w0L4 = 0 	RA = 1
10 w0L ↑ 	◂
The reaction is independent of E and I. Substituting R A = 1
10 w0L into
Eq. (4),
1
2 ( 1
10 w0L)L2 − 1
24 w0L3 + C1 = 0 	C1 = − 1
120 w0 L3
b. Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Substituting for RA, C1, and C2
into Eq. (2),
EI y = 1
6(
1
10 w0L)x3 − w0x5
120L − (
1
120 w0L3
)x
y = w0
120EIL (−x5 + 2L2x3 − L4x) 	◂
c. Slope at A (Fig. 3). 	Differentiate the equation of the elastic curve
with respect to x:
θ = dy
dx = w0
120EIL (−5x4 + 6L2x2 − L4 )
Making x = 0, 	θA = − w0 L3
120EI θA = w0L3
120EI ⦪ 	◂
A
L
B x
A	θ
Fig. 3 	Deformed elastic curve
showing slope at A.
x
y
[x = 0, y = 0]
[x = L, y = 0]
[x = L, 	= 0]
A 	B
θ
Fig. 2 	Boundary conditions.

-- 632 of 897 --

618
Problems
In the following problems assume that the flexural rigidity EI of each
beam is constant.
9.1 through 9.4 	For the loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve for the cantilever beam AB, (b) the deflection at the
free end, (c) the slope at the free end.
B
A
y
L
P
x
Fig. P9.1
M0
B
A
y
L
x
Fig. P9.2
B
A
y
w
L
x
Fig. P9.3
B
A
C
y
w0
w0
L/2 	L/2
x
Fig. P9.4
9.5 and 9.6 	For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the
equation of the elastic curve for portion AB of the beam, (b) the
deflection at B, (c) the slope at B.
y
A
w
B 	C 	x
a/2
w/2
a
Fig. P9.5
y
A
w
B
L 	a
C 	x
MC = wL2
6
Fig. P9.6
9.7 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve for portion BC of the beam, (b) the deflection at mid-
span, (c) the slope at B.
B x
y
C
w
wL
5
P =
A
L	L/2
Fig. P9.7

-- 633 of 897 --

619
9.8 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve for portion AB of the beam, (b) the slope at A, (c) the
slope at B.
y
A C
B
L 	L
w
x
Fig. P9.8
y
A
L/2	L/2
x
B	C
P
W
Fig. P9.10
A
C
x	B
y w0
S
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.9
x
y
A
L
B
w0
Fig. P9.11
y
x
M0 M0 /2
B
	A
L
Fig. P9.12
9.9 Knowing that beam AB is an S8 × 18.4 rolled shape and that w0 =
4 kips/ft, L = 9 ft, and E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the slope at A,
(b) the deflection at C.
9.10 Knowing that beam AB is a W130 × 23.8 rolled shape and that P =
50 kN, L = 1.25 m, and E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the slope at A,
(b) the deflection at C.
9.11 For the beam and loading shown, (a) express the magnitude and
location of the maximum deflection in terms of w0, L, E, and I.
(b) Calculate the value of the maximum deflection, assuming that
beam AB is a W18 × 50 rolled shape and that w0 = 4.5 kips/ft,
L = 18 ft, and E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.12 (a) Determine the location and magnitude of the maximum deflec-
tion of beam AB. (b) Assuming that beam AB is a W310 × 143,
M0 = 80 kN·m, and E = 200 GPa, determine the maximum allow-
able length L of the beam if the maximum deflection is not to
exceed 1.8 mm.
9.13 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection at point C.
Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
x
y
A
L = 10 ft
W4 × 13
a = 2.5 ft
B
C
M0 = 25 kip·ft
Fig. P9.13

-- 634 of 897 --

620
9.14 Uniformly distributed loads are applied to beam AE as shown.
(a) Selecting the x axis through the centers A and E of the end sec-
tions of the beam, determine the equation of the elastic curve for
portion AB of the beam. (b) Knowing that the beam is a W200 ×
35.9 rolled shape and that L = 3 m, w = 5 kN/m, and E = 200 GPa,
determine the distance of the center of the beam from the x axis.
A
B 	E x
D
3w
W	w
L/3 	L/3 	L/3
y
Fig. P9.14
9.15 For the beam and loading shown, knowing that a = 2 m, w = 50 kN/m,
and E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the slope at support A, (b) the
deflection at point C.
y
w
C 	B 	x	A
a
L = 6 m
W310 × 38.7
Fig. P9.15
9.16 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection at point C.
Use E = 200 GPa.
9.17 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the slope at the free end, (c) the deflection at the
free end.
x
y
A
L = 3 m
W150 × 18.0
a = 1 m
B	C
P = 20 kN
Fig. P9.16
9.18 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the slope at end A, (c) the deflection at the midpoint
of the span.
Fig. P9.17
y
A 	x
L
B
w = w0 cos πx
2L
Fig. P9.18
x
y
A
L
B
w = 4w0
x
L
x2
L2 ]	[ 	–

-- 635 of 897 --

621
9.19 through 9.22 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the reac-
tion at the roller support.
9.23 For the beam shown, determine the reaction at the roller support
when w0 = 6 kips/ft.
9.24 For the beam shown, determine the reaction at the roller support
when w0 = 15 kN/m.
9.25 through 9.28 	Determine the reaction at the roller support and draw
the bending moment diagram for the beam and loading shown.
L = 3 m
w0
A
B
w = w0(x/L)2
Fig. P9.24
P
A 	C
B
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.25
B
A
L/2
C
L
M0
Fig. P9.26
B
C
w0
1
2
A
L
L
Fig. P9.27
B
C
w
A
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.28
Fig. P9.19
L
A
B
M0
Fig. P9.20
B
A
w
L
Fig. P9.21
B
A
w0
L
Fig. P9.22
B
A
w0
L
Fig. P9.23
B
L = 12 ft
w = w0 (x/L)2
A
w0

-- 636 of 897 --

622
9.29 and 9.30 	Determine the reaction at the roller support and the deflec-
tion at point C.
A
L/2 	L/2
C 	B
w
Fig. P9.29
B
C
w
w
A
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.30
9.31 and 9.32 	Determine the reaction at the roller support and the deflec-
tion at point D if a is equal to L∕3.
B
A
a
L
D
M0
Fig. P9.31 	Fig. P9.32
B
A 	D
a
L
P
9.33 and 9.34 	Determine the reaction at A and draw the bending-moment
diagram for the beam and loading shown.
A 	B
w
L
Fig. P9.33
B	A
C
L/2 	L/2
M0
Fig. P9.34

-- 637 of 897 --

*9.3 Singularity Functions to Determine Slope and Deflection 	623
*9.3 	SINGULARITY FUNCTIONS
TO DETERMINE SLOPE
AND DEFLECTION
The integration method provides a convenient and effective way of determining
the slope and deflection at any point of a prismatic beam, as long as the bend-
ing moment can be represented by a single analytical function M(x). However,
when the loading of the beam needs two different functions to represent the
bending moment over the entire length, as in Concept Application 9.3
(Fig. 9.11a), four constants of integration are required. An equal number of
equations, expressing continuity conditions at point D as well as boundary
conditions at supports A and B, must be used to determine these constants. If
three or more functions are needed for the bending moment, additional con-
stants and a corresponding number of additional equations are required, result-
ing in rather lengthy computations. Such is the case for the beam shown in
Photo 9.2. This portion of the chapter simplifies computations in situations like
this through the use of the singularity functions discussed in Sec. 5.4.
Photo 9.2 	In this roof structure, each of the open-web joists applies a concentrated
load to the beam that supports it. Courtesy of John DeWolf
Consider again the beam and loading of Concept Application 9.3
(Fig. 9.11) and draw the free-body diagram of that beam (Fig. 9.18). Use
the appropriate singularity function (Sec. 5.4) to represent the contribution
to the shear of the concentrated load P, and write
V(x) = 3P
4 − P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩0
Integrate in x and recall from Sec. 5.4 that, in the absence of any concentrated
couple, the expression for the bending moment does not contain a constant
term, so
M(x) = 3P
4 x − P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩ 	(9.11)
P
B
D
A
3L/4
L/4
(a)
Fig. 9.11 	(repeated) Simply supported beam
with transverse load P.
A
D
B 	x
y 	P
L/4 3L/4
3
4 P 	1
4 P
Fig. 9.18 	Free-body diagram for beam of
Fig. 9.11.

-- 638 of 897 --

624 	Deflection of Beams
Substituting for M(x) from Eq. (9.11) into Eq. (9.4),
EI d 2y
dx2 = 3P
4 x − P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩ 	(9.12)
and, integrating in x,
EI θ = EI dy
dx = 3
8 Px2 − 1
2 P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩2 + C1 	(9.13)
EI y = 1
8 Px3 − 1
6 P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩3 + C1x + C2 	(9.14)†
The constants C1 and C2 can be determined from the boundary con-
ditions shown in Fig. 9.19. Letting x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (9.14),
0 = 0 − 1
6 P⟨0 − 1
4 L⟩3 + 0 + C2
which reduces to C2 = 0, since any bracket containing a negative quantity is
equal to zero. Letting now x = L, y = 0, and C2 = 0 in Eq. (9.14),
0 = 1
8 PL3 − 1
6 P⟨3
4 L⟩3 + C1L
Since the quantity between brackets is positive, the brackets can be replaced
by ordinary parentheses. Solving for C1 gives
C1 = − 7PL2
128
The expressions obtained for the constants C1 and C2 are the same found
in Concept Application 9.3. But the need for additional constants C3 and C4
has been eliminated, and the equations expressing that the slope and the
deflection are continuous at point D are not needed.
†The continuity conditions for the slope and deflection at D are “built-in” in Eqs. (9.13) and
(9.14). Indeed, the difference between the expressions for the slope θ1 in AD and the slope
θ2 in DB is represented by the term − 1
2P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩2 in Eq. (9.13), and this term is equal to
zero at D. Similarly, the difference between the expressions for the deflection y1 in AD and
the deflection y2 in DB is represented by − 1
6P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩3 in Eq. (9.14), and this term is also
equal to zero at D.
B
A
y
x
[x = 0, y = 0] 	[x = L, y = 0]
Fig. 9.19 	Boundary conditions for
beam of Fig. 9.11.
Concept Application 9.6
For the beam and loading shown (Fig. 9.20a) and using singularity functions,
(a) express the slope and deflection as functions of the distance x from the
support at A, (b) determine the deflection at the midpoint D. Use E = 200 GPa
and I = 6.87 × 10−6 m4.
(a) The beam is loaded and supported in the same manner as the beam
of Concept Application 5.5. Recall that the distributed load was replaced by

-- 639 of 897 --

*9.3 Singularity Functions to Determine Slope and Deflection 	625
the two equivalent open-ended loads shown in Fig. 9.20b. The expressions for
the shear and bending moment are
V(x) = −1.5⟨x − 0.6⟩1 + 1.5⟨x − 1.8⟩1 + 2.6 − 1.2⟨x − 0.6⟩0
M(x) = −0.75⟨x − 0.6⟩2 + 0.75⟨x − 1.8⟩2
+ 2.6x − 1.2⟨x − 0.6⟩1 − 1.44⟨x − 2.6⟩0
Integrating the last expression twice,
EIθ = −0.25⟨x − 0.6⟩3 + 0.25⟨x − 1.8⟩3
+ 1.3x2 − 0.6⟨x − 0.6⟩2 − 1.44⟨x − 2.6⟩1 + C1 	(1)
EIy = −0.0625⟨x − 0.6⟩4 + 0.0625⟨x − 1.8⟩4 + 0.4333x3
− 0.2⟨x − 0.6⟩3 − 0.72⟨x − 2.6⟩2 + C1x + C2 	(2)
The constants C1 and C2 can be determined from the boundary condi-
tions shown in Fig. 9.20c. Letting x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (2) and noting that
all the brackets contain negative quantities and, therefore, are equal to
zero, we conclude that C2 = 0. Letting x = 3.6, y = 0, and C2 = 0 in
Eq. (2) gives
0 = −0.0625⟨3.0⟩4 + 0.0625⟨1.8⟩4
+ 0.4333(3.6) 3 − 0.2⟨3.0⟩3 − 0.72⟨1.0⟩2 + C1 (3.6) + 0
Since all the quantities between brackets are positive, the brackets can be
replaced by ordinary parentheses. Solving for C1, we find C1 = −2.692.
(b) Substituting for C1 and C2 into Eq. (2) and making x = xD = 1.8 m,
we find that the deflection at point D is defined by the relation
EIy D = −0.0625⟨1.2⟩4 + 0.0625⟨0⟩4
+ 0.4333(1.8) 3 − 0.2⟨1.2⟩3 − 0.72⟨−0.8⟩2 − 2.692(1.8)
The last bracket contains a negative quantity and, therefore, is equal to zero.
All the other brackets contain positive quantities and can be replaced by ordi-
nary parentheses.
EIy D = −0.0625(1.2) 4 + 0.0625(0) 4
+ 0.4333(1.8) 3 − 0.2(1.2) 3 − 0 − 2.692(1.8) = −2.794
Recalling the given numerical values of E and I,
(200 GPa)(6.87 × 10−6 m4 )y D = −2.794 kN·m3
y D = −13.64 × 10−3 m = −2.03 mm
B
B
w0 = 1.5 kN/m
w
w0 = 1.5 kN/m
P = 1.2 kN
P = 1.2 kN
B
Ay = 2.6 kN 	– w0 = – 1.5 kN/m
M0 = 1.44 kN·m
M0 = 1.44 kN·m
A
C 	D
E
x	A 	E
C
D
(a)
(b)
0.6 m 1.2 m
3.6 m
0.8 m 	1.0 m
0.6 m
2.6 m
1.8 m
E
E
B
A
y
x
[x = 0, y = 0] 	[x = 3.6, y = 0]
(c)
Fig. 9.20 	(a) Simply supported beam
with multiple loads. (b) Free-body
diagram of beam showing equivalent
loading system. (c) Boundary conditions.

-- 640 of 897 --

626 	Deflection of Beams
Sample Problem 9.4
For the prismatic beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the slope at A, (c) the maximum deflection.
STRATEGY: 	You can begin by determining the bending-moment equation
of the beam, using a singularity function for any transition in loading. Sub-
stituting this into the differential equation of the elastic curve, integrating
twice, and applying the boundary conditions, you can then obtain the equation
of the elastic curve. Use this equation to find the desired slope and
deflection.
MODELING: 	The equation defining the bending moment of the beam was
obtained in Sample Prob. 5.9. Using the modified loading diagram shown in
Fig. 1, we had [Eq. (3)]:
M(x) = − w0
3L x3 + 2w0
3L ⟨x − 1
2 L⟩3 + 1
4 w0Lx
w 	2w0
L
k1 = +
A
C
RA = 	RB
x
B
L/2 	L/2
4w0
L
k2 = –
1 w0L	4
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram showing
modified loading.
ANALYSIS:
a. Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Using Eq. (9.4),
EI d2y
dx2 = − w0
3L x3 + 2w0
3L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩3 + 1
4 w0Lx 	(1)
and, integrating twice in x,
EI θ = − w0
12L x4 + w0
6L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩4 + w0L
8 x2 + C1 	(2)
EI y = − w0
60L x5 + w0
30L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩5 + w0 L
24 x3 + C1x + C2 	(3)
w0
A 	B
L/2 	L/2
C

-- 641 of 897 --

*9.3 Singularity Functions to Determine Slope and Deflection 	627
Boundary Conditions. 	Referring to Fig. 2,
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	Using Eq. (3) and noting that each bracket ⟨ 	⟩ con-
tains a negative quantity and is equal to zero, C2 = 0.
[x = L, y = 0]: 	Again using Eq. (3),
0 = − w0L4
60 + w0
30L(
L
2)
5
+ w0 L4
24 + C1L 	C1 = − 5
192 w0 L3
Substituting C1 and C2 into Eqs. (2) and (3),
EI θ = − w0
12L x4 + w0
6L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩4 + w0 L
8 x2 − 5
192 w0 L3 	(4)
EI y = − w0
60L x5 + w0
30L ⟨x − 1
2L⟩5 + w0 L
24 x3 − 5
192 w0 L3x 	(5) 	◂
b. Slope at A (Fig. 3). 	Substituting x = 0 into Eq. (4),
EI θA = − 5
192 w0 L3 	θA = 5w0 L3
192EI ⦪ 	◂
c. Maximum Deflection (Fig. 3). 	Because of the symmetry of the
supports and loading, the maximum deflection occurs at point C where
x = 1
2L. Substituting into Eq. (5),
EI ymax = w0 L4
[− 1
60(32) + 0 + 1
24(8) − 5
192(2) ] = − w0 L4
120
ymax = w0 L4
120EI ↓ 	◂
L
A B	C
y
x
[x = 0, y = 0] 	[x = L, y = 0]
Fig. 2 	Boundary conditions.
L/2
A B
C
y
x	ymax
A	θ
Fig. 3 	Deformed elastic curve showing
slope at A and maximum deflection at C.
Sample Problem 9.5
The rigid bar DEF is welded at point D to the uniform steel beam AB.
For the loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the elastic curve
of the beam, (b) the deflection at the midpoint C of the beam. Use
E = 29 × 106 psi.
B
C
F 	E
D
A
50 lb/ft
160 lb
8 ft 3 ft
3 in.
1 in.
5 ft
(continued)

-- 642 of 897 --

628 	Deflection of Beams
STRATEGY: 	Begin by determining the bending-moment equation of
the beam ADB, using a singularity function for any transition in loading.
Substituting this into the differential equation of the elastic curve, inte-
grating twice, and applying the boundary conditions, you can then
obtain the equation of the elastic curve. Use this equation to find the
desired deflection.
MODELING: 	The equation defining the bending moment of the beam was
obtained in Sample Prob. 5.10. Using the modified loading diagram shown
in Fig. 1 and expressing x in feet, [Eq. (3)] is
M(x) = −25x2 + 480x − 160⟨x − 11⟩1 − 480⟨x − 11⟩0 lb·ft
ANALYSIS:
a. Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Using Eq. (9.4),
EI(d2y∕dx2 ) = −25x2 + 480x − 160⟨x − 11⟩1 − 480⟨x − 11⟩0 lb·ft 	(1)
and, integrating twice in x,
EI θ = −8.333x3 + 240x2 − 80⟨x − 11⟩2 − 480⟨x − 11⟩1 + C1 lb·ft2 	(2)
EI y = −2.083x4 + 80x3 − 26.67⟨x − 11⟩3 − 240⟨x − 11⟩2
+ C1x + C2 lb·ft3 	(3a)
Boundary Conditions. 	Referring to Fig. 2,
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	Using Eq. (3) and noting that each bracket ⟨ ⟩ con-
tains a negative quantity and, thus, is equal to zero, we find C2 = 0.
[x = 16 ft, y = 0]: 	Again using Eq. (3), each bracket contains a
positive quantity and can be replaced by a parenthesis:
0 = −2.083(16) 4 + 80(16) 3 − 26.67(5) 3 − 240(5) 2 + C1 (16)
C1 = −11.36 × 103
Substituting the values found for C1 and C2 into Eq. (3) gives
EI y = −2.083x4 + 80x3 − 26.67⟨x − 11⟩3 − 240⟨x − 11⟩2
− 11.36 × 103x lb·ft3 	(3b) 	◂
To determine EI, recall that E = 29 × 106 psi and compute
I = 1
12 bh3 = 1
12 (1 in.)(3 in.) 3 = 2.25 in4
EI = (29 × 106 psi)(2.25 in4 ) = 65.25 × 106 lb·in2
However, since all previous computations have been carried out with feet as
the unit of length,
EI = (65.25 × 106 lb·in2 )(1 ft/12 in.) 2 = 453.1 × 103 lb·ft2
B x
D
A
w0 = 50 lb/ft	w
MD = 480 lb·ft
RA = 480 lb 	RB	P = 160 lb
5 ft	11 ft
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram of showing
equivalent force-couple system.
16 ft
y
A 	x
B
[x = 0, y = 0] 	[x = 16 ft, y = 0]
Fig. 2 	Boundary conditions.

-- 643 of 897 --

*9.3 Singularity Functions to Determine Slope and Deflection 	629
b. Deflection at Midpoint C. (Fig. 3). 	Making x = 8 ft in Eq. (3b),
EI y C = −2.083(8) 4 + 80(8) 3 − 26.67⟨−3⟩3 − 240⟨−3⟩2 − 11.36 × 103 (8)
8 ft 	8 ft
y
A
C
x
B	yC
Fig. 3 	Deformed elastic curve
showing displacement at midpoint C.
Noting that each bracket is equal to zero and substituting for EI its numeri-
cal value gives
(453.1 × 103 lb·ft2 )y C = −58.45 × 103 lb·ft3
and solving for yC: 	y C = −0.1290 ft 	y C = −1.548 in. 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that the deflection obtained at midpoint
C is not the maximum deflection.
Sample Problem 9.6
For the uniform beam ABC, (a) express the reaction at A in terms of P,
L, a, E, and I, (b) determine the reaction at A and the deflection under
the load when a = L∕2.
STRATEGY: 	The beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree.
Using singularity functions, you can write the bending-moment equation
for the beam, including the unknown reaction at A as part of the expres-
sion. After substituting this equation into the differential equation of the
elastic curve, integrating twice, and applying the boundary conditions,
the reaction at A can be determined, followed by the determination of
the desired deflection.
MODELING:
Reactions. 	For the given vertical load P the reactions are as shown in
Fig. 1. We note that they are statically indeterminate.
Shear and Bending Moment. 	Using a step function to represent the
contribution of P to the shear,
V(x) = R A − P⟨x − a⟩0
Integrating in x, the bending moment is
M(x) = R A x − P⟨x − a⟩1
(continued)
B 	C
L
a
A
P
P
L
A
y
B 	C
x
a
MC
RC	RA
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram.

-- 644 of 897 --

630 	Deflection of Beams
ANALYSIS:
Equation of the Elastic Curve. 	Using Eq. (9.4),
EI d 2y
dx2 = R A x − P⟨x − a⟩1
Integrating twice in x,
EI dy
dx = EI θ = 1
2 R A x2 − 1
2 P⟨x − a⟩2 + C1
EI y = 1
6 R A x3 − 1
6 P⟨x − a⟩3 + C1x + C2
Boundary Conditions. 	Referring to Fig. 2 and noting that the bracket
⟨x − a⟩ is equal to zero for x = 0 and to (L − a) for x = L,
[x = 0, y = 0]: 	C2 = 0 	(1)
[x = L, θ = 0]: 	1
2R A L2 − 1
2P(L − a) 2 + C1 = 0 	(2)
[x = L, y = 0]: 	1
6R A L3 − 1
6P(L − a) 3 + C1L + C2 = 0 	(3)
a. Reaction at A. 	Multiplying Eq. (2) by L, subtracting Eq. (3) member
by member from the equation, and noting that C2 = 0, we obtain
1
3 R A L3 − 1
6 P(L − a) 2 [3L − (L − a)] = 0
RA = P(1 − a
L)
2
(1 + a
2L)↑ 	◂
The reaction is independent of E and I.
b. Reaction at A and Deflection at B when a = 1
2L (Fig. 3). 	Making
a = 1
2L in the expression obtained for RA,
R A = P(1 − 1
2 ) 2 (1 + 1
4 ) = 5P∕16 	RA = 5
16 P ↑ 	◂
Substituting a = L∕2 and RA = 5P∕16 into Eq. (2) and solving for C1, C1 =
−PL2∕32. Making x = L∕2, C1 = −PL2∕32, and C2 = 0 in the expression
obtained for y,
yB = − 7PL3
768EI y B = 7PL3
768EI ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that the deflection obtained at B is not the
maximum deflection.
L
C
A
y 	[x = 0, y = 0]
[x = 0, y = 0]
[x = L, θ = 0]
x
Fig. 2 	Boundary conditions.
A
B
C
RA
yB
L/2	L/2
P
Fig. 3 	Deformed elastic curve
showing deflection at B.

-- 645 of 897 --

631
Problems
Use singularity functions to solve the following problems and assume
that the flexural rigidity EI of each beam is constant.
9.35 and 9.36 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equa-
tion of the elastic curve, (b) the slope at end A, (c) the deflection at
point C.
9.37 and 9.38 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection
at (a) point B, (b) point C.
x
y
B	C
A
L
a 	b
P
Fig. P9.35
M0
x
y
B
C
A
a 	b
L
Fig. P9.36
B 	C 	D
y
x	A
P
a
P
a	2a
Fig. P9.37
A
P
B 	C
y
a
x
P
2a
Fig. P9.38
9.39 and 9.40 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the deflec-
tion at end A, (b) the deflection at point C, (c) the slope at end D.
x
y
D	C	B
A
a 	a 	a
P 	P
Fig. P9.39
x
y
D
C
B
A
a
M0
M0
a 	a
Fig. P9.40
9.41 and 9.42 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equa-
tion of the elastic curve, (b) the deflection at the free end.
B
x
y
C	A 	D
w
L/2
L/4 	L/4
Fig. P9.42
y
A
B 	C
w
x
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.41

-- 646 of 897 --

632
9.43 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the deflection at point B, (c) the deflection at
point C.
9.44 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the deflection at point B, (c) the deflection at
point D.
B
x
y
C
w0
L/ 2 	L/ 2
A
Fig. P9.43
L/2 	L/2
B
A
y
C 	D 	x
L/2
w 	w
Fig. P9.44
9.45 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at end A,
(b) the deflection at midpoint C. Use E = 200 GPa.
9.46 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at end A,
(b) the deflection at point B. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
C
B	A
1.8 m 	1.8 m
0.9 m 0.9 m
W310 × 60
6.2 kN
3 kN/m
Fig. P9.45
A 	D
1.25 in.
24 in. 16 in.
48 in.
8 in.
200 lb
10 lb/in.
B 	C
Fig. P9.46
9.47 For the timber beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
end A, (b) the deflection at midpoint C. Use E = 1.6 × 106 psi.
A 	D
350 lb/ft
2 kips
C	B
1.75 ft 1.75 ft 3.5 ft
3.5 in.
5.5 in.
Fig. P9.47	A
S130 × 15
1 m 	1 m
B	C
8 kN
	48 kN/m
Fig. P9.48
9.48 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at end A,
(b) the deflection at midpoint C. Use E = 200 GPa.

-- 647 of 897 --

633
9.49 and 9.50 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction
at the roller support, (b) the deflection at point C.
9.51 and 9.52 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction
at the roller support, (b) the deflection at point B.
9.53 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at point C,
(b) the deflection at point B. Use E = 200 GPa.
A 	B
L/2 	L/2
C 	B
w
Fig. P9.49
L/2 	L/2
C
A
B
M0
Fig. P9.50
L/3
A 	B 	C
D
L/3 	L/3
P 	P
Fig. P9.51
A
B
M0	M0
L/4 	L/2 	L/4
D
C
Fig. P9.52
C
B
A
14 kN/m
W410 × 60
5 m 	3 m
Fig. P9.53
9.54 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at point A,
(b) the deflection at point B. Use E = 200 GPa.
1.2 m 	1.2 m 	1.2 m
A D
W200 × 52
50 kN 	50 kN
B 	C
Fig. P9.54

-- 648 of 897 --

634
9.55 and 9.56 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction
at point A, (b) the deflection at point C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
B	C
2.5 kips/ft
6 ft 	6 ft
A
W10 × 22
Fig. P9.55
B
C
w = 4.5 kips/ft
2.5 ft	2.5 ft	2.5 ft	2.5 ft
A 	D 	E
W14 × 22
Fig. P9.56
w
B	D	A
a 	2a 	2a
C
Fig. P9.57
L/2 	L/2
A 	B 	C 	D
L/3
P
Fig. P9.58
Fig. P9.63
D 0.4 m
H
G
E
C	B
F
A
W100 × 19.3
0.15 m
0.5 m 0.3 m 0.3 m 	0.5 m
100 kN
Fig. P9.64
1.2 m
50 kN
30 kN/m
1.2 m
2.4 m
A 	B
C
F
D
E 	W460 × 52
9.57 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at point A,
(b) the deflection at point D.
9.58 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at point A,
(b) the deflection at midpoint C.
9.59 through 9.62 For the beam and loading indicated, determine the
magnitude and location of the largest downward deflection.
9.59 Beam and loading of Prob. 9.45.
9.60 Beam and loading of Prob. 9.46.
9.61 Beam and loading of Prob. 9.47.
9.62 Beam and loading of Prob. 9.48.
9.63 The rigid bars BF and DH are welded to the rolled-steel beam AE
as shown. Determine for the loading shown (a) the deflection at
point B, (b) the deflection at midpoint C of the beam. Use
E = 200 GPa.
9.64 The rigid bar DEF is welded at point D to the rolled-steel beam AB.
For the loading shown, determine (a) the slope at point A, (b) the
deflection at midpoint C of the beam. Use E = 200 GPa.

-- 649 of 897 --

9.4 Method of Superposition 	635
9.4 	METHOD OF SUPERPOSITION
9.4A 	Statically Determinate Beams
When a beam is subjected to several concentrated or distributed loads, it is
often convenient to first compute the slope and deflection caused by each
individual load. The slope and deflection due to the combined loads are then
obtained by applying the principle of superposition (Sec. 2.5) and adding these
individual values of the slope or deflection corresponding to the various loads.
Concept Application 9.7
Determine the slope and deflection at D for the beam and loading
shown (Fig. 9.21a), knowing that the flexural rigidity of the beam is
EI = 100 MN⋅m2.
The slope and deflection at any point of the beam can be obtained by
superposing the slopes and deflections caused by the concentrated load and
by the distributed load (Fig. 9.21b).
Since the concentrated load in Fig. 9.21c is applied at quarter span, the
results for the beam and loading of Concept Application 9.3 can be used to write
(θD)P = − PL2
32EI = − (150 × 103 )(8) 2
32(100 × 106 ) = −3 × 10−3 rad
(y D)P = − 3PL3
256EI = − 3(150 × 103 )(8) 3
256(100 × 106 ) = −9 × 10−3 m
= −9 mm
On the other hand, recalling the equation of the elastic curve obtained for
a uniformly distributed load in Concept Application 9.2, the deflection in
Fig. 9.21d is
y = w
24EI (−x4 + 2L x3 − L3x) 	(1)
(continued)
A
D B
150 kN
20 kN/m
2 m
8 m
(a)
Fig. 9.21 	(a) Simply supported
beam having distributed and
concentrated loads.
2 m
D
B	A
L = 8 m
P = 150 kN
D
20 kN/m
150 kN
B	A
D
x = 2 m
L = 8 m
B	A
w = 20 kN/m
(c)	(b) 	(d)
Fig. 9.21 	(cont.) (b) The beam’s loading can be obtained by superposing deflections due to (c) the concentrated load and
(d) the distributed load.
Differentiating with respect to x gives
θ = dy
dx = w
24EI (−4x3 + 6L x2 − L3 ) 	(2)

-- 650 of 897 --

636 	Deflection of Beams
To facilitate the work of practicing engineers, most structural and
mechanical engineering handbooks include tables giving the deflections and
slopes of beams for various loadings and types of support. Such a table is
found in Appendix F. The slope and deflection of the beam of Fig. 9.21a
could have been determined from that table. Indeed, using the information
given under cases 5 and 6, we could have expressed the deflection of the beam
for any value x ≤ L∕4. Taking the derivative of the expression obtained in
this way would have yielded the slope of the beam over the same interval.
We also note that the slope at both ends of the beam can be obtained by
simply adding the corresponding values given in the table. However, the maxi-
mum deflection of the beam of Fig. 9.21a cannot be obtained by adding the
maximum deflections of cases 5 and 6, since these deflections occur at dif-
ferent points of the beam.†
9.4B 	Statically Indeterminate Beams
We often find it convenient to use the method of superposition to determine
the reactions at the supports of a statically indeterminate beam. As an exam-
ple, consider the beam shown in Photo 9.3, which is indeterminate to the first
degree. We can use the approach described in Sec. 9.2 and designate one of
the reactions as redundant. We can then eliminate or modify accordingly the
corresponding support. The redundant reaction is then treated as an unknown
load that, together with the other loads, must produce deformations compat-
ible with the original supports. The slope or deflection at the point where the
support has been modified or eliminated is obtained by computing the defor-
mations caused by both the given loads and the redundant reaction and by
superposing the results. Once the reactions at the supports are found, the slope
and deflection can be determined.
Making w = 20 kN/m, x = 2 m, and L = 8 m in Eqs. (1) and (2), we obtain
(θD)w = 20 × 103
24(100 × 106 ) (−352) = −2.93 × 10−3 rad
(y D)w = 20 × 103
24(100 × 106 ) (−912) = −7.60 × 10−3 m
= −7.60 mm
Combining the slopes and deflections produced by the concentrated and the
distributed loads,
θD = (θD)P + (θD)w = −3 × 10−3 − 2.93 × 10−3
= −5.93 × 10−3 rad
y D = (y D)P + (y D)w = −9 mm − 7.60 mm = −16.60 mm
Photo 9.3 	The continuous beams supporting
this highway overpass have three supports and
are thus statically indeterminate.
Courtesy of John DeWolf
†An approximate value of the maximum deflection of the beam can be obtained by plotting
the values of y corresponding to various values of x. The determination of the exact location
and magnitude of the maximum deflection would require setting equal to zero the expression
obtained for the slope of the beam and solving this equation for x.

-- 651 of 897 --

9.4 Method of Superposition 	637
Concept Application 9.8
Determine the reactions at the supports for the prismatic beam and loading
shown in Fig. 9.22a. (This is the same beam and loading as in Concept
Application 9.5.)
We consider the reaction at B as redundant and release the beam from the
support. The reaction RB is now considered as an unknown load (Fig. 9.22b) and
will be determined from the condition that the deflection of the beam at B must
be zero. The solution is carried out by considering separately the deflection (yB)w
caused at B by the uniformly distributed load w (Fig. 9.22c) and the deflection
(yB)R produced at the same point by the redundant reaction RB (Fig. 9.22d).
From the table of Appendix F (cases 2 and 1),
(y B)w = − wL4
8EI (y B)R = + R B L3
3EI
(continued)
B	A
L
w
(a)
Fig. 9.22 	(a) Statically
indeterminate beam with a
uniformly distributed load.
B
(y B)R
RB
w 	w
B
A 	A
B
yB = 0
(yB)w	RB
A
(c)	(b) 	(d)
Fig. 9.22 	(cont.) (b) Analyze the indeterminate beam by superposing two determinate cantilever beams, subjected to
(c) a uniformly distributed load, (d) the redundant reaction.
Writing that the deflection at B is the sum of these two quantities and that it
must be zero,
y B = (y B)w + (y B)R = 0
y B = − wL4
8EI + R B L3
3EI = 0
and, solving for R B, 	R B = 3
8 wL 	RB = 3
8 wL ↑
Drawing the free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 9.22e) and writing the
corresponding equilibrium equations,
+↑ ΣF y = 0: 	R A + R B − wL = 0 	(1)
R A = wL − R B = wL − 3
8 wL = 5
8 wL
RA = 5
8 wL ↑
+⤴ΣM A = 0: 	M A + R B L − (wL)( 1
2L) = 0 	(2)
M A = 1
2 wL2 − R B L = 1
2 wL2 − 3
8 wL2 = 1
8 wL2
MA = 1
8 wL2⤴
B
wL
MA
RA 	RB
A
L
L/2
(e)
Fig. 9.22 	(cont.) (e) Free-body
diagram of indeterminate beam.

-- 652 of 897 --

638 	Deflection of Beams
Alternative Solution. 	We may consider the couple exerted at the fixed
end A as redundant and replace the fixed end by a pin-and-bracket support.
The couple MA is now considered as an unknown load (Fig. 9.22f ) and
will be determined from the condition that the slope of the beam at A must
be zero. The solution is carried out by considering separately the slope
(θA)w caused at A by the uniformly distributed load w (Fig. 9.22g) and
the slope (θA)M produced at the same point by the unknown couple MA
(Fig 9.22h).
B	A
w	MA
MA
w
B	A
(f ) 	(g) 	(h)
A = 0 	( A)w
( A)M
B	A
θ
θ	θ
Fig. 9.22 	(cont.) (f ) Analyze the indeterminate beam by superposing two determinate simply supported beams,
subjected to (g) a uniformly distributed load, (h) the redundant reaction.
Using the table of Appendix F (cases 6 and 7) and noting that A and B
must be interchanged in case 7,
(θA)w = − wL3
24EI (θA)M = M A L
3EI
Writing that the slope at A is the sum of these two quantities and that it must
be zero gives
θA = (θA)w + (θA)M = 0
θA = − wL3
25EI + M A L
3EI = 0
where MA is
M A = 1
8 wL2 	MA = 1
8 wL2 ⤴
The values of RA and RB are found by using the equilibrium equations
(1) and (2).
The beam considered in Concept Application 9.8 was indeterminate to
the first degree. In the case of a beam indeterminate to the second degree (see
Sec. 9.2), two reactions must be designated as redundant, and the correspond-
ing supports must be eliminated or modified accordingly. The redundant reac-
tions are then treated as unknown loads that, simultaneously and together with
the other loads, must produce deformations that are compatible with the
original supports. (See Sample Prob. 9.9.)

-- 653 of 897 --

9.4 Method of Superposition 	639
Sample Problem 9.7
For the beam and loading shown, determine the slope and deflection at
point B.
STRATEGY: 	Using the method of superposition, you can model the given
problem using a summation of beam load cases for which deflection formulae
are readily available.
MODELING: 	Through the principle of superposition, the given loading can
be obtained by superposing the loadings shown in the following picture equa-
tion of Fig. 1. The beam AB is the same in each part of the figure.
B
C
w
A
L/2 	L/2
B
C
w
A
y
L/ 2 	L/ 2
B
x
y B	A
B
w
Loading I 	Loading II
A
L
B
C
w
A
L/2 	L/2
B
y
B
A
B
x
x	(yB)I
( B)I
A
y 	( B)II
(yB)II
w
θ 	θ
θ
Fig. 1 	Actual loading is equivalent to the superposition of two distributed loads.
ANALYSIS: 	For each of the loadings I and II (detailed further in Fig. 2),
determine the slope and deflection at B by using the table of Beam Deflections
and Slopes in Appendix F.
Loading I.
(θB) I = − wL3
6EI (y B) I = − wL4
8EI
Loading II.
(θC) II = +w(L∕2) 3
6EI = + wL3
48EI (y C) II = +w(L∕2) 4
8EI = + wL4
128EI
B
w
Loading I
Loading II
A
L
y
B
x
(yB) I
( B)I
A
B	C
w
A
L/2 	L/2
A 	C
B
x
y 	( B)II	( C)II
(y B)II
(yC)II
θ
θ	θ
Fig. 2 	Deformation details of the
superposed loadings I and II.
(continued)

-- 654 of 897 --

640 	Deflection of Beams
In portion CB, the bending moment for loading II is zero. Thus, the elastic
curve is a straight line.
(θB) II = (θC) II = + wL3
48EI (y B) II = (y C) II + (θC) II (
L
2)
= wL4
128EI + wL3
48EI (
L
2) = + 7wL4
384EI
Slope at Point B.
θB = (θB) I + (θB) II = − wL3
6EI + wL3
48EI = − 7wL3
48EI θB = 7wL3
48EI ⦪ 	◂
Deflection at B.
y B = (y B) I + (y B) II = − wL4
8EI + 7wL4
384EI = − 41wL4
384EI y B = 41wL4
384EI ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that the formulae for one beam case can
sometimes be extended to obtain the desired deflection of another case, as
you saw here for loading II.
Sample Problem 9.8
For the uniform beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at each
support, (b) the slope at end A.
STRATEGY: 	The beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree. Stra-
tegically selecting the reaction at B as the redundant, you can use the method
of superposition to model the given problem by using a summation of load
cases for which deflection formulae are readily available.
MODELING: 	The reaction RB is selected as redundant and considered as
an unknown load. Applying the principle of superposition, the deflections due
to the distributed load and to the reaction RB are considered separately as
shown in Fig. 1.
B
w
A 	C
2L/3
L
L/3

-- 655 of 897 --

9.4 Method of Superposition 	641
ANALYSIS: 	For each loading case, the deflection at point B is found by
using the table of Beam Deflections and Slopes in Appendix F.
Distributed Loading. 	Use case 6, Appendix F:
y = − w
24EI (x4 − 2Lx3 + L3x)
At point B, x = 2
3L:
(y B)w = − w
24EI [(
2
3 L)
4
− 2L(
2
3 L)
3
+ L3
(
2
3 L)] = −0.01132 wL4
EI
Redundant Reaction Loading. 	From case 5, Appendix F, with a = 2
3 L
and b = 1
3 L,
(y B)R = − Pa2b2
3EIL = + R B
3EIL (
2
3 L)
2
(
L
3)
2
= 0.01646 RB L3
EI
a. Reactions at Supports. 	Recalling that yB = 0,
y B = (y B)w + (y B)R
0 = −0.01132 wL4
EI + 0.01646 RB L3
EI RB = 0.688wL ↑ 	◂
Since the reaction RB is now known, use the methods of statics to determine
the other reactions (Fig. 2):
RA = 0.271wL ↑ 	RC = 0.0413wL ↑ 	◂
B
B
w
A
A
y
C
x	C
2L/3 	L/3
RB 	RB
B
w
A 	C
2L/3 	L/3
B	A 	C
2L/3 	L/3
[yB = 0] B
A
y
x	C
(yB)w	( A)w
B
A
y
x	C
(yB)R	( A)R
= 	+
+	=
θ θ
Fig. 1 	Indeterminate beam modeled as superposition of two determinate simply supported beams with reaction at B
chosen as redundant.
B
w
A 	C
RA = 0.271 wL 	RB = 0.688 wL
RC = 0.0413 wL
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of beam with
calculated reactions.
(continued)

-- 656 of 897 --

642 	Deflection of Beams
b. Slope at End A. 	Referring again to Appendix F,
Distributed Loading. 	(θA)w = − wL3
24EI = −0.04167 wL3
EI
Redundant Reaction Loading. 	For P = −R B = −0.688wL and b = 1
3L,
(θA)R = − Pb(L2 − b2 )
6EIL = + 0.688wL
6EIL 	(
L
3)[L2 − (
L
3)
2
]
= 0.03398 wL3
EI
Finally, θA = (θA)w + (θA)R
= −0.04167 wL3
EI + 0.03398 wL3
EI = −0.00769 wL3
EI
θA = 0.00769 wL3
EI ⦪ 	◂
Sample Problem 9.9
For the beam and loading shown, determine the reaction at the fixed
support C.
STRATEGY: 	The beam is statically indeterminate to the second degree.
Strategically selecting the reactions at C as redundants, you can use the
method of superposition and model the given problem by using a sum-
mation of load cases for which deflection formulae are readily
available.
MODELING: 	Assuming the axial force in the beam to be zero, the beam
ABC is indeterminate to the second degree, and we choose two reaction com-
ponents as redundants: the vertical force RC and the couple MC. The deforma-
tions caused by the given load P, the force RC, and the couple MC are
considered separately, as shown in Fig. 1.
ANALYSIS: 	For each load, the slope and deflection at point C are found by
using the table of Beam Deflections and Slopes in Appendix F.
Load P. 	For this load, portion BC of the beam is straight.
(θC)P = (θB)P = − Pa2
2EI (y C)P = (y B)P + (θB)p b
= − Pa3
3EI − Pa2
2EI b = − Pa2
6EI (2a + 3b)
B
P
C
L
a 	b
A

-- 657 of 897 --

9.4 Method of Superposition 	643
Force RC. 	(θC)R = + R C L2
2EI (y C)R = + R C L3
3EI
Couple MC. 	(θC)M = + MC L
EI (y C)M = + M C L2
2EI
Boundary Conditions. 	At end C, the slope and deflection must be
zero:
[x = L, θC = 0]: 	θC = (θC)P + (θC)R + (θC)M
0 = − Pa2
2EI + R C L2
2EI + M C L
EI (1)
[x = L, y C = 0]: 	y C = (y C)P + (y C)R + (y C)M
0 = − Pa2
6EI (2a + 3b) + R C L3
3EI + M C L2
2EI (2)
Reaction Components at C. 	Solve Eqs. (1) and (2) simultaneously:
R C = + Pa2
L3 (a + 3b) 	RC = Pa2
L3 (a + 3b) ↑ 	◂
M C = − Pa2b
L2 	MC = Pa2b
L2 	⤸ 	◂
The methods of statics are used to determine the reaction at A, shown in
Fig. 2.
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that an alternate strategy that could have
been used in this particular problem is to treat the couple reactions at the
ends as redundant. The application of superposition would then have involved
a simply supported beam, for which deflection formulae are also readily
available.
B
P
C
C
a 	b
A	B	A
P	MC 	MC
RC 	RC
	a 	b
C
C
L
A
C
C
A
A
L
B	B C
C
A
A 	A
( C)M
(y C)M
( C)P
( C)R
( B)P
(yC)P
(yC)R
(yB)P
[θC = 0]
[yC = 0]
θ
θ
θ 	θ
Fig. 1 	Indeterminate beam modeled as the superposition of three determinate cases, including one for each of the two
redundant reactions.
L
a 	b	
RA 	RC
Pa2b
L2	MC =	P	Pab2
L2	MA =
Pb2
L3	RA = 	(3a + b) Pa2
L3	RC = 	(a + 3b)
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram showing the
reaction results.

-- 658 of 897 --

644
Problems
Use the method of superposition to solve the following problems and
assume that the flexural rigidity EI of each beam is constant.
9.65 through 9.68 	For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine
the slope and deflection at the free end.
A
a
w 	w
a 	a
B 	C 	D
Fig. P9. 65
B C
w =
L/2 	L/2
A
P
P
L
Fig. P9. 66
C	A 	B
P 	2P
L/ 2 	L/ 2
Fig. P9.67
C
A
B
P
a
L
MA = Pa
Fig. P9.68
9.69 through 9.72 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the
deflection at point C, (b) the slope at end A.
D	C	B
P 	P 	P
A 	E
a 	a 	a	a
Fig. P9.69
L
a
C
A 	B
P
MA = Pa
Fig. P9.70
B
w
A
wL2
12	
MA =
C
L
Fig. P9.71
D
C
B
P
P
A
L/3 	L/3 	L/3
Fig. P9.72

-- 659 of 897 --

645
9.73 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine the slope and
deflection at end C. Use E = 200 GPa.
3 kN
C
B
A
0.75 m 	0.5 m
S100 × 11.5
3 kN
Fig. P9.73 and P9.74
9.74 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine the slope and
deflection at point B. Use E = 200 GPa.
9.75 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine the slope and
deflection at end C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
1.75 in.
30 in. 	10 in.
B
C
A
125 lb
15 lb/in.
Fig. P9.75 and P9.76
9.76 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine the slope and
deflection at point B. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.77 and 9.78 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at end A, (b) the deflection at point C. Use E = 200 GPa.
B	C
140 kN 80 kN·m	80 kN·m
2.5 m 	2.5 m
A
W410 × 46.1
Fig. P9.77
W150 × 24
20 kN/m
30 kN
1.6 m 0.8 m
A 	B
C
Fig. P9.78
9.79 and 9.80 	For the uniform beam shown, determine (a) the reaction at A,
(b) the reaction at B.
A
B
C 	D
P 	P
L/3 	L/3 	L/3
Fig. P9.79
L/2 	L/2
C
A
B
w
Fig. P9.80

-- 660 of 897 --

646
9.81 and 9.82 	For the uniform beam shown, determine the reaction at
each of the three supports.
A
B
P
C
D
L/3 	L/3 	L/3
Fig. P9.81
A 	B C
2L
3
L
3
M0
Fig. P9.82
9.83 and 9.84 	For the beam shown, determine the reaction at B.
w
B
A 	C
L/ 2 	L/ 2
Fig. P9.83
B	A
L
w
Fig. P9.84
9.85 Beam DE rests on the cantilever beam AC as shown. Knowing that
a square rod of side 10 mm is used for each beam, determine the
deflection at end C if the 25-N⋅m couple is applied (a) to end E of
the beam DE, (b) to end C of the beam AC. Use E = 200 GPa.
E
120 mm 	180 mm
25 N·m
B
A
C
D
10 mm
10 mm
Fig. P9.85
9.86 Beam AD rests on beam EF as shown. Knowing that a W12 × 26
rolled-steel shape is used for each beam, determine for the loading
shown the deflection at points B and C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
F
3 ft 	3 ft 	3 ft
20 kips 	20 kips
3 ft
B
E
A
C 	D
Fig. P9.86

-- 661 of 897 --

647
9.87 The two beams shown have the same cross section and are joined
by a hinge at C. For the loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
point A, (b) the deflection at point B. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
A 	B	C	B
12 in.	12 in. 6 in.
Hinge
D
800 lb
1.25 in.
1.25 in.
Fig. P9.87
A 	C	B
0.4 m 	0.4 m 	0.4 m 	0.4 m
Hinge	Hinge
D 	E
24 mm
12 mm
w
Fig. P9.88
P = 6 kips
a = 4 ft
a = 4 ft
b = 5 ft
D
A 	C
E
B
b = 5 ft
Fig. P9.89
400 mm 250 mm
50 mm
50 mm	w
A C
δ0
D
B
Fig. P9.90
9.88 A central beam BD is joined at hinges to two cantilever beams AB
and DE. All beams have the cross section shown. For the loading
shown, determine the largest w so that the deflection at C does not
exceed 3 mm. Use E = 200 GPa.
9.89 For the loading shown, and knowing that beams AB and DE have
the same flexural rigidity, determine the reaction (a) at B, (b) at E.
9.90 Before the uniformly distributed load w is applied, a gap, δ 0 = 1.2 mm,
exists between the ends of the cantilever bars AB and CD. Knowing
that E = 105 GPa and w = 30 kN/m, determine the reaction (a) at A,
(b) at D.

-- 662 of 897 --

648
9.91 Knowing that the rod ABC and the wire BD are both made of
steel, determine (a) the deflection at B, (b) the reaction at A. Use
E = 200 GPa.
C
D
0.18 m 	0.18 m
A B
0.2 m
40-mm
diameter
4-mm diameter
1.6 kN/m
Fig. P9.91
9.92 Before the 2-kip/ft load is applied, a gap, δ0 = 0.8 in., exists between
the W16 × 40 beam and the support at C. Knowing that E = 29 ×
106 psi, determine the reaction at each support after the uniformly
distributed load is applied.
2 kips/ft
B	A
W16 × 40
12 ft 	12 ft
C 	0	δ
Fig. P9.92
9.93 A 7
8 -in.-diameter rod BC is attached to the lever AB and to the fixed
support at C. Lever AB has a uniform cross section 3
8 in. thick and
1 in. deep. For the loading shown, determine the deflection of point A.
Use E = 29 × 106 psi and G = 11.2 × 106 psi.
20 in.
C
B
80 lb
10 in.
A
Fig. P9.93
9.94 A 16-mm-diameter rod has been bent into the shape shown. Deter-
mine the deflection of end C after the 200-N force is applied. Use
E = 200 GPa and G = 80 GPa.
L = 250 mm 	L = 250 mm
200 N
B
C
A
Fig. P9.94

-- 663 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	649
*9.5 	MOMENT-AREA THEOREMS
*9.5A 	General Principles
In Sec. 9.1 through Sec. 9.3 we used a mathematical method based on the
integration of a differential equation to determine the deflection and slope of
a beam at any given point. The bending moment was expressed as a function
M(x) of the distance x measured along the beam, and two successive integra-
tions led to the functions θ(x) and y(x) representing, respectively, the slope
and deflection at any point of the beam. In this section you will see how
geometric properties of the elastic curve can be used to determine the deflec-
tion and slope of a beam at a specific point (Photo 9.4).
†This relationship also can be determined by noting that the angle dθ formed by the
tangents to the elastic curve at P and P′ (Fig. 9.24) is also the angle formed by the cor-
responding normals to that curve. Thus dθ = ds∕ρ, where ds is the length of the arc PP′
and ρ is the radius of curvature at P. Substituting for 1∕ρ from Eq. (4.21) and noting that
since the slope at P is very small, ds is equal in first approximation to the horizontal
distance dx between P and P′, we will again obtain Eq. (9.15).
Photo 9.4 	The maximum deflection of each beam supporting the floors of a
building should be taken into account in the design process. ©fotog/Getty Images
First Moment-Area Theorem. 	Consider a beam AB subjected to some
arbitrary loading (Fig. 9.23a). Draw the diagram representing the variation
along the beam of M∕EI obtained by dividing the bending moment M by the
flexural rigidity EI (Fig. 9.23b). Except for a difference in the scales of ordi-
nates, this diagram is the same as the bending-moment diagram if the flexural
rigidity of the beam is constant.
Recalling Eq. (9.4) and that dy∕dx = θ,
dθ
dx = d2y
dx2 = M
EI
or
dθ = M
EI dx 	(9.15)†
B
B
B
C
C
C
D
D
D
A
A
A
M
EI
x
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
D
C
B
C
D
A
D/C
θ
θ
θ
Fig. 9.23 	First moment-area theorem.
(a) Beam subjected to arbitrary load. (b) Plot of
M/EI curve. (c) Elastic curve showing slope at
C and D. (d) Elastic curve showing slope at D
with respect to C.
d
d
C
ds P'
P
θ
θ
ρ
Fig. 9.24 	Geometry of the elastic curve used
to define the slope at point P′ with respect to P.

-- 664 of 897 --

650 	Deflection of Beams
Next consider two arbitrary points C and D on the beam and integrate
both members of Eq. (9.15) from C to D:
∫θD
θ C
dθ = ∫xD
xC
M
EI dx
or
θD − θC = ∫xD
xC
M
EI dx 	(9.16)
where θC and θD indicate the slope at C and D (Fig. 9.24c). But the right-hand
member of Eq. (9.16) represents the area under the M∕EI diagram between
C and D, while the left-hand member is the angle between the tangents to the
elastic curve at C and D (Fig. 9.23d). This angle is given as
θD∕C = area under M∕EI diagram
between C and D (9.17)
This is the first moment-area theorem.
Note that θD∕C and the area under the M∕EI diagram have the same sign.
This positive area (i.e., located above the x axis) corresponds to a counter-
clockwise rotation of the tangent to the elastic curve moving from C to D,
and a negative area corresponds to a clockwise rotation.
Second Moment-Area Theorem. 	Now consider two points P and P′
located between C and D at a distance dx from each other (Fig. 9.25). The
tangents to the elastic curve drawn at P and P′ intercept a segment with a
length dt on the vertical through point C. Since the slope θ at P and the angle
dθ formed by the tangents at P and P′ are both small quantities, dt is assumed
to be equal to the arc of the circle of radius x1 subtending the angle dθ.
Therefore,
dt = x1 dθ
or substituting for dθ from Eq. (9.15),
dt = x1
M
EI dx 	(9.18)
Now integrate Eq. (9.18) from C to D. As point P describes the elastic
curve from C to D, the tangent at P sweeps the vertical through C from C to E.
Thus, the integral of the left-hand member is equal to the vertical distance
from C to the tangent at D. This distance is denoted by tC∕D and is called the
tangential deviation of C with respect to D. Therefore,
tC∕D = ∫xD
xC
x1
M
EI dx 	(9.19)
B
C 	D
dx	x1
dt
dθ
A
P'
P
E
Fig. 9.25 	Geometry used to determine the
tangential deviation of C with respect to D.

-- 665 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	651
Observe that (M∕EI) dx represents an element of area under the (M∕EI)
diagram, and x1(M∕EI) dx is the first moment of that element with respect to
a vertical axis through C (Fig. 9.26). The right-hand member in Eq. (9.19)
represents the first moment with respect to that axis of the area located under
the M∕EI diagram between C and D.
We can, therefore, state the second moment-area theorem as follows:
The tangential deviation tC∕D of C with respect to D is equal to the first
moment with respect to a vertical axis through C of the area under the (M∕EI)
diagram between C and D.
Recalling that the first moment of an area with respect to an axis is
equal to the product of the area and the distance from its centroid to that axis,
the second moment-area theorem is expressed as:
tC∕D = (area between C and D) x1 	(9.20)
where the area refers to the area under the M∕EI diagram and where x1 is
the distance from the centroid of the area to the vertical axis through C
(Fig. 9.27a).
Remember to distinguish between the tangential deviation of C with
respect to D (tC∕D) and the tangential deviation of D with respect to C (tD∕C).
The tangential deviation tD∕C represents the vertical distance from D to the
tangent to the elastic curve at C and is obtained by multiplying the area under
the (M∕EI) diagram by the distance x2 from its centroid to the vertical axis
through D (Fig. 9.27b):
tD∕C = (area between C and D) x2 	(9.21)
Note that if an area under the M∕EI diagram is located above the x axis,
its first moment with respect to a vertical axis is positive. If it is located
below the x axis, its first moment is negative. As shown in Figure 9.27,
a point with a positive tangential deviation is located above the correspond-
ing tangent. A point with a negative tangential deviation is located below
that tangent.
*9.5B 	Cantilever Beams and Beams
with Symmetric Loadings
Recall that the first moment-area theorem defines the angle θD∕C between
the tangents at two points C and D of the elastic curve. The angle θD that
the tangent at D forms with the horizontal (i.e., the slope at D) can be
obtained only if the slope at C is known. Similarly, the second moment-area
theorem defines the vertical distance of one point of the elastic curve from
the tangent at another point. Therefore, the tangential deviation tD∕C helps
to locate point D only if the tangent at C is known. Thus, the two moment-
area theorems can be applied effectively to determine slopes and deflec-
tions only if a known reference tangent to the elastic curve has been
established.
B	C 	D	A
M
EI
x
P'	P
dx	x1
Fig. 9.26 	The expression x1(M∕EI) dx is the first
moment of the shaded area with respect to C.
B	A
B
C
tC/D
tD/C
D
D
A
C'
D'
C
B	C 	D	A
M
EI
x
B	C 	D	A
M
EI
x
x2
(a)
(b)
x1
Fig. 9.27 	Second moment-area
theorem illustrated. (a) Evaluating tC∕D.
(b) Evaluating tD∕C.

-- 666 of 897 --

652 	Deflection of Beams
In cantilever beams (Fig. 9.28), the tangent to the elastic curve at the
fixed end A is known and can be used as the reference tangent. Since θA = 0,
the slope of the beam at any point D is θD = θD∕A and can be obtained
using the first moment-area theorem. On the other hand, the deflection yD of
point D is equal to the tangential deviation tD∕A measured from the horizontal
reference tangent at A and can be obtained using the second moment-area
theorem.
In a simply supported beam AB with a symmetric load (Fig. 9.29a) or an
overhanging symmetric beam with a symmetric load (see Sample Prob. 9.11),
the tangent at the center C of the beam must be horizontal (by reason of sym-
metry) and can be used as the reference tangent (Fig. 9.29b). Since θC = 0,
the slope at the support B is θB = θB∕C and can be obtained using the first
moment-area theorem. Also, ∣y∣max is equal to the tangential deviation tB∕C and
can be obtained with the second moment-area theorem. The slope at any other
point D of the beam (Fig. 9.29c) is found in a similar way, and the deflection
at D is yD = tD∕C − tB∕C.
D = D/A
yD = tD/A
Reference tangent
Tangent at D	D
A
P
θ	θ
Fig. 9.28 	Application of moment-area
method to cantilever beams.
C
C
B
y max = t B/C
A
B	A
P
Horizontal
Reference tangent
(a)
(b)
B/C	B =
C
B
D
tD/C
tB/C
y D
A
Reference tangent
(c)
D/C	D =
P
θ 	θ
θ	θ
Fig. 9.29 	Application of moment-area
method to simply supported beams with
symmetric loads. (a) Beam and loads.
(b) Maximum deflection and slope at point B.
(c) Deflection and slope at arbitrary point D.
Concept Application 9.9
Determine the slope and deflection at end B of the prismatic cantilever beam
AB when it is loaded as shown (Fig. 9.30a), knowing that the flexural rigidity
of the beam is EI = 10 MN·m2.
Draw the free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 9.30b). Summing vertical
components and moments about A, the reaction at the fixed end A consists
of a 50 kN upward vertical force RA and a 60 kN·m counterclockwise couple
MA. Next, draw the bending-moment diagram (Fig. 9.30c) and determine
from similar triangles the distance xD from end A to point D of the beam
where M = 0:
xD
60 = 3 − xD
90 = 3
150 x D = 1.2 m
Dividing the values obtained for M by the flexural rigidity EI, draw
the M∕EI diagram (Fig. 9.30d) and compute the areas corresponding
respectively to the segments AD and DB, assigning a positive sign to the
3 m
A 	B
50 kN
90 kN·m
(a)
Fig. 9.30 	(a) Cantilevered beam with
end loads.

-- 667 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	653
area located above the x axis and a negative sign to the area located below
that axis. Use the first moment-area theorem to obtain
θB∕A = θB − θA = area from A to B = A1 + A2
= − 1
2 (1.2 m) (6 × 10−3 m−1 ) + 1
2 (1.8 m)(9 × 10−3 m−1 )
= −3.6 × 10−3 + 8.1 × 10−3
= +4.5 × 10−3 rad
and, since θA = 0,
θB = +4.5 × 10−3 rad
Using the second moment-area theorem, the tangential deviation tB∕A is
equal to the first moment about a vertical axis through B of the total area
between A and B. The moment of each partial area is the product of that area
and the distance from its centroid to the axis through B:
tB∕A = A1 (2.6 m) + A2 (0.6 m)
= (−3.6 × 10−3 )(2.6 m) + (8.1 × 10−3 )(0.6 m)
= −9.36 mm + 4.86 mm = −4.50 mm
0.8 m 1.8 m
2.6 m
0.6 m
+9 × 10 –3 m–1
–6 × 10 –3 m–1
A A1
A2
B
D 	x
M
EI
1.2 m
(d)
FIg. 9.30 	(cont.) (d) Plot of M/EI showing
locations of area centroids.
Since the reference tangent at A is horizontal, the deflection at B is equal to
tB∕A, so
yB = tB∕A = −4.50 mm
The deflected beam is shown in Fig. 9.30e.
B
A
Reference tangent
B = B/A = +4.5 × 10 –3 rad
yB = tB/A = –4.5 mm
(e)
θ 	θ
Fig. 9.30 	(cont.) (e) Deflected beam showing
slope and deflection results at end B.
–60 kN·m
A
B
(b)
(c)
3 m – xD
xD
MA = 60 kN·m
RA = 50 kN
+90 kN·m
90 kN·m
M
A B	D x
50 kN
Fig. 9.30 	(cont.) (b) Free-body diagram
with reactions. (c) Moment diagram.

-- 668 of 897 --

654 	Deflection of Beams
*9.5C 	Bending-Moment Diagrams
by Parts
In many applications, the angle θD∕C and the tangential deviation tD∕C are
easier to determine if the effect of each load is evaluated separately from the
other loads. To do this, the M∕EI diagram is drawn for each load, and angle
θD∕C is obtained by adding the areas under the various diagrams. Similarly,
the tangential deviation tD∕C is obtained by adding the first moments of these
areas about a vertical axis through D. A bending-moment or M∕EI diagram
plotted this way is said to be drawn by parts.
When an M∕EI diagram is drawn by parts, the areas defined consist
of simple geometric shapes, such as rectangles, triangles, and parabolic
spandrels. The areas and centroids of some of these shapes are shown in
Fig. 9.31.
Shape 	Area 	c
b
b
3
Rectangle
Triangle
Parabolic
spandrel
Cubic
spandrel
General
spandrel
b
2
bh
bh
2
c
h
b
C
C
c
h
b
4
bh
3
b
C
c
h
b
5
bh
4
bh
n + 1
b
n + 2
y = kx2
b
C
c
h
y = kx3
b
C
c
h
y = kxn
Fig. 9.31 	Areas and centroids of common
shapes.

-- 669 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	655
Concept Application 9.10
Determine the slope and deflection at end B of the prismatic beam of Concept
Application 9.9, drawing the bending-moment diagram by parts.
The given load is replaced by the two equivalent loads shown in
Fig. 9.32a, and the corresponding bending-moment and M∕EI diagrams
are drawn from right to left, starting at the free end B.
3 m
A 	B
50 kN
90 kN·m
90 kN·m
3 m
3 m
3 m
1.5 m
2 m
–150 kN·m
–15 × 10–3 m–1
9 × 10–3 m–1
M
A
M
A
B	A
B	B
x	x
A1
A2
A B A B
x 	x
A
B
90 kN·m
M
EI
M
EI
50 kN
(a)
Fig. 9.32 	(a) Superposition of loads and their resulting bending-moment and M/EI diagrams.
Applying the first moment-area theorem and recalling that θA = 0
θB = θB∕A = A1 + A2
= (9 × 10−3 m−1 )(3 m) − 1
2 (15 × 10−3 m−1 )(3 m)
= 27 × 10−3 − 22.5 × 10−3 = 4.5 × 10−3 rad
Applying the second moment-area theorem, compute the first moment of each
area about a vertical axis through B and write
y B = tB∕A = A1 (1.5 m) + A2 (2 m)
= (27 × 10−3 )(1.5 m) − (22.5 × 10−3 )(2 m)
= 40.5 mm − 45 mm = −4.5 mm
It practice, it is convenient to combine the two portions of the M∕EI diagram
into a single drawing (Fig. 9.32b).
3 m
1.5 m
2 m
	–15 × 10–3 m–1
9 × 10 –3 m–1
A
A1
A2
B
x
M
EI
(b)
FIg. 9.32 	(cont.) M∕EI diagrams combined
into a single drawing.

-- 670 of 897 --

656 	Deflection of Beams
Concept Application 9.11
For the prismatic beam AB and the loading shown in Fig. 9.33a, determine
the slope at a support and the maximum deflection.
a 	a 	a 	a
w
A
D 	E
B
C
L = 4a
B
(a)
Fig. 9.33 	(a) Simply supported beam
with symmetric distributed loading.
Sketch the deflected beam (Fig. 9.33b). Since the tangent at the
center C of the beam is horizontal, it is used as the reference tangent,
and ∣y∣max = tA∕C. But since θC = 0,
θC∕A = θC − θA = −θA 	or 	θA = −θC∕A
The free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 9.33c) shows
R A = R B = wa
Next, the shear and bending-moment diagrams are drawn for portion AC of
the beam. These diagrams are drawn by parts, considering the effects of the
reaction RA and of the distributed load separately. However, for convenience
the two parts of each diagram have been plotted together in Fig. 9.33d. Recall
that when the distributed load is uniform, the corresponding parts of the
shear and bending-moment diagrams are, respectively, linear and parabolic.
The area and centroid of the triangle and of the parabolic spandrel are
obtained by referring to Fig. 9.31. The areas of the triangle and spandrel are
A1 = 1
2 (2a)(
2wa2
EI ) = 2wa3
EI
and
A2 = −1
3 (a)(
wa2
2EI) = −wa3
6EI
Applying the first moment-area theorem,
θC∕A = A1 + A2 = 2wa3
EI − wa3
6EI = 11wa3
6EI
Recall from Fig. 9.33a and b that a = 1
4 L and θA = −θC∕A, making
θA = − 11wa3
6EI = − 11wL3
384EI
Applying the second moment-area theorem
tA∕C = A1
4a
3 + A2
7a
4 = (
2wa3
EI )
4a
3 + (−wa3
6EI)
7a
4 = 19wa4
8EI
and
∣y∣max = tA∕C = 19wa4
8EI = 19wL4
2048EI
A = –
A
C
B
Reference tangent
C/A
y max = tA/C
(b)
θ	θ
a
2wa
A
RA 	RB
D 	E
B
C
B
a
2a
(c)
a
(2wa2)
w
A
V
RA = wa
RA = wa
–wa
(– wa2)
D 	C
x
D
A
C
a
a
a 	a
a
2a
1
2
–
A
A1
A2	
wa2
D
C 	x
M
EI 	2 wa2
2 EI
EI
4a
3
7a
4 	1
4
(d)
Fig. 9.33 	(cont.) (b) Elastic curve with
maximum deflection and slope at point
A shown. (c) Free-body diagram of the
beam. (d) Shear and M∕EI diagrams for
the left half of the beam.

-- 671 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	657
Sample Problem 9.10
Prismatic rods AD and DB are welded together to form the cantilever beam
ADB. Knowing that the flexural rigidity is EI in portion AD of the beam
and 2EI in portion DB, determine the slope and deflection at end A for the
loading shown.
A
a
D
EI 	2EI
a
P 	P
B
STRATEGY: 	To apply the moment-area theorems, you should first obtain
the M∕EI diagram for the beam. For a cantilever beam, it is convenient to place
the reference tangent at the fixed end, since it is known to be horizontal.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
(M∕EI) Diagram. 	Referring to Fig. 1, draw the bending-moment diagram
for the beam and then obtain the M∕EI diagram by dividing the value of
M at each point of the beam by the corresponding value of the flexural
rigidity.
Reference Tangent. 	Referring to Fig. 2, choose the horizontal tangent at
the fixed end B as the reference tangent. Since θB = 0 and yB = 0,
θA = −θB∕A 	y A = tA∕B
Reference tangent
– B/A
A
A
B	y A= t A/B
θ
θ
Fig. 2 	Slope and deflection at end A related
to reference tangent at fixed end B.
A
V
– P
– Pa
– 2P
– 3Pa
Pa
B
M
x
x
x
x
D
EI
EI 2EI
2EI
RB
MB
M
EI
Pa
EI
3Pa
2EI
P 	P
–	–
–
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram and
construction of the M∕EI diagram.
(continued)

-- 672 of 897 --

658 	Deflection of Beams
Slope at A. 	Divide the M∕EI diagram into the three triangular portions
shown in Fig. 3.
A1 = − 1
2
Pa
EI a = − Pa2
2EI
A2 = − 1
2
Pa
2EI a = − Pa2
4EI
A3 = − 1
2
3Pa
2EI a = − 3Pa2
4EI
Using the first moment-area theorem,
θB∕A = A1 + A2 + A3 = − Pa2
2EI − Pa2
4EI − 3Pa2
4EI = −3Pa2
2EI
θA = −θB∕A = + 3Pa2
2EI θA = 3Pa2
2EI ⦨ 	◂
Deflection at A. 	Using the second moment-area theorem,
y A = tA∕B = A1(
2
3 a) + A2(
4
3 a) + A3(
5
3 a)
= (− Pa2
2EI)
2a
3 + (− Pa2
4EI)
4a
3 + (− 3Pa2
4EI )
5a
3
y A = − 23Pa3
12EI yA = 23Pa3
12EI ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This example demonstrates that the moment-
area theorems can be just as easily used for nonprismatic beams as for
prismatic beams.
a	a
B
A
a
D 	A2
A3
A1
Pa
x
2EI
M
EI
Pa
EI
3Pa
2EI
5
3
a	4
3
a	2
3
– 	– 	–
Fig. 3 	Areas and centroids of moment-area
diagram used to find slope and deflection.
Sample Problem 9.11
For the prismatic beam and loading shown, determine the slope and deflec-
tion at end E.
B
A
L
C 	D E
2
a
L
a
w	w
STRATEGY: 	To apply the moment-area theorems, you should first
obtain the M∕EI diagram for the beam. Due to the symmetry of both the
beam and its loading, it is convenient to place the reference tangent at the
midpoint since it is known to be horizontal.

-- 673 of 897 --

*9.5 Moment-Area Theorems 	659
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
M∕EI Diagram. 	From a free-body diagram of the beam (Fig. 1), determine
the reactions and then draw the shear and bending-moment diagrams. Since
the flexural rigidity of the beam is constant, divide each value of M by EI
and obtain the M∕EI diagram shown.
Reference Tangent. 	In Fig. 2, since the beam and its loads are
symmetric with respect to the midpoint C, the tangent at C is horizontal
and can be used as the reference tangent. Referring to Fig. 2 and since
θC = 0,
θE = θC + θE∕ C = θE∕C 	(1)
yE = tE∕C − tD∕C 	(2)
Slope at E. 	Referring to the M∕EI diagram shown in Fig. 1 and using the
first moment-area theorem,
A1 = − wa2
2EI(
L
2) = − wa2L
4EI
A2 = − 1
3(
wa2
2EI)(a) = − wa3
6EI
Using Eq. (1),
θE = θE∕C = A1 + A2 = − wa2L
4EI − wa3
6EI
θE = − wa2
12EI (3L + 2a) 	θE = wa2
12EI (3L + 2a) ⦪ 	◂
Deflection at E. 	Use the second moment-area theorem to write
tD∕C = A1
L
4 = (− wa2L
4EI )
L
4 = − wa2L2
16EI
tE∕C = A1(a + L
4) + A2(
3a
4 )
= (− wa2L
4EI )(a + L
4) + (− wa3
6EI)(
3a
4 )
= − wa3L
4EI − wa2L2
16EI − wa4
8EI
Use Eq. (2) to obtain
yE = tE∕C − tD∕C = − wa3L
4EI − wa4
8EI
= − wa3
8EI (2L + a) 	y E = wa3
8EI (2L + a) ↓ 	◂
B
A C 	D 	E
A1 	A2
L	a
V
x
x
x
M
a
a
wa
– wa
wa2
2
L
2
wa2
2EI
wa2
2EI
3a
4
a
4
wa2
2
L
4
M
EI
RB = wa RD = wa
w 	w
–	–
– –
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram and construction
of the moment-area diagram.
B	A
C
yE
E	E	D
Reference tangent tD/C tE/C
θ
Fig. 2 	Due to symmetry, reference
tangent at midpoint C is horizontal.
Shown are the slope and deflection at
end E related to this reference tangent.

-- 674 of 897 --

660
Problems
Use the moment-area method to solve the following problems.
9.95 through 9.98 For the uniform cantilever beam and loading shown,
determine (a) the slope at the free end, (b) the deflection at the
free end.
M0
L
A
B
Fig. P9.95
L
A
B
P
Fig. P9.96
B
w
L
A
Fig. P9.97
B
A
w0
L
Fig. P9.98
9.99 and 9.100 	For the uniform cantilever beam and loading shown,
determine the slope and deflection at (a) point B, (b) point C.	P = wa	
2
3
A B C
w
2a 	a
Fig. P9.99
C
B
A
w
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.100
9.101 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at point C, (b) the deflection at point C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.102 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at point A, (b) the deflection at point A. Use E = 200 GPa.	A
3.0 in.
1 ft 	ft
B 	C
1.5 kips
4 kips/ft
1
3
2
3
Fig. P9.101
A
26 kN/m
C	B
0.5 m 2.2 m
W250 × 28.4
18 kN
Fig. P9.102

-- 675 of 897 --

661
9.103 Two C6 × 8.2 channels are welded back to back and loaded as
shown. Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the slope at
point D, (b) the deflection at point D.
D
A
C	B
2 ft 	2 ft 	2 ft
C6 × 8.2
1.1 kips 	1.1 kips 	1.1 kips
Fig. P9.103
9.104 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at point A, (b) the deflection at point A. Use E = 200 GPa.
A
4 kN/m
C	B
1 m 	2.5 m
W250 × 22.3
5 kN
Fig. P9.104
9.105 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at point A, (b) the deflection at point A.
A
B 	C
2EI	EI
2L/3	L/3
w
Fig. P9.105
A
30 kN/m
20 kN·m
C
B
1.2 m	0.8 m
W250 × 22.3
5 × 120 mm
Fig. P9.107
9.108 Two cover plates are welded to the rolled-steel beam as shown.
Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the slope at end C, (b) the
deflection at end C.
W12 × 40	3 ft
5 ft
30 kips 	20 kips
A
B 	C
× 9 in.	1
2
Fig. P9.108
EI 	2EI 	3EI
A 	B 	C 	D
M0
a 	a 	a
Fig. P9.106
9.106 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine the deflection
and slope at end A caused by the moment M0.
9.107 Two cover plates are welded to the rolled-steel beam as shown.
Using E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the slope at end A, (b) the deflec-
tion at end A.

-- 676 of 897 --

662
9.109 through 9.114 	For the prismatic beam and loading shown, deter-
mine (a) the slope at end A, (b) the deflection at the center C of the
beam.
A
L/2	L/2
C B
P
Fig. P9.109
P 	P
B
A 	E
C 	D
a 	a
L/ 2 	L/ 2
Fig. P9.110
A
B E
C 	D
L
4
L
4
L
4
L
4
P
P
P
Fig. P9.111
A
a	a
E
C 	D	B
L/ 2	L/ 2
w 	w
Fig. P9.112
A
a	a
E
C 	D	B
M0 	M0
L/ 2	L/ 2
Fig. P9.113
A 	B
C
w0
L/2	L/2
Fig. P9.114
9.115 and 9.116 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the
slope at end A, (b) the deflection at the center C of the beam.
A
D	C	B
E
2EI
a
EI	EI
P
a 	a 	a
Fig. P9.115
A
D	C	B
E
3EI
a
EI	EI
a 	a 	a
P 	P	2P
Fig. P9.116
S6 × 12.5
1.5 kips 	1.5 kips	P
A 	E
B 	C 	D
2 ft 	2 ft
4.5 ft 	4.5 ft
Fig. P9.117
9.117 Knowing that the magnitude of the load P is 7 kips, determine
(a) the slope at end A, (b) the deflection at end A, (c) the deflection
at midpoint C of the beam. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.

-- 677 of 897 --

663
9.118 and 9.119 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the
slope at end A, (b) the deflection at the midpoint of the beam. Use
E = 200 GPa.
9.120 For the beam and loading shown and knowing that w = 8 kN/m,
determine (a) the slope at end A, (b) the deflection at midpoint C.
Use E = 200 GPa.
0.6 m
A 	E
B 	D
10 kN·m 	10 kN·m
40 kN/m
0.6 m
3.6 m
S250 × 37.8
Fig. P9.118
60 kN·m
150 kN
60 kN·m
150 kN
2 m 	2 m
5 m
W460 × 74
A 	E
B 	D
Fig. P9.119
9.121 For the beam and loading of Prob. 9.117, determine (a) the load P
for which the deflection is zero at the midpoint C of the beam,
(b) the corresponding deflection at end A. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.122 For the beam and loading of Prob. 9.120, determine the value of w
for which the deflection is zero at the midpoint C of the beam. Use
E = 200 GPa.
*9.123 A uniform rod AE is to be supported at two points B and D. Deter-
mine the distance a for which the slope at ends A and E is zero.
A
5 m 	5 m
B
C
40 kN·m 	40 kN·m
W310 × 60
w
Fig. P9.120
A
a 	a
L
E
L/ 2
C	B 	D
Fig. P9.123 and P9.124
*9.124 A uniform rod AE is to be supported at two points B and D. Deter-
mine the distance a from the ends of the rod to the points of support,
if the downward deflections of points A, C, and E are to be equal.

-- 678 of 897 --

664 	Deflection of Beams
*9.6 	MOMENT-AREA THEOREMS
APPLIED TO BEAMS WITH
UNSYMMETRIC LOADINGS
*9.6A 	General Principles
When either a simply supported or an overhanging beam carries a symmetric
load, the tangent at the center C of the beam is horizontal and can be used
as the reference tangent (Sec. 9.6). Conversely, when a simply supported or
overhanging beam carries an unsymmetric load, it is not always possible to
determine by inspection the point of the beam where the tangent is horizontal.
Other means must be used to locate a reference tangent (i.e., a tangent of
known slope for applying either of the two moment-area theorems).
It is usually convenient to select the reference tangent at one of the
beam supports. For example, considering the tangent at the support A of the
simply supported beam AB (Fig. 9.34), its slope can be determined by comput-
ing the tangential deviation tB∕A of the support B with respect to A and divid-
ing tB∕A by the distance L between the supports. Recalling that the tangential
deviation of a point located above the tangent is positive,
θA = − tB∕A
L (9.22)
Once the slope of the reference tangent has been found, the slope θD of
the beam at any point D (Fig. 9.35) can be determined by using the first
moment-area theorem to obtain θD∕A, and then writing:
θD = θA + θD∕A 	(9.23)
D
Reference
tangent
B	A θD
θ D/A
θ A
Fig. 9.35 	Finding the tangential deviation between
supports provides a convenient reference tangent for
evaluating slopes.
The tangential deviation tD∕A of D with respect to the support A can be
obtained from the second moment-area theorem. Note that tD∕A is equal to seg-
ment ED (Fig. 9.36a) and represents the vertical distance D from the reference
tangent. On the other hand, the deflection yD of point D represents the vertical
distance of D from the horizontal line AB (Fig. 9.36b). Since yD is equal in
magnitude to the segment FD, it can be expressed as the difference between EF
and ED (Fig. 9.36c). Observing from the similar triangles AFE and ABH that
EF
x = HB
L or 	EF = x
L tB∕A
and recalling the sign conventions used for deflections and tangential deviations,
yD = ED − EF = tD∕A − x
L tB∕A 	(9.24)
P
Reference
tangent
A
w
B
A 	B
L
(a)
(b)
A
tB/A
θ
Fig. 9.34 	(a) Unsymmetric loading.
(b) Application of moment-area method
to find slope at point A.
tD/A
D
E
B	A
Reference
tangent
(a)
D
F
yD
B	A
(b)
t B/A
D
E
H
x
L
F B	A
(c)
Fig. 9.36 	(a) Tangential deviation of point D
with respect to point A. (b) Deflection of point D.
(c) Knowing HB through tB/A, EF can be found
by similar triangles.

-- 679 of 897 --

*9.6 Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with Unsymmetric Loadings 	665
Concept Application 9.12
For the prismatic beam and loading shown (Fig. 9.37a), determine the slope
and deflection at point D.
Reference Tangent at Support A. 	Compute the reactions at the supports
and draw the M∕EI diagram (Fig. 9.37b). The tangential deviation tB∕A of
support B with respect to support A is found by applying the second moment-
area theorem and computing the moments about a vertical axis through B of
the areas A1 and A2.
A1 = 1
2
L
4
3PL
16EI = 3PL2
128EI A2 = 1
2
3L
4
3PL
16EI = 9PL2
128EI
tB∕A = A1(
L
12 + 3L
4 ) + A2(
L
2)
= 3PL2
128EI
10L
12 + 9PL2
128EI
L
2 = 7PL3
128EI
The slope of the reference tangent at A (Fig. 9.37c) is
θA = − tB∕A
L = − 7PL2
128EI
Slope at D. 	Applying the first moment-area theorem from A to D,
θD∕A = A1 = 3PL2
128EI
Thus, the slope at D is
θD = θA + θD∕A = − 7PL2
128EI + 3PL2
128EI = − PL2
32EI
Deflection at D. 	The tangential deviation DE = tD∕A is found by computing
the moment of the area A1 about a vertical axis through D:
DE = tD∕A = A1(
L
12) = 3PL2
128EI
L
12 = PL3
512EI
The deflection at D is equal to the difference between the segments DE and
EF (Fig. 9.37c). Thus,
yD = DE − EF = tD∕A − 1
4 tB∕A
= PL3
512EI − 1
4
7PL3
128EI
= − 3PL3
256EI = −0.01172PL3∕EI
B
D
L
L 	P
A
1
4
(a)
12
B
D
L
A1 	A2
A 	D 	B x
L
2
L
4
L
4
3L
EI
M
16EI
3PL
L 	P
A
1
4
RB = P
4	RA = P	
3
4
(b)
L
Reference
tangent
F
E
t B/A
D
A
A 	B
L	1
4
(c)
θ
Fig. 9.37 	(a) Simply supported beam
with unsymmetric load. (b) Free-body
diagram and M/EI diagram. (c) Reference
tangent and geometry to determine
slope and deflection at point D.

-- 680 of 897 --

666 	Deflection of Beams
*9.6B 	Maximum Deflection
When a simply supported or overhanging beam carries an unsymmetric load, the
maximum deflection generally does not occur at the center of the beam. Such is
the case depicted in Photo 9.5, where the bridge is loaded by the axles of the
truck, with each axle having a different load. To determine the maximum deflec-
tion of such a beam, it is first necessary to locate point K of the beam where the
tangent is horizontal. The deflection at that point is the maximum deflection.
Photo 9.5 	The deflections of the beams used for the bridge must be reviewed for different possible positions of the truck.
©A. and I. Kruk/Shutterstock
This analysis must begin by determining a reference tangent at one
of the supports. If support A is selected, the slope θA of the tangent at A
is obtained by computing the tangential deviation tB∕A of support B with
respect to A and dividing that quantity by the distance L between the two
supports.
Since the slope θK at point K is zero (Fig. 9.38a),
θK∕A = θK − θA = 0 − θA = −θA
Recalling the first moment-area theorem, point K can be found from the M∕EI
diagram knowing that θK∕A = −θA (Fig. 9.38b).
Observing that the maximum deflection ∣y∣max is equal to the tangential
deviation tA∕K of support A with respect to K (Fig. 9.38a), ∣y∣max is found by
computing the first moment with respect to the vertical axis through A of the
area between A and K (Fig. 9.38b).
(a)
P
A
A
w
B
B
K
L
< 0
= 0
A
K
K/A 	t B/A
Reference
tangent
y max = tA/K
θ
θ
θ
(b)
A 	K 	B x
=	= 	–	K/A 	A	Area	
M
EI 	θ	θ
Fig. 9.38 	Determination of maximum deflection using moment-area method. (a) The maximum deflection occurs at a
point K where θK = 0, which is where θK/A = −θA. (b) With point K so located, the maximum deflection is equal to the first
moment of the shaded area with respect to A.

-- 681 of 897 --

*9.6 Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with Unsymmetric Loadings 	667
Concept Application 9.13
Determine the maximum deflection of the beam of Concept Application 9.12.
The free-body diagram is shown in Fig. 9.39a.
Determination of Point K Where Slope Is Zero. 	Recall that the slope at
point D, where the load is applied, is negative. It follows that point K, where
the slope is zero, is located between D and the support B (Fig. 9.39b). Our
computations are simplified if the slope at K is related to the slope at B, rather
than to the slope at A.
Since the slope at A has already been determined in Concept Application 9.12,
the slope at B is obtained by
θB = θA + θB∕A = θA + A1 + A2
= − 7PL2
128EI + 3PL2
128EI + 9PL2
128EI = 5PL2
128EI
Observing that the bending moment at a distance u from end B is M = 1
4Pu
(Fig. 9.39c), the area A′ located between K and B under the M∕EI diagram
(Fig. 9.39d) is expressed as
A′ = 1
2
Pu
4EI u = Pu2
8EI
Use the first moment-area theorem to obtain
θB∕K = θB − θK = A′
and since θK = 0, 	θB = A′
Substituting the values obtained for θB and A′,
5PL2
128EI = Pu2
8EI
and solving for u,
u = √5
4 L = 0.559L
Thus, the distance from the support A to point K is
AK = L − 0.559L = 0.441L
Maximum Deflection. 	The maximum deflection ∣y∣max is equal to the tan-
gential deviation tB∕K and thus to the first moment of area A′ about a vertical
axis through B (Fig. 9.39d).
∣y∣max = tB∕K = A′(
2u
3 ) = Pu2
8EI(
2u
3 ) = Pu3
12EI
Substituting the value obtained for u,
∣y∣max = P
12EI(
√5
4 L)
3
= 0.01456PL3∕EI
B
D
L
A1 	A2
A 	D 	B x
EI
M
P
A
RA = 3P
4 1
4
3L
4 	RB = P
4
E
D K
A
K = 0 	B
A B
y max = t B/K
(a)
(b)
θ θ 	θ
RB =
M
V 	P
4
A'
A 	D 	K 	B x
EI
M
4EI
Pu
K B
u
u
(c)
(d)
Fig. 9.39 	(a) Free-body diagram.
(b) M∕EI diagram and geometry to
determine the maximum deflection.
(c) Free-body diagram of portion KB.
(d) Maximum deflection is the first moment
of the shaded area with respect to B.

-- 682 of 897 --

668 	Deflection of Beams
*9.6C 	Statically Indeterminate Beams
Reactions at the supports of a statically indeterminate beam can be deter-
mined using the moment-area method in much the same way that was
described in Sec. 9.4. For a beam indeterminate to the first degree, one of
the reactions is designated as redundant, and the corresponding support is
eliminated or modified accordingly. The redundant reaction is then treated
as an unknown load, which, together with the other loads, must produce
deformations that are compatible with the original supports. This compat-
ibility condition is usually expressed by writing that the tangential devia-
tion of one support with respect to another is either zero or has a
predetermined value.
Two separate free-body diagrams of the beam are drawn. One shows
the given loads and the corresponding reactions at the supports that have not
been eliminated; the other shows the redundant reaction and the correspond-
ing reactions at the same supports (see Concept Application 9.14). An M∕EI
diagram is drawn for each of the two loadings, and the desired tangential
deviations are obtained using the second moment-area theorem. Superposing
the results, we obtain the required compatibility condition needed to determine
the redundant reaction. The other reactions are obtained from the free-body
diagram of beam.
Once the reactions at the supports are found, the slope and deflec-
tion can be obtained using the moment-area method at any other point of
the beam.
Concept Application 9.14
Determine the reaction at the supports for the prismatic beam and loading
shown (Fig. 9.40a).
Consider the couple exerted at the fixed end A as redundant and replace
the fixed end by a pin-and-bracket support. Couple MA is now considered to
be an unknown load (Fig. 9.40b) and will be determined from the condition
that the tangent to the beam at A must be horizontal. Thus, this tangent must
pass through the support B, and the tangential deviation tB∕A of B with respect
to A must be zero. The solution is carried out by computing separately
the tangential deviation (tB∕A)w caused by the uniformly distributed load w
B
w
A
L
(a)
Fig. 9.40 	(a) Statically
indeterminate beam with a
uniformly distributed load.
t B/A = 0
(c) 	(d)	(b)
A 	B
MA
B''
(tB/A)M	w
A 	B
B'
(t B/A)w
A
w
B
MA
Fig. 9.40 	(cont.) (b) Analyze the indeterminate beam by superposing two determinate simply supported
beams, subjected to (c) a uniformly distributed load, (d) the redundant reaction.

-- 683 of 897 --

*9.6 Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with Unsymmetric Loadings 	669
In Concept Application 9.14, there was a single redundant reaction (i.e., the
beam was statically indeterminate to the first degree). The moment-area theorems
also can be used when there are additional redundant reactions, but it is necessary
to write additional equations. Thus, for a beam that is statically indeterminate to
the second degree, it would be necessary to select two redundant reactions and
write two equations considering the deformations of the structure involved.
(Fig. 9.40c) and the tangential deviation (tB∕A)M produced by the unknown
couple MA (Fig. 9.40d).
Using the free-body diagram of the beam under the known distributed
load w (Fig. 9.40e), determine the corresponding reactions at the supports A
and B.
(RA) 1 = (RB) 1 = 1
2 wL ↑ 	(1)
Now draw the corresponding shear and M∕EI diagrams (Fig. 9.40e). Observ-
ing that M∕EI is represented by an arc of parabola and recalling the formula
A = 2
3 bh for the area under a parabola, the first moment of this area about a
vertical axis through B is
(tB∕A)w = A1 (
L
2) = (
2
3 LwL2
8EI )(
L
2) = wL4
24EI (2)
Using the free-body diagram of the beam when it is subjected to the
unknown couple MA (Fig. 9.40f ), the corresponding reactions at A and B are
(RA) 2 = MA
L ↑ 	(RB) 2 = MA
L ↓ 	(3)
Drawing the corresponding M∕EI diagram (Fig. 9.40f ), the second moment-
area theorem is applied to obtain
(tB∕A)M = A2 (
2L
3 ) = (− 1
2 LM A
EI )(
2L
3 ) = − M A L2
3EI (4)
Combining the results obtained in Eqs. (2) and (4) and expressing that
the resulting tangential deviation tB∕A must be zero (Fig. 9.40b–d),
tB∕A = (tB∕A)w + (tB∕A)M = 0
wL4
24EI − M A L2
3EI = 0
and solving for MA,
M A = + 1
8 wL2 	MA = 1
8 wL2 ⤴
Substituting for MA into Eq. (3), and recalling Eq. (1), the values of RA and
RB are
R A = (R A) 1 + (R A) 2 = 1
2 wL + 1
8 wL = 5
8 wL
R B = (R B) 1 + (R B) 2 = 1
2 wL − 1
8 wL = 3
8 wL
(e)
B
B
x
x
w
A
A
B
L
A A1
L
V
(RB) 1	(RA) 1
wL	
1
2
wL	
1
2
L
2
L
2
wL2
M
EI
8EI
wL	
1
8
–
( 	2)
Fig. 9.40 	(cont.) (e) Free-body
diagram of beam with distributed load,
shear diagram, and M∕EI diagram.
(f)
MA
B	A
L
x
(RB) 2	(RA)2
A2
MA
EI	
– 2L
3
B	A
M
EI
Fig. 9.40 	(cont.) (f ) Free-body diagram
of beam with redundant couple and
M∕EI diagram.

-- 684 of 897 --

670 	Deflection of Beams
Sample Problem 9.12
For the beam and loading shown, (a) determine the deflection at end A,
(b) evaluate yA for the following data:
W10 × 33: I = 171 in4 	E = 29 × 106 psi
a = 3 ft = 36 in. 	L = 5.5 ft = 66 in.
w = 13.5 kips/ft = 1125 lb/in.
STRATEGY: 	To apply the moment-area theorems, you should first obtain
the M∕EI diagram for the beam. Then, by placing the reference tangent at a
support, you can evaluate the tangential deviations at other strategic points
that, through simple geometry, will enable the determination of the desired
deflection.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
M∕EI Diagram. 	Referring to Fig. 1, draw the bending-moment diagram.
Since the flexural rigidity EI is constant, the M∕EI diagram is as shown, which
consists of a parabolic spandrel of area A1 and a triangle of area A2.
A1 = 1
3(− wa2
2EI)a = − wa3
6EI
A2 = 1
2(− wa2
2EI)L = − wa2L
4EI
Reference Tangent at B. 	The reference tangent is drawn at point B in
Fig. 2. Using the second moment-area theorem, the tangential deviation of C
with respect to B is
tC∕B = A2
2L
3 = (− wa2L
4EI )
2L
3 = − wa2L2
6EI
A''
A'
A
yA
C'
C	B
L	a
Reference tangent tC/B
tA/B
Fig. 2 	Reference tangent and geometry to
determine deflection at A.
From the similar triangles A″A′B and CC′B,
A″A′ = tC∕B(
a
L) = − wa2L2
6EI (
a
L) = − wa3L
6EI
Again using the second moment-area theorem,
tA∕B = A1
3a
4 = (− wa3
6EI)
3a
4 = − wa4
8EI
B
w
A
L
C
a
B
C
wa2
2EI
wa2
2
wa2
2L
a	3
4
A 	x
M
EI
B
w
C
A1
A2
x
M
L	2
3
RB 	RC =
A
–
–
Fig. 1 	Free-body, moment, and
M∕EI diagrams.

-- 685 of 897 --

*9.6 Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with Unsymmetric Loadings 	671
a. Deflection at End A
y A = A″A′ + tA/B = − wa3L
6EI − wa4
8EI = − wa4
8EI(
4
3
L
a + 1)
y A = wa4
8EI(1 + 4
3
L
a)↓ 	◂
b. Evaluation of yA. 	Substituting the data,
y A = (1125 lb/in.)(36 in.) 4
8(29 × 106 lb/in2 )(171 in4 )(1 + 4
3
66 in.
36 in.)
yA = 0.1641 in. ↓ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that an equally effective alternate strategy
would be to draw a reference tangent at point C.
Sample Problem 9.13
For the beam and loading shown, determine the magnitude and location of
the largest deflection. Use E = 200 GPa.
B	A
L = 3.6 m
b = 2.2 m
a = 1.4 m W250 × 22.3
w = 25 kN/m
STRATEGY: 	To apply the moment-area theorems, you should first
obtain the M∕EI diagram for the beam. Then, by placing the reference
tangent at a support, you can evaluate the tangential deviation at the other
support that, through simple geometry and the further application of the
moment-area theorems, will enable the determination of the maximum
deflection.
MODELING: 	Use the free-body diagram of the entire beam in Fig. 1 to
obtain
RA = 16.81 kN ↑ 	RB = 38.2 kN ↑
(continued)
w
b
L
a
RA = 	RB
wb2
2L
B	A
Fig. 1 	Free-body diagram.

-- 686 of 897 --

672 	Deflection of Beams
ANALYSIS:
M∕EI Diagram. 	Draw the M∕EI diagram by parts (Fig. 2), considering the
effects of the reaction RA and of the distributed load separately. The areas of
the triangle and of the spandrel are
A1 = 1
2
R A L
EI L = R A L2
2EI A2 = 1
3(− wb2
2EI)b = − wb3
6EI
Reference Tangent. 	As seen in Fig. 3, the tangent to the beam at support A
is chosen as the reference tangent. Using the second moment-area theorem,
the tangential deviation tB∕A of support B with respect to support A is
tB∕A = A1
L
3 + A2
b
4 = (
R A L2
2EI )
L
3 + (− wb3
6EI)
b
4 = R A L3
6EI − wb4
24EI
Slope at A.
θA = − tB∕A
L = −(
R A L2
6EI − wb4
24EIL) (1)
Largest Deflection. 	As seen in Fig. 4, the largest deflection occurs at
point K, where the slope of the beam is zero. Using Fig. 5, write
θK = θA + θK∕A = 0 	(2)
But 	θK∕A = A3 + A4 = R A x2
m
2EI − w
6EI (x m − a) 3 	(3)
Substitute for θA and θK∕A from Eqs. (1) and (3) into Eq. (2):
−(
R A L2
6EI − wb4
24EIL) + [
R A x2
m
2EI − w
6EI (x m − a) 3
] = 0
L
3
wb2
2EI
RAL
EI
b
4
A 	x
M
EI
B
A1
A2
–
Fig. 2 	Parts of M∕EI diagram with centroid
locations.
A B
L
Reference tangent
tB/A
A	θ
Fig. 3 	Determination of θA through
tangential deviation tB∕A.
tA/K
A 	y m
K
B
Reference tangent
A
K/A
[ K = 0]
θ
θ θ
Fig. 4 	Geometry to determine maximum
deflection.
A3
RAxm
EI
K
A4
a
A 	x
x m
(x m – a)
M
EI
w
2EI (x m a)2
(x m a)	1
4
–
–
–
Fig. 5 	M∕EI diagram between Point A and the
location of maximum deflection, point K.

-- 687 of 897 --

*9.6 Moment-Area Theorems Applied to Beams with Unsymmetric Loadings 	673
Substituting the numerical data gives
−29.53 103
EI + 8.405x2
m
103
EI − 4.167(xm − 1.4) 3 103
EI = 0
Solving by trial and error for xm, 	xm = 1.890 m 	◂
Computing the moments of A3 and A4 about a vertical axis through A
gives
∣y∣m = tA∕K = A3
2x m
3 + A4[a + 3
4 (x m − a)]
= R A x m
3
3EI − wa
6EI (x m − a) 3 − w
8EI (x m − a) 4
Using the given data, RA = 16.81 kN, and I = 28.7 × 10−6 m4,
y m = 6.44 mm ↓ 	◂
Sample Problem 9.14
For the uniform beam and loading shown, determine the reaction at B.
STRATEGY: 	Applying the superposition concept, you can model this stati-
cally indeterminate problem as a summation of the displacements for the given
load and the redundant load cases. The redundant reaction can then be found
by noting that a displacement associated with the two cases must be consistent
with the geometry of the original beam.
MODELING: 	The beam is indeterminate to the first degree. Referring
to Fig. 1, the reaction RB is chosen as redundant, and the distributed load
and redundant reaction load are considered separately. Next the tangent
B
w
A 	C
L/3	2L/3
B C
w
A
B
B
C
C
w
A
A
B
B
B 	C	A
C
C
A
A
2L
3
L
3
RB 	RB
B' C'
Reference tangent
tC/A
t B/A (tB/A)w
A
(tC/A)w
(tC/A)R
(tB/A)R	θ
Fig. 1 	Indeterminate beam modeled as superposition of two determinate beams with reaction at B chosen as redundant.
(continued)

-- 688 of 897 --

674 	Deflection of Beams
at A is selected as the reference tangent. From the similar triangles
ABB′ and ACC′,
tC∕A
L = tB∕A
2
3 L tC ∕A = 3
2 tB∕A 	(1)
For each loading, we draw the M∕EI diagram and then determine the tan-
gential deviations of B and C with respect to A.
ANALYSIS:
Distributed Loading (Fig. 2). 	Considering the M∕EI diagram from
end A to an arbitrary point X,
(tX∕A)w = A1
x
3 + A2
x
4 = (
1
2
wLx
2EI x)
x
3 + (
− 1
3
wx2
2EI x)
x
4 = wx3
24EI(2L − x)
Letting x = L and x = 2
3 L,
(tC∕A)w = wL4
24EI (tB∕A)w = 4
243
wL4
EI
Redundant Reaction Loading (Fig. 3).
(tC∕A)R = A3
L
9 + A4
L
3 = (
1
2
R B L
3EI
L
3)
L
9 + (− 1
2
R B L
3EI L)
L
3 = − 4
81
R B L3
EI
(tB∕A)R = A5
2L
9 = [− 1
2
2R B L
9EI (
2L
3 )]
2L
9 = − 4
243
R B L3
EI
Combined Loading. 	Adding the results gives
tC∕A = wL4
24EI − 4
81
R B L3
EI tB∕A = 4
243
(wL4 − R B L3 )
EI
Reaction at B. 	Substituting for tC∕A and tB∕A into Eq. (1),
(
wL4
24EI − 4
81
R B L3
EI ) = 3
2[
4
243
(wL4 − R B L3 )
EI 	]
R B = 0.6875wL 	R B = 0.688wL ↑ 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	Note that an alternate strategy would be to
determine the deflections at B for the given load and the redundant reaction
and to set the sum equal to zero.
(RA)1 	(RC) 1
C
X
X x
x
x
L
w
A
A
wL
2
wLx
2EI
3
x
4
M
EI
A1
A2
wx2
2EI
=
–
Fig. 2 	Free-body and M∕EI diagrams for
beam with distributed load.
(RC) 2	(RA)2 	RB 	RB
B 	C
x
x
A
A
A
A5
A4
A3
C
C
B
B
1
3
M
EI
M
EI
2L
3
L
3
L
3
RBL
EI
2
9
RBL
EI
1
3
RBL
EI
1
3
L
3
1
3
2L
3
1
3 ( )
( )
=
–
–
Fig. 3 	Free-body and M∕EI diagrams for
beam with redundant reaction.

-- 689 of 897 --

675
Problems
Use the moment-area method to solve the following problems.
9.125 through 9.128 	For the prismatic beam and loading shown, deter-
mine (a) the deflection at point D, (b) the slope at end A.
L/3
B
D
P
A
L
Fig. P9.125
D 	E
B	A
P 	P
L/2 	L/4 	L/4
Fig. P9.126
A
L
L/4 	L/4
B
C 	D
M0	M0
Fig. P9.127
A 	B
D
w0
L/2
L
Fig. P9.128
9.129 and 9.130 	For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the
slope at end A, (b) the deflection at point D. Use E = 200 GPa.
A 	B	D	C
1.5 m 	1.5 m 3.0 m
W250 × 44.8
40 kN 	20 kN
Fig. P9.129
A D
1.6 m 0.8 m
B
30 kN
20 kN/m
W150 × 24
Fig. P9.130
9.131 For the timber beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
point A, (b) the deflection at point D. Use E = 1.5 × 106 psi.
1 ft 	2 ft
1.2 kips/ft 	2 kips
4 ft
7.5 in.
3.5 in.
B	A
C 	D
Fig. P9.131

-- 690 of 897 --

676
9.132 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at point A,
(b) the deflection at point E. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
A 	B
D
E W12 × 26
2 ft 	4 ft 	4 ft
5 kips/ft
8 kips/ft
Fig. P9.132
9.133 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
point A, (b) the deflection at point A.
9.134 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
point A, (b) the deflection at point D.
M0
A 	C
B
a 	L
Fig. P9.133
w
B D	A
L 	L/ 2
Fig. P9.134
9.135 Knowing that the beam AB is made of a solid steel rod of diameter
d = 0.75 in., determine for the loading shown (a) the slope at
point D, (b) the deflection at point A. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.136 Knowing that the beam AD is made of a solid steel bar, determine
(a) the slope at point B, (b) the deflection at point A. Use
E = 200 GPa.
150 lb 	300 lb
D 	E
B	A
d
24 in.
4 in. 	6 in.
Fig. P9.135
D
B 	C
1.2 kN 3 kN/m
0.25 m
0.20 m 0.25 m
A
30 mm
30 mm
Fig. P9.136
9.137 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at point C,
(b) the deflection at point D. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.138 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at point B,
(b) the deflection at point D. Use E = 200 GPa.
8 kips/ft
B
D
C
A
4 ft
6 ft	6 ft
W12 × 30
16 kips
Fig. P9.137
W410 × 114
4.8 m
A 	D
B
40 kN/m 	160 kN
1.8 m
Fig. P9.138

-- 691 of 897 --

677
9.139 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at end A,
(b) the slope at end B, (c) the deflection at the midpoint C.
L/ 2 	L/ 2
A C
w
B
EI 	2EI
Fig. P9.139
9.140 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection (a) at
point D, (b) at point E.
B
D 	E
A
L/3 	L/3
2EI	2EI 	EI
L/3
P 	P
Fig. P9.140
A C
L
B
P
L/2
Fig. P9.147
L/2
A
M0
C
L
B
Fig. P9.148
B
A
w0
L
Fig. P9.149
L/ 2 	L/ 2
C
A
B
w
Fig. P9.150
9.141 through 9.144 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the
magnitude and location of the largest downward deflection.
9.141 	Beam and loading of Prob. 9.126
9.142 	Beam and loading of Prob. 9.128
9.143 	Beam and loading of Prob. 9.129
9.144 	Beam and loading of Prob. 9.132
9.145 For the beam and loading of Prob. 9.135, determine the largest
upward deflection in span DE.
9.146 For the beam and loading of Prob. 9.138, determine the largest
upward deflection in span AB.
9.147 through 9.150 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the
reaction at the roller support.

-- 692 of 897 --

678
9.151 and 9.152 	For the beam and loading shown, determine the reaction
at each support.
M0
A 	C
B
L 	L/ 2
Fig. P9.151
A
P
C
B
L 	L/2 	L/2
Fig. P9.152
9.153 A hydraulic jack can be used to raise point B of the cantilever beam
ABC. The beam was originally straight, horizontal, and unloaded. A
20-kN load was then applied at point C, causing this point to move
down. Determine (a) how much point B should be raised to return
point C to its original position, (b) the final value of the reaction at B.
Use E = 200 GPa.
B
C
A
W130 × 23.8
20 kN
1.8 m 	1.2 m
Fig. P9.153
9.154 Determine the reaction at the roller support and draw the bending-
moment diagram for the beam and loading shown.
4.5 ft 	4.5 ft
3 ft
12 ft
W14 × 38
A 	D 	E
B
30 kips 	10 kips
Fig. P9.154
9.155 For the beam and loading shown, determine the spring constant k
for which the force in the spring is equal to one-third of the total
load on the beam.
k
C
w
A B
L 	L
Fig. P9.155 and P9.156
9.156 For the beam and loading shown, determine the spring constant k
for which the bending moment at B is MB = −wL2∕10.

-- 693 of 897 --

679
Two approaches were used in this chapter to determine the slopes and
deflections of beams under transverse loadings and applied moments. A
mathematical method based on the method of integration of a differential
equation was used to get the slopes and deflections at any point along the
beam. Then the moment-area method was used to find the slopes and deflec-
tions at a given point along the beam. Particular emphasis was placed on
the computation of the maximum deflection of a beam under a given load-
ing. These methods also were used to determine support reactions and
deflections of indeterminate beams, where the number of reactions at the
supports exceeds the number of equilibrium equations available to determine
these unknowns.
Deformation Under Transverse Loading
The relationship of the curvature 1∕ρ of the neutral surface and the
bending moment M in a prismatic beam in pure bending can be applied
to a beam under a transverse loading, but in this case both M and 1∕ρ
vary from section to section. Using the distance x from the left end of
the beam,
1
ρ = M(x)
EI (9.1)
This equation enables us to determine the radius of curvature of the neutral
surface for any value of x and to draw some general conclusions regarding
the shape of the deformed beam.
A relationship was found between the deflection y of a beam, measured
at a given point Q, and the distance x of that point from some fixed origin
(Fig. 9.41). The resulting equation defines the elastic curve of a beam.
Expressing the curvature 1∕ρ in terms of the derivatives of the function y(x)
and substituting into Eq. (9.1), we obtained the second-order linear differential
equation
d2y
dx2 = M(x)
EI (9.4)
Integrating this equation twice, the expressions defining the slope θ(x) = dy∕dx
and the deflection y(x) were obtained:
EI dy
dx = ∫x
0
M(x) dx + C1 	(9.5)
EI y = ∫x
0
dx ∫x
0
M(x) dx + C1x + C2 	(9.6)
The product EI is known as the flexural rigidity of the beam. Two constants
of integration C1 and C2 can be determined from the boundary conditions
Review and Summary
C
y
x
y
A
D
Q
x
Elastic
curve
P2	P1
Fig. 9.41 	Elastic curve for beam with
transverse loads.

-- 694 of 897 --

680
imposed on the beam by its supports (Fig. 9.42). The maximum deflection
can be obtained by first determining the value of x for which the slope is zero
and then computing the corresponding value of y.
B
	A
y
(a)
x
yA = 0 	y B = 0
P
y
B
A 	x
(b)
yA = 0 	y B = 0
P
y
B
x	A
(c)
yA = 0
θ A = 0
Fig. 9.42 	Known boundary conditions for statically determinate beams. (a) Simply supported beam.
(b) Overhanging beam. (c) Cantilever beam.
Elastic Curve Defined by Different Functions
When the load requires different analytical functions to represent the bending
moment in various portions of the beam, multiple differential equations are
required to represent the slope θ(x) and the deflection y(x). For the beam and
load considered in Fig. 9.43, two differential equations are required: one for
the portion of beam AD and the other for the portion DB. The first equation
yields the functions θ1 and y1, and the second the functions θ2 and y2. Alto-
gether, four constants of integration must be determined: two by writing that
the deflections at A and B are zero and two by expressing that the portions
of beam AD and DB have the same slope and the same deflection at D.
For a beam supporting a distributed load w(x), the elastic curve can be
determined directly from w(x) through four integrations yielding V, M, θ, and
y (in that order). For the cantilever beam of Fig. 9.44a and the simply sup-
ported beam of Fig. 9.44b, four constants of integration can be determined
from the four boundary conditions.
D
B	A
y
x
[x = L, y2 = 0]
[x = 0, y1 = 0]
x = L, 1 =	1
4	[	[
x = L, y1 = y2]
2
1
4	[
P
θ 	θ
Fig. 9.43 	Simply supported beam and
boundary conditions, where two sets of
functions are required due to the discontinuity
in load at point D.
B
x	A
y
[ yA = 0]
[ A 	0]
[V B = 0]
[M B = 0]	=	θ
B
	A
y
x
[ yA = 0] 	[ yB = 0]
[MA = 0] 	[MB = 0]
Fig. 9.44 	Boundary conditions for beams carrying a distributed load.
(a) Cantilever beam. (b) Simply supported beam.
Statically Indeterminate Beams
Statically indeterminate beams are supported such that the reactions at the
supports involve four or more unknowns. Since only three equilibrium
equations are available to determine these unknowns, they are supple-
mented with equations obtained from the boundary conditions imposed by

-- 695 of 897 --

681
the supports. For the beam of Fig 9.45, the reactions at the supports
involve four unknowns: MA , Ax , A y , and B. This beam is indeterminate to
the first degree. (If five unknowns are involved, the beam is indeterminate
to the second degree.) Expressing the bending moment M(x) in terms of
the four unknowns and integrating twice, the slope θ(x) and the deflection
y(x) are determined in terms of the same unknowns and the constants of
integration C1 and C2. The six unknowns are obtained by solving the three
equilibrium equations for the free body of Fig. 9.45b and the three equa-
tions expressing that θ = 0, y = 0 for x = 0, and that y = 0 for x = L
(Fig. 9.46) simultaneously.
Use of Singularity Functions
The integration method provides an effective way to determine the slope and
deflection at any point of a prismatic beam, as long as the bending moment
M can be represented by a single analytical function. However, when several
functions are required to represent M over the entire length of the beam, the
use of singularity functions considerably simplifies the determination of θ and
y at any point of the beam. Considering the beam of Fig. 9.47 and drawing
its free-body diagram (Fig. 9.48), the shear at any point of the beam is
V(x) = 3P
4 − P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩0
where the step function ⟨x − 1
4 L⟩0 is equal to zero when the quantity inside
the brackets ⟨ 	⟩ is negative and otherwise is equal to one. Integrating three
times,
M(x) = 3P
4 x − P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩ 	(9.11)
B	A A
L
(a)
B
wL
Ax
Ay
L
L/2
(b)
MA
B
w
Fig. 9.45 	(a) Statically indeterminate beam with a uniformly distributed load.
(b) Free-body diagram with four unknown reactions.
w
B x
x = 0, 	= 0	[ 	] x = L, y = 0	[ 	]
x = 0, y = 0	[ 	]
A
y
θ
Fig. 9.46 	Boundary conditions for beam
of Fig. 9.45.
P
B
D
A
3L/4
L/4
Fig. 9.47 	Simply supported
beam with concentrated load.
A
D
B 	x
y 	P
L/4 3L/4
3
4 P 	1
4 P
Fig. 9.48 	Free-body diagram for
beam of Fig. 9.47.

-- 696 of 897 --

682
EI θ = EI dy
dx = 3
8 Px2 − 1
2 P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩2 + C1 	(9.13)
EI y = 1
8 Px3 − 1
6P⟨x − 1
4 L⟩3 + C1x + C2 	(9.14)
where the brackets ⟨ 	⟩ should be replaced by zero when the quantity inside
is negative and by parentheses otherwise. Constants C1 and C2 are determined
from the boundary conditions shown in Fig. 9.49.
B
A
y
x
x = 0, y = 0	[ 	] 	x = L, y = 0	[ 	]
Fig. 9.49 	Boundary conditions for
simply supported beam.
Method of Superposition
The method of superposition separately determines and then adds the slope
and deflection caused by the various loads applied to a beam. This procedure
is made easier using the table of Appendix F, which gives the slopes and
deflections of beams for various loadings and types of support.
Statically Indeterminate Beams by Superposition
The method of superposition can be effective for analyzing statically inde-
terminate beams. For example, the beam of Fig. 9.50 involves four unknown
reactions and is indeterminate to the first degree; the reaction at B is cho-
sen as redundant, and the beam is released from that support. Treating the
reaction RB as an unknown load and considering the deflections caused at
B by the given distributed load and by RB separately, the sum of these
deflections is zero (Fig. 9.51). For a beam indeterminate to the second
degree (i.e., with reactions at the supports involving five unknowns), two
reactions are redundant, and the corresponding supports must be eliminated
or modified accordingly.
B	A
L
w
Fig. 9.50 	Indeterminate beam
with uniformly distributed load.
B
(y B)R
RB
w 	w
B
A 	A
B
yB = 0
(yB)w	RB
A
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
Fig. 9.51 	(a) Analyze indeterminate beam by superposing two determinate beams, with (b) a uniformly distributed load,
(c) the redundant reaction.
First Moment-Area Theorem
Deflections and slopes of beams can also be determined using the moment-
area method. The moment-area theorems were developed by drawing a
diagram representing the variation along the beam of the quantity M∕EI,

-- 697 of 897 --

683
which is obtained by dividing the bending moment M by the flexural rigid-
ity EI (Fig. 9.52). The first moment-area theorem is stated as: The area
under the (M∕EI) diagram between two points is equal to the angle between
the tangents to the elastic curve drawn at these points. Considering tangents
at C and D,
θD∕C = area under (M∕EI) diagram
between C and D 	(9.17)
Second Moment-Area Theorem
Again using the M∕EI diagram and a sketch of the deflected beam
(Fig. 9.53), a tangent at point D is drawn and the vertical distance tC∕D,
which is called the tangential deviation of C with respect to D, is con-
sidered. The second moment-area theorem is stated as: The tangential
deviation tC∕D of C with respect to D is equal to the first moment with
respect to a vertical axis through C of the area under the M∕EI diagram
between C and D. It is important to distinguish between the tangential
deviation of C with respect to D (Fig. 9.53a), which is
tC∕D = (area between C and D) x1 	(9.20)
and the tangential deviation of D with respect to C (Fig. 9.53b), which is
tD∕C = (area between C and D) x2 	(9.21)
B
B
B
C
C
C
D
D
D
A
A
A
M
EI
x
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
D
C
B
C
D
A
D/C	θ
θ
θ
Fig. 9.52 	First moment-area theorem
Illustrated. (a) Beam subjected to arbitrary
load. (b) M∕EI diagram. (c) Elastic curve
showing slope at C and D. (d) Elastic curve
showing slope at D with respect to C.
B	A
B
C
tC/D
tD/C
D
D
A
C'
D'
C
B	C 	D	A
M
EI
x
B	C 	D	A
M
EI
x
x2
(a)
(b)
x1
Fig. 9.53 	Second moment-area theorem illustrated.
(a) Evaluating tC∕D. (b) Evaluating tD∕C.

-- 698 of 897 --

684
Cantilever Beams and
Beams with Symmetric Loadings
To determine the slope and deflection at points of cantilever beams, the tan-
gent at the fixed support is horizontal (Fig. 9.54). For symmetrically loaded
beams, the tangent is horizontal at the midpoint C of the beam (Fig. 9.55).
Using the horizontal tangent as a reference tangent, slopes and deflections are
determined by using, respectively, the first and second moment-area theorems.
To find a deflection that is not a tangential deviation (Fig. 9.55c), it is first
necessary to determine which tangential deviations can be combined to obtain
the desired deflection.
D = D/A
yD = tD/A
Reference tangent
Tangent at D	D
A
P
θ 	θ
Fig. 9.54 	Application of moment-area
method to cantilever beams.
C
B	A
P
Horizontal
(a)
P
C
B
y max = tB/C
A
Reference tangent
(b)
B/C	B = θ	θ
C
B
D
tD/C
tB/C
y D
A
Reference tangent
(c)
D/C	D =	θ 	θ
Fig. 9.55 	Application of moment-area method to simply supported beams with symmetric loadings. (a) Beam and loadings.
(b) Maximum deflection and slope at point B. (c) Deflection and slope at arbitrary point D.
Bending-Moment Diagram by Parts
In many cases, the application of the moment-area theorems is simplified if
the effect of each load is considered separately. To do this, we draw the M∕EI
diagram by parts with a separate M∕EI diagram for each load. The areas and
the moments of areas under the several diagrams are added to determine
slopes and tangential deviations for the original beam and loading.
Unsymmetric Loadings
The moment-area method is also used to analyze beams with unsymmetric
loadings. Observing that the location of a horizontal tangent is usually not
obvious, a reference tangent is selected at one of the beam supports, since the
slope of that tangent is easily determined. For the beam and loading shown
in Fig. 9.56, the slope of the tangent at A is obtained by computing the tan-
gential deviation tB∕A and dividing it by the distance L between supports A
and B. Then, using both moment-area theorems and simple geometry, the
slope and deflection are determined at any point of the beam.
P
Reference
tangent
A
w
B
A 	B
L
(a)
(b)
tB/A
θ A
Fig. 9.56 	Application of moment-area method to unsymmetrically
loaded beam establishes a reference tangent at a support.

-- 699 of 897 --

685
Maximum Deflection
The maximum deflection of an unsymmetrically loaded beam generally does not
occur at midspan. The approach indicated in the preceding paragraph was used
to determine point K where the maximum deflection occurs and the magnitude
of that deflection. Observing that the slope at K is zero (Fig. 9.57), θK∕A = −θA.
Recalling the first moment-area theorem, the location of K is found by determin-
ing an area under the M∕EI diagram equal to θK∕A. The maximum deflection is
then obtained by computing the tangential deviation tA∕K.
A A
w 	w
B 	B	A 	B
MA 	MA
tB/A = 0 	B''
B'
(t B/A)w
(tB/A)M
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
Fig. 9.59 	Modeling the indeterminate beam as the superposition of two determinate cases.
P
A
A
w
B
B
K
L
< 0
= 0
(a)
A 	K 	B x
(b)
A
K
=	= 	–	K/A 	A
K/A 	t B/A
Reference
tangent
Area	
M
EI
y max = tA/K 	θ
θ θ
θ 	θ
Fig. 9.57 	Determination of maximum
deflection using moment-area method.
Statically Indeterminate Beams
The moment-area method can be used for the analysis of statically indeterminate
beams. Since the reactions for the beam and loading shown in Fig. 9.58 cannot
be determined by statics alone, one of the reactions of the beam is designated as
redundant (MA in Fig. 9.59a), and the redundant reaction is considered to be an
unknown load. The tangential deviation of B with respect to A is considered
separately for the distributed load (Fig. 9.59b) and for the redundant reaction
(Fig. 9.59c). Expressing that under the combined action of the distributed load
and of the couple MA the tangential deviation of B with respect to A must be zero,
tB∕A = (tB∕A)w + (tB∕A)M = 0
From this equation, the magnitude of the redundant reaction MA can be found.
B
w
A
L
Fig. 9.58 	Statically indeterminate beam.

-- 700 of 897 --

686
Review Problems
9.157 For the loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the elastic
curve for the cantilever beam AB, (b) the deflection at the free end,
(c) the slope at the free end.
9.158 (a) Determine the location and magnitude of the maximum absolute
deflection in AB between A and the center of the beam. (b) Assuming
that beam AB is a W460 × 113, M0 = 224 kN·m, and E = 200 GPa,
determine the maximum allowable length L of the beam if the max-
imum deflection is not to exceed 1.2 mm.
9.159 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the equation of the
elastic curve, (b) the deflection at the free end.
w0
x
B
A
y
L
Fig. P9.157
y
x
M0 M0
B
	A
L
Fig. P9.158
w = w0 [1 – 4( ) + 3( )2]	x
L
x
L
y
A
x
L
B
Fig. P9.159
9.160 Determine the reaction at A and draw the bending-moment diagram
for the beam and loading shown.
9.161 For the timber beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at
end A, (b) the deflection at midpoint C. Use E = 12 GPa.
B	A 	C
L/2 	L/2
w0
Fig. P9.160
0.5 m 0.5 m
P = 4 kN
w = 5 kN/m
1 m
150 mm
50 mm
D	A
B 	C
Fig. P9.161

-- 701 of 897 --

687
9.162 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the reaction at point A,
(b) the deflection at point C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
B	C
9 kips/ft
6 ft 	6 ft
A
W12 × 22
Fig. P9.162
9.163 Beam CE rests on beam AB as shown. Knowing that a W10 × 30
rolled-steel shape is used for each beam, determine for the loading
shown the deflection at point D. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
9.164 The cantilever beam BC is attached to the steel cable AB as shown.
Knowing that the cable is initially taut, determine the tension in the
cable caused by the distributed load shown. Use E = 200 GPa.
W10 × 30
30 kips
D
C
A
E
B
2 ft 	4 ft
12 ft
4 ft 	2 ft
Fig. P9.163
W410 × 46.1
6 m
A = 255 mm2
3 m 	20 kN/m
C
B
A
Fig. P9.164
9.165 For the cantilever beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope
at point A, (b) the deflection at point A. Use E = 200 GPa.
9.166 Knowing that P = 4 kips, determine (a) the slope at end A, (b) the
deflection at the midpoint C of the beam. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
3 m
2.1 m
A
B 	C
20 kN
120 kN/m
W360 × 64
Fig. P9.165
W8 × 13
5 kips	P 	P
3 ft	3 ft 5 ft	5 ft
A B 	D E
C
Fig. P9.166
9.167 For the beam and loading shown, determine (a) the slope at point A,
(b) the deflection at point D.
9.168 Determine the reaction at the roller support and draw the bending-
moment diagram for the beam and loading shown.
D
C	B
P
A
L/2 	L/2 	L/2
P
Fig. P9.167
75 kN 	40 kN/m
A
D 	E 	B
2.4 m
0.3 m
0.9 m
3.6 m
W310 × 44.5
Fig. P9.168

-- 702 of 897 --

688
Computer Problems
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
9.C1 Several concentrated loads can be applied to the cantilever beam AB.
Write a computer program to calculate the slope and deflection of
beam AB from x = 0 to x = L, using given increments Δx. Apply
this program with increments Δx = 50 mm to the beam and loading
of Prob. 9.73 and Prob. 9.74.
9.C2 The 22-ft beam AB consists of a W21 × 62 rolled-steel shape and
supports a 3.5-kip/ft distributed load as shown. Write a computer
program and use it to calculate for values of a from 0 to 22 ft, using
1-ft increments, (a) the slope and deflection at D, (b) the location
and magnitude of the maximum deflection. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
B
Pi
A
ci
L
Fig. P9.C1
B	A
D
3.5 kips/ft
a
22 ft
Fig. P9.C2
9.C3 The cantilever beam AB carries the distributed loads shown. Write a
computer program to calculate the slope and deflection of beam AB from
x = 0 to x = L using given increments Δx. Apply this program with
increments Δx = 100 mm, assuming that L = 2.4 m, w = 36 kN/m, and
(a) a = 0.6 m, (b) a = 1.2 m, (c) a = 1.8 m. Use E = 200 GPa.
B
A
a
L
w
w
W250 × 32.7
Fig. P9.C3
9.C4 The simple beam AB is of constant flexural rigidity EI and carries
several concentrated loads as shown. Using the Method of Integra-
tion, write a computer program that can be used to calculate the
slope and deflection at points along the beam from x = 0 to x = L
using given increments Δx. Apply this program to the beam and
loading of (a) Prob. 9.16 with Δx = 0.25 m, (b) Prob. 9.129 with
Δx = 0.25 m.
B
P1 	P2 	Pn
x
y
an
a2
a1
A
L
Fig. P9.C4

-- 703 of 897 --

689
9.C5 The supports of beam AB consist of a fixed support at end A and a
roller support located at point D. Write a computer program that can
be used to calculate the slope and deflection at the free end of the
beam for values of a from 0 to L using given increments Δa. Apply
this program to calculate the slope and deflection at point B for each
of the following cases:
L 	ΔL 	w 	E 	Shape
(a) 	12 ft 	0.5 ft 	1.6 k/ft 	29 × 106 psi 	W16 × 57
(b) 	3 m 	0.2 m 	18 kN/m 	200 GPa 	W460 × 113
9.C6 For the beam and loading shown, use the Moment-Area Method to
write a computer program to calculate the slope and deflection at
points along the beam from x = 0 to x = L using given increments Δx.
Apply this program to calculate the slope and deflection at each
concentrated load for the beam of (a) Prob. 9.77 with Δx = 0.5 m,
(b) Prob. 9.119 with Δx = 0.5 m.
B
A
a
x
y
D
L
w
Fig. P9.C5
B
P1 	P2 	Pn
MA 	MB
x
y an
a2
a1
A
L
Fig. P9.C6
9.C7 Two 52-kN loads are maintained 2.5 m apart as they are moved
slowly across beam AB. Write a computer program to calculate the
deflection at the midpoint C of the beam for values of x from 0 to
9 m, using 0.5-m increments. Use E = 200 GPa.
B	A
x 	4.5 m
2.5 m
52 kN 	52 kN
9 m
C
W460 × 113
Fig. P9.C7
9.C8 A uniformly distributed load w and several distributed loads Pi may
be applied to beam AB. Write a computer program to determine the
reaction at the roller support and apply this program to the beam and
loading of (a) Prob. 9.53a, (b) Prob. 9.154.
B
Pi
ci
a
L
w
A
Fig. P9.C8

-- 704 of 897 --



-- 705 of 897 --

Columns
The curved pedestrian bridge is supported by a series of columns.
The analysis and design of members supporting axial compressive
loads will be discussed in this chapter.
10
Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Describe the behavior of columns in terms of stability.
• Develop Euler’s formula for columns, using effective lengths to
account for different end conditions.
• Develop the secant formula for analysis of eccentrically loaded
columns.
• Use Allowable Stress Design for columns made of steel,
aluminum, and wood.
• Provide the basis for using Load and Resistance Factor Design
for steel columns.
• Present two design approaches to use for eccentrically loaded
columns: the allowable-stress method and the interaction method.
©Jose Manuel/Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images

-- 706 of 897 --

692 	Columns
Introduction
In the preceding chapters, we had two primary concerns: (1) the strength of
the structure, i.e., its ability to support a specified load without experiencing
excessive stress; (2) the ability of the structure to support a specified load
without undergoing unacceptable deformations. This chapter is concerned
with the stability of the structure (its ability to support a given load without
experiencing a sudden change in configuration). This discussion is focused on
columns, that is, the analysis and design of vertical prismatic members sup-
porting axially compressive loads.
In Sec. 10.1, the stability of a simplified model is discussed, where the
column consists of two rigid rods connected by a pin and a spring and sup-
ports a load P. If its equilibrium is disturbed, this system will return to its
original equilibrium position as long as P does not exceed a certain value Pcr ,
called the critical load. This is a stable system. However, if P > Pcr , the
system moves away from its original position and settles in a new position of
equilibrium. This system is said to be unstable.
In Sec. 10.1A, the stability of elastic columns considers a pin-ended
column subjected to a centric axial load. Euler’s formula for the critical
load of the column is derived, and the corresponding critical normal stress
in the column is determined. Applying a factor of safety to the critical load,
we obtain the allowable load that can be safely applied to a pin-ended
column.
In Sec. 10.1B, the analysis of the stability of columns with different
end conditions is considered by learning how to determine the effective length
of a column.
Columns supporting eccentric axial loads are discussed in Sec. 10.2.
These columns have transverse deflections for all magnitudes of the load. An
equation for the maximum deflection under a given load is developed and
used to determine the maximum normal stress in the column. Finally, the
secant formula relating the average and maximum stresses in a column is
developed.
In the first sections of the chapter, each column is assumed to be a
straight, homogeneous prism. In the last part of the chapter, real columns are
designed and analyzed using empirical formulas set forth by professional orga-
nizations. In Sec. 10.3A, design equations are presented for the allowable
stress in columns made of steel, aluminum, or wood that are subjected to a
centric load. Section 10.3B describes an alternative approach for steel col-
umns, the Load and Resistance Factor Design method. The design of columns
under an eccentric axial load is covered in Sec. 10.4.
10.1 	STABILITY OF STRUCTURES
Consider the design of a column AB of length L to support a given load P
(Fig. 10.1). The column is pin-connected at both ends, and P is a centric axial
load. If the cross-sectional area A is selected so that the value σ = P∕A of the
stress on a transverse section is less than the allowable stress σall for the mate-
rial used and the deformation δ = PL∕AE falls within the given specifications,
we might conclude that the column has been properly designed. However, it
may happen that as the load is applied, the column buckles (Fig. 10.2). Instead
of remaining straight, it suddenly becomes sharply curved such as shown in
Introduction
10.1 	STABILITY OF
STRUCTURES
10.1A Euler’s Formula for Pin-Ended
Columns
10.1B Euler’s Formula for Columns
with Other End Conditions
*10.2 	ECCENTRIC LOADING
AND THE SECANT
FORMULA
10.3 	CENTRIC LOAD DESIGN
10.3A Allowable Stress Design
10.3B Load and Resistance Factor
Design
10.4 	ECCENTRIC LOAD
DESIGN
L
B
P
A
Fig. 10.1 	Pin-ended
axially loaded column.
B
A
P
Fig. 10.2 	Buckled
pin-ended column.

-- 707 of 897 --

10.1 Stability of Structures 	693
Photo 10.1. Clearly, a column that buckles under the load it is to support is
not properly designed.
We can gain insight into the stability of elastic columns by consider-
ing a simplified model consisting of two rigid rods AC and BC connected
at C by a pin and a torsional spring of constant K (Fig. 10.3).
If the two rods and forces P and P′ are perfectly aligned, the system
will remain in the position of equilibrium shown in Fig.10.4a as long as it is
not disturbed. But suppose we move C slightly to the right so that each rod
forms a small angle Δθ with the vertical (Fig. 10.4b). Will the system return
to its original equilibrium position, or will it move further away? In the first
case, the system is stable; in the second, it is unstable.
To determine whether the two-rod system is stable or unstable, con-
sider the forces acting on rod AC (Fig. 10.5). These forces consist of the
couple formed by P and P′ of moment P(L∕2) sin Δθ, which tends to move
the rod away from the vertical, and the couple M exerted by the spring,
which tends to bring the rod back into its original vertical position. Since the
angle of deflection of the spring is 2 Δθ, the moment of couple M is
M = K(2 Δθ). If the moment of the second couple is larger than the
moment of the first couple, the system tends to return to its original equi-
librium position; the system is stable. If the moment of the first couple is
larger than the moment of the second couple, the system tends to move
Photo 10.1 	Laboratory test showing a buckled column.
Courtesy of Fritz Engineering Laboratory, Lehigh University
L/2
L/2
C
B
A
constant K
P
Fig. 10.3 	Model column made of two
rigid rods joined by a torsional spring at C.
Fig. 10.4 	Free-body diagram
of model column (a) perfectly
aligned, (b) point C moved
slightly out of alignment.
C 	C
B	B
A 	A
2
(a) 	(b)
P'
Δ
Δ
Δ
P 	P
P'
θ
θ
θ
Fig. 10.5 	Free-body diagram
of rod AC in unaligned position.
C
L/2
A
M
P'
Δ
P
θ

-- 708 of 897 --

694 	Columns
away from its original equilibrium position; the system is unstable. The load
when the two couples balance each other is called the critical load, Pcr , which
is given as
Pcr (L∕2)sinΔθ = K(2 Δθ) 	(10.1)
or since sin Δθ ≈ Δθ, when the displacement of C is very small (at the
immediate onset of buckling),
Pcr = 4K∕L 	(10.2)
Clearly, the system is stable for P < Pcr and unstable for P > Pcr.
Assume that a load P > Pcr has been applied to the two rods of
Fig. 10.3 and the system has been disturbed. Since P > Pcr , the system will
move further away from the vertical and, after some oscillations, will settle
into a new equilibrium position (Fig. 10.6a). Considering the equilibrium of
the free body AC (Fig. 10.6b), an equation similar to Eq. (10.1) but involving
the finite angle θ, is
P(L∕2) sin θ = K(2θ)
or
PL
4K = θ
sin θ (10.3)
The value of θ corresponding to the equilibrium position in Fig. 10.6
is obtained by solving Eq. (10.3) by trial and error. But for any positive value
of θ, sin θ < θ. Thus, Eq. (10.3) yields a value of θ different from zero only
when the left-hand member of the equation is larger than one. Recalling
Eq. (10.2), this is true only if P > Pcr . But, if P < Pcr , the second equilibrium
position shown in Fig. 10.6 would not exist, and the only possible equilibrium
position would be the one corresponding to θ = 0. Thus, for P < Pcr , the
position where θ = 0 must be stable.
This observation applies to structures and mechanical systems in general
and is used in the next section for the stability of elastic columns.
10.1A 	Euler’s Formula for Pin-Ended
Columns
We will now return to the column AB considered in the preceding section
(Fig. 10.1) and determine the critical value of the load P, i.e., the value Pcr.
This is the load for which the position shown in Fig. 10.1 ceases to be stable.
If P > Pcr , the slightest misalignment or disturbance will cause the column to
buckle into a curved shape, as shown in Fig. 10.2.
This approach determines the conditions under which the configura-
tion of Fig. 10.2 is possible. Since a column is like a beam placed in a
vertical position and subjected to an axial load, we proceed as in Chap. 9
and denote by x the distance from end A of the column to a point Q of its
elastic curve and by y the deflection of that point (Fig. 10.7a). The x axis
is vertical and directed downward, and the y axis is horizontal and directed
to the right. Considering the equilibrium of the free body AQ (Fig. 10.7b),
C
L/2	
A
C
B
A
(b)	(a)
P
P
M
P'
θ	θ
Fig. 10.6 	(a) Model column in buckled
position, (b) free-body diagram of rod AC.
L
B
P
A
Fig. 10.1 	(repeated).
B
A
P
Fig. 10.2 	(repeated).
L
Q 	Q
B
A A
x
y
y
x
x
y
P'
P'
M
y
[ x = 0, y = 0]
[ x = L, y = 0]
(a) 	(b)
P 	P
Fig. 10.7 	Free-body diagrams of (a) buckled
column and (b) portion AQ.

-- 709 of 897 --

10.1 Stability of Structures 	695
the bending moment at Q is M = −Py. Substituting this value for M in
Eq. (9.4) gives
d 2y
dx2 = M
EI = − P
EI y 	(10.4)
or transposing the last term,
d 2y
dx 2 + P
EI y = 0 	(10.5)
This equation is a linear, homogeneous differential equation of the second
order with constant coefficients. Setting
p 2 = P
EI (10.6)
Eq. (10.5) is rewritten as
d2y
dx2 + p2y = 0 	(10.7)
which is the same as the differential equation for simple harmonic motion,
except the independent variable is now the distance x instead of the time t.
The general solution of Eq. (10.7) is
y = A sin px + B cos px 	(10.8)
and is easily checked by calculating d 2y∕dx 2 and substituting for y and d 2y∕dx 2
into Eq. (10.7).
Recalling the boundary conditions that must be satisfied at ends A and
B of the column (Fig. 10.7a), make x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (10.8), and find that
B = 0. Substituting x = L, y = 0, obtain
A sin pL = 0 	(10.9)
This equation is satisfied if either A = 0 or sin pL = 0. If the first of these
conditions is satisfied, Eq. (10.8) reduces to y = 0 and the column is straight
(Fig. 10.1). For the second condition to be satisfied, pL = nπ, or substituting
for p from Eq. (10.6) and solving for P,
P = n2π2EI
L2 	(10.10)
The smallest value of P defined by Eq. (10.10) is that corresponding to
n = 1. Thus,
Pcr = π2EI
L2 	(10.11a)
This expression is known as Euler’s formula, after the Swiss mathema-
tician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783). Substituting this expression for P into
Eq. (10.6), the value for p into Eq. (10.8), and recalling that B = 0,
y = A sin πx
L (10.12)
which is the equation of the elastic curve after the column has buckled
(Fig. 10.2). Note that the maximum deflection ym = A is indeterminate. This

-- 710 of 897 --

696 	Columns
is because the differential Eq. (10.5) is a linearized approximation of the
governing differential equation for the elastic curve.†
If P < Pcr , the condition sin pL = 0 cannot be satisfied, and the solution
of Eq. (10.12) does not exist. Then we must have A = 0, and the only pos-
sible configuration for the column is a straight one. Thus for P < Pcr the
straight configuration of Fig. 10.1 is stable.
In a column with a circular or square cross section, the moment of
inertia I is the same about any centroidal axis, and the column is as likely
to buckle in one plane as another (except for the restraints that can be imposed
by the end connections). For other cross-sectional shapes, the critical load
should be found by making I = Imin in Eq. (10.11a). If it occurs, buckling
will take place in a plane perpendicular to the corresponding principal axis
of inertia.
The stress corresponding to the critical load is the critical stress σcr .
Recalling Eq. (10.11a) and setting I = Ar2, where A is the cross-sectional area
and r its radius of gyration gives
σcr = Pcr
A = π2E Ar 2
AL2
or
σcr = π2E
(L∕r)2 	(10.13a)
The quantity L∕r is the slenderness ratio of the column. The minimum value
of the radius of gyration r should be used to obtain the slenderness ratio and
the critical stress in a column.
Equation (10.13a) shows that the critical stress is proportional to the
modulus of elasticity of the material and inversely proportional to the
square of the slenderness ratio of the column. The plot of σcr versus L∕r is
shown in Fig. 10.8 for structural steel, assuming E = 200 GPa and σY =
250 MPa. Keep in mind that no factor of safety has been used in plotting
σcr . Also, if σcr obtained from Eq. (10.13a) or from the curve of Fig. 10.8
is larger than the yield strength σY, this value is of no interest, since the
column will yield in compression and cease to be elastic before it has a
chance to buckle.
The analysis of the behavior of a column has been based on the
assumption of a perfectly aligned centric load. In practice, this is seldom
the case, and in Sec. 10.2, the effect of eccentric loading is taken into
account. This approach leads to a smoother transition from the buckling
failure of long, slender columns to the compression failure of short,
stubby columns. It also provides a more realistic view of the relationship
between the slenderness ratio of a column and the load that causes it
to fail.
†Recall that d 2y∕dx 2 = M∕EI was obtained in Sec. 9.1A by assuming that the slope dy∕dx
of the beam could be neglected and that the exact expression in Eq. (9.3) for the curvature
of the beam could be replaced by 1∕ρ = d2y∕dx 2.
100
0 	100
	89 	200
200
250
300
(MPa)
Y = 250 MPa
E = 200 GPa
2E
(L/r) 2
L/r
cr =	σ
σ
σ
π
Fig. 10.8 	Plot of critical stress for structural
steel.

-- 711 of 897 --

10.1 Stability of Structures 	697
Concept Application 10.1
A 2-m-long pin-ended column with a square cross section is to be made of
wood (Fig. 10.9). Assuming E = 13 GPa, σall = 12 MPa, and using a factor
of safety of 2.5 to calculate Euler’s critical load for buckling, determine the
size of the cross section if the column is to safely support (a) a 100-kN load,
(b) a 200-kN load.
a. For the 100-kN Load. 	Use the given factor of safety to obtain
Pcr = 2.5(100 kN) = 250 kN 	L = 2 m 	E = 13 GPa
Use Euler’s formula, Eq. (10.11a), and solve for I:
I = Pcr L2
π2E = (250 × 103 N)(2 m) 2
π2 (13 × 109 Pa) = 7.794 × 10−6 m4
Recalling that, for a square of side a, I = a4∕12, write
a4
12 = 7.794 × 10−6 m4 	a = 98.3 mm ≈ 100 mm
Check the value of the normal stress in the column:
σ = P
A = 100 kN
(0.100 m) 2 = 10 MPa
Since σ is smaller than the allowable stress, a 100 × 100-mm cross section is
acceptable.
b. For the 200-kN Load. 	Solve Eq. (10.11a) again for I, but make
Pcr = 2.5(200) = 500 kN to obtain
I = 15.588 × 10−6 m4
a4
12 = 15.588 × 10−6 	a = 116.95 mm
The value of the normal stress is
σ = P
A = 200 kN
(0.11695 m) 2 = 14.62 MPa
Since this is larger than the allowable stress, the dimension obtained is not
acceptable, and the cross section must be selected on the basis of its resistance
to compression.
A = P
σall
= 200 kN
12 MPa = 16.67 × 10−3 m2
a2 = 16.67 × 10−3 m2 	a = 129.1 mm
A 130 × 130-mm cross section is acceptable.
C
D
2 m
P
Fig. 10.9 	Pin-ended
wood column of
square cross section.

-- 712 of 897 --

698 	Columns
10.1B 	Euler’s Formula for Columns with
Other End Conditions
Euler’s formula (10.11) was derived in the preceding section for a column that
was pin-connected at both ends. In this section, the critical load Pcr will be
determined for columns with different end conditions.
A column with one free end A supporting a load P and one fixed
end B (Fig. 10.10a) behaves as the upper half of a pin-connected column
(Fig. 10.10b). The critical load for the column of Fig. 10.10a is thus the
same as for the pin-ended column of Fig. 10.10b and can be obtained from
Euler’s formula Eq. (10.11a) by using a column length equal to twice the
actual length L. We say that the effective length Le of the column of Fig. 10.10
is equal to 2L, and substitute Le = 2L in Euler’s formula:
Pcr = π2EI
L2
e
(10.11b)
The critical stress is
σcr = π2E
(L e∕r) 2 	(10.13b)
The quantity Le∕r is called the effective slenderness ratio of the column and
for Fig. 10.10a is equal to 2L∕r.
Now consider a column with two fixed ends A and B supporting a load
P (Fig. 10.11). The symmetry of the supports and the load about a horizontal
axis through the midpoint C requires that the shear at C and the horizontal
components of the reactions at A and B be zero (Fig. 10.12a). Thus, the
restraints imposed on the upper half AC of the column by the support at A
and by the lower half CB are identical (Fig. 10.13). Portion AC must be sym-
metric about its midpoint D, and this point must be a point of inflection where
the bending moment is zero. The bending moment at the midpoint E of the
lower half of the column also must be zero (Fig. 10.14a). Since the bending
moment at the ends of a pin-ended column is zero, portion DE of the column
in Fig. 10.13a must behave like a pin-ended column (Fig. 10.14b). Thus, the
effective length of a column with two fixed ends is Le = L∕2.
L
A	A
B	B Le = 2L
P'
(b)	(a)
A'
P 	P
Fig. 10.10 	Effective length of a
fixed-free column of length L is
equivalent to a pin-ended column of
length 2L.
L 	C
B
A
P
Fig. 10.11 	Column with
fixed ends.
M'
P'
B
L
L/2
C
A
M
P
Fig. 10.12 	Free-body
diagram of buckled
fixed-ended column.
L/4
C
A
D
L/4
M'
P'
M
P
Fig. 10.13 	Free-body
diagram of upper half
of fixed-ended column
L 	C
D 	D
E 	E
B
A
L	1
2 	L	L e = 1
2
(a) 	(b)
P
P
Fig. 10.14 	Effective length of a fixed-ended
column of length L is equivalent to a pin-
ended column of length L∕2.

-- 713 of 897 --

10.1 Stability of Structures 	699
In a column with one fixed end B and one pin-connected end A sup-
porting a load P (Fig. 10.15), the differential equation of the elastic curve
must be solved to determine the effective length. From the free-body diagram
of the entire column (Fig. 10.16), a transverse force V is exerted at end A, in
addition to the axial load P, and V is statically indeterminate. Considering the
free-body diagram of a portion AQ of the column (Fig. 10.17), the bending
moment at Q is
M = −Py − Vx
Substituting this value into Eq. (9.4) of Sec. 9.1A,
d 2y
dx2 = M
EI = − P
EI y − V
EI x
Transposing the term containing y and setting
p2 = P
EI (10.6)
as in Sec. 10.1A gives
d2y
dx2 + p2y = − V
EI x 	(10.14)
This is a linear, nonhomogeneous differential equation of the second order
with constant coefficients. Observing that the left-hand members of Eqs. (10.7)
and (10.14) are identical, the general solution of Eq. (10.14) can be obtained
by adding a particular solution of Eq. (10.14) to the solution of Eq. (10.8)
obtained for Eq. (10.7). Such a particular solution is
y = − V
p2EI x
or recalling Eq. (10.6),
y = − V
P x 	(10.15)
Adding the solutions of Eq. (10.8) and (10.15), the general solution of
Eq. (10.14) is
y = A sin px + B cos px − V
P x 	(10.16)
The constants A and B and the magnitude V of the unknown transverse
force V are obtained from the boundary conditions in Fig. 10.16. Making
x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (10.16), B = 0. Making x = L, y = 0, gives
A sin pL = V
P L 	(10.17)
Taking the derivative of Eq. (10.16), with B = 0,
dy
dx = Ap cos px − V
P
and making x = L, dy∕dx = 0,
Ap cos pL = V
P (10.18)
B
A
L
P
Fig. 10.15 	Column with
fixed-pinned end conditions.
B
x
A y
L
V'
V 	[ x = 0, y = 0]
[ x = L, y = 0]
[ x = L, dy/dx = 0]
P
MB
P'
Fig. 10.16 	Free-body diagram of
buckled fixed-pinned column.
V'
A
Q
y
y
x
x
V
M
P'
P
Fig. 10.17 	Free-body diagram of portion
AQ of buckled fixed-pinned column.

-- 714 of 897 --

700 	Columns
Dividing Eq. (10.17) by Eq. (10.18) member by member, a solution like
Eq. (10.16) can exist only if
tan pL = pL 	(10.19)
Solving this equation by trial and error, the smallest value of pL that satisfies
Eq. (10.19) is
pL = 4.4934 	(10.20)
Carrying the value of p from Eq. (10.20) into Eq. (10.6) and solving for P,
the critical load for the column of Fig. 10.15 is
Pcr = 20.19EI
L2 	(10.21)
The effective length of the column is obtained by equating the right-
hand members of Eqs. (10.11b) and (10.21):
π2EI
L2
e
= 20.19EI
L2
Solving for Le, the effective length of a column with one fixed end and one
pin-connected end is L e = 0.699L ≈ 0.7L.
The effective lengths corresponding to the various end conditions are
shown in Fig. 10.18.
B
A
L
P
Fig. 10.15 	(repeated).
C
B
A 	A A
Le = 0.7L
Le = 0.5L	Le = 2L 	L e = L
L
B
B 	B
A
(c) One fixed end,
one pinned end
(d) Both ends
fixed
(b) Both ends
pinned
(a) One fixed end,
one free end
P 	P 	P P
Fig. 10.18 	Effective length of column for various end conditions.

-- 715 of 897 --

10.1 Stability of Structures 	701
Sample Problem 10.1
An aluminum column with a length of L and a rectangular cross section has
a fixed end B and supports a centric load at A. Two smooth and rounded fixed
plates restrain end A from moving in one of the vertical planes of symmetry
of the column but allow it to move in the other plane. (a) Determine the ratio
a/b of the two sides of the cross section corresponding to the most efficient
design against buckling. (b) Design the most efficient cross section for the
column, knowing that L = 20 in., E = 10.1 × 106 psi, P = 5 kips, and a factor
of safety of 2.5 is required.
STRATEGY: 	The most efficient design is that for which the critical stresses
corresponding to the two possible buckling modes are equal. This occurs if
the two critical stresses obtained from Eq. (10.13b) are the same. Thus for
this problem, the two effective slenderness ratios in this equation must be
equal to solve part a. Use Fig. 10.18 to determine the effective lengths. The
design data can then be used with Eq. (10.13b) to size the cross section for
part b.
MODELING:
Buckling in xy Plane. 	Referring to Fig. 10.18c, the effective length of the
column with respect to buckling in this plane is Le = 0.7L . The radius of
gyration rz of the cross section is obtained by
Iz = 1
12 ba3 	A = ab
and since Iz = Ar 2
z , 	r 2
z = Iz
A =
1
12 ba3
ab = a2
12 r z = a∕ √12
The effective slenderness ratio of the column with respect to buckling in the
xy plane is
Le
r z
= 0.7L
a∕√12 (1)
Buckling in xz Plane. 	Referring to Fig. 10.18a, the effective length of
the column with respect to buckling in this plane is Le = 2L, and the corre-
sponding radius of gyration is r y = b∕ √12. Thus,
Le
r y
= 2L
b∕√12 (2)
(continued)
B
x
L
y
a
A
b
z
P

-- 716 of 897 --

702 	Columns
ANALYSIS:
a. Most Efficient Design. 	The most efficient design is when the criti-
cal stresses corresponding to the two possible modes of buckling are equal.
Referring to Eq. (10.13b), this is the case if the two values obtained above
for the effective slenderness ratio are equal.
0.7L
a∕√12 = 2L
b∕√12
and solving for the ratio a∕b, a
b = 0.7
2
a
b = 0.35 	◂
b. Design for Given Data. 	Since F.S. = 2.5 is required,
Pcr = (F.S.)P = (2.5)(5 kips) = 12.5 kips
Using a = 0.35b,
A = ab = 0.35b2 	and 	σcr = Pcr
A = 12,500 lb
0.35b2
Making L = 20 in. in Eq. (2), Le∕ry = 138.6∕b. Substituting for E, Le∕r, and
σcr into Eq. (10.13b) gives
σcr = π2E
(L e ∕r) 2
12,500 lb
0.35b2 	= π2 (10.1 × 106 psi)
(138.6∕b)2
b = 1.620 in. 	a = 0.35b = 0.567 in. 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	The calculated critical Euler buckling stress can
never be taken to exceed the yield strength of the material. In this problem,
you can readily determine that the critical stress σcr = 13.6 ksi; though the
specific alloy was not given, this stress is less than the tensile yield strength
σY values for all aluminum alloys listed in Appendix D.

-- 717 of 897 --

703
Problems
10.1 Knowing that the torsional spring at B is of constant K and that the
bar AB is rigid, determine the critical load Pcr.
K
A
B
L
P
Fig. P10.1
C
A
B
L	
1
2
L	
1
2
K
P
Fig. P10.2
C
A
B
L	
2
3
L	
1
3
k
P
Fig. P10.4
C
A
B
L	
1
2
k
P
L	
1
2
Fig. P10.3
d
h
k
B
A
k
Fig. P10.5
10.2 Two rigid bars AC and BC are connected by a pin at C as shown.
Knowing that the torsional spring at B is of constant K, determine
the critical load Pcr for the system.
10.3 and 10.4 Two rigid bars AC and BC are connected as shown to a
spring of constant k. Knowing that the spring can act in either
tension or compression, determine the critical load Pcr for the
system.
10.5 The rigid rod AB is attached to a hinge at A and to two springs, each
of constant k. If h = 16 in., d = 12 in., and if the weight of the block
at B is 0.5 lb, determine the range of values of k for which the
equilibrium of rod AB is stable in the position shown. Each spring
can act in either tension or compression.

-- 718 of 897 --

704
10.6 The rigid rod AB is attached to a hinge at A and to two springs, each
of constant k = 2 kips/in., that can act in either tension or compres-
sion. Knowing that h = 2 ft , determine the critical load.
10.7 The rigid bar AD is attached to two springs of constant k and is in equi-
librium in the position shown. Knowing that the equal and opposite loads
P and P′ remain vertical, determine the magnitude Pcr of the critical load
for the system. Each spring can act in either tension or compression.
k 	C
B
D
A
h
h
2h
k
P
Fig. P10.6 B
C
k
k
D
A
P'P'
l	a
P
Fig. P10.7
C
G
H
K
K
K
K
D	A
F
E
B
L	
1
2
L	
1
2
L	
1
2
L	
1
2
P	P
Fig. P10.8
10.8 A frame consists of four L-shaped members connected by four tor-
sional springs, each of constant K . Knowing that equal loads P are
applied at points A and D as shown, determine the critical value Pcr
of the loads applied to the frame.
10.9 Determine the critical load of a round wooden dowel that is 0.9 m
long and has a diameter of (a) 10 mm, (b) 15 mm. Use E = 12 GPa.
10.10 Determine the critical load of a pin-ended wooden stick that is
3 ft long and has a 3
16 × 11
4 -in. rectangular cross section. Use
E = 1.6 × 106 psi.
10.11 A column of effective length L can be made by securely nailing
together identical planks in either of the arrangements shown. For
the thickness of the planks indicated, determine the ratio of the
critical load using the arrangement a to the critical load using the
arrangement b.
d/4
(a) 	(b)
d
Fig. P10.11

-- 719 of 897 --

705
10.12 A compression member of 1.5-m effective length consists of a solid
30-mm-diameter brass rod. To reduce the weight of the member by
25%, the solid rod is replaced by a hollow rod of the cross section
shown. Determine (a) the percent reduction in the critical load,
(b) the value of the critical load for the hollow rod. Use E = 200 GPa.
10.13 Determine (a) the critical load for the brass strut, (b) the dimension d for
which the aluminum strut will have the same critical load, (c) the weight
of the aluminum strut as a percent of the weight of the brass strut. 30 mm 	30 mm
15 mm
Fig. P10.12
25 mm
C
A
B
D
1 m
1 m
P
P
Fig. P10.14
10 in.
6 in.
in.	1
4
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P10.15
10.14 Determine (a) the critical load for the square strut, (b) the radius of
the round strut for which both struts have the same critical load. (c)
Express the cross-sectional area of the square strut as a percentage
of the cross-sectional area of the round strut. Use E = 200 GPa.
10.15 A column with the cross section shown has a 13.5-ft effective length.
Using a factor of safety equal to 2.8, determine the allowable centric
load that can be applied to the column. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.16 A compression member of 7-m effective length is made by welding
together two L152 × 102 × 12.7 angles as shown. Using E = 200 GPa,
determine the allowable centric load for the member if a factor of
safety of 2.2 is required.
102 mm
152 mm
102 mm
Fig. P10.16
C
A
B
D
d 	d
P
P
Brass
E = 120 GPa
ρ = 8740 kg/m 3
Aluminum
E = 70 GPa
ρ = 2710 kg/m3
20 mm
1.1 m
1.1 m
Fig. P10.13

-- 720 of 897 --

706
10.17 A column of 22-ft effective length is made by welding two 9 × 0.5-in.
plates to a W8 × 35 as shown. Determine the allowable centric load
if a factor of safety of 2.3 is required. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
4.5 in.
4.5 in.
y
x
Fig. P10.17
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P10.18
10.18 A column of 3-m effective length is to be made by welding together
two C130 × 13 rolled-steel channels. Using E = 200 GPa, determine
for each arrangement shown the allowable centric load if a factor of
safety of 2.4 is required.
10.19 Knowing that a factor of safety of 2.6 is required, determine the
largest load P that can be applied to the structure shown. Use E =
200 GPa and consider only buckling in the plane of the structure.
10.20 Members AB and CD are 30-mm-diameter steel rods, and members
BC and AD are 22-mm-diameter steel rods. When the turnbuckle is
tightened, the diagonal member AC is put in tension. Knowing that
a factor of safety with respect to buckling of 2.75 is required, deter-
mine the largest allowable tension in AC. Use E = 200 GPa and
consider only buckling in the plane of the structure.
C
A
0.5 m
0.5 m
B
P
15-mm diameter
20-mm diameter
1 m
Fig. P10.19
2.25 m
A 	D
C
B
3.5 m
Fig. P10.20
A
L
B
d
b
P
Fig. P10.21
10.21 The uniform brass bar AB has a rectangular cross section and is
supported by pins and brackets as shown. Each end of the bar can
rotate freely about a horizontal axis through the pin, but rotation
about a vertical axis is prevented by the brackets. (a) Determine
the ratio b/d for which the factor of safety is the same about the
horizontal and vertical axes. (b) Determine the factor of safety if
P = 1.8 kips , L = 7 ft, d = 1.5 in., and E = 29 × 106 psi .

-- 721 of 897 --

707
10.22 A 1-in.-square aluminum strut is maintained in the position
shown by a pin support at A and by sets of rollers at B and C
that prevent rotation of the strut in the plane of the figure. Know-
ing that LAB = 3 ft , determine (a) the largest values of LBC and
LCD that can be used if the allowable load P is to be as large as
possible, (b) the magnitude of the corresponding allowable load.
Consider only buckling in the plane of the figure and use
E = 10.4 × 106 psi .
10.23 A 1-in.-square aluminum strut is maintained in the position
shown by a pin support at A and by sets of rollers at B and C
that prevent rotation of the strut in the plane of the figure. Know-
ing that LAB = 3 ft, LBC = 4 ft , and LCD = 1 ft, determine the
allowable load P using a factor of safety with respect to buckling
of 3.2. Consider only buckling in the plane of the figure and use
E = 10.4 × 106 psi.
10.24 Column ABC has a uniform rectangular cross section with b = 12 mm
and d = 22 mm. The column is braced in the xz plane at its midpoint C
and carries a centric load P of magnitude 3.8 kN. Knowing that a
factor of safety of 3.2 is required, determine the largest allowable
length L. Use E = 200 GPa .
D
C
B
A
L AB
LBC
L CD
P
Fig. P10.22 and P10.23
L
A
B
y
x
L
b
d
C
z
P
Fig. P10.24 and P10.25
10.25 Column ABC has a uniform rectangular cross section and is braced
in the xz plane at its midpoint C. (a) Determine the ratio b/d for
which the factor of safety is the same with respect to buckling in the
xz and yz planes. (b) Using the ratio found in part a , design the cross
section of the column so that the factor of safety will be 3.0 when
P = 4.4 kN , L = 1 m, and E = 200 GPa .
10.26 Column AB carries a centric load P of magnitude 15 kips. Cables
BC and BD are taut and prevent motion of point B in the xz plane.
Using Euler’s formula and a factor of safety of 2.2 , and neglecting
the tension in the cables, determine the maximum allowable length L.
Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
C
A 	D
L
B
P
y
z
x
W10 × 22
Fig. P10.26

-- 722 of 897 --

708
10.27 Each of the five struts shown consists of a solid steel rod. (a) Know-
ing that the strut of Fig. (1) is of a 20-mm diameter, determine the
factor of safety with respect to buckling for the loading shown.
(b) Determine the diameter of each of the other struts for which the
factor of safety is the same as the factor of safety obtained in part a .
Use E = 200 GPa.
900 mm
(1) 	(2) 	(3) 	(4) 	(5)
P0 = 7.5 kN
P0
P0 	P0 	P0
Fig. P10.27
4 m
(1) 	(2) 	(3) 	(4)
m m 	m m
Fig. P10.28
10.28 A rigid block of mass m can be supported in each of the four ways
shown. Each column consists of an aluminum tube that has a 44-mm
outer diameter and a 4-mm wall thickness. Using E = 70 GPa and
a factor of safety of 2.8, determine the allowable mass for each sup-
port condition.

-- 723 of 897 --

*10.2 Eccentric Loading and the Secant Formula 	709
*10.2 	ECCENTRIC LOADING AND
THE SECANT FORMULA
In this section, column buckling is approached by observing that the load P
applied to a column is never perfectly centered on the cross section. The eccen-
tricity of the load is the distance between the line of action P and the axis of
the column (Fig. 10.19a). The given eccentric load is replaced by a centric
force P and a couple MA of moment MA = Pe (Fig. 10.19b). Regardless of how
P 	P
e
B
A	A
B
P'	P'
L
MB = Pe
MA = Pe
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 10.19 	(a) Column with an eccentric
load (b) modeled as a column with an
equivalent centric force-couple load.
small the load P and the eccentricity e are, the couple MA will cause some
bending of the column (Fig. 10.20). As the eccentric load increases, both the
couple MA and the axial force P increase, and both cause the column to bend
further. Viewed in this way, buckling is not a question of determining how long
the column can remain straight and stable under an increasing load, but how
much the column can be permitted to bend if the allowable stress is not
exceeded and the deflection y max is not excessive.
We first write and solve the differential equation of the elastic curve, pro-
ceeding in the same manner as we did earlier in Secs. 10.1A and B. Drawing
the free-body diagram of a portion AQ of the column and choosing the coordinate
axes as shown (Fig. 10.21), we find that the bending moment at Q is
M = −Py − M A = −Py − Pe 	(10.22)
Substituting the value of M into Eq. (9.4) gives
d2y
dx2 = M
EI = − P
EI y − Pe
EI
Transposing the term containing y and setting
p2 = P
EI (10.6)
as done earlier gives
d2y
dx2 + p2 y = −p2e 	(10.23)
A
B
MA = Pe
ymax
P'
MB = Pe
P
Fig. 10.20 	Free-body diagram
of an eccentrically loaded column.
A
Q
x
x
y
y
MA = Pe
M
P'
P
Fig. 10.21 	Free-body
diagram of portion AQ of an
eccentrically loaded column.

-- 724 of 897 --

710 	Columns
Since the left-hand member of Eq. (10.23) is the same as Eq. (10.7), the
general solution of Eq. (10.23) is rewritten as
y = A sin px + B cos px − e 	(10.24)
where the last term is a particular solution.
Constants A and B are obtained from the boundary conditions shown
in Fig. 10.22. Making x = 0, y = 0 in Eq. (10.24), we have
B = e
Making x = L, y = 0 gives
A sin pL = e(1 − cos pL) 	(10.25)
Recalling that
sin pL = 2 sin pL
2 cos pL
2
and
1 − cos pL = 2 sin2 pL
2
and substituting into Eq. (10.25) after reductions gives
A = e tan pL
2
Substituting for A and B into Eq. (10.24), the equation of the elastic
curve is
y = e(tan pL
2 sin px + cos px − 1) (10.26)
The maximum deflection is obtained by setting x = L∕2 in Eq. (10.26).
ymax = e(tan pL
2 sin pL
2 + cos pL
2 − 1)
= e
(
sin2 pL
2 + cos 2 pL
2
cos pL
2
− 1
)
= e(sec pL
2 − 1) (10.27)
Recalling Eq. (10.6), we have
ymax = e[sec(√
P
EI
L
2) − 1] (10.28)
The expression obtained indicates that ymax becomes infinite when
√
P
EI
L
2 = π
2 (10.29)
A
B
x
ymax
y
C
L/2
L/2
[ x = 0, y = 0]
[ x = L, y = 0]
Fig. 10.22 	Boundary conditions for
an eccentrically loaded column.

-- 725 of 897 --

*10.2 Eccentric Loading and the Secant Formula 	711
While the deflection does not actually become infinite, it nevertheless becomes
unacceptably large, and P should not be allowed to reach the critical value
which satisfies Eq. (10.29). Solving Eq. (10.29) for P,
Pcr = π2EI
L2 	(10.30)
which also was obtained in Sec. 10.1A for a column under a centric load.
Solving Eq. (10.30) for EI and substituting into Eq. (10.28), the maximum
deflection in the alternative form is
ymax = e(sec π
2 √
P
Pcr
− 1) (10.31)
The maximum stress σmax occurs in the section of the column where
the bending moment is maximum (i.e., the transverse section through the
midpoint C) and can be obtained by adding the normal stresses due to
the axial force and the bending couple exerted on that section (see
Sec. 4.7). Thus,
σmax = P
A + Mmaxc
I (10.32)
From the free-body diagram of portion AC (Fig. 10.23),
Mmax = Pymax + M A = P(ymax + e)
Substituting this into Eq. (10.32) and recalling that I = Ar2,
σmax = P
A[1 + (ymax + e)c
r2 	] (10.33)
Substituting the value obtained in Eq. (10.28) for ymax:
σmax = P
A[1 + ec
r2 sec(√
P
EI
L
2)] (10.34)
An alternative form of σmax is obtained by substituting from Eq. (10.31) into
Eq. (10.33) for ymax. Thus,
σmax = P
A(1 + ec
r2 sec π
2 √
P
Pcr) (10.35)
This equation can be used with any end conditions, as long as the appropriate
value is used for the critical load (see Sec. 10.1B).
Since σmax does not vary linearly with load P, the principle of superpo-
sition does not apply to the determination of stress due to the simultaneous
application of several loads. The resultant load must be computed first, and
then Eq. (10.34) or (10.35) can be used to find the corresponding stress. For
the same reason, any given factor of safety should be applied to the load—not
to the stress—when using the second formula.
P'
A
C
L/2
ymax
MA = Pe
Mmax
P
Fig. 10.23 	Free-body diagram of
upper half of eccentrically loaded
column.

-- 726 of 897 --

712 	Columns
Making I = Ar2 in Eq. (10.34) and solving for the ratio P∕A in front of
the bracket gives
P
A = σmax
1 + ec
r2 sec(
1
2 √
P
EA
L e
r )
(10.36)
where the effective length is applied for various end conditions. This equation is
the secant formula. It defines the force per unit area, P∕A, that causes a specified
maximum stress σmax in a column with a given effective slenderness ratio Le∕r for
a ratio ec∕r2, where e is the eccentricity of the applied load. Since P∕A appears in
both members, it is necessary to solve a transcendental equation by trial and error
to obtain the value of P∕A corresponding to a given column and loading condition.
Equation (10.36) is used to draw the curves shown in Fig. 10.24a and
b for a steel column, assuming the values of E and σY shown. These curves
make it possible to determine the load per unit area P∕A, which causes the
column to yield for given values of the ratios Le∕r and ec∕r2.
For small values of Le∕r, the secant is almost equal to 1 in Eq. (10.36),
and thus P∕A can be assumed equal to
P
A = σmax
1 + ec
r2
(10.37)
This value can be obtained by neglecting the effect of the lateral deflection
of the column and using the method of Sec. 4.7. On the other hand, Fig. 10.24
shows that, for large values of Le∕r, the curves corresponding to the ratio ec∕r2
get very close to Euler’s curve given in Eq. (10.13b). Thus, the effect of the
eccentricity of the load on P∕A becomes negligible. The secant formula is
mainly used for intermediate values of Le∕r. However, to use it effectively,
the eccentricity e of the load should be known, but unfortunately, this quantity
is seldom known with any degree of precision.
0 	50
10
20
30
40
36
50
100
150
300
250
200
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
100 	150 	200
ec
r2 = 	0	ec
r2 =
ec
r2 = 1
ec
r2 = 1
P/A
 (MPa)
P/A
 (ksi)
Le /r
0 	50 	100 	150 	200
Le /r
250 MPa	Y
E
=
= 200 GPa
Euler’s curve Euler’s curve
E = 29 × 106 psi
(a) 	(b)
σY = 36 ksi
σ
Fig. 10.24 	Secant formula plots for buckling in eccentrically loaded columns. (a) U.S. customary units. (b) SI units.

-- 727 of 897 --

*10.2 Eccentric Loading and the Secant Formula 	713
Sample Problem 10.2
The uniform column AB consists of an 8-ft section of structural tubing with
the cross section shown. (a) Using Euler’s formula and a factor of safety of 2,
determine the allowable centric load for the column and the corresponding
normal stress. (b) Assuming that the allowable load found in part a is applied
at a point 0.75 in. from the geometric axis of the column, determine the hori-
zontal deflection of the top of the column and the maximum normal stress in
the column. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
A = 3.54 in2
I = 8.00 in4
r = 1.50 in.
c = 2.00 in.
4 in.
4 in. x	C
y
STRATEGY: 	For part a, use the factor of safety with Euler’s formula to
determine the allowable centric load. For part b, use Eqs. (10.31) and (10.35)
to find the horizontal deflection and maximum normal stress in the column,
respectively.
MODELING:
Effective Length. 	Since the column has one end fixed and one end free,
its effective length is
L e = 2(8 ft) = 16 ft = 192 in.
Critical Load. 	Using Euler’s formula,
Pcr = π2EI
L2
e
= π2 (29 × 106 psi)(8.00 in4 )
(192 in.)2 	Pcr = 62.1 kips
ANALYSIS:
a. Allowable Load and Stress. 	For a factor of safety of 2,
Pall = Pcr
F.S. = 62.1 kips
2 Pall = 31.1 kips 	◂
and
σ = Pall
A = 31.1 kips
3.54 in2 	σ = 8.79 ksi 	◂
(continued)
e = 0.75 in.
8 ft
A
A
B
B
P
P
(a)
(b)

-- 728 of 897 --

714 	Columns
b. Eccentric Load (Fig. 1). 	Observe that column AB and its load are
identical to the upper half of the column of Fig. 10.20, which was used for
the secant formulas. Thus, the formulas of Sec. 10.2 apply directly here.
Recalling that Pall∕Pcr = 1
2 and using Eq. (10.31), the horizontal deflection of
point A is
e = 0.75 in.
A
Pall = 31.1 kips
Fig. 1 	Allowable load applied at assumed
eccentricity.
y m = e[sec(
π
2 √
P
Pcr) − 1] = (0.75 in.)[sec(
π
2 √2) − 1]
= (0.75 in.)(2.252 − 1) 	ym = 0.939 in. 	◂
This result is illustrated in Fig. 2.
e = 0.75 in.
A
B
ym = 0.939 in.	P
Fig. 2 	Deflection of eccentrically
loaded column.
The maximum normal stress is obtained from Eq. (10.35) as
σ m = P
A[1 + ec
r2 sec(
π
2 √
P
Pcr)]
= 31.1 kips
3.54 in2 [1 + (0.75 in.)(2 in.)
(1.50 in.) 2 	sec(
π
2 √2)]
= (8.79 ksi)[1 + 0.667(2.252)] 	σm = 22.0 ksi 	◂

-- 729 of 897 --

715
Problems
10.29 The line of action of the axial load P of magnitude 270 kN is paral-
lel to the geometric axis of the column AB and intersects the x axis
at e = 14 mm. Using E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the deflection of
the midpoint C of the column, (b) the maximum stress in the column.
C
B
A
y
z
7.2 m	W200 × 52
e
P'
P
x
Fig. P10.29
P'
B
C
A
e
e
1.2 m
32-mm
diameter
P
Fig. P10.31
10.30 Solve Prob. 10.29 if the load P is applied parallel to the geometric
axis of the column AB so that it intersects the x axis at e = 21 mm.
10.31 An axial load P is applied to the 32-mm-diameter steel rod AB as
shown. For P = 37 kN and e = 1.2 mm, determine (a) the deflection
at the midpoint C of the rod, (b) the maximum stress in the rod. Use
E = 200 GPa.

-- 730 of 897 --

716
10.32 An axial load P is applied to the 1.375-in. diameter steel rod AB
as shown. When P = 21 kips, it is observed that the horizontal
deflection at midpoint C is 0.03 in. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, deter-
mine (a) the eccentricity e of the load, (b) the maximum stress in
the rod.
P'
B
C
A
e
e
30 in.
1.375-in.
diameter
P
Fig. P10.32
P
B
C
D
32 mm 	32 mm
0.65 m
e
Fig. P10.33
9.4 ft
W8 × 31
B
x
C
y
z
P
e
Fig. P10.34
10.33 An axial load P is applied to the 32-mm-square aluminum bar BC
as shown. When P = 24 kN, the horizontal deflection at end C is
4 mm. Using E = 70 GPa, determine (a) the eccentricity e of the
load, (b) the maximum stress in the bar.
10.34 The axial load P is applied at a point located on the x axis at a
distance e from the geometric axis of the rolled-steel column BC.
When P = 82 kips, the horizontal deflection of the top of the column
is 0.20 in. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the eccentricity e
of the load, (b) the maximum stress in the column.

-- 731 of 897 --

717
10.35 An axial load P is applied at point D that is 0.25 in. from the
geometric axis of the square aluminum bar BC. Using E = 10.1 ×
106 psi, determine (a) the load P for which the horizontal deflec-
tion of end C is 0.50 in., (b) the corresponding maximum stress in
the column.
1.75 in.	1.75 in.
2.5 ft
P
C
B
D
0.25 in.
Fig. P10.35
e
P'
120 mm
t = 6 mm
2.8 m
A
B
C
e
P
Fig. P10.36
W8 × 40
11 ft
B
C
y
z
x
P
e
Fig. P10.38
10.36 A brass pipe having the cross section shown has an axial load P
applied 5 mm from its geometric axis. Using E = 120 GPa, deter-
mine (a) the load P for which the horizontal deflection at the mid-
point C is 5 mm, (b) the corresponding maximum stress in the
column.
10.37 Solve Prob. 10.36, assuming that the axial load P is applied 10 mm
from the geometric axis of the column.
10.38 The line of action of the axial load P is parallel to the geometric
axis of the column AB and intersects the x axis at x = 0.8 in. Using
E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the load P for which the horizontal
deflection at the end C is 0.5 in., (b) the corresponding maximum
stress in the column.

-- 732 of 897 --

718
10.39 An axial load P is applied at a point located on the x axis at a dis-
tance e = 12 mm from the geometric axis of the W310 × 60 rolled-
steel column BC. Assuming that L = 3.5 m and using E = 200 GPa,
determine (a) the load P for which the horizontal deflection of the
midpoint C of the column is 15 mm, (b) the corresponding maximum
stress in the column.
W310 × 60
L
B
C
y
z
x
P
e
Fig. P10.39
B
C
A
d
e = 0.03 in.
e = 0.03 in.
3 in.	8
4 in.
4 in.
Fig. P10.41
L = 2.1 m
W250 × 44.8
x
C
B
y
z
P
e
Fig. P10.43
10.40 Solve Prob. 10.39, assuming that L is 4.5 m.
10.41 The steel bar AB has a 3
8 × 3
8 -in. square cross section and is held by
pins that are a fixed distance apart and are located at a distance e =
0.03 in. from the geometric axis of the bar. Knowing that at tem-
perature T0 the pins are in contact with the bar and that the force in
the bar is zero, determine the increase in temperature for which the
bar will just make contact with point C if d = 0.01 in. Use E = 29
× 106 psi and a coefficient of thermal expansion α = 6.5 × 10−6/°F.
10.42 For the bar of Prob. 10.41, determine the required distance d for
which the bar will just make contact with point C when the tem-
perature increases by 120°F.
10.43 An axial load P is applied to the W250 × 44.8 rolled-steel column
BC that is free at its top C and fixed at its base B. Knowing that the
eccentricity of the load is e = 12 mm and that for the grade of steel
used σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the magnitude
of P of the allowable load when a factor of safety of 2.4 with respect
to permanent deformation is required, (b) the ratio of the load found
in part a to the magnitude of the allowable centric load for the col-
umn. (Hint: Since the factor of safety must be applied to the load P,
not to the stress, use Fig. 10.24 to determine PY.)
10.44 Solve Prob. 10.43, assuming that the length of the column is reduced
to 1.6 m.

-- 733 of 897 --

719
10.45 A pipe having the cross section shown is used as a 10-ft column.
For the grade of steel used, σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi. Know-
ing that a factor of safety of 2.8 with respect to permanent deformation
is required, determine the allowable load P when the eccentricity e
is (a) 0.6 in., (b) 0.3 in. (See hint of Prob. 10.43.)
e P
P′
5.563 in.
t = 0.258 in.
10 ft
A
B
e
Fig. P10.45
L
B
C
y
z
x
P
e
Fig. P10.47
10.46 Solve Prob. 10.45, assuming that the length of the column is increased
to 14 ft.
10.47 A 100-kN axial load P is applied to the W150 × 18 rolled-steel
column BC that is free at its top C and fixed at its base B. Knowing
that the eccentricity of the load is e = 6 mm, determine the largest
permissible length L if the allowable stress in the column is 80 MPa.
Use E = 200 GPa.

-- 734 of 897 --

720
10.48 A 26-kip axial load P is applied to a W6 × 12 rolled-steel column
BC that is free at its top C and fixed at its base B. Knowing that the
eccentricity of the load is e = 0.25 in., determine the largest permis-
sible length L if the allowable stress in the column is 14 ksi. Use
E = 29 × 106 psi.
L
B
C
y
z
x
P
e
Fig. P10.48	C
B
A
y
z
L
e
P′
P
x
Fig. P10.49
10.49 Axial loads of magnitude P = 135 kips are applied parallel to the
geometric axis of the W10 × 54 rolled-steel column AB and intersect
the x axis at a distance e from the geometric axis. Knowing that
σall = 12 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the largest permissible
length L when (a) e = 0.25 in., (b) e = 0.5 in.
10.50 Axial loads of magnitude P = 580 kN are applied parallel to the
geometric axis of the W250 × 80 rolled-steel column AB and inter-
sect the x axis at a distance e from the geometric axis. Knowing that
σall = 75 MPa and E = 200 GPa, determine the largest permissible
length L when (a) e = 5 mm, (b) e = 10 mm.
C
B
A
y
z
L
e
P′
P
x
Fig. P10.50

-- 735 of 897 --

721
10.51 An axial load of magnitude P = 220 kN is applied at a point located
on the x axis at a distance e = 6 mm from the geometric axis of the
wide-flange column BC. Knowing that E = 200 GPa, choose the
lightest W200 shape that can be used if σall = 120 MPa.
1.8 m
B
C
y
z
P
e
x
Fig. P10.51
10.52 Solve Prob. 10.51, assuming that the magnitude of the axial load is
P = 345 kN.
10.53 A 12-kip axial load is applied with an eccentricity e = 0.375 in. to
the circular steel rod BC that is free at its top C and fixed at its base
B. Knowing that the stock of rods available for use have diameters
in increments of 1
8 in. from 1.5 in. to 3.0 in., determine the lightest
rod that can be used if σall = 15 ksi. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.54 Solve Prob. 10.53, assuming that the 12-kip axial load will be applied
to the rod with an eccentricity e = 1
2 d.
10.55 Axial loads of magnitude P = 175 kN are applied parallel to the
geometric axis of a W250 × 44.8 rolled-steel column AB and inter-
sect the x axis at a distance e = 12 mm from its geometric axis.
Knowing that σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa, determine the factor
of safety with respect to yield. (Hint: Since the factor of safety must
be applied to the load P, not to the stresses, use Fig. 10.24 to deter-
mine PY.)
10.56 Solve Prob. 10.55, assuming that e = 16 mm and P = 155 kN.
B
D
y
x
d 4.0 ft
12 kips
z
e
C
Fig. P10.53
C
B
A
y
z
3.8 m
e
P′
P
x
Fig. P10.55

-- 736 of 897 --

722 	Columns
10.3 	CENTRIC LOAD DESIGN
The preceding sections determined the critical load of a column by using
Euler’s formula and investigated the deformations and stresses in eccentrically
loaded columns by using the secant formula. In each case, all stresses remained
below the proportional limit, and the column was initially a straight, homo-
geneous prism. Real columns fall short of such an idealization. To account
for the differences between idealized columns, which do not exist, and real
columns, design normally is based on empirical formulas that are developed
from laboratory tests.
Over the last century, many steel columns have been tested by applying
to them a centric axial load and increasing the load until failure occurred. The
results of such tests are represented in Fig. 10.25 where a point has been
plotted with its ordinate equal to the normal stress σcr at failure and its abscissa
is equal to the corresponding effective slenderness ratio Le∕r. Although there
is considerable scatter in the test results, regions corresponding to three types
of failure can be observed.
Short
columns Intermediate columns 	Long columns
Euler’s critical stress
2E
(L e /r)2
Le /r
cr =
Y
cr	σ
σ
σ 	π
Fig. 10.25 	Plot of test data for steel columns.
∙ For long columns, where Le∕r is large, failure is closely predicted by
Euler’s formula, and the value of σcr depends on the modulus of elastic-
ity E of the steel used—but not on its yield strength σY.
∙ For very short columns and compression blocks, failure essentially
occurs as a result of yield, and σcr ≈ σY.
∙ For columns of intermediate length, failure is dependent on both σY and
E. In this range, column failure is an extremely complex phenomenon,
and test data are used extensively to guide the development of specifi-
cations and design formulas.
Empirical formulas for an allowable or critical stress given in terms
of the effective slenderness ratio were first introduced over a century ago.
Since then, they have undergone a process of refinement and improve-
ment. Typical empirical formulas used to approximate test data are shown in

-- 737 of 897 --

10.3 Centric Load Design 	723
Fig. 10.26. It is not always possible to use a single formula for all values of
Le∕r. Most design specifications use different formulas—each with a definite
range of applicability. In each case we must check that the equation used is
applicable for the value of Le∕r for the column involved. Furthermore, it must
be determined whether the equation provides the critical stress for the column,
to which the appropriate factor of safety must be applied, or if it provides an
allowable stress.
Photo 10.2 shows examples of columns that are designed using such
design specification formulas. The design formulas for three different
materials using Allowable Stress Design are presented next, followed by
formulas for the design of steel columns based on Load and Resistance
Factor Design.†
Gordon-Rankine formula:
1+
Parabola:
Straight line:
k2
Le /r
cr
cr = 2 – 	( )2
k3
k1 r
Le
cr =
cr =
1 –
3
r
Le
( )2
r
Le
σ
σ 	σ
σ	σ
σ σ
Fig. 10.26 	Plots of empirical formulas for critical stresses.
†In specific design formulas, the letter L always refers to the effective length of the column.
‡Manual of Steel Construction, 15th ed., American Institute of Steel Construction,
Chicago, 2017.
(a) 	(b)
Photo 10.2 	(a) The water tank is supported by steel columns. (b) The house under
construction is framed with wood columns. (a) ©Steve Photo/Alamy Stock Photo; (b) ©Ufulum/
Shutterstock
10.3A 	Allowable Stress Design
Structural Steel. 	The most commonly used formulas for allowable stress
design of steel columns under a centric load are found in the Specification for
Structural Steel Buildings of the American Institute of Steel Construction.‡
An exponential expression is used to predict σall for columns of short and

-- 738 of 897 --

724 	Columns
intermediate lengths, and an Euler-based relation is used for long columns.
The design relationships are developed in two steps.
1. A curve representing the variation of σcr as a function of L∕r is obtained
(Fig. 10.27). It is important to note that this curve does not incorporate
any factor of safety.§ Portion AB of this curve is
σcr = [0.658 (σY∕σ e) ]σ Y 	(10.38)
where
σe = π2E
(L∕r)2 	(10.39)
Portion BC is
σcr = 0.877σe 	(10.40)
When L∕r = 0, σcr = σY in Eq. (10.38). At point B, Eq. (10.38) intersects
Eq. (10.40). The slenderness L∕r at the junction between the two equations is
L
r = 4.71√
E
σ Y
(10.41)
If L∕r is smaller than the value from Eq. (10.41), σcr is determined from
Eq. (10.38). If L∕r is greater, σcr is determined from Eq. (10.40). At the slen-
derness L∕r specified in Eq. (10.41), the stress σe = 0.44 σY. Using Eq. (10.40),
σcr = 0.877 (0.44 σY) = 0.39 σY.
2. A factor of safety must be used for the final design. The factor of safety
given by the specification is 1.67. Thus ,
σall = σcr
1.67 (10.42)
These equations can be used with SI or U.S. customary units.
By using Eqs. (10.38), (10.40), (10.41), and (10.42), the allowable axial
stress can be determined for a given grade of steel and any given value of
L∕r. The procedure is to compute L∕r at the intersection between the two
equations from Eq. (10.41). For smaller given values of L∕r, use Eqs. (10.38)
and (10.42) to calculate σall, and if greater, use Eqs. (10.40) and (10.42).
Figure 10.28 provides an example of how σall varies as a function of L∕r for
different grades of structural steel.
0
A
B
C
0.39
E	
4.71 	L/r
cr
Y
Y
Y
σ
σ
σ
σ
Fig. 10.27 	Column design curve
recommended by the American
Institute of Steel Construction.
§In the Specification for Structural Steel Buildings, the symbol F is used for stresses.
0 	50 	100 	150 	200
L/r
all	σ
Fig. 10.28 	Steel column design curves
for different grades of steel.

-- 739 of 897 --

10.3 Centric Load Design 	725
Concept Application 10.2
Determine the longest unsupported length L for which the S100 × 11.5
rolled-steel compression member AB can safely carry the centric load shown
(Fig. 10.29). Assume σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
From Appendix E, for an S100 × 11.5 shape,
A = 1460 mm2 	r x = 41.7 mm 	r y = 14.6 mm
If the 60-kN load is to be safely supported,
σall = P
A = 60 × 103 N
1460 × 10 −6 m2 = 41.1 × 106 Pa
To compute the critical stress σcr , we start by assuming that L∕r is larger than
the slenderness specified by Eq. (10.41). We then use Eq. (10.40) with
Eq. (10.39) and write
σcr = 0.877 σe = 0.877 π2E
(L∕r)2
= 0.877 π2 (200 × 109 Pa)
(L∕r)2 	= 1.731 × 1012 Pa
(L∕r)2
Using this expression in Eq. (10.42),
σall = σcr
1.67 = 1.037 × 1012 Pa
(L∕r)2
Equating this expression to the required value of σall gives
1.037 × 1012 Pa
(L∕r)2 	= 41.1 × 106 Pa 	L∕r = 158.8
The slenderness ratio from Eq. (10.41) is
L
r = 4.71√
200 × 109
250 × 106 = 133.2
Our assumption that L∕r is greater than this slenderness ratio is correct.
Choosing the smaller of the two radii of gyration:
L
r y
= L
14.6 × 10−3 m = 158.8 	L = 2.32 m
B
L
A
P = 60 kN
Fig. 10.29 	Centrically
loaded S100 × 11.5
rolled-steel member.
Aluminum. 	Many aluminum alloys are used in structures and machines. The
specifications of the Aluminum Association† provides formulas based on three slen-
derness ranges. Short columns are governed by material failure. For long columns,
an Euler-type equation is used. Intermediate columns are governed by a quadratic
†Specifications for Aluminum Structures, Aluminum Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., 2015.

-- 740 of 897 --

726 	Columns
equation. The variation of σall with L∕r defined by these formulas is shown in
Fig. 10.30. Specific formulas for the design of building structures are given in both
SI and U.S. customary units for two commonly used alloys. The equations for alloy
2014-T6 apply to extrusions, but they can also be used conservatively to design
columns with nonextruded cross sections made from this same alloy.
Alloy 6061-T6:
L∕r ≤ 17.8: σall = [21.2] ksi 	(10.43a)
= [146.3] MPa 	(10.43b)
‡National Design Specification for Wood Construction, American Wood Council, Washington,
D.C., 2015.
§In the National Design Specification for Wood Construction, the symbol F is used for stresses.
17.8 > L∕r < 66.0: σall = [25.2 − 0.232(L∕r) + 0.00047(L∕r) 2 ] ksi 	(10.44a)
= [173.9 − 1.602(L∕r) + 0.00323(L∕r) 2 ] MPa (10.44b)
L∕r ≥ 66.0: σall = 51,400 ksi
(L∕r)2 	σall = 356 × 103 MPa
(L∕r)2 	(10.45a, b)
Alloy 2014-T6:
L∕r ≤ 17.0: σall = [32.1] ksi 	(10.46a)
= [221.5] MPa 	(10.46b)
17.0 > L∕r < 52.7: σall = [39.7 − 0.465(L∕r) + 0.00121(L∕r) 2 ] ksi 	(10.47a)
= [273.6 − 3.205(L∕r) + 0.00836(L∕r) 2 ] MPa (10.47b)
L∕r ≥ 52.7: σall = 51,400 ksi
(L∕r) 2 	σall = 356 × 103 MPa
(L∕r) 2 	(10.48a, b)
Wood. 	For the design of wood columns, the specifications of the American
Forest & Paper Association‡ provide a single equation to obtain the allowable
stress for short, intermediate, and long columns under centric loading. For a
column with a rectangular cross section of sides b and d, where d < b, the
variation of σall with L∕d is shown in Fig. 10.31.
For solid columns made from a single piece of wood or by gluing
laminations together, the allowable stress σall is
σall = σC CP 	(10.49)
where σC is the adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain.§
Adjustments for σC are included in the specifications to account for different
variations (such as in the load duration). The column stability factor CP
accounts for the column length and is defined by
CP = 1 + (σ CE ∕σ C)
2c − √ [
1 + (σ CE ∕σ C)
2c 	]
2
− σ CE ∕σ C
c (10.50)
The parameter c accounts for the type of column, and it is equal to 0.8 for
sawn lumber columns and 0.90 for glued laminated wood columns. The value
of σCE is defined as
σ CE = 0.822E
(L∕d) 2 	(10.51)
where E is an adjusted modulus of elasticity for column buckling. Columns
in which L∕d exceeds 50 are not permitted by the National Design Specifica-
tion for Wood Construction.
L/r
all	σ
Fig. 10.30 	Design curve for
aluminum columns recommended
by the Aluminum Association.
L/d
50	0
all
C
σ
σ
Fig. 10.31 	Column design curve
recommended by the American
Forest & Paper Association.

-- 741 of 897 --

10.3 Centric Load Design 	727
Concept Application 10.3
Knowing that column AB (Fig. 10.32) has an effective length of 14 ft
and must safely carry a 32-kip load, design the column using a square
glued laminated cross section. The adjusted modulus of elasticity for the
wood is E = 800 × 103 psi, and the adjusted allowable stress for compres-
sion parallel to the grain is σC = 1060 psi.
A
B
d
d
14 ft
P = 32 kips
Fig. 10.32 	Centrically loaded
wood column.
Note that c = 0.90 for glued laminated wood columns. Computing the
value of σCE, using Eq. (10.51), gives
σCE = 0.822 E
(L∕d)2 = 0.822(800 × 103 psi)
(168 in./d) 2 	= 23.299d 2 psi
Equation (10.50) is used to express the column stability factor in terms
of d, with (σCE∕σC) = (23.299d 2∕1.060 × 103) = 21.98 × 10−3 d 2,
CP = 1 + (σ CE ∕σ C)
2c − √ [
1 + (σ CE∕σ C)
2c 	]
2
− σ CE ∕σ C
c
= 1 + 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
2(0.90) − √ [
1 + 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
2(0.90) 	]
2
− 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
0.90
(continued)

-- 742 of 897 --

728 	Columns
10.3B 	Load and Resistance Factor Design
Structural Steel 	Section 1.5D gave an alternative method of design based
on determining the load when the structure ceases to be useful. Design is
based on the inequality given by
γ D P D + γ L P L ≤ ϕP U 	(1.27)
The design of steel columns under a centric load using Load and Resistance
Factor Design with the American Institute of Steel Construction Specification
is similar to that for the Allowable Stress Design. Using the critical stress σcr,
the ultimate load PU is
P U = σcr A 	(10.52)
The critical stress σcr is determined using Eq. (10.41) for the slenderness
at the junction between Eq. (10.38) and Eq. (10.40). If the specified slen-
derness L∕r is smaller than in Eq. (10.41), Eq. (10.38) governs. If it is
larger, Eq. (10.40) governs. The equations can be used with SI or U.S.
customary units.
By using Eq. (10.52) with Eq. (1.27), it can be determined if the design
is acceptable. First calculate the slenderness ratio from Eq. (10.41). For values
of L∕r smaller than this slenderness, the ultimate load PU used with Eq. (1.27)
is obtained from Eq. (10.52), where σcr is determined from Eq. (10.38). For
values of L∕r larger than this slenderness, the ultimate load PU is found by
using Eq. (10.52) with Eq. (10.40). The Load and Resistance Factor Design
method of the American Institute of Steel Construction specifies that the resis-
tance factor ϕ is 0.90.
Note: The design formulas presented throughout Sec. 10.3 are exam-
ples of different design approaches. These equations do not provide all
of the requirements needed for many designs, and the student should
refer to the appropriate design specifications before attempting actual
designs.
Since the column must carry 32 kips, Eq. (10.49) gives
σall = 32 kips
d 2 	= σ C CP = 1.060CP
Solving this equation for CP and substituting the value into the previous equa-
tion, we obtain
30.19
d 2 	= 1 + 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
2(0.90) − √ [
1 + 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
2(0.90) 	]
2
− 21.98 × 10−3 d 2
0.90
Solving for d by trial and error yields d = 6.45 in.

-- 743 of 897 --

10.3 Centric Load Design 	729
Sample Problem 10.3
Column AB consists of a W10 × 39 rolled-steel shape made of a grade of
steel for which σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi. Determine the allowable
centric load P (a) if the effective length of the column is 24 ft in all direc-
tions, (b) if bracing is provided to prevent the movement of the midpoint C
in the xz plane. (Assume that the movement of point C in the yz plane is not
affected by the bracing.)
STRATEGY: 	The allowable centric load for part a is determined from the
governing allowable stress design equation for steel, Eq. (10.38) or
Eq. (10.40), based on buckling associated with the axis with a smaller radius
of gyration since the effective lengths are the same. In part b, it is necessary
to determine the effective slenderness ratios for both axes, including the
reduced effective length due to the bracing. The larger slenderness ratio
governs the design.
MODELING: 	First compute the slenderness ratio from Eq. (10.41) corre-
sponding to the given yield strength σY = 36 ksi.
L
r = 4.71√
29 × 106
36 × 103 = 133.7
ANALYSIS:
a. Effective Length = 24 ft. 	The column is shown in Fig. 1a. Know-
ing that ry < rx , buckling takes place in the xz plane (Fig. 2). For L = 24 ft
and r = ry = 1.98 in., the slenderness ratio is
L
r y
= (24 × 12) in.
1.98 in. = 288 in.
1.98 in. = 145.5
Since L∕r > 133.7, Eq. (10.39) in Eq. (10.40) is used to determine
σcr = 0.877σe = 0.877 π2E
(L ∕r)2 = 0.877 π2 (29 × 103 ksi)
(145.5) 2 	= 11.86 ksi
The allowable stress is determined using Eq. (10.42)
σall = σcr
1.67 = 11.86 ksi
1.67 = 7.10 ksi
and
Pall = σall A = (7.10 ksi)(11.5 in2 ) = 81.7 kips 	◂
y
x
W10 × 39
A = 11.5 in2
rx = 4.27 in.
ry = 1.98 in.
(continued)
y
A
B
24 ft
z
P
x
(a)
y
A
C
B
12 ft
12 ft
z
x
(b)
P
Fig. 1 	Centrically loaded column
(a) unbraced, (b) braced.
y
B
24 ft
z
x
A
Fig. 2 	Buckled shape for
unbraced column.

-- 744 of 897 --

730 	Columns
b. Bracing at Midpoint C. 	The column is shown in Fig. 1b. Since
bracing prevents movement of point C in the xz plane but not in the yz plane,
the slenderness ratio corresponding to buckling in each plane (Fig. 3) is com-
puted to determine which is larger.
xz Plane: 	Effective length = 12 ft = 144 in., r = ry = 1.98 in.
L∕r = (144 in.)∕(1.98 in.) = 72.7
yz Plane: 	Effective length = 24 ft = 288 in., r = rx = 4.27 in.
L∕r = (288 in.)∕(4.27 in.) = 67.4
y
B
24 ft
z
x
A
y
B
12 ft
12 ft
z
x
A
C
Buckling in xz plane 	Buckling in yz plane
Fig. 3 	Buckled shapes for braced column.
Since the larger slenderness ratio corresponds to a smaller allowable load, we
choose L∕r = 72.7. Since this is smaller than L∕r = 133.7, Eqs. (10.39) and
(10.38) are used to determine σcr:
σ e = π2E
(L ∕r)2 = π2 (29 × 103 ksi)
(72.7)2 	= 54.1 ksi
σcr = [0.658 (σY∕σ e) ] F Y = [0.658 (36 ksi∕54.1 ksi) ] 36 ksi = 27.3 ksi
The allowable stress using Eq. (10.42) and the allowable load are
σall = σcr
1.67 = 27.3 ksi
1.67 = 16.32 ksi
Pall = σall A = (16.32 ksi)(11.5 in2 ) 	Pall = 187.7 kips 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	This sample problem shows the benefit of using
bracing to reduce the effective length for buckling about the weak axis when
a column has significantly different radii of gyration, which is typical for steel
wide-flange columns.

-- 745 of 897 --

10.3 Centric Load Design 	731
Sample Problem 10.4
Using the aluminum alloy 2014-T6 for the circular rod shown, determine the
smallest diameter that can be used to support the centric load P = 60 kN if
(a) L = 750 mm, (b) L = 300 mm.
A
d
B
L
P = 60 kN
STRATEGY: 	Use the aluminum allowable stress equations to design the
column, i.e., to determine the smallest diameter that can be used. Since there
are two design equations based on L∕r, it is first necessary to assume which
governs. Then check the assumption.
MODELING: 	For the cross section of the solid circular rod shown in
Fig. 1,
I = π
4 c4 	A = πc2 	r = √
I
A = √
πc4∕4
πc2 	= c
2
Fig. 1 	Cross section of
aluminum column.
d
c
ANALYSIS:
a. Length of 750 mm. 	Since the diameter of the rod is not known,
L∕r must be assumed. Assume that L∕r > 52.7 and use Eq. (10.48b). For the
centric load P, σ = P∕A and write
P
A = σall = 356 × 103 MPa
(L ∕r)2
(continued)

-- 746 of 897 --

732 	Columns
60 × 103 N
πc2 	= 356 × 109 Pa
(
0.750 m
c∕2 	)
2
c4 = 120.7 × 10−9 m4 	c = 18.64 mm
For c = 18.64 mm, the slenderness ratio is
L
r = L
c∕2 = 750 mm
(18.64 mm)∕2 = 80.5 > 52.7
The assumption that L∕r is greater than 52.7 is correct. For L = 750 mm, the
required diameter is
d = 2c = 2(18.64 mm) 	d = 37.3 mm 	◂
b. Length of 300 mm. 	Assume that L∕r > 52.7. Using Eq. (10.48b)
and following the procedure used in part a, c = 11.79 mm and L∕r = 50.9.
Since L∕r is less than 52.7, this assumption is wrong. Now assume that
L∕r is between 17.0 and 52.7 and use Eq. (10.47b) for the design of this rod.
P
A = σall = [273.6 − 3.205(
L
r ) + 0.00836(
L
r )
2
] MPa
60 × 103 N
πc2 	= [273.6 − 3.205(
0.3m
c∕2 ) + 0.00836(
0.3m
c∕2 )
2
] 106 Pa
c = 11.95 mm
For c = 11.95 mm, the slenderness ratio is
L
r = L
c∕2 = 300 mm
(11.95 mm)∕2 = 50.2
The second assumption that L∕r is between 17.0 and 52.7 is correct. For L =
300 mm, the required diameter is
d = 2c = 2(11.95 mm) 	d = 23.9 mm 	◂

-- 747 of 897 --

733
Problems
10.57 Using Allowable Stress Design, determine the allowable centric load
for a column of 6-m effective length that is made from the following
rolled-steel shape: (a) W200 × 35.9, (b) W200 × 86. Use σY = 250 MPa
and E = 200 GPa.
10.58 A W8 × 31 rolled-steel shape is used for a column of 21-ft effective
length. Using Allowable Stress Design, determine the allowable centric
load if the yield strength of the grade of steel used is (a) σY = 36 ksi,
(b) σY = 50 ksi. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.59 A steel pipe having the cross section shown is used as a column.
Using the AISC allowable stress design formulas, determine the
allowable centric load if the effective length of the column is
(a) 6 m, (b) 4 m. Use σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
10.60 A glued laminated wood column has a 4.8-m effective length and a
140 × 170-mm cross section. Knowing that for the grade of wood
used the adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the
grain is σC = 8.2 MPa and the adjusted modulus E = 3.6 GPa,
determine the maximum allowable centric load for the column.
10.61 A sawn lumber column with a 5.5 × 5.5-in. cross section has an
11-ft effective length. Knowing for the grade of wood used the
adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain is
σC = 1300 psi and the adjusted modulus E = 540 × 103 psi, deter-
mine the maximum allowable centric load for the column.
10.62 Using the aluminum alloy 2014-T6, determine the largest allowable
length of the aluminum bar AB for a centric load P of magnitude
(a) 150 kN, (b) 90 kN, (c) 25 kN.
10.63 A compression member has the cross section shown and an effective
length of 8 ft. Knowing that the aluminum alloy used is 2014-T6,
determine the allowable centric load.
Fig. P10.59
t = 6 mm
125 mm
A
B
50 mm
20 mm
L
P
Fig. P10.62
6.0 in.
6.0 in.
t = 0.625 in.
Fig. P10.63
4 in.
4 in.
0.6 in.
0.4 in.
0.6 in.
Fig. P10.64
10.64 A compression member has the cross section shown and an effective
length of 5 ft. Knowing that the aluminum alloy used is 6061-T6,
determine the allowable centric load.

-- 748 of 897 --

734
10.65 A steel column with the cross section shown has a 13.5-ft effective
length. Using Allowable Stress Design, determine the largest cen-
tric load that can be applied to the column. Use σY = 36 ksi and
E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.66 A compression member of 9-m effective length is obtained by weld-
ing two 10-mm-thick steel plates to a W250 × 80 rolled-steel shape
as shown. Knowing that σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa and using
Allowable Stress Design, determine the allowable centric load for the
compression member.
Fig. P10.66
10.67 A column of 6.4-m effective length is obtained by connecting four
L89 × 89 × 9.5-mm steel angles with lacing bars as shown. Using
Allowable Stress Design, determine the allowable centric load for the
column. Use σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
10.68 A column of 21-ft effective length is obtained by connecting
C10 × 20 steel channels with lacing bars as shown. Using Allowable
Stress Design, determine the allowable centric load for the column.
Use σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
89 mm
89 mm
Fig. P10.67
7.0 in.
Fig. P10.68
216 mm
140 mm
Fig. P10.69
10.69 A rectangular column with a 4.4-m effective length is made of glued
laminated wood. Knowing that for the grade of wood used the
adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain is
σC = 8.3 MPa and the adjusted modulus E = 4.6 GPa, determine the
maximum allowable centric load for the column.
54 mm
8 mm
6 mm 	6 mm
34 mm
8 mm 	8 mm
8 mm
Fig. P10.70
10.70 An aluminum structural tube is reinforced by bolting two plates to
it as shown for use as a column of 1.7-m effective length. Knowing
that all material is aluminum alloy 2014-T6, determine the maximum
allowable centric load.
10 in.
6 in.
in.	1
4
in.	1
2
in.	1
2
Fig. P10.65

-- 749 of 897 --

735
10.71 The glued laminated column shown is free at its top A and fixed at
its base B. Using wood that has an adjusted allowable stress for
compression parallel to the grain σC = 9.2 MPa and an adjusted
modulus of elasticity E = 5.7 GPa, determine the smallest cross
section that can support a centric load of 62 kN.
2 m
A
B
d d
P
Fig. P10.71 	b 	d
P
Fig. P10.72
A
B
100 mm
24 mm
24 mm
24 mm
P
Fig. P10.73
10.72 An 18-kip centric load is applied to a rectangular sawn lumber col-
umn of 22-ft effective length. Using lumber for which the adjusted
allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain is σC = 1050 psi
and the adjusted modulus is E = 440 × 103 psi, determine the small-
est cross section that can be used. Use b = 2d.
10.73 A glued laminated column of 3-m effective length is to be made
from boards of 24 × 100-mm cross section. Knowing that for the
grade of wood used, E = 11 GPa and the adjusted allowable stress
for compression parallel to the grain is σC = 9 MPa, determine the
number of boards that must be used to support the centric load
shown when (a) P = 34 kN, (b) P = 17 kN.

-- 750 of 897 --

736
10.74 For a rod made of aluminum alloy 6061-T6, select the smallest
square cross section that can be used if the rod is to carry a 35-kip
centric load.
A
B
18 in.
d	d
P = 35 kips
Fig. P10.74
A
B
2b 	b
0.45 m
P
Fig. P10.75
A
B
2.25 m 	90-mm outside
diameter
120 kN
Fig. P10.76
10.75 A 72-kN centric load must be supported by an aluminum column as
shown. Using the aluminum alloy 6061-T6, determine the minimum
dimension b that can be used.
10.76 An aluminum tube of 90-mm outer diameter is to carry a centric
load of 120 kN. Knowing that the stock of tubes available for use
are made of alloy 2014-T6 and with wall thicknesses in increments
of 3 mm from 6 mm to 15 mm, determine the lightest tube that can
be used.
10.77 A steel column of 4.5-m effective length must carry a centric load of
900 kN. Knowing that σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa, use Allow-
able Stress Design to select the wide-flange shape of 250-mm nom-
inal depth that should be used.

-- 751 of 897 --

737
10.78 A steel column of 17.5-ft effective length must carry a centric load
of 338 kips. Using Allowable Stress Design, select the wide-flange
shape of 12-in. nominal depth that should be used. Use σY = 50 ksi
and E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.79 A steel column of 17-ft effective length must carry a centric load of
235 kips. Using Allowable Stress Design, select the wide-flange
shape of 10-in. nominal depth that should be used. Use σY = 36 ksi
and E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.80 A centric load P must be supported by the steel bar AB. Using Allow-
able Stress Design, determine the smallest dimension d of the cross
section that can be used when (a) P = 148 kN, (b) P = 196 kN. Use
σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
10.81 A square steel tube having the cross section shown is used as a
column of 26-ft effective length to carry a centric load of 65 kips.
Knowing that the tubes available for use are made with wall thick-
nesses ranging from 1
4 in . to 3
4 in. in increments of 1
16 in., use Allow-
able Stress Design to determine the lightest tube that can be used.
Use σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
A
B
3 d 	1.4 m	d
P
Fig. P10.80
6 in.
6 in.
Fig. P10.81
10.82 Solve Prob. 10.81, assuming that the effective length of the column
is decreased to 20 ft.
10.83 Two 89 × 64-mm-steel angles are bolted together as shown for use
as a column of 2.4-m effective length to carry a centric load of
180 kN. Knowing that the angles available have thicknesses of
6.4 mm, 9.5 mm, and 12.7 mm, use Allowable Stress Design to
determine the lightest angles that can be used. Use σY = 250 MPa
and E = 200 GPa.
89 mm 	89 mm
64 mm
Fig. P10.83 64 mm 64 mm
89 mm
Fig. P10.84
10.84 Two 89 × 64-mm-steel angles are bolted together as shown for use
as a column of 2.4-m effective length to carry a centric load of
325 kN. Knowing that the angles available have thicknesses of
6.4 mm, 9.5 mm, and 12.7 mm, use Allowable Stress Design to
determine the lightest angles that can be used. Use σY = 250 MPa
and E = 200 GPa.

-- 752 of 897 --

738
*10.85 A rectangular steel tube having the cross section shown is used as
a column of 14.5-ft effective length. Knowing that σY = 36 ksi and
E = 29 × 106 psi, use Load and Resistance Factor Design to deter-
mine the largest centric live load that can be applied if the centric
dead load is 54 kips. Use a dead load factor γD = 1.2, a live load
factor γL = 1.6, and the resistance factor ϕ = 0.90.
7 in.
5 in.
in.	t = 5
16
Fig. P10.85
6 in.
6 in.
Fig. P10.88
*10.86 A column with a 5.8-m effective length supports a centric load,
with ratio of dead to live load equal to 1.35. The dead load factor
γD = 1.2, the live load factor γL = 1.6, and the resistance factor
ϕ = 0.90. Use Load and Resistance Factor Design to determine
the allowable centric dead and live loads if the column is made of
the following rolled-steel shape: (a) W250 × 67, (b) W360 × 101.
Use σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
*10.87 A steel column of 5.5-m effective length must carry a centric dead
load of 310 kN and a centric live load of 375 kN. Knowing that
σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa, use Load and Resistance Factor
Design to select the wide-flange shape of 310-mm nominal depth
that should be used. The dead load factor γD = 1.2, the live load
factor γL = 1.6, and the resistance factor ϕ = 0.90.
*10.88 The steel tube having the cross section shown is used as a column
of 15-ft effective length to carry a centric dead load of 51 kips and
a centric live load of 58 kips. Knowing that the tubes available for
use are made with wall thicknesses in increments of 1
16 in. from 3
16 in.
to 3
8 in., use Load and Resistance Factor Design to determine the
lightest tube that can be used. Use σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
The dead load factor γD = 1.2, the live load factor γL = 1.6, and the
resistance factor ϕ = 0.90.

-- 753 of 897 --

10.4 Eccentric Load Design 	739
10.4 	ECCENTRIC LOAD DESIGN
In this section, the design of columns subjected to an eccentric load is con-
sidered. The empirical formulas developed in the preceding section for col-
umns under a centric load can be modified and used when load P is applied
to the column with a known eccentricity e.
Recall from Sec. 4.7 that an eccentric axial load P applied in a plane
of symmetry can be replaced by an equivalent system consisting of a cen-
tric load P and a couple M of moment M = Pe, where e is the distance
from the line of action of the load to the longitudinal axis of the column
(Fig. 10.33). The normal stresses exerted on a transverse section of the
column are obtained by superposing the stresses due to the centric load P
and the couple M (Fig. 10.34), provided that the section is not too close
P
e
C
M = Pe
C
P
Fig. 10.33 	Eccentric axial load replaced
with an equivalent centric load and couple.
bending
Mc
I
σ
centric = P
A
	σ
Fig. 10.34 	Normal stress of an eccentrically
loaded column is the superposition of centric
axial and bending stresses.
to either end of the column and as long as the stresses do not exceed the
proportional limit of the material. The normal stress due to the eccentric
load P can be expressed as
σ = σcentric + σbending 	(10.53)
The maximum compressive stress in the column is
σmax = P
A + Mc
I (10.54)
In a properly designed column, the maximum stress given in Eq. (10.54)
should not exceed the allowable stress for the column. Two alternative
approaches can be used to satisfy this requirement: the allowable-stress
method and the interaction method.
Allowable-Stress Method. 	This method is based on the assumption that
the allowable stress for an eccentrically loaded column is the same as if the
column were centrically loaded. Therefore, σmax ≤ σall, where σall is the allow-
able stress under a centric load. Substituting for σmax from Eq. (10.54) gives
P
A + Mc
I ≤ σall 	(10.55)
The allowable stress is determined using the same equations in Sec. 10.3. For
a given material, these equations express σall as a function of the slenderness
ratio of the column. Engineering codes require that the largest value of the
slenderness ratio of the column be used to determine the allowable stress,
whether it corresponds to the actual plane of bending or not. This requirement
sometimes results in an overly conservative design.

-- 754 of 897 --

740 	Columns
Interaction Method. 	Recall that the allowable stress for a column sub-
jected to a centric load (Fig. 10.36a) is generally smaller than the allowable
stress for a column in pure bending (Fig. 10.36b), since it takes into account
the possibility of buckling. Therefore, when the allowable-stress method is
used to design an eccentrically loaded column such that the sum of the stresses
due to the centric load P and the bending couple M (Fig. 10.36c) does not
exceed the allowable stress for a centrically loaded column, the resulting
design is often overly conservative. An improved method of design can be
developed by rewriting Eq. (10.55) in the form
P∕A
σall
+ Mc∕I
σall
≤ 1 	(10.56)
and substituting for σall in the first and second terms the allowable stresses,
that correspond, respectively, to the allowable stresses obtained for the centric
load of Fig. 10.36a and the pure bending of Fig. 10.36b. Thus,
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ Mc ∕ I
(σall ) bending
≤ 1 	(10.57)
This is known as an interaction formula.
Concept Application 10.4
A column with a 2-in.-square cross section and 28-in. effective length is made
of the aluminum alloy 2014-T6 (Fig. 10.35). Using the allowable-stress
method, determine the maximum load P that can be safely supported with an
eccentricity of 0.8 in.
Compute the radius of gyration r using the given data:
A = (2 in.) 2 = 4 in2 	I = 1
12 (2 in.) 4 = 1.333 in4
r = √
I
A = √
1.333 in4
4 in2 	= 0.5774 in.
Next, compute L∕r = (28 in.)∕(0.5774 in.) = 48.50.
Since L∕r is between 17.0 and 52.7, use Eq. (10.47a) to determine the
allowable stress for the aluminum column subjected to a centric load.
σall = [39.7 − 0.465(48.5) + 0.00121(48.5) 2 ] = 19.99 ksi
Now use Eq. (10.55) with M = Pe and c = 1
2 (2 in.) = 1 in. to determine
the allowable load:
P
4 in2 + P(0.8 in.)(1 in.)
1.333 in4 	≤ 19.99 ksi
P ≤ 23.5 kips
The maximum load that can be safely applied is P = 23.5 kips.
e
2 in.
2 in.
28 in.
A
B
P
Fig. 10.35 	Column subjected to eccentric
axial load.
(a)
P'
P
(b)
M'
M
(c)
M'
P'
P
M
Fig. 10.36 	Column subjected to
(a) centric axial load, (b) pure bending,
(c) eccentric load.

-- 755 of 897 --

10.4 Eccentric Load Design 	741
When M = 0, the use of Eq. (10.57) results in the design of a centrically
loaded column by the method of Sec. 10.3. On the other hand, when P = 0,
this equation results in the design of a beam in pure bending by the method
of Sec. 5.3. When P and M are both different from zero, the interaction for-
mula results in a design that takes into account the capacity of the member
to resist bending as well as axial loading. In all cases, (σall)centric is determined
by using the largest slenderness ratio of the column, regardless of the plane
in which bending takes place.†
†This procedure is required by all major codes for the design of steel, aluminum, and timber
compression members. In addition, many specifications call for the use of an additional
factor in the second term of Eq. (10.57). This factor takes into account the additional stresses
resulting from the deflection of the column due to bending.
Concept Application 10.5
Use the interaction method to determine the maximum load P that can be
safely supported by the column of Concept Application 10.4 with an eccen-
tricity of 0.8 in. The allowable stress in bending is 24 ksi.
The value of (σall)centric has been determined and thus
(σall ) centric = 19.99 ksi 	(σall ) bending = 24 ksi
Substituting these values into Eq. (10.57),
P∕A
19.99 ksi + Mc∕I
24 ksi ≤ 1.0
Use the numerical data from Concept Application 10.4 to write
P∕4
19.99 ksi + P(0.8)(1.0)∕1.333
24 ksi ≤ 1.0
P ≤ 26.7 kips
The maximum load that can be safely applied is P = 26.7 kips.
When the eccentric load P is not applied in a plane of symmetry, it
causes bending about both of the principal axes of the cross section of the
column. The eccentric load P then can be replaced by a centric load P and
two couples Mx and Mz, as shown in Fig. 10.37. The interaction formula to
be used is
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ ∣ Mx ∣ zmax∕Ix
(σall ) bending
+ ∣ Mz ∣ xmax∕Iz
(σall ) bending
≤ 1 	(10.58)
C
y
z
Mz
Mx
C
x
P
P
Fig. 10.37 	Equivalent centric load and couples
for an eccentric axial load causing biaxial bending.

-- 756 of 897 --

742 	Columns
Sample Problem 10.5
Using the Allowable Stress Design method, determine the largest load P
that can be safely carried by a W310 × 74 steel column of 4.5-m effective
length. Use E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa.
y
x
C
W310 × 74
A = 9420 mm2
rx = 132 mm
Sx = 1050 × 10 3 mm3
ry = 49.8 mm
STRATEGY: 	Determine the allowable centric stress for the column, using
the governing Allowable Stress Design equation for steel, Eq. (10.38) or
Eq. (10.40) with Eq. (10.42). Then use Eq. (10.55) to calculate the load P.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
The largest slenderness ratio of the column is L∕ry = (4.5 m)∕
(0.0498 m) = 90.4. Using Eq. (10.41) with E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa,
the slenderness ratio at the junction between the two equations for σcr
is L∕r = 133.2. Thus, Eqs. (10.38) and (10.39) are used, and
σcr = 162.2 MPa. Using Eq. (10.42), the allowable stress is
(σall ) centric = 162.2∕1.67 = 97.1 MPa
For the given column, replacing the eccentric loading with a centric force-
couple system acting at the centroid (Fig. 1), we write
P
A = P
9.42 × 10−3 m2
Mc
I = M
S = P(0.200 m)
1.050 × 10−3 m3
Substituting into Eq. (10.55), we obtain
P
A + Mc
I ≤ σall
P
9.42 × 10−3 m2 + P(0.200 m)
1.050 × 10−3 m3 ≤ 97.1 MPa 	P ≤ 327 kN
The largest allowable load P is 	P = 327 kN ↓ 	◂
200 mm
C
P
200 mm
C 	C
M = P(0.200 m)
P	P
Fig. 1 	Eccentric loading replaced by
centric force-couple system acting at
column’s centroid.

-- 757 of 897 --

10.4 Eccentric Load Design 	743
Sample Problem 10.6
Using the interaction method, solve Sample Prob. 10.5. Assume
(σall)bending = 150 MPa.
STRATEGY: 	Use the allowable centric stress found in Sample Prob. 10.5
to calculate the load P.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Using Eq. (10.57),
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ Mc∕I
(σall ) bending
≤ 1
Substituting the allowable bending stress and the allowable centric stress
found in Sample Prob. 10.5, as well as the other given data, we obtain
P∕(9.42 × 10−3 m2 )
97.1 × 106 Pa + P(0.200 m)∕(1.050 × 10−3 m3 )
150 × 106 Pa ≤ 1
P ≤ 423 kN
The largest allowable load P is 	P = 423 kN ↓ 	◂
Sample Problem 10.7
A steel column with an effective length of 16 ft is loaded eccentrically as
shown. Using the interaction method, select the wide-flange shape of 8-in.
nominal depth that should be used. Assume E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 36 ksi,
and use an allowable stress in bending of 22 ksi.
STRATEGY: 	It is necessary to select the lightest column that satisfies
Eq. (l0.57). This involves a trial-and-error process, which can be shortened if
the first 8-in. wide-flange shape selected is close to the final solution. This is
done by using the allowable-stress method, Eq. (10.55), with an approximate
allowable stress.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
So that we can select a trial section, we use the allowable-stress method with
σall = 22 ksi and write
σall = P
A + Mc
Ix
= P
A + Mc
Ar2
x
(1)
C
5 in.
P = 85 kips
(continued)

-- 758 of 897 --

744 	Columns
From Appendix E, we observe that for shapes of 8-in. nominal depth
c ≈ 4 in. and r x ≈ 3.5 in. Using Fig. 1 and substituting into Eq. (1),
22 ksi = 85 kips
A + (425 kip·in.)(4 in.)
A(3.5 in.) 2 	A ≈ 10.2 in2
For a first trial shape, select W8 × 35.
Trial 1: W8 × 35 (Fig. 2). 	The allowable stresses are
Allowable Bending Stress: 	(see data) 	(σall ) bending = 22 ksi
Allowable Concentric Stress: 	The largest slenderness ratio of
the column is L∕ry = (192 in.)∕(2.03 in.) = 94.6. Using Eq. (10.41) with
E = 29 × 106 psi and σY = 36 ksi, the slenderness ratio at the junction
between the two equations for σcr is L∕r = 133.7. Thus, use Eqs. (10.38)
and (10.39) and find σcr = 22.5 ksi. Using Eq. (10.42), the allowable
stress is
(σall ) centric = 22.5∕1.67 = 13.46 ksi
For the W8 × 35 trial shape,
P
A = 85 kips
10.3 in2 = 8.25 ksi Mc
I = M
Sx
= 425 kip·in.
31.2 in3 	= 13.62 ksi
With this data, the left-hand member of Eq. (10.57) is
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ Mc∕I
(σall ) bending
= 8.25 ksi
13.46 ksi + 13.62 ksi
22 ksi = 1.232
Since 1.232 > 1.000, the requirement expressed by the interaction formula
is not satisfied. Select a larger trial shape.
Trial 2: W8 × 48 (Fig. 3). 	Following the procedure used in trial 1 gives
L
r y
= 192 in.
2.08 in. = 92.3 	(σall ) centric = 13.76 ksi
P
A = 85 kips
14.1 in2 = 6.03 ksi Mc
I = M
Sx
= 425 kip·in.
43.2 in3 	= 9.84 ksi
Substituting into Eq. (10.57) gives
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ Mc∕I
(σall ) bending
= 6.03 ksi
13.76 ksi + 9.82 ksi
22 ksi = 0.885 < 1.000
The W8 × 48 shape is satisfactory but may be unnecessarily large.
Trial 3: W8 × 40 (Fig. 4). 	Following the same procedure, the interac-
tion formula is not satisfied.
Selection of Shape. 	The shape to be used is 	W8 × 48 	◂
5 in.
P = 85 kips
C
z
x
y
P = 85 kips
M = (85 kips)(5 in.)
= 425 kip·in.
C
z
x
y
Fig. 1 	Eccentric loading replaced by
equivalent force-couple at column’s centroid.
y
x	C
W8 × 35
A = 10.3 in 2
rx = 3.51 in.
r y = 2.03 in.
Sx = 31.2 in3
L = 16 ft = 192 in.
Fig. 2 	Section properties for W8 × 35.
y
x	C
W8 × 48
A = 14.1 in 2
rx = 3.61 in.
r y = 2.08 in.
Sx = 43.2 in3
L = 16 ft = 192 in.
Fig. 3 	Section properties for
W8 × 48.
y
x	C
W8 × 40
A = 11.7 in 2
rx = 3.53 in.
r y = 2.04 in.
Sx = 35.5 in3
L = 16 ft = 192 in.
Fig. 4 	Section properties for
W8 × 40.

-- 759 of 897 --

745
Problems
10.89 A steel compression member of 2.75-m effective length supports an
eccentric load as shown. Using the allowable-stress method and
assuming e = 40 mm, determine the maximum allowable load P.
Use σY = 250 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
40 mm
D
P
C
S130 × 15
Fig. P10.89
e
x
y
z
C D
7.5 in.
5.0 in.
P
Fig. P10.91
Fig. P10.93
e
152 mm
152 mm
15 mm
5.5 m
A
B
P
10.90 Solve Prob. 10.89, using e = 60 mm.
10.91 A sawn-lumber column of 5.0 × 7.5-in. cross section has an effective
length of 8.5 ft. The grade of wood used has an adjusted allowable
stress for compression parallel to the grain σC = 1180 psi and an
adjusted modulus E = 440 × 103 psi. Using the allowable-stress
method, determine the largest eccentric load P that can be applied
when (a) e = 0.5 in., (b) e = 1.0 in.
10.92 Solve Prob. 10.91 using the interaction method and an allowable
stress in bending of 1300 psi.
10.93 A column of 5.5-m effective length is made of the aluminum alloy
2014-T6 for which the allowable stress in bending is 220 MPa. Using
the interaction method, determine the allowable load P, knowing that
the eccentricity is (a) e = 0, (b) e = 40 mm.
10.94 Solve Prob. 10.93, assuming that the effective length of the column
is 2.8 m.

-- 760 of 897 --

746
10.95 A column of 14-ft effective length consists of a section of steel tubing
having the cross section shown. Using the allowable-stress method,
determine the maximum allowable eccentricity e if (a) P = 55 kips,
(b) P = 35 kips. Use σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
e
4 in.
4 in.
3
8 in.
14 ft
A
B
P
Fig. P10.95
P = 85 kN
C
D
z
y
240 mm
180 mm
x
25 mm
Fig. P10.99
L
A
B
D
P
4 in.
3 in. 	3 in.
in.	3
16
Fig. P10.97
10.96 Solve Prob. 10.95, assuming that the effective length of the column
is increased to 18 ft and that (a) P = 28 kips, (b) P = 18 kips.
10.97 Two L4 × 3 × 3
8 -in. steel angles are welded together to form the
column AB. An axial load P of magnitude 14 kips is applied at point D.
Using the allowable-stress method, determine the largest allowable
length L. Assume σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.98 Solve Prob. 10.97 using the interaction method with P = 18 kips and
an allowable stress in bending of 22 ksi.
10.99 A rectangular column is made of a grade of sawn wood that has
an adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain
σC = 8.3 MPa and an adjusted modulus of elasticity E = 11.1 GPa.
Using the allowable-stress method, determine the largest allowable
effective length L that can be used.
10.100 Solve Prob. 10.99, assuming that P = 105 kN.

-- 761 of 897 --

747
10.101 An eccentric load P = 56 kN is applied at a point 17 mm from the
geometric axis of a 50-mm-diameter rod made of the aluminum alloy
6061-T6. Using the interaction method and an allowable stress in
bending of 145 MPa, determine the largest allowable effective length L
that can be used.
P = 56 kN
17 mm
50-mm diameter
L
A
B
Fig. P10.101
1.5 m
d 	d
P = 62 kN
A
D
B
Fig. P10.103
2.2 m
80-mm outer
diameter
A
B
e
e = 20 mm P
Fig. P10.105
10.102 Solve Prob. 10.101, assuming that the aluminum alloy used is 2014-T6
and that the allowable stress in bending is 180 MPa.
10.103 A 62-kN vertical load P is applied at the midpoint of one edge of
the square cross section of the steel compression member AB, which
is free at its top A and fixed at its base B. Knowing that for the grade
of steel used σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa, and using the allowable-
stress method, determine the smallest allowable dimension d.
10.104 Solve Prob. 10.103, assuming that the vertical load P is applied at
the corner of the cross section.
10.105 A steel tube of 80-mm outer diameter is to carry a 93-kN load P
with an eccentricity of 20 mm. The tubes available for use are made
with wall thicknesses in increments of 3 mm from 6 mm to 15 mm.
Using the allowable-stress method, determine the lightest tube that
can be used. Assume E = 200 GPa and σY = 250 MPa.
10.106 Solve Prob. 10.105, using the interaction method with P = 165 kN,
e = 15 mm, and an allowable stress in bending of 150 MPa.

-- 762 of 897 --

748
10.107 A sawn lumber column of rectangular cross section has a 2.2-m
effective length and supports a 41-kN load as shown. The sizes avail-
able for use have b equal to 90 mm, 140 mm, 190 mm, and 240 mm.
The grade of wood has an adjusted allowable stress for compression
parallel to the grain σC = 8.1 MPa and an adjusted modulus E = 8.3 GPa.
Using the allowable-stress method, determine the lightest section that
can be used.
41 kN
D
C
190 mm
e = 80 mm
b
Fig. P10.107
d
C
D
P = 32 kips
e
2.25 in.
Fig. P10.109
e = 0.6 in.
e
3-in. outside
diameter
B
A
6 ft
P = 10 kips
Fig. P10.111
10.108 Solve Prob. 10.107, assuming that e = 40 mm.
10.109 A compression member of rectangular cross section has an effective
length of 36 in. and is made of the aluminum alloy 2014-T6 for
which the allowable stress in bending is 24 ksi. Using the interaction
method, determine the smallest dimension d of the cross section that
can be used when e = 0.4 in.
10.110 Solve Prob. 10.109, assuming that e = 0.2 in.
10.111 An aluminum tube of 3-in. outside diameter is to carry a load of
10 kips having an eccentricity e = 0.6 in. Knowing that the stock of
tubes available for use are made of alloy 2014-T6 and have wall
thicknesses in increments of 1
16 in. up to 1
2 in., determine the lightest
tube that can be used. Use the allowable-stress method.
10.112 Solve Prob. 10.111, using the interaction method of design with an
allowable stress in bending of 25 ksi.

-- 763 of 897 --

749
10.113 A steel column having a 24-ft effective length is loaded eccentrically
as shown. Using the allowable-stress method, select the wide-flange
shape of 14-in. nominal depth that should be used. Use σY = 36 ksi
and E = 29 × 106 psi.
P = 120 kips
8 in.
C D
Fig. P10.113
52 mm
C
	D
P
Fig. P10.115
C
y
x
z
ex = 70 mm
P
D
Fig. P10.116
10.114 Solve Prob. 10.113 using the interaction method, assuming that
σY = 50 ksi and the allowable stress in bending is 30 ksi.
10.115 A steel column of 6.3-m effective length must carry a load of 360 kN
with an eccentricity of 52 mm as shown. Using the interaction
method, select the wide-flange shape of 310-mm nominal depth that
should be used. Use E = 200 GPa, σY = 160 MPa in bending.
10.116 A steel column of 7.2-m effective length is to support an 83-kN
eccentric load P at a point D, located on the x axis as shown.
Using the allowable-stress method, select the wide-flange shape
of 250-mm nominal depth that should be used. Use E = 200 GPa
and σY = 250 MPa.

-- 764 of 897 --

750
Critical Load
The design and analysis of columns (i.e., prismatic members supporting
axial loads) is based on the determination of the critical load. Two equi-
librium positions of the column model are possible: the original position
with zero transverse deflections and a second position involving deflec-
tions that could be quite large. The first equilibrium position is unstable
for P > Pcr and stable for P < Pcr , since in the latter case it was the only
possible equilibrium position.
We considered a pin-ended column of length L and constant flexural
rigidity EI subjected to an axial centric load P. Assuming that the column
buckled (Fig. 10.38), the bending moment at point Q is equal to −Py. Thus,
d 2y
dx 2 = M
EI = − P
EI y 	(10.4)
Euler’s Formula
Solving this differential equation, subject to the boundary conditions corre-
sponding to a pin-ended column, we determined the smallest load P for which
buckling can take place. This load, known as the critical load and denoted by
Pcr, is given by Euler’s formula:
Pcr = π 2EI
L2 	(10.11a)
where L is the length of the column. For this or any larger load, the equilib-
rium of the column is unstable, and transverse deflections will occur.
Slenderness Ratio
Denoting the cross-sectional area of the column by A and its radius of gyration
by r, the critical stress σcr corresponding to the critical load Pcr is
σcr = π2E
(L∕r)2 	(10.13a)
The quantity L∕r is the slenderness ratio. The critical stress σcr is plotted as
a function of L∕r in Fig. 10.39. Since the analysis was based on stresses
remaining below the yield strength of the material, the column will fail by
yielding when σcr > σY.
Effective Length
The critical load of columns with various end conditions is written as
Pcr = π 2EI
L2
e
(10.11b)
where Le is the effective length of the column, i.e., the length of an equivalent
pin-ended column. The effective lengths of several columns with various end
conditions were calculated and shown in Fig. 10.18 in Sec. 10.1B.
Review and Summary
L
Q 	Q
B
A A
x
y
y
x
x
y
P'
P'
M
y
[ x = 0, y = 0]
[ x = L, y = 0]
(a) 	(b)
P 	P
Fig. 10.38 	Free-body diagrams of (a) buckled
column and (b) portion AQ.
100
0 	100
	89 	200
200
250
300
(MPa)
Y = 250 MPa
E = 200 GPa
2E
(L/r) 2
L/r
cr =
σ
σ
σ 	π
Fig. 10.39 	Plot of critical stress.

-- 765 of 897 --

751
Eccentric Axial Load
For a pin-ended column subjected to a load P applied with an eccentricity e,
the load can be replaced with a centric axial load and a couple of moment
MA = Pe (Fig. 10.40). The maximum transverse deflection is
ymax = e[sec(√
P
EI
L
2) − 1] (10.28)
Secant Formula
The maximum stress in a column supporting an eccentric axial load can be
found using the secant formula:
P
A = σmax
1 + ec
r2 sec(
1
2√
P
EA
L e
r )
(10.36)
This equation can be solved for the force per unit area P∕A, which causes a
specified maximum stress σmax in a pin-ended or other column of effective
slenderness ratio Le∕r.
Design of Real Columns
Since imperfections exist in all columns, the design of real columns is done
with empirical formulas based on laboratory tests, set forth in specifications
and codes issued by professional organizations. For centrically loaded col-
umns made of steel, aluminum, or wood, design is based on equations for the
allowable stress as a function of the slenderness ratio L∕r. For structural steel,
the Load and Resistance Factor Design method also can be used.
Design of Eccentrically Loaded Columns
Two methods can be used for the design of columns under an eccentric load.
The first method is the allowable-stress method. This conservative method
assumes that the allowable stress is the same as if the column were centrically
loaded. The allowable-stress method requires that the following inequality to
be satisfied:
P
A + Mc
I ≤ σall 	(10.55)
The second method is the interaction method, which is the basis of most
modern specifications. In this method, the allowable stress for a centrically
loaded column is used for the portion of the total stress due to the axial load,
and the allowable stress in bending is used for the stress due to bending. Thus,
the inequality to be satisfied is
P∕A
(σall ) centric
+ Mc∕I
(σall ) bending
≤ 1 	(10.57)
(a)
P
e
B
A
P'
L
A
B
P'
MB = Pe
P
MA = Pe
ymax
(b)
Fig. 10.40 	(a) Column with an eccentric load
(b) modeled as a column with an equivalent
centric force-couple load.

-- 766 of 897 --

752
Review Problems
10.117 Knowing that the spring at A is of constant k and that the bar AB is
rigid, determine the critical load Pcr.
P
k
	A
B
L
Fig. P10.117
d
d/3
(a) 	(b)
Fig. P10.118
10.118 A column of effective length L can be made by gluing together
identical planks in either of the arrangements shown. Determine the
ratio of the critical load using the arrangement a to the critical load
using the arrangement b.
Fig. P10.119
d
10.119 A single compression member of 8.2-m effective length is obtained
by connecting two C200 × 17.1 steel channels with lacing bars as
shown. Knowing that the factor of safety is 1.85, determine the
allowable centric load for the member. Use E = 200 GPa and
d = 100 mm.

-- 767 of 897 --

753
10.120 (a) Considering only buckling in the plane of the structure shown
and using Euler’s formula, determine the value of θ between 0 and
90° for which the allowable magnitude of the load P is maximum.
(b) Determine the corresponding maximum value of P knowing that
a factor of safety of 3.2 is required. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
10.121 Member AB consists of a single C130 × 10.4 steel channel of
length 2.5 m. Knowing that the pins A and B pass through the
centroid of the cross section of the channel, determine the factor
of safety for the load shown with respect to buckling in the plane
of the figure when θ = 30°. Use E = 200 GPa.
Fig. P10.120
P
A
C
B
-in. diameter	3
4
-in. diameter	5
8
3 ft
2 ft
θ
C
B
A 	6.8 kN
2.5 m
θ
Fig. P10.121 C
B
A
y
z x
20 ft
0.6 in.
75 kips
75 kips
W8 × 35
Fig. P10.122
10.122 The line of action of the 75-kip axial load is parallel to the geomet-
ric axis of the column AB and intersects the x axis at x = 0.6 in.
Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the horizontal deflection of
the midpoint C of the column, (b) the maximum stress in the column.
10.123 Supports A and B of the pin-ended column shown are at a fixed
distance L from each other. Knowing that at a temperature T0 the
force in the column is zero and that buckling occurs when the tem-
perature is T1 = T0 + ΔT, express ΔT in terms of b, L, and the
coefficient of thermal expansion α.
A
B
L
b	b
Fig. P10.123
y
C 	x
A = 13.75 × 103 mm2
I x = 26.0 × 106 mm4
Iy = 141.0 × 106 mm4
Fig. P10.124
10.124 A column is made from half of a W360 × 216 rolled-steel shape,
with the geometric properties as shown. Using the Allowable
Stress Design method, determine the allowable centric load if
the effective length of the column is (a) 4.0 m, (b) 6.5 m. Use
σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa.

-- 768 of 897 --

754
10.125 The glued laminated column shown is made from four planks, each
of 38 × 190-mm cross section. Knowing that for the grade of wood
used the adjusted allowable stress for compression parallel to the grain
is σC = 10 MPa and E = 12 GPa, determine the maximum allowable
centric load if the effective length of the column is (a) 7 m, (b) 3 m.
10.126 A column of 4.6-m effective length must carry a centric load of
525 kN. Knowing that σY = 345 MPa and E = 200 GPa, use allow-
able stress design to select the wide-flange shape of 200-mm nom-
inal depth that should be used.
10.127 A steel compression member of 9-ft effective length supports an
eccentric load as shown. Using the allowable-stress method, deter-
mine the maximum allowable eccentricity e if (a) P = 30 kips,
(b) P = 18 kips. Use σY = 36 ksi and E = 29 × 106 psi.
190 mm
38 mm
38 mm
38 mm
38 mm
Fig. P10.125
W4 × 13
e
C
D
P
Fig. P10.127
22 mm
60-mm diameter
1.2 m
A
B
P
Fig. P10.128
10.128 An eccentric load is applied at a point 22 mm from the geometric
axis of a 60-mm-diameter rod made of a steel for which σY = 250 MPa
and E = 200 GPa. Using the allowable-stress method, determine the
allowable load P.

-- 769 of 897 --

755
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
10.C1 A solid steel rod having an effective length of 500 mm is to be used
as a compression strut to carry a centric load P. For the grade of steel
used, E = 200 GPa and σY = 245 MPa. Knowing that a factor of safety
of 2.8 is required and using Euler’s formula, write a computer program
and use it to calculate the allowable centric load Pall for values of the
radius of the rod from 6 mm to 24 mm, using 2-mm increments.
10.C2 An aluminum bar is fixed at end A and supported at end B so that
it is free to rotate about a horizontal axis through the pin. Rotation
about a vertical axis at end B is prevented by the brackets. Knowing
that E = 10.1 × 106 psi, use Euler’s formula with a factor of safety
of 2.5 to determine the allowable centric load P for values of b from
0.75 in. to 1.5 in., using 0.125-in. increments.
Computer Problems
10.C3 The pin-ended members AB and BC consist of sections of aluminum
pipe of 120-mm outer diameter and 10-mm wall thickness. Knowing that
a factor of safety of 3.5 is required, determine the mass m of the largest
block that can be supported by the cable arrangement shown for values
of h from 4 m to 8 m, using 0.25-m increments. Use E = 70 GPa and
consider only buckling in the plane of the structure.
A b
1.5 in.
6 ft
B
P	Fig. C10.C2
h
D
m
3 m
4 m
3 m
C
A
B
Fig. C10.C3

-- 770 of 897 --

756
10.C4 An axial load P is applied at a point located on the x axis at a dis-
tance e = 0.5 in. from the geometric axis of the W8 × 40 rolled-steel
column AB. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, write a computer program and
use it to calculate for values of P from 25 to 75 kips, using 5-kip
increments, (a) the horizontal deflection at the midpoint C, (b) the
maximum stress in the column.
W8 × 40
C
B
A
y
z
18.4 ft
e
P'
P
x
Fig. C10.C4
10.C5 A column of effective length L is made from a rolled-steel shape
and carries a centric axial load P. The yield strength for the grade
of steel used is denoted by σY, the modulus of elasticity by E, the
cross-sectional area of the selected shape by A, and its smallest
radius of gyration by r. Using the AISC design formulas for Allow-
able Stress Design, write a computer program that can be used
with either SI or U.S. customary units to determine the allowable
load P. Use this program to solve (a) Prob. 10.57, (b) Prob. 10.58,
(c) Prob. 10.124.
10.C6 A column of effective length L is made from a rolled-steel shape and
is loaded eccentrically as shown. The yield strength of the grade of
steel used is denoted by σY, the allowable stress in bending by σall,
the modulus of elasticity by E, the cross-sectional area of the selected
shape by A, and its smallest radius of gyration by r. Write a computer
program that can be used with either SI or U.S. customary units to
determine the allowable load P, using either the allowable-stress
method or the interaction method. Use this program to check the
given answer for (a) Prob. 10.113, (b) Prob. 10.114.
C
z
D
y
x
ex
e y
P
Fig. C10.C6

-- 771 of 897 --



-- 772 of 897 --



-- 773 of 897 --

©Corbis Super/Alamy Stock Photo
Energy Methods
11
When the diver jumps on the board, the potential energy due to his
elevation above the board is converted into strain energy as the
board bends.
Learning Objectives
In this chapter, we will:
• Compute the strain energy due to axial, bending, and torsion
loading.
• Determine the effect of impact loading on members.
• Define the work done by a force or couple.
• Determine displacements from a single load using the work-
energy method.
• Apply Castigliano’s theorem to determine displacements due to
multiple loads.
• Solve statically indeterminate problems using Castigliano’s
theorem.

-- 774 of 897 --

760 	Energy Methods
Introduction
In the previous chapter we were concerned with the relations existing between
forces and deformations under various loading conditions. Our analysis was
based on two fundamental concepts, the concept of stress (Chap. 1) and the
concept of strain (Chap. 2). A third important concept, the concept of strain
energy, will now be introduced.
The strain energy of a member is the increase in internal energy asso-
ciated with the deformation of the member. The strain energy is equal to the
work done by a slowly increasing load applied to the member. The strain-
energy density of a material is the strain energy per unit volume; this is equal
to the area under the stress-strain diagram of the material (Sec. 11.1B). From
the stress-strain diagram of a material, two additional properties are the mod-
ulus of toughness and the modulus of resilience of the material.
In Sec. 11.2 the elastic strain energy associated with normal stresses is
discussed for members under axial loading and in bending. The elastic strain
energy associated with shearing stresses (such as in torsional loadings of
shafts and in transversely loaded beams) is discussed. Strain energy for a
general state of stress is considered in Sec. 11.3, where the maximum-
distortion-energy criterion for yielding is derived.
The effect of impact loading on members is considered in Sec. 11.4.
The maximum stress and the maximum deflection caused by a moving mass
impacting a member are calculated. Properties that increase the ability of a
structure to withstand impact loads effectively are discussed in Sec. 11.4B.
In Sec. 11.5A the elastic strain of a member subjected to a single con-
centrated load is calculated, and in Sec. 11.5B the deflection at the point of
application of a single load is determined.
The last portion of the chapter is devoted to the strain energy of struc-
tures subjected to multiple loads (Sec. 11.6). Castigliano’s theorem is derived
(Sec. 11.7) and used (Sec. 11.8) to determine the deflection at a given point
of a structure subjected to several loads. Indeterminate structures are analyzed
using Castigliano’s theorem (Sec. 11.9).
11.1 	STRAIN ENERGY
11.1A 	Strain-Energy Concepts
Consider a rod BC with a length of L and uniform cross-sectional area A that
is attached at B to a fixed support and subjected at C to a slowly increasing
axial load P (Fig. 11.1). By plotting the magnitude of the load P against the
deformation x of the rod (Sec. 2.1), a load-deformation diagram is obtained
(Fig. 11.2) that is characteristic of rod BC.
Introduction
11.1 	STRAIN ENERGY
11.1A Strain-Energy Concepts
11.1B Strain-Energy Density
11.2 	ELASTIC STRAIN
ENERGY
11.2A Normal Stresses
11.2B Shearing Stresses
11.3 	STRAIN ENERGY FOR
A GENERAL STATE OF
STRESS
11.4 	IMPACT LOADS
11.4A Analysis
11.4B Design
11.5 	SINGLE LOADS
11.5A Energy Formulation
11.5B Deflections
*11.6 	WORK AND ENERGY
UNDER MULTIPLE
LOADS
*11.7 	CASTIGLIANO’S
THEOREM
*11.8 	DEFLECTIONS BY
CASTIGLIANO’S
THEOREM
*11.9 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE
STRUCTURES
C
C
A
L
B
B
P
x
Fig. 11.1 	Axially loaded rod.
P
O 	x
Fig. 11.2 	Load-deformation
diagram for axial loading.

-- 775 of 897 --

11.1 Strain Energy 	761
Now consider the work dU done by the load P as the rod elongates by
a small amount dx. This elementary work is equal to the product of the mag-
nitude P of the load and of the small elongation dx:
dU = P dx 	(11.1)
Note that this equation is equal to the element with an area of width dx located
under the load-deformation diagram (Fig. 11.3). The total work U done by
the load as the rod undergoes a deformation x1 is
U = ∫x1
0
P dx
and is equal to the area under the load-deformation diagram between x = 0
and x = x1.
The work done by load P as it is slowly applied to the rod results in an
increase in the internal energy, which is associated with the deformation of
the rod. This internal energy is the strain energy of the rod, and it is equal to
the work done by P.
Strain energy = U = ∫x1
0
P dx 	(11.2)
Recall that work and energy should be obtained by multiplying units of
length by units of force. So, when SI units are used, work and energy are
expressed in N·m, which is called a joule (J). When U.S. customary units are
used, work and energy are in ft·lb or in in·lb.
For a linear elastic deformation, the portion of the load-deformation
diagram involved can be represented by a straight line with equation P = kx
(Fig. 11.4). Substituting for P in Eq. (11.2) gives
U = ∫x1
0
kx dx = 1
2 kx 2
1
or
U = 1
2 P1x1 	(11.3)
where P1 is the load corresponding to the deformation x1.
Strain energy can be used to determine the effects of impact loadings
on structures or machine components. For example, a body of mass m moving
with a velocity v0 strikes the end B of a rod AB (Fig. 11.5a). Neglecting the
inertia of the rod and assuming no dissipation of energy during the impact,
the maximum strain energy Um acquired by the rod (Fig. 11.5b) is equal to
the original kinetic energy T = 1
2 mv 2
0 of the moving body. If we then deter-
mine Pm of the static load (which would have produced the same strain energy
in the rod), we can obtain σm of the largest stress occurring in the rod by
dividing Pm by the cross-sectional area.
P
P 	U = Area
O
x x	x1
dx
U = 0
= 0
T =
v0
mv
m
1
2
2
0
B	A
U = Um
= m T = 0	v = 0
B	A
(a)
(b) 	σ
σ
σ
Fig. 11.3 	Work due to load P
is equal to the area under the
load-deformation diagram.
P
P = kx
U = P1x1
x1 	x
P1
O
1
2
Fig. 11.4 	Work due to linear
elastic deformation.
Fig. 11.5 	Rod subject to impact loading.

-- 776 of 897 --

762 	Energy Methods
11.1B 	Strain-Energy Density
As noted in Sec. 2.1, the load-deformation diagram for a rod BC depends upon
the length L and the cross-sectional area A. The strain energy U defined by
Eq. (11.2), therefore, will also depend on the dimensions of the rod. To elim-
inate the effect of size and direct attention to the properties of the material,
the internal strain energy per unit volume will be considered. Dividing the
strain energy U by the volume V = AL of the rod (Fig. 11.1) and using
Eq. (11.2) gives
U
V = ∫x1
0
P
A
dx
L
Recalling that P∕A represents the normal stress σx and x∕L the normal
strain εx ,
U
V = ∫ε1
0
σ x dε x
where ε1 denotes the value of the strain corresponding to the elongation x1.
The internal strain energy per unit volume U∕V is called the strain-energy
density, denoted by u. Therefore,
Strain-energy density = u = ∫ε1
0
σ x dε x 	(11.4)
The strain-energy density u is expressed in units of energy divided by units
of volume. Thus, when SI metric units are used, the strain-energy density is
in J/m3 or its multiples kJ/m3 and MJ/m3. When U.S. customary units are used,
they are in in·lb/in3.†
Referring to Fig. 11.6, the strain-energy density u is equal to the area
under the stress-strain curve, which is measured from εx = 0 to εx = ε1. If
the material is unloaded, the stress returns to zero. However, there is a
permanent deformation represented by the strain εp , and only the part of the
strain energy per unit volume corresponding to the triangular area is recov-
ered. The remainder of the energy spent deforming the material is dissipated
in the form of heat.
The strain-energy density obtained by setting ε1 = εR in Eq. (11.4),
where εR is the strain at rupture, is called the modulus of toughness of the
material. It is equal to the area under the entire stress-strain diagram
(Fig. 11.7) and represents the energy per unit volume required for the
material to rupture. The toughness of a material is related to its ductility,
as well as its ultimate strength (Sec. 2.1B), and the capacity of a structure
O p 	1 	ε	ε	ε
σ
†Note that 1 J/m3 and 1 Pa are both equal to 1 N/m2, while 1 in·lb/in3 and 1 psi are both
equal to 1 lb/in2. Thus strain-energy density and stress are dimensionally equal and can be
expressed in the same units.
Fig. 11.6 	Strain-energy density is the area
under the stress-strain curve between εx = 0
and εx = ε1. If loaded into the plastic region,
only the energy associated with elastic
unloading is recovered.
Fig. 11.7 	Modulus of toughness is the
area under the stress-strain curve to
rupture.
O R
Modulus
of toughness 	Rupture
ε	ε
σ

-- 777 of 897 --

11.2 Elastic Strain Energy 	763
to withstand an impact load depends upon the toughness of the material
used (Photo 11.1).
If the stress σx remains within the proportional limit of the material,
Hooke’s law applies:
σ x = Eε x 	(11.5)
Substituting for σx from Eq. (11.5) into Eq. (11.4) gives
u = ∫ε1
0
Eε x dε x = Eε 1
2
2 (11.6)
or using Eq. (11.5) to express ε1 in terms of the corresponding stress σ1 gives
u = σ 1
2
2E (11.7)
The strain-energy density obtained by setting σ1 = σY in Eq. (11.7),
where σY is the yield strength, is called the modulus of resilience of the mate-
rial, and is denoted by uY. So,
uY = σ Y
2
2E (11.8)
The modulus of resilience is equal to the area under the straight-line portion
OY of the stress-strain diagram (Fig. 11.8) and represents the energy per unit
volume that the material can absorb without yielding. A structure’s ability to
withstand an impact load without being permanently deformed depends on
the resilience of the material used.
Since the modulus of toughness and the modulus of resilience represent
characteristic values of the strain-energy density of the material considered,
they are both expressed in J/m3 or its multiples if SI units are used, and in
in·lb/in3 if U.S. customary units are used.†
11.2 	ELASTIC STRAIN ENERGY
11.2A 	Normal Stresses
Since the rod considered in the preceding section was subjected to uniformly
distributed stresses σx, the strain-energy density was constant throughout the
rod and could be defined as the ratio U∕V of the strain energy U and the
volume V of the rod. In a structural element or machine part with a nonuni-
form stress distribution, the strain-energy density u can be defined by consid-
ering the strain energy of a small element of material of volume ΔV. So,
u = lim
ΔV→0
ΔU
ΔV
or
u = dU
dV (11.9)
Photo 11.1 	The railroad coupler is made of a
ductile steel that has a large modulus of
toughness. ©ArtisticPhoto/Shutterstock
†Note that the modulus of toughness and the modulus of resilience could be expressed in
the same units as stress.
Modulus
of resilience
Y
Y
Y
O
σ
σ
ε	ε
Fig. 11.8 	Modulus of resilience is the
area under the stress-strain curve to yield.

-- 778 of 897 --

764 	Energy Methods
The expression previously obtained for u (Sec. 11.1B) in terms of σx and εx
is valid, so
u = ∫εx
0
σ x dε x 	(11.10)
which allows for variations in the stress σx , the strain εx , and the strain-energy
density u from point to point.
For values of σx within the proportional limit, σx = Eεx in Eq. (11.10)
and
u = 1
2 Eε 2
x = 1
2 σ x ε x = 1
2
σ 2
x
E (11.11)
The strain energy U of a body subjected to uniaxial normal stresses can be
obtained by substituting for u from Eq. (11.11) into Eq. (11.9) and integrating
both members.
U = ∫ σ 2
x
2E dV 	(11.12)
This equation is valid only for elastic deformations and is called the elastic
strain energy of the body.
Strain Energy Under Axial Loading. 	Recall from Sec. 2.10 that when
a rod is subjected to a centric axial load, it can be assumed that the normal
stresses σx are uniformly distributed in any given cross section. Using the area
of the section A located at a distance x from end B of the rod (Fig. 11.9) and
the internal force P in that section, we write σx = P∕A. Substituting for σx
into Eq. (11.12) gives
U = ∫ P 2
2EA2 dV
or setting dV = A dx ,
U = ∫L
0
P 2
2AE dx 	(11.13)
For a rod of uniform cross section with equal and opposite forces of
magnitude P at its ends (Fig. 11.10), Eq. (11.13) yields
U = P 2L
2AE (11.14)
C
B
L
x
P
A
Fig. 11.9 	Rod with centric axial load.
P'
L
P
A
Fig. 11.10 	Prismatic rod with centric axial load.

-- 779 of 897 --

11.2 Elastic Strain Energy 	765
Concept Application 11.1
A rod consists of two portions BC and CD of the same material, same length,
but of different cross sections (Fig. 11.11). Determine the strain energy of the
rod when it is subjected to a centric axial load P, expressing the result in
terms of P, L, E, the cross-sectional area A of portion CD, and the ratio n of
the two diameters.
C
B D
P
A
Area = n2A
L	1
2
L	1
2
Fig. 11.11 	Axially loaded stepped rod.
Use Eq. (11.14) for the strain energy of each of the two portions, and
add the expressions obtained:
Un = P 2 ( 1
2 L)
2 AE + P 2 ( 1
2 L)
2(n2A)E = P 2L
4 AE (1 + 1
n2)
or
Un = 1 + n2
2n2
P 2L
2 AE (1)
Check that, for n = 1,
U1 = P 2L
2 AE
which is the same as Eq. (11.14) for a rod of length L and uniform cross
section of area A. Also note that for n > 1, Un < U1. As an example, when
n = 2, U2 = ( 5
8 )U1 . Since the maximum stress occurs in portion CD of the
rod and is equal to σmax = P∕A, then for a given allowable stress, increasing
the diameter of portion BC of the rod results in a decrease of the overall
energy-absorbing capacity. Unnecessary changes in cross-sectional area
should be avoided in the design of members subjected to loads (such as
impact loadings) where the energy-absorbing capacity of the member is
critical.

-- 780 of 897 --

766 	Energy Methods
Concept Application 11.2
A load P is supported at B by two rods of the same material and of the same
uniform cross section of area A (Fig. 11.12a). Determine the strain energy of
the system.
Using the forces FBC and FBD in members BC and BD and recalling
Eq. (11.14), the strain energy of the system is
U = F 2
BC (BC)
2 AE + F 2
BD (BD)
2 AE (1)
From Fig. 11.12a,
BC = 0.6l 	BD = 0.8l
From the free-body diagram of pin B and the corresponding force triangle
(Fig. 11.12b),
F BC = +0.6P 	F BD = −0.8P
Substituting into Eq. (1) gives
U = P 2l [(0.6) 3 + (0.8) 3 ]
2 AE = 0.364 P 2l
AE
C
D
B
l
P
3
3
4
4
(a)
B
FBC 	FBC
FBD 	FBD
P 	P
5
3
4
(b)
Fig. 11.12 	(a) Frame CBD supporting a
vertical force P. (b) Free-body diagram of
joint B and corresponding force triangle.
Strain Energy in Bending. 	Consider a beam AB subjected to a given
loading (Fig. 11.13), and let M be the bending moment at a distance x
from end A. Neglecting the effect of shear and taking into account only
the normal stresses σx = My∕I, substitute this expression into Eq. (11.12)
and write
U = ∫ σ 2
x
2E dV = ∫ M 2y2
2EI 2 dV
Setting dV = dA dx, where dA represents an element of the cross-sectional
area, and recalling that M2∕2EI2 is a function of x alone gives
U = ∫L
0
M 2
2EI 2 ( ∫y2 dA)dx
Recall that the integral within the parentheses represents the moment of iner-
tia I of the cross section about its neutral axis. Thus,
U = ∫L
0
M 2
2EI dx 	(11.15)
B	A
x
Fig. 11.13 	Transversely loaded beam.

-- 781 of 897 --

11.2 Elastic Strain Energy 	767
11.2B 	Shearing Stresses
In the previous section, we determined the internal strain energy due to normal
stresses. Similarly, when a material is subjected to plane shearing stresses τxy ,
the strain-energy density at a given point is
u = ∫γxy
0
τ xy dγ xy 	(11.16)
where γxy is the shearing strain corresponding to τxy (Fig. 11.15a). Note that
the strain-energy density u is equal to the area under the shearing-stress-strain
diagram (Fig. 11.15b).
For values of τxy within the proportional limit, τxy = Gγxy , where G is
the modulus of rigidity of the material. Substituting for τxy into Eq. (11.16)
and integrating gives
u = 1
2 Gγ 2
xy = 1
2 τ xy γ xy = τ 2
xy
2G (11.17)
The value of the strain energy U of a body subjected to plane shearing
stresses can be obtained by recalling from Sec. 11.2A that
u = dU
dV (11.9)
Substituting for u from Eq. (11.17) into Eq. (11.9) and integrating both mem-
bers gives
U = ∫ τ 2
xy
2G dV 	(11.18)
This equation defines the elastic strain energy associated with the shear defor-
mations of the body. Like the similar expression in Sec. 11.2A for uniaxial
normal stresses, it is only valid for elastic deformations.
Strain Energy in Torsion. 	Consider a shaft BC of nonuniform circular
cross section with a length of L subjected to one or several twisting couples.
Using the polar moment of inertia J of the cross section located a distance x
Concept Application 11.3
Determine the strain energy of the prismatic cantilever beam AB (Fig. 11.14),
taking into account only the effect of the normal stresses.
The bending moment at a distance x from end A is M = −Px. Substitute
this expression into Eq. (11.15) to obtain
U = ∫L
0
P 2x 2
2EI dx = P 2L3
6EI
P
A
B
L
Fig. 11.14 	Cantilever beam with load P.
(a)
O
(b)
2 	xy	–
xy
xy
xy
τ
γ
γ	π
τ
Fig. 11.15 	(a) Shearing strain
corresponding to τxy. (b) Strain-energy
density u is the area under the stress-
strain diagram.

-- 782 of 897 --

768 	Energy Methods
from B (Fig. 11.16) and the internal torque T, recall that the shearing stresses
are τxy = Tρ∕J. Substituting for τxy into Eq. (11.18),
U = ∫ τ 2
xy
2G dV = ∫ T 2ρ2
2GJ 2 dV
Set dV = dA dx, where dA is the element cross-sectional area, and observe
that T 2∕2GJ 2 is a function of x alone to obtain
U = ∫L
0
T 2
2GJ 2 ( ∫ρ2 dA)dx
Recall that the integral within the parentheses represents the polar moment of
inertia J of the cross section, giving
U = ∫L
0
T 2
2GJ dx 	(11.19)
For a shaft of uniform cross section subjected at its ends to equal and
opposite couples of magnitude T (Fig. 11.17), Eq. (11.19) yields
U = T 2L
2GJ (11.20)
C
B
L
x
T
Fig. 11.16 	Shaft subject to torque.
L
T
T'
Fig. 11.17 	Prismatic shaft subject to
torque.
Concept Application 11.4
A circular shaft consists of two portions BC and CD of the same material and
length, but of different cross sections (Fig. 11.18). Determine the strain energy
of the shaft when it is subjected to a twisting couple T at end D. Express the
results in terms of T, L, G, the polar moment of inertia J of the smaller cross
section, and the ratio n of the two diameters.
Use Eq. (11.20) to compute the strain energy of each of the two portions
of shaft, and add the expressions obtained. Note that the polar moment of
inertia of portion BC is equal to n4J giving
Un = T 2 ( 1
2L)
2GJ + T 2 ( 1
2 L)
2G(n4J) = T 2L
4GJ (1 + 1
n4)
or
Un = 1 + n4
2n4
T 2L
2GJ (1)
For n = 1,
U1 = T 2L
2GJ
which is the expression given in Eq. (11.20) for a shaft of length L and uni-
form cross section. Note that, for n > 1, Un < U1. For example, when n = 2,
U2 = ( 17
32 )U1 . Since the maximum shearing stress occurs in segment CD of the
shaft and is proportional to the torque T, increasing the diameter of segment
BC results in a decrease of the overall energy-absorbing capacity of the shaft.
1
2 L
1
2 L
C
D
T
B
diam. = nd diam. = d
Fig. 11.18 	Stepped shaft subject to
torque T.

-- 783 of 897 --

11.2 Elastic Strain Energy 	769
Strain Energy Under Transverse Loading. 	In Sec. 11.2A an equa-
tion for the strain energy of a beam subjected to a transverse loading was
obtained. However, in that expression, only the effect of the normal stresses
due to bending is taken into account and the effect of the shearing stresses is
neglected. In Concept Application 11.5, both types of stresses will be taken
into account.
Concept Application 11.5
Determine the strain energy of the rectangular cantilever beam AB (Fig. 11.19),
taking into account the effect of both normal and shearing stresses.
Recall from Concept Application 11.3 that the strain energy due to the
normal stresses σx is
Uσ = P 2L3
6EI
To determine the strain energy Uτ due to the shearing stresses τxyw, recall
Eq. (6.9) and find that, for a beam with a rectangular cross section of width
b and depth h,
τxy = 3
2
V
A (1 − y2
c2) = 3
2
P
bh (1 − y2
c2)
Substituting for τxy into Eq. (11.18),
Uτ = 1
2G (
3
2
P
bh)
2
∫(1 − y2
c2)
2
dV
or setting dV = b dy dx, and after reductions,
Uτ = 9P2
8Gbh2 ∫c
−c (1 − 2 y2
c2 + y4
c4)dy ∫L
0
dx
Performing integrations and recalling that c = h∕2,
Uτ = 9P2L
8Gbh2[y − 2
3
y3
c2 + 1
5
y5
c4 ]
+c
−c
= 3P2L
5Gbh = 3P2L
5GA
The total strain energy of the beam is
U = Uσ + Uτ = P 2L3
6EI + 3P2L
5GA
or with I∕A = h2∕12 and factoring the expression for Uσ,
U = P2L3
6EI (1 + 3Eh2
10GL2) = Uσ (1 + 3Eh2
10GL2) (1)
Recall from Sec. 2.7 that G ≥ E∕3. Considering the parenthesis, this equa-
tion is less than 1 + 0.9(h∕L)2 and the relative error is less than 0.9(h∕L)2
when the effect of shear is neglected. For a beam with a ratio h∕L less than
1
10 , the percentage error is less than 0.9%. It is therefore customary in engi-
neering practice to neglect the effect of shear to compute the strain energy
of shallow beams.
P
L
A
B
h
b
Fig. 11.19 	Rectangular cantilever
beam with load P.

-- 784 of 897 --

770 	Energy Methods
11.3 	STRAIN ENERGY FOR A
GENERAL STATE OF STRESS
In the preceding sections, we determined the strain energy of a body in a state
of uniaxial stress (Sec. 11.2A) and in a state of plane shearing stress
(Sec. 11.2B). A body in a general state of stress is characterized by the six
stress components σx, σy, σz, τxy, τyz, and τzx (Fig. 2.35). The total strain-energy
density includes all six stress components. We use the expressions given in
Eqs. (11.10) and (11.16) along with four other expressions that are obtained
through a permutation of the subscripts.
z
y
x
Q
τ yx
	τ yz
τzy 	τxy
τxz	τ zx
σy
σz
σx
Fig. 2.35 	(repeated) Positive stress
components at point Q for a general
state of stress.
In the elastic deformation of an isotropic body, each of the six stress-
strain relationships involved is linear, and the strain-energy density is
u = 1
2 (σ x ε x + σ y ε y + σ z ε z + τ xy γ xy + τ yzγ yz + τ zx γ zx) 	(11.21)
Recalling Eq. (2.29) and substituting for the strain components into
Eq. (11.21), the most general state of stress at a given point of an elastic
isotropic body is
u = 1
2E [σ 2
x + σ 2
y + σ 2
z − 2ν(σx σ y + σ y σ z + σ z σ x)]
+ 1
2G (τ 2
x y + τ 2
y z + τ 2
z x) 	(11.22)
If the principal axes at the given point are used as coordinate axes, the shear-
ing stresses become zero and Eq. (11.22) reduces to
u = 1
2E [σ 2
a + σ 2
b + σ 2
c − 2ν(σa σ b + σ b σ c + σ c σ a)] 	(11.23)
where σa, σb, and σc are the principal stresses at the given point.
Now recall from Sec. 7.5A that one criterion used to predict whether a
given state of stress causes a ductile material to yield is the maximum-
distortion-energy criterion, which is based on the energy per unit volume
associated with the distortion (or change in shape) of that material. Separating

-- 785 of 897 --

11.3 Strain Energy for a General State of Stress 	771
the strain-energy density u at a given point into two parts, uv associated with
a change in volume of the material at that point and ud associated with a
distortion of the material at the same point,
u = uv + ud 	(11.24)
To determine uv and ud, we introduce the average value σ of the prin-
cipal stresses at the point considered as
σ = σa + σ b + σ c
3 (11.25)
and set
σ a = σ + σ a′ 	σ b = σ + σ b′ 	σ c = σ + σ c′ 	(11.26)
Thus the given state of stress (Fig. 11.20a) can be obtained by superposing
the states of stress shown in Fig. 11.20b and c. The state of stress described
in Fig. 11.20b tends to change the volume of the element but not its shape,
since all of the faces of the element are subjected to the same stress σ. On
the other hand, it follows from Eqs. (11.25) and (11.26) that
σ a′ + σ b′ + σ c′ = 0 	(11.27)
This indicates that some of the stresses shown in Fig. 11.20c are tensile and
others compressive. Thus this state of stress tends to change the shape of the
element. However, it does not tend to change its volume. Recall from Eq. (2.22)
that the dilatation e (i.e., the change in volume per unit volume) caused by
this state of stress is
e = 1 − 2ν
E (σ a′ + σ b′ + σ c′)
or e = 0 in view of Eq. (11.27). Thus the portion uv of the strain-energy
density must be associated with the state of stress shown in Fig. 11.20b, while
the portion ud must be associated with the state of stress shown in Fig. 11.20c.
The portion uv of the strain-energy density corresponding to a change
in volume of the element, involving the normal stresses, is obtained by sub-
stituting σ for each of the principal stresses in Eq. (11.23). Thus,
uv = 1
2E [3σ 2 − 2ν(3σ 2 )] = 3(1 − 2ν)
2E σ 2
a
b
c
'b
' a
'c
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ 	σ	σ
σ
σ
Fig. 11.20 	(a) Element subject to multiaxial state of stress expressed as the
superposition of (b) stresses tending to cause volume change, (c) stresses
tending to cause distortion.

-- 786 of 897 --

772 	Energy Methods
or recalling Eq. (11.25),
uv = 1 − 2ν
6E (σ a + σ b + σ c) 2 	(11.28)
The portion of the strain-energy density corresponding to the distortion
of the element is found by solving Eq. (11.24) for ud and substituting for u
and uv from Eqs. (11.23) and (11.28), respectively.
ud = u − uv = 1
6E [3(σ 2
a + σ 2
b + σ 2
c ) − 6ν (σ a σ b + σ b σ c + σ c σ a)
− (1 − 2ν)(σ a + σ b + σ c) 2 ]
Expanding the square and rearranging terms,
ud = 1 + ν
6E [(σ 2
a − 2σ a σ b + σ 2
b) + (σ 2
b − 2σ b σ c + σ 2
c )
+ (σ 2
c − 2σ c σ a + σ 2
a)]
Noting that each of the parentheses inside the bracket is a perfect square, and
recalling from Eq. (2.34) that the coefficient in front of the bracket is equal
to 1∕12G, the portion ud of the strain-energy density (i.e., the distortion energy
per unit volume) is
ud = 1
12G [(σ a − σ b) 2 + (σ b − σ c) 2 + (σ c − σ a) 2 ] 	(11.29)
In plane stress, assuming that the c axis is perpendicular to the plane of stress,
σc = 0 and Eq. (11.29) reduces to
ud = 1
6G (σ a
2 − σ a σ b + σ 2
b) 	(11.30)
Considering a tensile-test specimen, at yield σa = σY, σb = 0, and
(ud)Y = σ 2
Y∕6G. The maximum-distortion-energy criterion for plane stress
indicates that a given state of stress is safe when ud < (ud)Y, or by substituting
for ud from Eq. (11.30), it is safe as long as
σ 2
a − σ a σ b + σ 2
b < σ 2
Y 	(7.26)
which is the condition in Sec. 7.5A and represented graphically by the
ellipse of Fig. 7.32. For a general state of stress, Eq. (11.29) obtained for
ud should be used. The maximum-distortion-energy criterion is then found
by the condition:
(σ a − σ b) 2 + (σ b − σ c) 2 + (σ c − σ a) 2 < 2σ 2
Y 	(11.31)
which indicates that a given state of stress is safe if the point of coordinates
σa, σb, σc is located within the surface defined by
(σ a − σ b) 2 + (σ b − σ c) 2 + (σ c − σ a) 2 = 2σ 2
Y 	(11.32)
This surface is a circular cylinder with a radius of √2∕3 σ Y and an axis of
symmetry forming equal angles with the three principal axes of stress.

-- 787 of 897 --

11.3 Strain Energy for a General State of Stress 	773
Sample Problem 11.1
During a routine manufacturing operation, rod AB must acquire an elastic
strain energy of 120 in·lb. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the required
yield strength of the steel if the factor of safety is 5 with respect to permanent
deformation.
STRATEGY: 	Use the specified factor of safety to determine the required
strain-energy density, and then use Eq. (11.8) to determine the yield strength.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Factor of Safety. 	Since a factor of safety of 5 is required, the rod should
be designed for a strain energy of
U = 5(120 in·lb) = 600 in·lb
Strain-Energy Density. 	The volume of the rod is
V = AL = π
4 (0.75 in.) 2 (60 in.) = 26.5 in3
Since the rod has a uniform cross section, the required strain-energy density is
u = U
V = 600 in·lb
26.5 in3 = 22.6 in·lb/in3
Yield Strength. 	Recall that the modulus of resilience is equal to the
strain-energy density when the maximum stress is equal to σY (Fig. 1). Using
Eq. (11.8),
u = σ 2
Y
2E
22.6 in·lb/in3 = σ 2
Y
2(29 × 106 psi) σY = 36.2 ksi 	◂
Modulus of
resilience
σ
σY
ε
Fig. 1 	The modulus of resilience equals
the strain-energy density up to yield.
REFLECT and THINK: 	Since energy loads are not linearly related to the
stresses they produce, factors of safety associated with energy loads should
be applied to the energy loads and not to the stresses.
5 ft
B 	A
P
-in. diameter	3
4

-- 788 of 897 --

774 	Energy Methods
Sample Problem 11.2
(a) Taking into account only the effect of normal stresses due to bending,
determine the strain energy of the prismatic beam AB for the loading
shown. (b) Evaluate the strain energy, knowing that the beam is a W10 × 45,
P = 40 kips, L = 12 ft, a = 3 ft, b = 9 ft, and E = 29 × 106 psi.
STRATEGY: 	Use a free-body diagram to determine the reactions, and
write equations for the moment as a function of the coordinate along the
beam. The strain energy required for part a is then determined from
Eq. (11.15). Use this with the data to numerically evaluate the strain
energy for part b.
MODELING:
Bending Moment. 	Using the free-body diagram of the entire beam (Fig. 1),
determine the reactions
RA = Pb
L ↑ 	RB = Pa
L ↑
x 	v
a 	b
D
M2	M1
M
x
A 	B
Pb
L	
RA = 	Pa
L	
RB =
P
Fig. 1 	Free-body and bending-moment
diagrams.
Using the free-body diagram in Fig. 2, the bending moment for portion AD
of the beam is
M1 = Pb
L x
x
A Pb
L	
M1 =
V1
x
Pb
L	
RA =
From A to D:
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram, taking a section
within portion AD.
A
L
a 	b
B
D
P

-- 789 of 897 --

11.3 Strain Energy for a General State of Stress 	775
Similarly using the free-body diagram in Fig. 3, the bending moment for
portion DB at a distance v from end B is
M2 = Pa
L v
v
B
V2
Pa
L	
M2 = 	v
Pa
L	
RB =
From B to D:
Fig. 3 	Free-body diagram, taking a
section within portion DB.
ANALYSIS:
a. Strain Energy. 	Since strain energy is a scalar quantity, add the strain
energy of segment AD to that of DB to obtain the total strain energy of the
beam. Using Eq. (11.15),
U = UAD + UDB
= ∫a
0
M2
1
2EI dx + ∫b
0
M2
2
2EI dv
= 1
2EI ∫a
0 (
Pb
L x)
2
dx + 1
2EI ∫b
0 (
Pa
L v)
2
dv
= 1
2EI
P 2
L2 (
b2a3
3 + a2b3
3 ) = P 2a2b2
6EIL2 (a + b)
or since (a + b) = L, 	U = P2a2b2
6EIL ◂
b. Evaluation of the Strain Energy. 	The moment of inertia of a
W10 × 45 rolled-steel shape is obtained from Appendix E, and the given data
is restated using units of kips and inches.
P = 40 kips 	L = 12 ft = 144 in.
a = 3 ft = 36 in. 	b = 9 ft = 108 in.
E = 29 × 106 psi = 29 × 103 ksi 	I = 248 in4
Substituting into the expression for U,
U = (40 kips)2 (36 in.)2 (108 in.)2
6(29 × 103 ksi)(248 in4 )(144 in.) U = 3.89 in·kips 	◂

-- 790 of 897 --

776
11.1 Determine the modulus of resilience for each of the following grades
of structural steel:
(a) ASTM A709 Grade 50: 	σY = 50 ksi
(b) ASTM A913 Grade 65: 	σY = 65 ksi
(c) ASTM A709 Grade 100: 	σY = 100 ksi
11.2 Determine the modulus of resilience for each of the following alu-
minum alloys:
(a) 1100-H14: 	E = 70 GPa 	σY = 55 MPa
(b) 2014-T6: 	E = 72 GPa 	σY = 220 MPa
(c) 6061-T6: 	E = 69 GPa 	σY = 150 MPa
11.3 Determine the modulus of resilience for each of the following metals:
(a) Stainless steel
AISI 302 (annealed): 	E = 190 GPa 	σY = 260 MPa
(b) Stainless steel
AISI 302 (cold-rolled): 	E = 190 GPa 	σY = 520 MPa
(c) Malleable cast iron: 	E = 165 GPa 	σY = 230 MPa
11.4 Determine the modulus of resilience for each of the following
alloys:
(a) Titanium: 	E = 16.5 × 106 psi 	σY = 120 ksi
(b) Magnesium: 	E = 6.5 × 106 psi 	σY = 29 ksi
(c) Cupronickel (annealed): 	E = 20 × 106 psi 	σY = 16 ksi
11.5 The stress-strain diagram shown has been drawn from data
obtained during a tensile test of a specimen of structural steel.
Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the modulus of resilience
of the steel, (b) the modulus of toughness of the steel.
0.002
0.021 	0.2 	0.25
100
(ksi)
80
60
40
20
0
σ
ε
Fig. P11.5
11.6 The stress-strain diagram shown has been drawn from data obtained
during a tensile test of an aluminum alloy. Using E = 72 GPa, deter-
mine (a) the modulus of resilience of the alloy, (b) the modulus of
toughness of the alloy.
Problems
(MPa)
600
450
300
150
0.006 0.14 	0.18
σ
ε
Fig. P11.6

-- 791 of 897 --

777
11.7 The load-deformation diagram shown has been drawn from data
obtained during a tensile test of a specimen of an aluminum
alloy. Knowing that the cross-sectional area of the specimen
was 600 mm2 and that the deformation was measured using a
400-mm gage length, determine by approximate means (a) the
modulus of resilience of the alloy, (b) the modulus of toughness
of the alloy.
400
300
200
100
2.8
50
P (kN)
(mm)
P
P'
400 mm
δ
δ
Fig. P11.7
11.8 The load-deformation diagram shown has been drawn from data
obtained during a tensile test of a 5
8 -in.-diameter rod of struc-
tural steel. Knowing that the deformation was measured using
an 18-in. gage length, determine by approximate means (a) the
modulus of resilience of the steel, (b) the modulus of toughness
of the steel.
0.025
0.36 	3.2 	4
15
20
P (kips)
(in.)
10
5 P'
18 in.
P
δ
δ
Fig. P11.8
11.9 Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine (a) the strain energy of the steel
rod ABC when P = 8 kips, (b) the corresponding strain-energy den-
sity in portions AB and BC of the rod.
P
B
C
2 ft
3 ft
A
in.	
3
4
in.
	5
8
Fig. P11.9

-- 792 of 897 --

778
11.10 Using E = 200 GPa, determine (a) the strain energy of the steel rod
ABC when P = 25 kN, (b) the corresponding strain-energy density
in portions AB and BC of the rod.
11.11 A 48-in. section of aluminum pipe of cross-sectional area 1.8 in2
rests on a fixed support at A. The 1.2-in.-diameter steel rod hangs
from a rigid bar that rests on the top of the pipe at B. Knowing that
the modulus of elasticity is 29 × 106 psi for steel and 10.1 × 106 psi
for aluminum, determine (a) the total strain energy of the system
when P = 14 kips, (b) the corresponding strain-energy density in the
pipe AB and in the rod BC.
P
B
C
A
48 in.
36 in.
Fig. P11.11
11.12 Rod AB is made of a steel for which the yield strength is σY =
450 MPa and E = 200 GPa; rod BC is made of an aluminum alloy
for which σY = 280 MPa and E = 73 GPa. Determine the maximum
strain energy that can be acquired by the composite rod ABC without
causing any permanent deformations.
11.13 A portion of a 20-mm-square stainless steel bar has been machined
to a 20-mm-diameter cylinder as shown. Knowing that the allowable
normal stress is σall = 120 MPa and E = 190 GPa, determine, for
the loading shown, the maximum strain energy that may be acquired
by the bar ABC.
P
0.6 m
0.36 m
A
B
C
Fig. P11.13
14-mm diameter
1.6 m
1.2 m
10-mm diameter
P
B
C
A
Fig. P11.12
20-mm diameter
1.2 m
0.8 m
2 m
16-mm diameter
P
B
A C
Fig. P11.10

-- 793 of 897 --

779
11.14 Rod AB is made of a steel for which the yield strength is σY = 300 MPa.
A strain energy of 15 J must be acquired by the rod when the axial
load P is applied. Using E = 190 GPa, determine the length of the
rod for which the factor of safety with respect to permanent deforma-
tion is five.
11.15 Rod ABC is made of a steel for which the yield strength is σY =
450 MPa and the modulus of elasticity is E = 200 GPa. Knowing
that a strain energy of 11.2 J must be acquired by the rod as the axial
load P is applied, determine the factor of safety of the rod with
respect to permanent deformation when a = 0.5 m.
P
a	
1.3 m
A
B
C
18-mm diameter
12-mm diameter
Fig. P11.15
11.16 Show by integration that the strain energy of the tapered rod
AB is
U = 1
4
P 2 L
E Amin
where Amin is the cross-sectional area at end B.
11.17 Solve Prob. 11.16 using the stepped rod shown as an approximation
of the tapered rod. What is the percentage error in the answer
obtained?
A B
P
1.9c 1.7c 1.5c 1.3c 1.1c
L
5
L
5
L
5
L
5
L
5
Fig. P11.17
L
8-mm diameter
A
P
B
Fig. P11.14
L B
2c
c
A
P
Fig. P11.16

-- 794 of 897 --

780
11.18 through 11.21 In the truss shown, all members are made of the
same material and have the uniform cross-sectional area indi-
cated. Determine the strain energy of the truss when the load P
is applied.
l
l
D
B
C
1
2
l	1
2
A
A P
Fig. P11.18
C
D
30°
B
A
A
P
l
Fig. P11.19
C
30°
B
l
A
A 	A
D
P
Fig. P11.20
A 	A
2A 	D	B
C
l 	l
P
l	1
2
Fig. P11.21
11.22 Each member of the truss shown is a steel pipe with the cross-
sectional area shown. Using E = 200 GPa, determine the strain
energy of the truss for the loading shown.
2000 mm 2
1500 mm 2
60 kN
180 kN
B
C D
1.2 m
0.5 m
Fig. P11.22
11.23 Each member of the truss shown is made of aluminum and has the
cross-sectional area shown. Using E = 10.5 × 106 psi, determine the
strain energy of the truss for the loading shown.
D
2.5 ft
6 ft
3 in2
2 in2
5 in2
B
C
2.5 ft
40 kips
24 kips
Fig. P11.23

-- 795 of 897 --

781
11.24 through 11.27 	Taking into account only the effect of normal
stresses, determine the strain energy of the prismatic beam AB for
the loading shown.
w
B
A
L
Fig. P11.24
A
a 	L
B
D
P
Fig. P11.25
D 	E
B	A
a 	a
L
P 	P
Fig. P11.26
B
w
A
L
Fig. P11.27
11.28 Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the strain energy due to bending
for the steel beam and loading shown. (Neglect the effect of shearing
stresses.)
11.29 Using E = 1.8 × 106 psi, determine the strain energy due to bending
for the timber beam and loading shown. (Neglect the effect of shear-
ing stresses.)
16 kip·ft
4 ft
10 ft
6 ft
3
A 	E 	B
D
in.
	1
2
9 in.
	1
2
Fig. P11.29
11.30 and 11.31 Using E = 200 GPa, determine the strain energy due to
bending for the steel beam and loading shown. (Neglect the effect
of shearing stresses.)
B
C
180 kN
A
2.4 m 	2.4 m
4.8 m
W360 × 64
Fig. P11.30
S8 × 18.4
6 ft 	3 ft
8 kips
D
B	A
Fig. P11.28
B
D 	E
80 kN
A
80 kN
W310 × 74
1.6 m 	1.6 m 	1.6 m
4.8 m
Fig. P11.31

-- 796 of 897 --

782
11.32 Assuming that the prismatic beam AB has a rectangular cross sec-
tion, show that for the given loading the maximum value of the
strain-energy density in the beam is
umax = 45
8
U
V
where U is the strain energy of the beam and V is its volume.
11.33 The aluminum rod AB (G = 26 GPa) is bonded to the brass rod BD
(G = 39 GPa). Knowing that portion CD of the brass rod is hollow
and has an inner diameter of 40 mm, determine the total strain
energy of the two rods.
400 mm
375 mm
250 mm
D
60 mm
36 mm
TA = 800 N·m 	C
B
A
Fig. P11.33
11.34 Two solid shafts are connected by the gears shown. Using G =
11.2 × 106 psi, determine the strain energy of each shaft when a
10-kip·in. torque T is applied at D.
A
2.5 in.
4 in.
2.25 in.
24 in.
16 in. 	D
C
B
T
2 in.
Fig. P11.34
11.35 Show by integration that the strain energy in the tapered rod AB is
U = 7
48
T 2 L
GJmin
where Jmin is the polar moment of inertia of the rod at end B.
w
B
A
L
Fig. P11.32
L B
2c
c
A
T
Fig. P11.35

-- 797 of 897 --

783
11.36 The state of stress shown occurs in a machine component made of
a brass for which σY = 160 MPa. Using the maximum-distortion-
energy criterion, determine the range of values of σz for which yield
does not occur.
z
75 MPa
y
x
100 MPa
20 MPa
σ z
Fig. P11.36 and P11.37
11.37 The state of stress shown occurs in a machine component made of a
brass for which σY = 160 MPa. Using the maximum-distortion-energy
criterion, determine whether yield occurs when (a) σz = +45 MPa,
(b) σz = −45 MPa.
11.38 The state of stress shown occurs in a machine component made of
a grade of steel for which σY = 65 ksi. Using the maximum-distortion-
energy criterion, determine the range of values of σy for which the
factor of safety associated with the yield strength is equal to or larger
than 2.2.
11.39 The state of stress shown occurs in a machine component made of a
grade of steel for which σY = 65 ksi. Using the maximum-distortion-
energy criterion, determine the factor of safety associated with the
yield strength when (a) σy = +16 ksi, (b) σy = −16 ksi.
11.40 Determine the strain energy of the prismatic beam AB, taking into
account the effect of both normal and shearing stresses.
*11.41 A vibration isolation support is made by bonding rod A, of
radius R1, and tube B, of inner radius R2, to a hollow rubber
cylinder. Denoting by G the modulus of rigidity of the rubber,
determine the strain energy of the hollow rubber cylinder for
the loading shown.
Q
B
A
L
(b)
A
B
R2 	R1
(a)
A
Q
Fig. P11.41
z	
x
8 ksi
14 ksi
y
yσ
Fig. P11.38 and P11.39
B
b
d	A
L
M0
Fig. P11.40

-- 798 of 897 --

784 	Energy Methods
11.4 	IMPACT LOADS
11.4A 	Analysis
Consider a rod BD with an uniform cross section that is hit at end B by a
body of mass m moving with a velocity v0 (Fig. 11.21a). As the rod deforms
under the impact (Fig. 11.21b), stresses develop within the rod and reach a
maximum value σm . After vibrating for a while, the rod comes to rest, and all
stresses disappear. The loading arising from a hit by a mass moving with a
velocity is called impact loading (Photo 11.2).
Several assumptions are made to determine the maximum value σm of
the stress at a given point of a structure subjected to an impact load.
First, the kinetic energy T = 1
2 mv 2
0 of the striking body is assumed to
be transferred entirely to the structure. Thus the strain energy Um correspond-
ing to the maximum deformation xm is
Um = 1
2 mv 2
0 	(11.33)
This assumption leads to the following requirements.
1. No energy should be dissipated during the impact.
2. The striking body should not bounce off the structure and retain part
of its energy. This, in turn, necessitates that the inertia of the structure
be negligible, compared to the inertia of the striking body.
In practice, neither of these requirements is satisfied, and only part of
the kinetic energy of the striking body is actually transferred to the structure.
Thus assuming that all of the kinetic energy of the striking body is transferred
to the structure leads to a conservative design.
The stress-strain diagram obtained from a static test of the material is
also assumed to be valid under impact loads. So, for an elastic deformation
of the structure, the maximum value of the strain energy is
Um = ∫ σ 2
m
2E dV 	(11.34)
For the uniform rod in Fig. 11.21, the maximum stress σm has the same
value throughout the rod, and Um = σ2
m V∕2E. Solving for σm and substituting
for Um from Eq. (11.33) gives
σm = √
2Um E
V = √
mv 2
0 E
V (11.35)
Note from this equation that selecting a rod with a large volume V and a low
modulus of elasticity E results in a smaller value of the maximum stress σm
for a given impact load.
In most problems, the distribution of stresses in the structure is not
uniform, and Eq. (11.35) does not apply. It is then convenient to determine
the static load Pm that produces the same strain energy as the impact load
and compute from Pm the corresponding value σm of the largest stress in the
structure. Concept Applications 11.6 and 11.7 show examples where the
distribution of stress is not uniform.
(a)
Area = A
v0
v = 0
B
B
D
D
L
(b)
m
xm
Fig. 11.21 	Rod subject to impact loading.
Photo 11.2 	Diesel power alternately lifts a
weight inside the pile driver and then propels
it downward. This delivers a large impact load
to the pile that is being driven into the ground.
©FireAtDusk/iStock/Getty Images

-- 799 of 897 --

11.4 Impact Loads 	785
Concept Application 11.6
A body of mass m moving with a velocity v0 hits the end B of the nonuniform
rod BCD (Fig. 11.22). Knowing that the diameter of segment BC is twice the
diameter of portion CD, determine the maximum value σm of the stress in the rod.
Making n = 2 in Eq. (1) from Concept Application 11.1, when rod BCD
is subjected to a static load Pm, its strain energy is
Um = 5P 2
m L
16AE (1)
where A is the cross-sectional area of segment CD. Solving Eq. (1) for Pm,
the static load that produces the same strain energy as the given impact
load is
P m = √
16
5
Um AE
L
where Um is given by Eq. (11.33). The largest stress occurs in segment CD.
Dividing Pm by the area A of that portion,
σm = P m
A = √
16
5
Um E
AL (2)
or substituting for Um from Eq. (11.33) gives
σ m = √
8
5
mv 2
0 E
AL = 1.265 √
mv 2
0 E
AL
Comparing this with the value obtained for σm in the uniform rod of
Fig. 11.21 and making V = AL in Eq. (11.35), note that the maximum stress
in the rod of variable cross section is 26.5% larger than in the lighter uni-
form rod. Thus, as in our discussion of Concept Application 11.1, increasing
the diameter of segment BC results in a decrease of the energy-absorbing
capacity of the rod.
Area = 4A
v0
B
C
L
A
D
1
2
L	1
2
Fig. 11.22 	Stepped rod impacted
by a body of mass m.
Concept Application 11.7
A block of weight W is dropped from a height h onto the free end of the
cantilever beam AB (Fig. 11.23). Determine the maximum value of the stress
in the beam.
As it falls through the distance h, the potential energy Wh of the block
is transformed into kinetic energy. As a result of the impact, the kinetic energy
is transformed into strain energy. Therefore,
Um = Wh 	(1)
(continued)
h
A
B
W
L
Fig. 11.23 	Weight W falling on
cantilever beam.

-- 800 of 897 --

786 	Energy Methods
The total distance the block drops is actually h + ym, where ym is the maximum
deflection of the end of the beam. Thus a more accurate expression for Um
(see Sample Prob. 11.3) is
Um = W(h + ym) 	(2)
However, when h ≫ ym, ym may be neglected, and thus Eq. (1) applies.
Recalling the equation for the strain energy of the cantilever beam AB
in Concept Application 11.3, which was based on neglecting the effect of
shear,
Um = P 2
m L3
6EI
Solving this equation for Pm, the static force that produces the same strain
energy in the beam is
P m = √
6Um EI
L3 	(3)
The maximum stress σm occurs at the fixed end B and is
σ m = ∣M∣c
I = Pm Lc
I
Substituting for Pm from Eq. (3),
σm = √
6Um E
L (I∕c 2 ) (4)
or recalling Eq. (1),
σ m = √
6WhE
L (I∕c 2 )
11.4B 	Design
In Sec. 11.4A, we looked at three examples of impact loading to determine
the maximum stress σm: (a) in the rod of uniform cross section of shown in
Fig. 11.21, (b) in the rod of variable cross section of Concept Application 11.6,
and (c) in the cantilever beam of Concept Application 11.7, assuming that the
last has a circular cross section with a radius of c. We will now consider how
these maximum stresses apply to design.
(a) Equation (11.35) shows that, if Um is the amount of energy trans-
ferred to the rod as a result of the impact loading, the maximum stress in the
rod of uniform cross section is
σm = √
2Um E
V (11.36a)
where V is the volume of the rod.
(a)
Area = A
v0
v = 0
B
B
D
D
L
(b)
m
xm
Fig. 11.21 	(repeated ) Rod subject to
impact loading.

-- 801 of 897 --

11.4 Impact Loads 	787
(b) Considering the rod of Concept Application 11.6 and observing that
the volume of the rod is
V = 4A(L∕2) + A(L∕2) = 5AL∕2
substitute AL = 2V∕5 into Eq. (2) of Concept Application 11.6 and write
σm = √
8Um E
V (11.36b)
(c) Finally, recalling that I = 1
4 πc4 for a beam of circular cross
section,
L(I∕c2 ) = L( 1
4 πc4∕c2 ) = 1
4 (πc2L) = 1
4V
where V is the volume of the beam. Substituting into Eq. (4) of Concept
Application 11.7, the maximum stress in the cantilever beam is
σ m = √
24Um E
V (11.36c)
In each case, the maximum stress σm is proportional to the square root
of the modulus of elasticity of the material and inversely proportional to the
square root of the volume of the member. Assuming that all three members
have the same volume and are of the same material, we note that for a given
value of the absorbed energy, the uniform rod experiences the lowest maxi-
mum stress and the cantilever beam the highest.
This is explained by the fact that the distribution of stresses is uni-
form in case a, and the strain energy is uniformly distributed throughout
the rod. In case b, on the other hand, the stresses in segment BC of the
rod are only 25% as large as the stresses in segment CD. This uneven
distribution of the stresses and strain energy results in a maximum stress
σm that is twice as large as the corresponding stress in the uniform rod.
Finally, in case c, where the cantilever beam is subjected to a transverse
impact load, the stresses vary linearly along the beam as well as through
a transverse section. This uneven distribution of strain energy causes the
maximum stress σm to be 3.46 times larger than in the same member loaded
axially (as in case a).
The properties discussed in this section are quite general and can
be observed in all types of structures subject to impact loads. Thus a
structural member designed to most effectively withstand an impact load
should
1. Have a large volume.
2. Be made of a material with a low modulus of elasticity and a high yield
strength.
3. Be shaped so that the stresses are distributed as evenly as possible
throughout the member.

-- 802 of 897 --

788 	Energy Methods
11.5 	SINGLE LOADS
11.5A 	Energy Formulation
In this section, we will use the concept of strain energy, introduced at the
beginning of this chapter, to determine the maximum stress and maximum
displacement in members subjected to impact loading. For a rod of uniform
cross section (Fig. 11.1), the strain energy for an elongation x1 was defined
as the work of the load P as it is slowly increased from 0 to the value P1
corresponding to x1. Thus,
Strain energy = U = ∫x1
0
P dx 	(11.2)
For an elastic deformation, the work of load P and the strain energy of the
rod is
U = 1
2 P1x1 	(11.3)
In Sec. 11.2, we determined the strain energy for different structural
members under various load conditions. We used the strain-energy density u
at every point of the member and integrated u over the entire member.
We can use Eq. (11.3) to evaluate its elastic strain energy, provided that
the structure or member is subjected to a single concentrated load and provided
that the relationship between the load and the resulting deformation is known.
For instance, the cantilever beam of Concept Application 11.3 (Fig. 11.24) has
U = 1
2 P1 y1
and substituting the value from the table of Beam Deflections and Slopes of
Appendix F for y1 gives
U = 1
2 P1(
P1L3
3EI ) = P 2
1L3
6EI (11.37)
A similar approach can be used to determine the strain energy of a
structure or member subjected to a single couple. Recall that the elementary
work of a couple of moment M is M dθ, where dθ is a small angle. Since M
and θ are linearly related, the elastic strain energy of a cantilever beam AB
subjected to a single couple M1 at its end A (Fig. 11.25) is
U = ∫θ1
0
M dθ = 1
2 M1θ1 	(11.38)
where θ1 is the slope of the beam at A. Substituting the value obtained from
Appendix F for θ1 gives
U = 1
2 M1 (
M1L
EI ) = M 2
1L
2EI (11.39)
L
A
B
P1
y1
Fig. 11.24 	Cantilever beam with
load P1.
L
A
B
M1
1θ
Fig. 11.25 	Cantilever beam with couple M1.

-- 803 of 897 --

11.5 Single Loads 	789
Likewise, the elastic strain energy of a uniform circular shaft AB with
a length of L subjected at its end B to a single torque T1 (Fig. 11.26) is
U = ∫ϕ1
0
T dϕ = 1
2 T1ϕ1 	(11.40)
Substituting for the angle of twist ϕ1 from Eq. (3.15) gives
U = 1
2 T1(
T1 L
JG ) = T1
2L
2JG
The method presented in this section may simplify the solution of many
impact-loading problems. In Concept Application 11.8, the crash of an auto-
mobile into a barrier (Photo 11.3) is analyzed by using a simplified model
consisting of a block and a simple beam.
1
T1
L
A
B
ϕ
Fig. 11.26 	Cantilevered shaft with
torque T1.
Photo 11.3 	As the automobile crashes into the barrier, considerable energy is
dissipated as heat during the permanent deformation of the automobile and the
barrier. ©conrado/Shutterstock
Concept Application 11.8
A block of mass m moving with a velocity v0 hits the prismatic member AB
squarely at its midpoint C (Fig. 11.27a). Determine (a) the equivalent static
load Pm, (b) the maximum stress σm in the member, (c) the maximum deflec-
tion xm at point C.
a. Equivalent Static Load. 	The maximum strain energy of the member
is equal to the kinetic energy of the block before impact.
Um = 1
2 mv 2
0 	(1)
On the other hand, Um can be given as the work of the equivalent horizontal
static load as it is slowly applied at the midpoint C
Um = 1
2 P m x m 	(2)
(continued)
L
v0
B
A
C
m
1
2
L	
1
2
(a)
Fig. 11.27 	(a) Simply
supported beam having
block propelled into its
midpoint.

-- 804 of 897 --

790 	Energy Methods
where xm is the deflection of C corresponding to the static load Pm. From the
table of Beam Deflections and Slopes of Appendix F,
x m = P m L3
48EI (3)
Substituting for xm from Eq. (3) into Eq. (2),
Um = 1
2
P 2
m L3
48EI
Solving for Pm and recalling Eq. (1), the static load equivalent to the given
impact loading is
P m = √
96Um EI
L3 	= √
48mv 2
0 EI
L3 	(4)
b. Maximum Stress. 	Drawing the free-body diagram of the member
(Fig. 11.27b), the maximum value of the bending moment occurs at C and is
Mmax = PmL∕4. The maximum stress occurs in a transverse section through C
and is equal to
σ m = Mmax c
I = Pm Lc
4I
Substituting for Pm from Eq. (4),
σ m = √
3mv 2
0 EI
L(I∕c)2
c. Maximum Deflection. 	Substituting into Eq. (3) the expression
obtained for Pm in Eq. (4):
x m = L3
48EI √
48mv 2
0 EI
L3 	= √
mv 2
0 L3
48EI
11.5B 	Deflections
In this section, we will use the concept of strain energy to determine the
deflection of a member subjected to a static load. The preceding section
showed that, if the deflection x1 of a structure or member under a single
concentrated load P1 is known, the corresponding strain energy U is
U = 1
2 P1x1 	(11.3)
A similar equation for the strain energy of a structural member under a single
couple M1 is
U = 1
2 M1θ1 	(11.38)
We can use the strain energy U of a structure or member subjected to
a single concentrated load P1 or couple M1 with Eq. (11.3) or (11.38) to
determine the corresponding deflection x1 or angle θ1. To find the deflection
under a single load applied to a structure with several components, rather than
use one of the methods of Chap. 9, it is often easier to first compute the strain
Pm
Pm
B
A
C
L	
1
2
RB = 1
2
Pm	RA = 1
2
(b)
Fig. 11.27 	(cont) (b) Free-body
diagram of beam.

-- 805 of 897 --

11.5 Single Loads 	791
energy of the structure by integrating the strain-energy density over its various
parts, as was done in Sec. 11.2, and then use either Eq. (11.3) or (11.38) for
the desired deflection. Similarly, the angle of twist ϕ1 of a composite shaft
can be obtained by integrating the strain-energy density over various parts of
the shaft and solving Eq. (11.40) for ϕ1.
The method in this section can be used only if the given structure is
subjected to a single concentrated load or couple. The strain energy of a
structure subjected to several loads cannot be determined by computing the
work of each load as if applied independently to the structure (see Sec. 11.6).
Even if it is possible to determine the strain energy of the structure in this
manner, only one equation is available for the deflections corresponding to
various loads. In Secs. 11.7 and 11.8, another method based on the concept
of strain energy is developed that can be used to find the deflection or slope
at a given point—even when that structure is subjected to several concentrated
loads, distributed loads, or couples simultaneously.
Concept Application 11.9
A load P is supported at B by two uniform rods of the same cross-sectional
area A (Fig. 11.28). Determine the vertical deflection of point B.
The strain energy of the system under the given load was determined in
Concept Application 11.2. Equating U to the work of the load, write
U = 0.364 P 2l
AE = 1
2 P y B
and solving for the vertical deflection of B,
y B = 0.728 Pl
AE
Remark. 	Once the forces in the two rods have been obtained (see Concept
Application 11.2), the deformations δB∕C and δB∕D can be obtained using the
method in Chap. 2. However, determining the vertical deflection of point B
from these deformations requires a careful geometric analysis of the various
displacements. The strain-energy method used here makes such an analysis
unnecessary.
Concept Application 11.10
Determine the deflection of end A of the cantilever beam AB (Fig. 11.29),
taking into account the effect of (a) the normal stresses only, (b) the normal
and shearing stresses.
a. Effect of Normal Stresses. 	The work of the force P as it is slowly
applied to A is
U = 1
2 Py A
(continued)
C
D
B
l
P
3
3
4
4
Fig. 11.28 	Frame CBD with
vertical load P.
P
L
A
B
h
b
Fig. 11.29 	Cantilevered
rectangular beam with load P.

-- 806 of 897 --

792 	Energy Methods
Substituting for U the strain energy of the beam in Concept Application 11.3,
where only the effect of the normal stresses was considered, write
P 2L3
6EI = 1
2 Py A
and solving for yA ,
y A = PL3
3EI
b. Effect of Normal and Shearing Stresses. 	Now substitute for U
the expression for the total strain energy of the beam obtained in Concept
Application 11.5, where the effects of both the normal and shearing stresses
were taken into account. Thus,
P 2L3
6EI (1 + 3Eh2
10GL2) = 1
2 Py A
and solving for yA,
y A = PL3
3EI (1 + 3Eh2
10GL2)
Note that the relative error when the effect of shear is neglected is the same
as that obtained in Concept Application 11.5 (i.e., less than 0.9(h∕L)2). This
is less than 0.9% for a beam with a ratio h∕L less than 1
10 .
Concept Application 11.11
A torque T is applied at the end D of shaft BCD (Fig. 11.30). Knowing that
both portions of the shaft are of the same material and length, but that the
diameter of BC is twice the diameter of CD, determine the angle of twist for
the entire shaft.
In Concept Application 11.4, the strain energy of a similar shaft was
determined by breaking the shaft into its component parts BC and CD. Making
n = 2 in Eq. (1) of Concept Application 11.4 gives
U = 17
32
T 2L
2GJ
where G is the modulus of rigidity of the material and J is the polar moment
of inertia of segment CD. Making U equal to the work of the torque as it is
slowly applied to end D and recalling Eq. (11.40), write
17
32
T 2L
2GJ = 1
2 TϕD∕B
and solving for the angle of twist ϕD∕B,
ϕD∕B = 17T L
32GJ
1
2 L
1
2 L
C
D
T
B
diam. = 2d diam. = d
Fig. 11.30 	Stepped shaft BCD with
torque T.

-- 807 of 897 --

11.5 Single Loads 	793
Sample Problem 11.3
The block D of mass m is released from rest and falls a distance h before it
strikes the midpoint C of the aluminum beam AB. Using E = 73 GPa, determine
(a) the maximum deflection of point C, (b) the maximum stress in the beam.
STRATEGY: 	Calculate the strain energy of the beam in terms of the deflec-
tion and equate this to the work done by the block. This then can be used
with the data to solve part a. Using the relation between the applied load and
deflection (Appendix F), obtain the equivalent static load and use this to get
the normal stress due to bending.
MODELING:
Principle of Work and Energy. 	The block is released from rest (Fig. 1,
position 1). Note that in this position both the kinetic and strain energy are
zero. In position 2 (Fig. 1), where the maximum deflection ym occurs, the
kinetic energy is also zero. Use to the table of Beam Deflections and Slopes
in Appendix F to find the expression for ym shown in Fig. 2. The strain energy
of the beam in position 2 is
U2 = 1
2 P m y m = 1
2
48EI
L3 	y 2
m 	U2 = 24EI
L3 	y 2
m
A
Position 1 	Position 2
A	B 	B	h
y m
D
D
Fig. 1 	Block released from rest (position 1)
and maximum deflection of beam (position 2).
The work done by the weight W of the block is W(h + ym). Equating the strain
energy of the beam to the work done by W gives
24EI
L3 	y 2
m = W (h + y m) 	(1)
ANALYSIS:
a. Maximum Deflection of Point C. 	From the given data,
EI = (73 × 109 Pa) 1
12 (0.04 m) 4 = 15.573 × 103 N·m2
L = 1 m 	h = 0.040 m 	W = mg = (80 kg)(9.81 m/s2 ) = 784.8 N
Substituting W into Eq. (1), we obtain a quadratic equation that can be solved
for the deflection:
(373.8 × 10 3 )y 2
m − 784.8ym − 31.39 = 0 	ym = 10.27 mm 	◂
(continued)
A
L = 1 m
B
D
C
m = 80 kg
h = 40 mm
40 mm
40 mm
A 	B
C
PmL3
48EI
ym =
48EI
L3	
Pm = 	y m
From Appendix F
Fig. 2 	Equivalent static force to
cause deflection ym.

-- 808 of 897 --

794 	Energy Methods
b. Maximum Stress. 	The value of Pm (Fig. 2) is
Pm = 48EI
L3 	y m = 48(15.573 × 103 N·m)
(1 m) 3 	(0.01027 m) 	P m = 7677 N
Recalling that σm = Mmaxc∕I and Mmax = 1
4 P m L, write
σ m = ( 1
4 P m L)c
I =
1
4 (7677 N)(1 m)(0.020 m)
1
12 (0.040 m) 4 	σm = 179.9 MPa 	◂
REFLECT and THINK: 	An approximation for the work done by the weight
of the block is obtained by omitting ym from the expression for the work and
from the right-hand member of Eq. (1), as was done in Concept Application 11.7.
If this approximation is used here, ym = 9.16 mm, and the error is 10.8%.
However, if an 8-kg block is dropped from a height of 400 mm (producing
the same value for Wh), omitting ym from the right-hand member of Eq. (1)
results in an error of only 1.2%.
Sample Problem 11.4
Members of the truss shown consist of sections of aluminum pipe with the
cross-sectional areas indicated. Using E = 73 GPa, determine the vertical
deflection of point E caused by load P.
500 mm2
0.8 m
0.6 m 1.5 m
P = 40 kN
A 	C 	E
B 	D
500 mm2
1000 mm2
STRATEGY: 	Draw a free-body diagram of the truss to determine the reac-
tions and then use free-body diagrams at each joint to find the member forces.
Equation (11.14) can then be used to determine the strain energy in each
member. Equate the total strain energy in the members to the work done by
the load P to determine the vertical deflection at the load.
MODELING:
Axial Forces in Truss Members. 	The reactions are found by using the
free-body diagram of the entire truss (Fig. 1a). Consider the equilibrium of
joints E, C, D, and B in sequence (Fig. 1b–e). At each joint, determine the
forces indicated by dashed lines. At joint B, the equation ΣFx = 0 provides a
check of the computations.
A 	B
C
PmL3
48EI
ym =
48EI
L3	
Pm = 	y m
From Appendix F
Fig. 2 	(repeated) Equivalent static
force to cause deflection ym.

-- 809 of 897 --

11.5 Single Loads 	795
ANALYSIS:
Strain Energy. 	Noting that E is the same for all members, the strain energy
of the truss is
U = ∑ F 2
i L i
2A i E = 1
2E ∑ F 2
i L i
A i
(1)
where Fi is the force in a given member indicated in the following table and
where the summation is extended over all members of the truss.
Member 	Fi 	Li, m 	Ai, m2 	F i2Li
A i
AB 	0 	0.8 	500 × 10−6 	0
AC 	+15P∕8 	0.6 	500 × 10−6 	4 219P2
AD 	+5P∕4 	1.0 	500 × 10−6 	3 125P2
BD 	−21P∕8 	0.6 	1000 × 10−6 	4 134P2
CD 	0 	0.8 	1000 × 10−6 	0
CE 	+15P∕8 	1.5 	500 × 10−6 	10 547P2
DE 	−17P∕8 	1.7 	1000 × 10−6 	7 677P2
∑ F i
2L i
A i
= 29 700P 2
Returning to Eq. (1),
U = (1∕2E)(29.7 × 103P 2 ).
Principle of Work-Energy. 	The work done by the load P as it is gradually
applied is 1
2 Py E. Equating the work done by P to the strain energy U and
recalling that E = 73 GPa and P = 40 kN,
1
2 Py E = U 1
2 Py E = 1
2E (29.7 × 103P 2 )
yE = 1
E (29.7 × 103P) = (29.7 × 103 )(40 × 103 )
73 × 109
y E = 16.27 × 10−3 m 	yE = 16.27 mm ↓ 	◂
A
B
E 	17 17	8 8
4 	5
3
15
8
15 15
E C
D
B = 21P/8
Ax = 21P/8
P
Ay = P
FCE 	FAC 	FCE = 	FCD = 0
FAD
FBD
P
FCD	FDE
17
8	
FDE = 	P
21
8	
FBD =
FAB
P	21
8	
B = 	P
B
P
(a) 	(b) 	(c) 	(d) 	(e)
Fig. 1 	(a) Free-body diagram of truss. (b–e) Force diagrams at joints.
From equilibrium of each joint shown in Fig. 1 (b) through (e), we obtain the member forces
ΣF y = 0: F DE = − 17
8 P 	ΣF x = 0: F AC = + 15
8 P 	ΣF y = 0: F AD = + 5
4 P 	ΣF y = 0: F AB = 0
ΣF x = 0: F CE = + 15
8 P 	ΣFy = 0: F CD = 0 	ΣF x = 0: F BD = − 21
8 P 	ΣF x = 0: (Checks)

-- 810 of 897 --

796
11.42 A 5-kg collar D moves along the uniform rod AB and has a speed
v0 = 6 m/s when it strikes a small plate attached to end A of the
rod. Using E = 200 GPa and knowing that the allowable stress in
the rod is 250 MPa, determine the smallest diameter that can be
used for the rod.
11.43 The uniform rod AB is made of a brass for which σY = 18 ksi and
E = 15 × 106 psi. Collar D moves along the rod and has a speed
v0 = 10 ft/sec as it strikes a small plate attached to end B of the
rod. Using a factor of safety of four, determine the largest allow-
able weight of the collar if the rod is not to be permanently
deformed.
L = 4 ft
A
B
D
v0	8
5 -in. diameter
Fig. P11.43
11.44 Solve Prob. 11.43, assuming that the length of the brass rod is
increased from 4 ft to 8 ft.
11.45 Collar D is released from rest in the position shown and is stopped
by a small plate attached at end C of the vertical rod ABC. Determine
the mass of the collar for which the maximum normal stress in por-
tion BC is 125 MPa.
B
A
C
D
Bronze
E = 105 GPa
12-mm diameter
Aluminum
E = 70 GPa
9-mm diameter
0.6 m
2.5 m
4 m
Fig. P11.45
11.46 Solve Prob. 11.45, assuming that both portions of rod ABC are made
of aluminum.
Problems
1.2 m
A B
D
v0
Fig. P11.42

-- 811 of 897 --

797
11.47 The 48-kg collar G is released from rest in the position shown and
is stopped by plate BDF that is attached to the 20-mm-diameter steel
rod CD and to the 15-mm-diameter steel rods AB and EF. Knowing
that for the grade of steel used σall = 180 MPa and E = 200 GPa,
determine the largest allowable distance h.
2.5 m
B 	F
h
D
G
A 	E	C
Fig. P11.47
11.48 The post AB consists of a steel pipe of 3.5-in. diameter and 0.3-in.
wall thickness. A 15-lb block C moving horizontally at velocity v0
hits the post squarely at A. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the
largest speed v0 for which the maximum normal stress in the pipe
does not exceed 24 ksi.
11.49 Solve Prob. 11.48, assuming that the post AB consists of a solid steel
rod of 3.5-in. outer diameter.
11.50 An aluminum tube having the cross section shown is struck squarely
in its midsection by a 6-kg block moving horizontally with a speed
of 2 m/s. Using E = 70 GPa, determine (a) the equivalent static load,
(b) the maximum stress in the beam, (c) the maximum deflection at
the midpoint C of the beam.
100 mm
B
0.9 m
0.9 m
v0
80 mm
100 mm
t = 10 mm	C
A
Fig. P11.50
11.51 Solve Prob. 11.50, assuming that the tube has been replaced by a
solid aluminum bar with the same outside dimensions as the tube.
11.52 The 2-kg block D is dropped from the position shown onto the end
of a 16-mm-diameter rod. Knowing that E = 200 GPa, determine
(a) the maximum deflection of end A, (b) the maximum bending
moment in the rod, (c) the maximum normal stress in the rod.
v0
C
A
B
4 ft
Fig. P11.48
B
D
0.6 m
2 kg
40 mm
A
Fig. P11.52

-- 812 of 897 --

798
11.53 The 10-kg block D is dropped from a height h = 450 mm onto the
aluminum beam AB. Knowing that E = 70 GPa, determine (a) the
maximum deflection of point E, (b) the maximum stress in the beam.
11.54 The 4-lb block D is dropped from the position shown onto the end
of a 5
8 -in.-diameter rod. Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine
(a) the maximum deflection of end A, (b) the maximum bending
moment in the rod, (c) the maximum normal stress in the rod.
B
D
2 ft
4 lb
1.5 in.
A
Fig. P11.54
11.55 A 160-lb diver jumps from a height of 20 in. onto end C of a diving
board having the uniform cross section shown. Assuming that the
diver’s legs remain rigid and using E = 1.8 × 106 psi, determine
(a) the maximum deflection at point C, (b) the maximum normal
stress in the board, (c) the equivalent static load.
11.56 A block of weight W is dropped from a height h onto the horizontal
beam AB and hits it at point D. (a) Show that the maximum deflec-
tion ym at point D can be expressed as
ym = y st (1 + √1 + 2h
y st )
where yst represents the deflection at D caused by a static load W
applied at that point and where the quantity in parenthesis is referred
to as the impact factor. (b) Compute the impact factor for the beam
of Prob. 11.52.
B	A
D'
D
h
W
ym
Fig. P11.56 and P11.57
11.57 A block of weight W is dropped from a height h onto the horizontal
beam AB and hits point D. (a) Denoting by ym the exact value of the
maximum deflection at D and by y′m the value obtained by neglecting
the effect of this deflection on the change in potential energy of
the block, show that the absolute value of the relative error is
(y′m − ym)∕ym, never exceeding y′m∕2h. (b) Check the result obtained
in part a by solving part a of Prob. 11.52 without taking ym into
account when determining the change in potential energy of the load,
and comparing the answer obtained in this way with the exact answer
to that problem.
D
0.4 m
40 mm	m
h
60 mm
E
B	A
1.2 m
Fig. P11.53
A B
C
2.5 ft 9.5 ft 	16 in.
2.65 in.
20 in.
Fig. P11.55

-- 813 of 897 --

799
11.58 and 11.59 Using the method of work and energy, determine the
deflection at point D caused by the load P.
A
L
a 	b
B
D
P
Fig. P11.58
11.60 and 11.61 Using the method of work and energy, determine the
slope at point D caused by the couple M0.
M0
A 	B
D
L
a 	b
Fig. P11.60
11.62 and 11.63 Using the method of work and energy, determine the
deflection at point C caused by the load P.
B
A
L/2
2EI 	EI
L/2
C
P
Fig. P11.62
2EI
EI 	EI
P
A 	B
C
a 	a 	a 	a
Fig. P11.63
11.64 Using the method of work and energy, determine the slope at point A
caused by the couple M0.
11.65 Using the method of work and energy, determine the slope at point D
caused by the couple M0.
2EI
EI	A
B
D
L/2	L/2
M0
Fig. P11.65
11.66 The 20-mm-diameter steel rod BC is attached to the lever AB and
to the fixed support C. The uniform steel lever is 10 mm thick
and 30 mm deep. Using the method of work and energy, deter-
mine the deflection of point A when L = 600 mm. Use E = 200 GPa
and G = 77.2 GPa.
2EI
EI	A
B
C
L/2	L/2
M0
Fig. P11.64
C
A
450 N
B
L
500 mm
Fig. P11.66
D
a 	L
B
A
P
Fig. P11.59
M0
A 	D
B
a	L
Fig. P11.61

-- 814 of 897 --

800
11.67 Torques of the same magnitude T are applied to the steel shafts AB
and CD. Using the method of work and energy, determine the length
L of the hollow portion of shaft CD for which the angle of twist at
C is equal to 1.25 times the angle of twist at A.
60 in.
2 in.
1.5 in.
T
L
C
A
E
T
B
D
Fig. P11.67
11.68 Two steel shafts, each of 0.75-in. diameter, are connected by the
gears shown. Knowing that G = 11.2 × 106 psi and that shaft DF is
fixed at F, determine the angle through which end A rotates when a
750-lb·in. torque is applied at A. (Neglect the strain energy due to
the bending of the shafts.)
T
E
F 	B
A
3 in.
4 in.
8 in.
6 in.
5 in.
D
C
Fig. P11.68
11.69 The 20-mm-diameter steel rod CD is welded to the 20-mm-diameter
steel shaft AB as shown. End C of rod CD is touching the rigid
surface shown when a couple TB is applied to a disk attached to
shaft AB. Knowing that the bearings are self aligning and exert no
couples on the shaft, determine the angle of rotation of the disk
when TB = 400 N·m. Use E = 200 GPa and G = 77.2 GPa. (Con-
sider the strain energy due to both bending and twisting in shaft AB
and to bending in arm CD.)
TB
A
B
D
C
300 mm
200 mm
70 mm
Fig. P11.69

-- 815 of 897 --

801
11.70 The thin-walled hollow cylindrical member AB has a noncircular
cross section of nonuniform thickness. Using the expression given
in Eq. (3.50) of Sec. 3.10 and the expression for the strain-energy
density given in Eq. (11.17), show that the angle of twist of
member AB is
ϕ = TL
4𝒶2G ∮
ds
t
where ds is the length of a small element of the wall cross section
and 𝒶 is the area enclosed by centerline of the wall cross section.
11.71 and 11.72 Each member of the truss shown has a uniform cross-
sectional area A. Using the method of work and energy, determine
the horizontal deflection of the point of application of load P.
l	3
4
l
P 	A 	B
C 	D
Fig. P11.71
P
l	3
4
l
A 	B
C 	D
Fig. P11.72
11.73 Each member of the truss shown is made of steel and has a uniform
cross-sectional area of 3 in2. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine
the vertical deflection of joint A caused by the application of the
24-kip load.
11.74 Members of the truss shown are made of steel and have the
cross-sectional areas shown. Using E = 200 GPa, determine
the vertical deflection of joint C caused by the application of
the 210-kN load.
11.75 Each member of the truss shown is made of steel and has a cross-
sectional area of 5 in2. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the verti-
cal deflection of point C caused by the 15-kip load.
6 ft 	6 ft
2.5 ft
A 	B
D	E
C
15 kips
Fig. P11.75
11.76 Each member of the truss shown is made of steel and has a cross-
sectional area of 400 mm2. Using E = 200 GPa, determine the
deflection of point D caused by the 16-kN load.
L
T
T'
A
B
t
x
ds
Fig. P11.70
A
C
B
24 kips
4 ft
3 ft
Fig. P11.73
A
B
C
210 kN
1.5 m
2 m
1.5 m
1800 mm2
1200 mm2
Fig. P11.74
C
D
16 kN
E
A 	B
1.5 m
0.8 m
Fig. P11.76

-- 816 of 897 --

802 	Energy Methods
*11.6 	WORK AND ENERGY
UNDER MULTIPLE LOADS
We will now evaluate the strain energy of a structure subjected to several loads,
expressing the strain energy in terms of the loads and resulting deflections.
Consider an elastic beam AB subjected to two concentrated loads P1
and P2. The strain energy of the beam is equal to the work of P1 and P2 as
they are slowly applied to the beam at C1 and C2, respectively (Fig. 11.31).
However, to evaluate this work, the deflections x1 and x2 must be expressed
in terms of the loads P1 and P2.
B	A
P1
C1
x1 	x2
C2
P2
Fig. 11.31 	Beam with multiple loads.
Assume that only P1 is applied to the beam (Fig. 11.32). Both C1 and
C2 are deflected, and their deflections are proportional to the load P1. Denot-
ing these deflections by x11 and x21, respectively, write
x11 = α11P1 	x21 = α21P1 	(11.41)
where α11 and α21 are constants called influence coefficients. These constants
represent the deflections of C1 and C2 when a unit load is applied at C1 and
are characteristics of the beam.
Now assume that only P2 is applied to the beam (Fig. 11.33). The
resulting deflections of C1 and C2 are denoted by x12 and x22, respectively, so
x12 = α12 P2 	x22 = α22 P2 	(11.42)
B	A
P2
C"1 	C"2
x12 	x22
Fig. 11.33 	Beam deflections at
C1 and C2 due to single load P2.
where α12 and α22 are the influence coefficients representing the deflections
of C1 and C2 when a unit load is applied at C2. Applying the principle of
superposition, the deflections x1 and x2 of C1 and C2 when both loads are
applied (Fig. 11.31) are
x1 = x11 + x12 = α11P1 + α12 P2 	(11.43)
x2 = x21 + x22 = α21P1 + α22 P2 	(11.44)
B	A
P1
x11 	x21
C'1 	C'2
Fig. 11.32 	Beam deflections at
C1 and C2 due to single load P1.

-- 817 of 897 --

*11.6 Work and Energy Under Multiple Loads 	803
To compute the work done by P1 and P2 and thus the strain energy of
the beam, assume that P1 is first applied slowly at C1 (Fig. 11.34a). Recalling
the first of Eqs. (11.41), the work of P1 is
1
2 P1x11 = 1
2 P1 (α11P1 ) = 1
2 α11P 2
1 	(11.45)
Note that P2 does no work while C2 moves through x21, since it has not yet
been applied to the beam.
Now slowly apply P2 at C2 (Fig. 11.34b). Recalling the second of
Eqs. (11.42), the work of P2 is
1
2 P2 x22 = 1
2 P2 (α22 P2 ) = 1
2 α22 P 2
2 	(11.46)
But, as P2 is slowly applied at C2, the point of application at P1 moves through
x12 from C′1 to C1, and load P1 does work. Since P1 is fully applied during
this displacement (Fig. 11.35), its work is equal to P1x12, or recalling the first
of Eqs. (11.42),
P1x12 = P1 (α12 P2 ) = α12 P1P2 	(11.47)
C1	C'
P1
P
O 1
x1
x11 	x12
x C2
P2
P
O
C'2
x2
x21 	x22
x
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 11.35 	Load-displacement diagrams for application of P1 followed by P2. (a) Load-
displacement diagram for C1. (b) Load-displacement diagram for C2.
Adding the expressions in Eqs. (11.45), (11.46), and (11.47), the strain energy
of the beam under the loads P1 and P2 is
U = 1
2 (α11P 1
2 + 2α12 P1P2 + α22 P 2
2 ) 	(11.48)
If load P2 had been applied first to the beam (Fig. 11.36a), followed by
load P1 (Fig. 11.36b), the work done by each load would have been as shown
P2	P1
C'1 	C'2
B	A x11 	x21
C1 	C2
C'2	C'1 	B	A
x22	x12
(b)
(a) 	P1
Fig. 11.34 	(a) Deflection due to P1 only.
(b) Additional deflection due to
subsequent application of P2.
P1 	P2
P2
C"1 	C"2
B	A
x12 	x22
C1 	C2
C"2	
C"1
B	A
x21	
x11
(b)
(a)
Fig. 11.36 	(a) Deflection due to P2 only. (b) Additional
deflection due to subsequent application of P1.

-- 818 of 897 --

804 	Energy Methods
in Fig. 11.37. Similar calculations would lead to an alternative expression for
the strain energy of the beam:
U = 1
2 (α22 P 2
2 + 2α21P2 P1 + α11P 1
2 ) 	(11.49)
Equating the right-hand members of Eqs. (11.48) and (11.49), α12 = α21, and
we thus conclude that the deflection produced at C1 by a unit load applied at
C2 is equal to the deflection produced at C2 by a unit load applied at C1. This
is known as Maxwell’s reciprocal theorem, after the British physicist James
Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879).
While we are now able to express the strain energy U of a structure
subjected to several loads as a function of these loads, the work energy
method of Sec. 11.5B cannot be used to determine the deflections of such
a structure. Computing the strain energy U by integrating the strain-energy
density u over the structure and substituting the expression obtained into
Eq. (11.48) yields only one equation, which clearly cannot be solved for
the multiple coefficients α.
*11.7 	CASTIGLIANO’S THEOREM
Recall from the previous section that the strain energy of an elastic structure
subjected to two loads P1 and P2 is
U = 1
2 (α11P 1
2 + 2α12 P1P2 + α22 P 2
2 ) 	(11.48)
where α11, α12, and α22 are the influence coefficients associated with the points
of application C1 and C2 of the two loads. Differentiating Eq. (11.48) with
respect to P1 and using Eq. (11.43) gives
∂U
∂P1
= α11P1 + α12 P2 = x1 	(11.50)
Differentiating Eq. (11.48) with respect to P2, using Eq. (11.44), and keeping
in mind that α12 = α21, we have
∂U
∂P2
= α12 P1 + α22 P2 = x 2 	(11.51)
C1	C"
P1
P
O 1
x1
x12 	x11
x C2	C"
P2
P
O
2
x2
x22 	x21
x
(a) 	(b)
Fig. 11.37 	Load-displacement diagrams for application of P2 followed by P1.
(a) Load-displacement diagram for C1. (b) Load-displacement diagram for C2.

-- 819 of 897 --

*11.7 Castigliano’s Theorem 	805
More generally if an elastic structure is subjected to n loads P1, P2, . . ., Pn,
the deflection xj of the point of application of Pj, and measured along the line
of action of Pj is expressed as the partial derivative of the strain energy of
the structure with respect to the load Pj. Thus,
x j = ∂U
∂P j
(11.52)
This is Castigliano’s theorem, named after the Italian engineer Alberto
Castigliano (1847–1884).†
Recall that the work of a couple M is 1
2 Mθ, where θ is the angle of
rotation at the point where the couple is slowly applied. Castigliano’s theorem
can be used to determine the slope of a beam at the point of application of a
couple Mj. Thus,
θj = ∂U
∂M j
(11.55)
Similarly, the angle of twist ϕj in a section of a shaft where a torque Tj is
slowly applied is obtained by differentiating the strain energy of the shaft with
respect to Tj:
ϕj = ∂U
∂T j
(11.56)
†For an elastic structure subjected to n loads P1, P2, . . ., Pn, the deflection of the point of
application of Pj, measured along the line of action of Pj, is
x j = ∑
k
αjk Pk 	(11.53)
and the strain energy of the structure is
U = 1
2 ∑
i
∑
k
αik Pi Pk 	(11.54)
Differentiating U with respect to Pj and observing that Pj is found in terms corresponding
to either i = j or k = j gives
∂U
∂Pj
= 1
2 ∑
k
α jk Pk + 1
2 ∑
i
αij Pi
or since αij = αji,
∂U
∂Pj
= 1
2 ∑
k
αjk Pk + 1
2 ∑
i
αji Pi = ∑
k
αjk Pk
Recalling Eq. (11.53), we verify that
x j = ∂U
∂Pj
(11.52)

-- 820 of 897 --

806 	Energy Methods
*11.8 	DEFLECTIONS BY
CASTIGLIANO’S THEOREM
We saw in the preceding section that we could use Castiglinano’s theorem
to calculate the deflection xj of a structure at the point of application of
a load Pj. This involved computing the partial derivative ∂U∕∂Pj of the
strain energy U of the structure. As we recall from Secs. 11.2A and 11.2B,
the strain energy U is obtained by integrating or summing over the struc-
ture the strain energy of each element of the structure. As we will now
show, the calculation by Castigliano’s theorem of the deflection xj is sim-
plified if the differentiation with respect to the load Pj is carried out before
the integration or summation.
For the beam from Sec. 11.2A, the strain energy was found to be
U = ∫L
0
M 2
2EI dx 	(11.15)
and the deflection xj of the point of application of the load Pj is then
x j = ∂U
∂P j
= ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂P j
dx 	(11.57)
For a truss of n uniform members with a length Li, cross-sectional
area Ai, and internal force Fi, Eq. (11.14) can be used for the strain energy U
to write
U = ∑
n
i=1
F i
2L i
2 A i E (11.58)
The deflection xj of the point of application of the load Pj is obtained by
differentiating each term of the sum with respect to Pj. Thus,
xj = ∂U
∂P j
= ∑
n
i=1
FiL i
A iE
∂Fi
∂P j
(11.59)
Concept Application 11.12
The cantilever beam AB supports a uniformly distributed load w and a concen-
trated load P (Fig. 11.38). Knowing that L = 2 m, w = 4 kN/m, P = 6 kN, and
EI = 5 MN·m2, determine the deflection at A.
B
A
P
w
L
Fig. 11.38 	Cantilever beam loaded
as shown.

-- 821 of 897 --

*11.8 Deflections by Castigliano’s Theorem 	807
Thus far, the deflection xj of a structure at a given point Cj could be
obtained using the direct application of Castigliano’s theorem only if load
Pj is applied at Cj in the direction for which xj is to be determined. In
problems where a load does not exist at Cj, or when the load is applied in
a direction other than the desired one, the deflection xj still can be found
using Castigliano’s theorem if we use the following procedure. First, a
fictitious or “dummy” load Qj at Cj is applied in the direction in which the
deflection xj is to be determined. Then Castigliano’s theorem is used to
obtain the deflection
x j = ∂U
∂Qj
(11.60)
due to Qj and the actual loads. Making Qj = 0 in Eq. (11.60) yields the
deflection at Cj in the desired direction under the given load.
The slope θj of a beam at a point Cj can be found by applying a ficti-
tious couple Mj at Cj, computing the partial derivative ∂U∕∂M j , and making
Mj = 0 in the expression obtained.
The deflection yA of point A where load P is applied is obtained from
Eq. (11.57). Since P is vertical and directed downward, yA represents a vertical
deflection and is positive downward.
y A = ∂U
∂P = ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂P dx 	(1)
The bending moment M at a distance x from A is
M = −(Px + 1
2 wx 2 ) 	(2)
and its derivative with respect to P is
∂M
∂P = −x
Substituting for M and ∂M∕∂P into Eq. (1),
y A = 1
EI ∫L
0 (Px 2 + 1
2 wx 3
)dx
= 1
EI (
PL3
3 + wL4
8 ) (3)
Substituting the given data,
yA = 1
5 × 106 N·m2 [
(6 × 103 N)(2 m) 3
3 + (4 × 103 N/m)(2 m) 4
8 	]
y A = 4.8 × 10−3 m 	y A = 4.8 mm ↓
Note that the computation of the partial derivative ∂M∕∂P could not have
been carried out if the numerical value of P had been substituted for P in
Eq. (2) for the bending moment.

-- 822 of 897 --

808 	Energy Methods
Concept Application 11.13
The cantilever beam AB supports a uniformly distributed load w (Fig. 11.39a).
Determine the deflection and slope at A.
Deflection at A. 	Apply a dummy downward load QA at A (Fig. 11.39b)
and write
y A = ∂U
∂QA
= ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂QA
dx 	(1)
The bending moment M at a distance x from A is
M = −QA x − 1
2 wx 2 	(2)
and its derivative with respect to QA is
∂M
∂QA
= −x 	(3)
Substituting for M and ∂M∕∂QA from Eqs. (2) and (3) into Eq. (1) and making
QA = 0, the deflection at A for the given load is:
y A = 1
EI ∫L
0
(− 1
2 wx 2 )(−x) dx = + wL4
8EI
Since the dummy load was directed downward, the positive sign indicates that
y A = wL4
8EI ↓
Slope at A. 	Apply a dummy counterclockwise couple MA at A (Fig. 11.39c)
and write
θA = ∂U
∂M A
Recalling Eq. (11.15),
θA = ∂
∂M A
∫L
0
M 2
2EI dx = ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂M A
dx 	(4)
The bending moment M at a distance x from A is
M = −M A − 1
2wx 2 	(5)
and its derivative with respect to MA is
∂M
∂M A
= −1 	(6)
Substituting for M and ∂M∕∂M A from Eqs. (5) and (6) into Eq. (4) and making
MA = 0, the slope at A for the given load is:
θA = 1
EI ∫L
0
(− 1
2 wx 2 )(−1) dx = + wL3
6EI
Since the dummy couple was counterclockwise, the positive sign indicates that
the angle θA is also counterclockwise:
θA = wL3
6EI ⦨
B
A
w
L
(a)
B
A
QA
w
L
(b)
B
A
w
MA 	L
(c)
Fig. 11.39 	(a) Cantilever beam
supporting a uniformly distributed load.
(b) Dummy load QA applied to determine
deflection at A. (c) Dummy load MA
applied to determine the slope at A.

-- 823 of 897 --

*11.8 Deflections by Castigliano’s Theorem 	809
Concept Application 11.14
A load P is supported at B by two rods of the same material and the same
cross-sectional area A (Fig. 11.40a). Determine the horizontal and vertical
deflection of point B.
We apply a dummy horizontal load Q at B (Fig. 11.40b). From Castigliano’s
theorem,
x B = ∂U
∂Q y B = ∂U
∂P
Using Eq. (11.14) to obtain the strain energy for the rods
U = F 2
BC (BC)
2 AE + F 2
BD (BD)
2 AE
where FBC and FBD represent the forces in BC and BD, respectively.
Therefore,
x B = ∂U
∂Q = FBC (BC)
AE
∂FBC
∂Q + FBD (BD)
AE
∂FBD
∂Q (1)
and
y B = ∂U
∂P = FBC (BC)
AE
∂FBC
∂P + FBD (BD)
AE
∂FBD
∂P (2)
From the free-body diagram of pin B (Fig. 11.40c),
F BC = 0.6P + 0.8Q 	F BD = −0.8P + 0.6Q 	(3)
Differentiating these equations with respect to Q and P, write
∂FBC
∂Q = 0.8 ∂FBD
∂Q = 0.6
∂FBC
∂P = 0.6 ∂FBD
∂P = −0.8 	(4)
Substituting from Eqs. (3) and (4) into both Eqs. (1) and (2), making Q = 0,
and noting that BC = 0.6l and BD = 0.8l, the horizontal and vertical deflec-
tions of point B under the given load P are
xB = (0.6P)(0.6l)
AE (0.8) + (−0.8P)(0.8l)
AE (0.6)
= −0.096 Pl
AE
yB = (0.6P)(0.6l )
AE (0.6) + (−0.8P)(0.8l )
AE (−0.8)
= + 0.728 Pl
AE
Referring to the directions of the loads Q and P, we conclude that
xB = 0.096 Pl
AE ← 	y B = 0.728 Pl
AE ↓
We check that the expression found for the vertical deflection of B is the same
as obtained in Concept Application 11.9.
C
D
B
l
P
3
3
4
4
(a)
Q
C
D
B
l
P
3
3
4
4
(b)
B
3
3
4
4
FBC
FBD
P
Q
(c)
Fig. 11.40 	(a) Frame CBD supporting
vertical load P. (b) Frame CBD with
horizontal dummy load Q applied.
(c) Free-body diagram of joint B for
finding member forces in terms of
loads P and Q.

-- 824 of 897 --

810 	Energy Methods
*11.9 	STATICALLY
INDETERMINATE
STRUCTURES
In this section, we will use Castigliano’s theorem to find the reactions at the
supports of statically indeterminate structures. For example, in a structure
indeterminate to the first degree, designate one of the reactions as redundant
and eliminate or modify accordingly the corresponding support. The redun-
dant reaction is treated like an unknown load that, together with the other
loads, must produce deformations compatible with the original supports. First
calculate the strain energy U of the structure due to the combined action of
the loads and the redundant reaction. Observing that the partial derivative of
U with respect to the redundant reaction represents the deflection (or slope)
at the support that has been eliminated or modified, we then set this derivative
equal to zero and solve for the redundant reaction.† The remaining reactions
are found using the equations of statics.
†This is in the case of a rigid support allowing no deflection. For other types of support,
the partial derivative of U should be set equal to the allowed deflection.
Concept Application 11.15
Determine the reactions at the supports for the prismatic beam and load shown
(Fig. 11.41a).
The beam is statically indeterminate to the first degree. The reaction at
A is redundant and the beam is released from that support. The reaction RA
is considered to be an unknown load (Fig. 11.41b) and will be determined
under the condition that the deflection yA at A must be zero. By Castigliano’s
theorem, y A = ∂U∕∂R A, where U is the strain energy of the beam under the
distributed load and the redundant reaction. Recalling Eq. (11.57),
y A = ∂U
∂R A
= ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂R A
dx 	(1)
The bending moment M for the load of Fig. 11.41b at a distance x
from A is
M = R A x − 1
2 wx 2 	(2)
and its derivative with respect to RA is
∂M
∂R A
= x 	(3)
Substituting for M and ∂M∕∂R A from Eqs. (2) and (3) into Eq. (1), write
y A = 1
EI ∫L
0 (R A x 2 − 1
2 wx 3
) dx = 1
EI(
R A L3
3 − wL4
8 )
B
A
w
L
(a)
RA
yA = 0 	B
A
w
L
(b)
Fig. 11.41 	(a) Beam statically
indeterminate to first degree.
(b) Redundant reaction at A and zero
displacement boundary condition.

-- 825 of 897 --

*11.9 	Statically Indeterminate Structures 	811
Set yA = 0 and solve for RA:
R A = 3
8 wL 	RA = 3
8 wL ↑
From the conditions of equilibrium for the beam, the reaction at B consists of
the force and couple:
RB = 5
8 wL ↑ 	MB = 1
8 wL2 ⤸
Concept Application 11.16
A load P is supported at B by three rods of the same material and the same
cross-sectional area A (Fig. 11.42a). Determine the force in each rod.
The structure is statically indeterminate to the first degree. The reaction
at H is choosen as the redundant. Thus rod BH is released from its support
at H. The reaction RH is now considered to be an unknown load (Fig. 11.42b)
and will be determined under the condition that the deflection yH of point H
must be zero. By Castigliano’s theorem, y H = ∂U∕∂R H , where U is the strain
energy of the three-rod system under load P and the redundant reaction RH.
Recalling Eq. (11.59),
y H = FBC(BC)
AE
∂FBC
∂R H
+ FBD(BD)
AE
∂FBD
∂R H
+ FBH(BH)
AE
∂FBH
∂R H
(1)
Note that the force in rod BH is equal to RH, or
F BH = R H 	(2)
Then, from the free-body diagram of pin B (Fig. 11.42c),
F BC = 0.6P − 0.6R H 	F BD = 0.8R H − 0.8P 	(3)
Differentiating with respect to RH the force in each rod gives
∂FBC
∂R H
= −0.6 ∂FBD
∂R H
= 0.8 ∂FBH
∂R H
= 1 	(4)
Substituting from Eqs. (2), (3), and (4) into Eq. (1) and noting that the
lengths BC, BD, and BH are equal to 0.6l, 0.8l, and 0.5l, respectively,
yH = 1
AE [(0.6P − 0.6R H)(0.6l)(−0.6)
+ (0.8R H − 0.8P)(0.8l)(0.8) + R H(0.5l)(1)]
Setting yH = 0 gives
1.228R H − 0.728P = 0
and solving for RH:
R H = 0.593P
Carrying this value into Eqs. (2) and (3), the forces in the three rods are
F BC = +0.244P 	F BD = −0.326P 	F BH = +0.593P
H
0.5l
0.6l
0.8l
C
D
l
P
B
(a)
H
	C
D
P
B
RH
yH = 0
(b)
B
FBC
FBH = RH
FBD
P
(c)
Fig. 11.42
(a) Statically
indeterminate
frame supporting
a vertical load P.
(b) Redundant
reaction at H and
zero displacement
boundary condition.
(c) Free-body
diagram of joint B.

-- 826 of 897 --

812 	Energy Methods
Sample Problem 11.5
For the truss and loading of Sample Prob. 11.4, determine the vertical
deflection of joint C.
STRATEGY: 	Add a dummy load associated with the desired vertical
deflection at joint C. The truss is then analyzed to determine the mem-
ber forces, first by drawing a free-body diagram of the truss to find the
reactions and then by using equilibrium at each joint to find the member
forces. Use Eq. (11.59) to get the deflection in terms of the dummy
load Q.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Castigliano’s Theorem. 	We introduce the dummy vertical load Q as
shown in Fig. 1. Using Castigliano’s theorem where the force Fi in a given
member i is caused by the combined load of P and Q and since
E = constant,
yC = ∑(
Fi Li
A i E )
∂Fi
∂Q = 1
E ∑(
Fi Li
A i )
∂Fi
∂Q (1)
C
Q
A
B 	D
E
P
Fig. 1 	Dummy load Q applied
to joint C used to determine
vertical deflection at C.
Force in Members. 	Since the force in each member caused by the load
P was previously found in Sample Prob. 11.4, we only need to determine
the force in each member due to Q. Using the free-body diagram of the
truss with load Q, we draw a free-body diagram (Fig. 2) to determine the
reactions. Then, considering in sequence the equilibrium of joints E, C, B
and D and using Fig. 3, we determine the force in each member caused
by load Q.
Joint E: 	FCE = FDE = 0
Joint C: 	FAC = 0; FCD = −Q
Joint B: 	FAB = 0; FBD = − 3
4 Q
The total force in each member under the combined action of Q and
P is shown in the following table. Form ∂F i∕∂Q for each member, then
compute (FiLi∕Ai) (∂F i∕∂Q), as indicated.
500 mm2
0.8 m
0.6 m 1.5 m
P = 40 kN
A 	C 	E
B 	D
500 mm2
1000 mm2
A 	C
Q	Q
0.8 m
Q
Q
3
4
3
4
E
B
0.6 m
D
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of Q
truss with only dummy load Q.
Joint D 	Force triangle
D
FAD
FCD = Q FCD = Q
3
4	
FBD = Q 	3
4	
FBD = Q
5
4	
FAD = Q
Fig. 3 	Force analysis diagrams for joint D.

-- 827 of 897 --

*11.9 	Statically Indeterminate Structures 	813
Member 	Fi 	∂Fi∕∂Q 	Li, m 	Ai, m2
(
Fi Li
A i )
∂F i
∂Q
AB 	0 	0 	0.8 	500 × 10−6 	0
AC 	+15P∕8 	0 	0.6 	500 × 10−6 	0
AD 	+5P∕4 + 5Q∕4 	5
4 	1.0 	500 × 10−6 	+3125P + 3125Q
BD 	−21P∕8 − 3Q∕4 	− 3
4 	0.6 	1000 × 10−6 	+1181P + 338Q
CD 	−Q 	−1 	0.8 	1000 × 10−6 	+ 800Q
CE 	+15P∕8 	0 	1.5 	500 × 10−6 	0
DE 	−17P∕8 	0 	1.7 	1000 × 10−6 	0
∑(
Fi Li
A i )
∂F i
∂Q = 4306P + 4263Q
Deflection of C. 	Substituting into Eq. (1), we have
y C = 1
E ∑(
Fi Li
A i )
∂F i
∂Q = 1
E (4306P + 4263Q)
Since load Q is not part of the original load, set Q = 0. Substituting P = 40 kN
and E = 73 GPa gives
y C = 4306 (40 × 103 N)
73 × 109 Pa = 2.36 × 10−3 m 	yC = 2.36 mm ↓ 	◂
Sample Problem 11.6
For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection at point D. Use
E = 29 × 106 psi.
STRATEGY: 	Add a dummy load associated with the desired vertical deflec-
tion at joint D. Use a free-body diagram to determine the reactions due to
both the dummy load and the distributed load. The moments in each segment
are then written as a function of the coordinate along the beam. Equation (11.57)
is used to determine the deflection.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Castigliano’s Theorem. 	We introduce a dummy load Q as shown in
Fig. 1. Using Castigliano’s theorem and noting that EI is constant, write
y D = ∫ M
EI(
∂M
∂Q ) dx = 1
EI ∫M(
∂M
∂Q ) dx 	(1)
The integration will be performed separately for segments AD and DB.
B	A
D
L = 12 ft
a = 4.5 ft
w = 1.8 kips/ft
b = 7.5 ft
W10 × 15
B	A D
L
a
w
b
Q
Fig. 1 	Dummy load Q used to
determine vertical deflection at point D.
(continued)

-- 828 of 897 --

814 	Energy Methods
Reactions. 	Using the free-body diagram of the entire beam (Fig. 2) gives
RA = wb 2
2L + Q b
L ↑ 	RB = wb (a + 1
2 b)
L + Q a
L ↑
Portion AD of Beam. 	Using the free-body diagram shown in Fig. 3,
M1 = R A x = (
wb 2
2L + Q b
L)x ∂M1
∂Q = +bx
L
Substituting into Eq. (1) and integrating from A to D gives
1
EI ∫ M1
∂M1
∂Q dx = 1
EI ∫a
0
R A x(
bx
L )dx = R A a 3b
3EIL
Then substitute for RA and set the dummy load Q equal to zero.
1
EI ∫ M1
∂M1
∂Q dx = wa 3b 3
6EIL2 	(2)
Portion DB of Beam. 	Using the free-body diagram shown in Fig. 4,
the bending moment at a distance v from end B is
M2 = R B v − wv 2
2 = [
wb (a + 1
2 b)
L + Q a
L ]v − wv 2
2
∂M2
∂Q = + av
L
Substitute into Eq. (1) and integrate from point B (where v = 0) to
point D (where v = b) for
1
EI ∫ M2
∂M2
∂Q dv = 1
EI ∫b
0 (R B v − wv 2
2 )(
av
L )dv = R B ab3
3EIL − w ab4
8EIL
Substituting for RB and setting Q = 0,
1
EI ∫ M2
∂M2
∂Q dv = [
wb(a + 1
2 b)
L 	]
ab3
3EIL − wab4
8EIL = 5a2b4 + ab5
24EIL2 	w 	(3)
Deflection at Point D. 	Recalling Eqs. (1), (2), and (3),
yD = wab 3
24EIL2 (4a 2 + 5ab + b 2 ) = wab 3
24EIL2 (4a + b)(a + b) = wab 3
24EIL (4a + b)
From Appendix E, I = 68.9 in4 for a W10 × 15 beam. Substituting the numer-
ical values for I, w, a, b, and L, 	yD = 0.262 in. ↓ 	◂
B	A D
L
a
a + b	1
2
wb
b
RA 	RB
b	1
2
Q
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of beam.
x
(x ≤ a)
A
From A to D
M1
RA
V1
Fig. 3 	Free-body diagram
of left portion (in AD).
w
From B to D
B
v
RB
M2
V2
(v ≤ b)
Fig. 4 	Free-body diagram of right
portion (in BD).

-- 829 of 897 --

*11.9 	Statically Indeterminate Structures 	815
Sample Problem 11.7
For the uniform beam and loading shown, determine the reactions at the
supports.
STRATEGY: 	The beam is indeterminate to the first degree, and we
must choose one of the reactions as a redundant. We then use a free-body
diagram to solve for the reactions due to the distributed load and the
redundant reaction. Using free-body diagrams of the segments, we obtain
the moments as a function of the coordinate along the beam. Using
Eq. (11.57), we write Castigliano’s theorem for deflection associated with
the redundant reaction. We set this deflection equal to zero, and solve for
the redundant reaction. Equilibrium can then be used to find the other
reactions.
MODELING and ANALYSIS:
Castigliano’s Theorem. 	Choose the reaction RA as the redundant one
(Fig. 1). Using Castigliano’s theorem, determine the deflection at A due to the
combined action of RA and the distributed load. Since EI is constant,
yA = ∫ M
EI(
∂M
∂R A)dx = 1
EI ∫ M ∂M
∂R A
dx 	(1)
The integration will be performed separately for portions AB and BC of the
beam. RA is then obtained by setting yA equal to zero.
Free Body: Entire Beam. 	Using Fig. 2, the reactions at B and C in
terms of RA and the distributed load are
R B = 9
4 wL − 3R A 	R C = 2R A − 3
4 wL 	(2)
C	A
B
L 	L
2
w
B
A 	C
L	RA L
2
w
Fig. 1 	Released beam, replacing
support at A with redundant reaction RA.
(continued)
B
A 	C
L
wL	3
2 	L
4
3L
4
L
2
RA 	RB 	RC
Fig. 2 	Free-body diagram of beam.

-- 830 of 897 --

816 	Energy Methods
Portion AB of Beam. 	Using the free-body diagram shown in Fig. 3,
find
M1 = R A x − wx 2
2
∂M1
∂R A
= x
Substituting into Eq. (1) and integrating from A to B gives
1
EI ∫ M1
∂M
∂R A
dx = 1
EI ∫L
0 (R A x 2 − wx 3
2 )dx = 1
EI(
R A L3
3 − wL4
8 ) (3)
Portion BC of Beam. 	Using the free-body diagram shown in Fig. 4, find
M2 = (2R A − 3
4 wL) v − wv 2
2
∂M2
∂R A
= 2v
Substituting into Eq. (1) and integrating from C (where v = 0) to B (where
v = 1
2 L) gives
1
EI ∫ M2
∂M2
∂R A
dv = 1
EI ∫L∕2
0 (4R A v 2 − 3
2 wLv 2 − wv 3
)dv
= 1
EI (
R A L3
6 − wL4
16 − wL4
64 ) = 1
EI (
R A L3
6 − 5wL4
64 ) (4)
Reaction at A. 	Adding the expressions from Eqs. (3) and (4), we obtain
yA and set it equal to zero:
y A = 1
EI (
R A L3
3 − wL4
8 ) + 1
EI (
R A L3
6 − 5wL4
64 ) = 0
Thus, 	RA = 13
32 wL 	RA = 13
32 wL ↑ 	◂
Reactions at B and C. 	Substituting for RA into Eq. (2), we obtain
RB = 33
32 wL ↑ 	RC = wL
16 ↑ 	◂
wx
x
A
From A to B
M1
RA
V1
x
2
(x ≤ L)
Fig. 3 	Free-body diagram of left
portion showing internal shear
and moment.
(v ≤ )
From C to B
C
v
RC = 2RA
M2
V2
L
2
v
2
wv
wL	3
4
	–
Fig. 4 	Free-body diagram of right
portion showing internal shear and
moment.

-- 831 of 897 --

817
Problems
11.77 and 11.78 	Using the information in Appendix F, compute the work
of the loads as they are applied to the beam (a) if the load P is
applied first, (b) if the couple M is applied first.
L
B
A
M0
P
Fig. P11.77
B	A C
P
M0
L / 2 	L / 2
Fig. P11.78
11.79 through 11.82 	For the beam and loading shown, (a) compute the
work of the loads as they are applied successively to the beam, using
the information provided in Appendix F, (b) compute the strain
energy of the beam by the method of Sec. 11.2A and show that it
is equal to the work obtained in part a.
B	A
C
L / 2 	L / 2
P	P
Fig. P11.79
C
B
L/2 	L/2
A
M0	M0
Fig. P11.80
D 	E B	A
L
4
L
2
L
4
P 	P
Fig. P11.81
L
B	A
M0	M0
Fig. P11.82
11.83 through 11.85 	For the prismatic beam shown, determine the deflec-
tion of point D.
11.86 through 11.88 	For the prismatic beam shown, determine the slope
at point D.
L/2 	L/2
B
A
D
w
Fig. P11.83 and P11.86
P
A 	B
E
D
L/2 	L/2 	a
Fig. P11.84 and P11.87
A 	B
w
E
D
L/2 	L/2 	L/2
Fig. P11.85 and P11.88

-- 832 of 897 --

818
11.89 For the prismatic beam shown, determine the slope at point A.
A 	B
D
L
a 	b
P
Fig. P11.89
L /2 	L /2
A 	B
C
M0
Fig. P11.90
B	A
C
6 ft 2 ft
8 kips 	4 kips
W14 × 30
Fig. P11.91 and P11.92
8 kN
A
C
18 kN/m
B
1 m 	1.5 m
2.5 m
W250 × 22.3
Fig. P11.93
A
C	B
0.6 m 	0.9 m
40 mm
80 mm
5 kN/m
4 kN
Fig. P11.94
11.90 For the prismatic beam shown, determine the slope at point B.
11.91 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection of end C.
Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
11.92 For the beam and loading shown, determine the slope of end C. Use
E = 29 × 106 psi.
11.93 and 11.94 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflec-
tion at point B. Use E = 200 GPa.
11.95 For the beam and loading shown, determine the slope at end A. Use
E = 200 GPa.
B
C
160 kN
A
2.4 m 	2.4 m
4.8 m
W310 × 74
Fig. P11.95

-- 833 of 897 --

819
11.96 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection at
point D. Use E = 200 GPa.
B	A D 	E
0.6 m
90 kN 	90 kN
0.6 m
2 m
S250 × 37.8
Fig. P11.96
B
D	C
A
8 kips
S8 × 18.4
6 ft 	3 ft
3 ft
Fig. P11.97 and P11.98
l
l
D
B
C
1
2
l	1
2
A
A P
Fig. P11.99
11.97 For the beam and loading shown, determine the slope at end A. Use
E = 29 × 106 psi.
11.98 For the beam and loading shown, determine the deflection at
point C. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
11.99 and 11.100 For the truss and loading shown, determine the hori-
zontal and vertical deflection of joint C.
A 	A
2A 	D	B
C
l 	l
P
l	1
2
Fig. P11.100
2.5 ft 	3 in2
4 in2
6 in2
6 ft
80 kips
48 kips
B
C
D
2.5 ft
Fig. P11.101 and P11.102
11.101 and 11.102 Each member of the truss shown is made of steel and
has the cross-sectional area shown. Using E = 29 × 106 psi, deter-
mine the deflection indicated.
11.101 Vertical deflection of joint C.
11.102 Horizontal deflection of joint C.

-- 834 of 897 --

820
11.103 Members of the truss shown consist of sections of aluminum pipes
with the cross-sectional areas indicated. Using E = 70 GPa, deter-
mine the vertical deflection of joint D. Members AB, AC, AD, and
CE: A = 500 mm2; other members: A = 1000 mm2.
40 kN
0.8 m 	0.8 m
1.5 m
0.6 m
C
A B
D
E
Fig. P11.103
11.104 For the truss and loading of Prob. 11.103, determine the horizontal
deflection of joint D.
11.105 A uniform rod of flexural rigidity EI is bent and loaded as shown.
Determine (a) the vertical deflection of point A, (b) the horizontal
deflection of point A.
L
L C
B
A
60°
P
Fig. P11.105
11.106 For the uniform rod and loading shown and using Castigliano’s
theorem, determine the deflection of point B.
A
R
B
P
Fig. P11.106

-- 835 of 897 --

821
11.107 For the beam and loading shown and using Castigliano’s theorem,
determine (a) the horizontal deflection of point B, (b) the vertical
deflection of point B.
B
R
A
P
Fig. P11.107
11.108 Two rods AB and BC of the same flexural rigidity EI are welded
together at B. For the loading shown, determine (a) the horizontal
deflection of point B, (b) the vertical deflection of point B.
11.109 Three rods, each of the same flexural rigidity EI, are welded to form
the frame ABCD. For the loading shown, determine the deflection
of point D.
11.110 Three rods, each of the same flexural rigidity EI, are welded to form
the frame ABCD. For the loading shown, determine the angle formed
by the frame at point D.
11.111 through 11.114 Determine the reaction at the roller support
and draw the bending-moment diagram for the beam and loading
shown.
C
B
A
P
60° 	60°
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P11.108
P
L
L
A 	D
B 	C
Fig. P11.109 and P11.110
A
B
C
P
L/2 	L/2
Fig. P11.111
A
B
L
M0
Fig. P11.112
A
L
B	D
a 	b
M0
Fig. P11.113
L/2 	L/2
B
A
C
w
Fig. P11.114

-- 836 of 897 --

822
11.115 and 11.116 	For the uniform beam and loading shown, determine
the reaction at each support.
B C
w
A
L	L/2
Fig. P11.115
B C	A
L	L/2
M0
Fig. P11.116
11.117 through 11.120 	Three members of the same material and same
cross-sectional area are used to support the load P. Determine the
force in member BC.
P
l
C	D 	E
B
ϕ	ϕ
Fig. P11.117
B D
A 	C
l
l
30°
P
Fig. P11.119
C
D
R 	E
B
P
ϕ
Fig. P11.118
D
C
3
4
E
B
l
l
P
Fig. P11.120
11.121 and 11.122 	Knowing that the eight members of the indeterminate
truss shown have the same uniform cross-sectional area, determine
the force in member AB.
P
l	
3
4
C
A 	B
l
E	D
Fig. P11.121
P
l
l	
3
4
C
E	D
A 	B
Fig. P11.122

-- 837 of 897 --

823
Strain Energy
We considered a uniform rod subjected to a slowly increasing axial load P
(Fig. 11.43). The area under the load-deformation diagram (Fig. 11.44)
represents the work done by P. This work is equal to the strain energy of the
rod associated with the deformation caused by load P:
Strain energy = U = ∫x1
0
P dx 	(11.2)
P
P 	U = Area
O
x x	x1
dx
Fig. 11.44 	Work due to load P
is equal to the area under the
load-deformation diagram.
Strain-Energy Density
Since the stress is uniform throughout the rod shown in Fig. 11.43, the strain
energy can be divided by the volume of the rod to obtain the strain energy
per unit volume. This is the strain-energy density of the material.
Strain-energy density = u = ∫ε1
0
σ x dε x 	(11.4)
The strain-energy density is equal to the area under the stress-strain diagram
of the material (Fig. 11.45). Equation (11.4) remains valid when the stresses
are not uniformly distributed, but the strain-energy density now varies from
point to point. If the material is unloaded, there is a permanent strain εp, and
only the strain-energy density corresponding to the triangular area is recov-
ered. The remainder of the energy is dissipated in the form of heat during the
deformation of the material.
Modulus of Toughness
The area under the entire stress-strain diagram (from zero to rupture) is called
the modulus of toughness and is a measure of the total energy that can be
acquired by the material.
Review and Summary
C
C
A
L
B
B
P
x
Fig. 11.43 	Axially loaded rod.
O p 	1
σ
ε	ε	ε
Fig. 11.45 	Strain-energy density is the
area under the stress-strain curve between
εx = 0 and εx = ε1. If loaded into the plastic
region, only the energy associated with
elastic unloading is recovered.

-- 838 of 897 --

824
Modulus of Resilience
If the normal stress σ remains within the proportional limit of the material,
the strain-energy density u is
u = σ 2
2E
The area under the stress-strain curve from zero strain to the strain εY
at yield (Fig. 11.46) is the modulus of resilience of the material. It represents
the energy per unit volume that the material can absorb without yielding:
uY = σ Y
2
2E (11.8)
Modulus
of resilience
Y
Y
Y
O
σ
σ
ε 	ε
Fig. 11.46 	Modulus of resilience is the
area under the stress-strain curve to yield.
Strain Energy Under Axial Load
The strain energy under axial load is associated with normal stresses. If a rod
of length L and variable cross-sectional area A is subjected to a centric axial
load P at its end, the strain energy of the rod is
U = ∫L
0
P 2
2AE dx 	(11.13)
If the rod has a uniform cross section with an area A, the strain energy is
U = P 2L
2AE (11.14)
Strain Energy Due to Bending
For a beam subjected to transverse loads (Fig. 11.47), the strain energy asso-
ciated with the normal stresses is
U = ∫L
0
M 2
2EI dx 	(11.15)
where M is the bending moment and EI is the flexural rigidity of the beam.
Strain Energy Due to Shearing Stresses
The strain energy also can be associated with shearing stresses. The strain-
energy density for a material in pure shear is
u = τ 2
xy
2G (11.17)
where τxy is the shearing stress and G is the modulus of rigidity of the
material.
B	A
x
Fig. 11.47 	Transversely loaded beam.

-- 839 of 897 --

825
Strain Energy Due to Torsion
For a shaft with a length of L and uniform cross section subjected to couples
of magnitude T at its ends (Fig. 11.48), the strain energy is
U = T 2L
2GJ (11.20)
where J is the polar moment of inertia of the cross-sectional area of the
shaft.
L
T
T'
Fig. 11.48 	Prismatic shaft subjected
to torque.
General State of Stress
The strain energy of an elastic isotropic material under a general state of stress
was considered where the strain-energy density at a given point is expressed
in terms of the principal stresses σa, σb, and σc at that point:
u = 1
2E [σ 2
a + σ 2
b + σ c
2 − 2ν(σa σ b + σ b σ c + σ c σ a)] 	(11.23)
The strain-energy density at a given point is divided into two parts: uv, which
is associated with a change in volume of the material at that point, and ud,
which is associated with a distortion of the material at the same point. Thus,
u = uv + ud, where
uv = 1 − 2ν
6E (σ a + σ b + σ c) 2 	(11.28)
and
ud = 1
12G [(σ a − σ b) 2 + (σ b − σ c) 2 + (σ c − σ a) 2 ] 	(11.29)
This equation for ud is used to derive the maximum-distortion-energy crite-
rion to predict whether a ductile material yields under a given state of plane
stress.
Impact Loads
For the impact loading of an elastic structure being hit by a mass moving
with a given velocity, it is assumed that the kinetic energy of the mass is
transferred entirely to the structure. The equivalent static load is the load that
causes the same deformations and stresses as the impact load.
A structural member designed to withstand an impact load effectively
should be shaped so that the stresses are evenly distributed throughout the
member. Also, the material used should have a low modulus of elasticity and
a high yield strength.

-- 840 of 897 --

826
Members Subjected to a Single Load
The strain energy of structural members subjected to a single load was consid-
ered for the beam and loading of Fig. 11.49. The strain energy of the beam is
U = P 2
1L3
6EI (11.37)
Observing that the work done by load P is equal to 1
2P1 y1 , the work of the
load and the strain energy of the beam are equal and can be equated to deter-
mine the deflection y1 at the point of application of the load.
The method just described is of limited value, since it is restricted to
structures subjected to a single concentrated load and to the determination of
the deflection at the point of application of that load. In the remaining sections
of the chapter, we presented a more general method, which can be used to
determine deflections at various points of structures subjected to several loads.
Castigliano’s Theorem
Castigliano’s theorem states that the deflection xj of the point of applica-
tion of a load Pj measured along the line of action of Pj is equal to the
partial derivative of the strain energy of the structure with respect to the
load Pj. Thus,
x j = ∂U
∂P j
(11.52)
Castigliano’s theorem also can be used to determine the slope of a beam at
the point of application of a couple Mj by writing
θj = ∂U
∂M j
(11.55)
Similarly the angle of twist is determined in a section of a shaft where a torque
Tj is applied by writing
ϕj = ∂U
∂T j
(11.56)
Castigliano’s theorem can be applied to determine the deflections and
slopes at various points of a given structure. Dummy loads are used to deter-
mine displacements at points where no actual load is applied. The calculation
of a deflection xj is simpler if the differentiation with respect to load Pj is
carried out before the integration. For a beam,
x j = ∂U
∂P j
= ∫L
0
M
EI
∂M
∂P j
dx 	(11.57)
For a truss consisting of n members, the deflection xj at the point of applica-
tion of the load Pj is
x j = ∂U
∂P j
= ∑
n
i=1
Fi Li
A i E
∂Fi
∂P j
(11.59)
Indeterminate Structures
Castigliano’s theorem can also be used in the analysis of statically indetermi-
nate structures, as shown in Sec. 11.9.
L
A
B
P1
y1
Fig. 11.49 	Cantilever beam with
load P1.

-- 841 of 897 --

827
11.123 A single 6-mm-diameter steel pin B is used to connect the steel
strip DE to two aluminum strips, each of 20-mm width and 5-mm
thickness. The modulus of elasticity is 200 GPa for the steel and
70 GPa for the aluminum. Knowing that for the pin at B the allow-
able shearing stress is τall = 85 MPa, determine, for the loading
shown, the maximum strain energy that can be acquired by the
assembled strips.
11.124 Using E = 10.6 × 106 psi, determine by approximate means the
maximum strain energy that can be acquired by the aluminum rod
shown if the allowable normal stress is σall = 22 ksi.
4 @ 1.5 in. = 6 in.
A
B
1.5 in. 2.10 in.2.55 in.2.85 in.
3 in.
P
Fig. P11.124
11.125 The design specifications for the steel shaft AB require that the shaft
acquire a strain energy of 400 in·lb as the 25-kip·in. torque is applied.
Using G = 11.2 × 106 psi, determine (a) the largest inner diameter
of the shaft that can be used, (b) the corresponding maximum shear-
ing stress in the shaft.
2.5 in.
25 kip·in.
36 in.
B
A
Fig. P11.125
Review Problems
1.25 m
0.5 m
5 mm
20 mm
B
A
D
C
E
P
Fig. P11.123

-- 842 of 897 --

828
11.126 The 15-kg collar D is released from rest in the position shown and
is stopped by a plate attached at end C of the vertical rod ABC.
Knowing that E = 200 GPa for both portions of the rod, determine
(a) the maximum deflection of end C, (b) the equivalent static load,
(c) the maximum stress that occurs in the rod.
11.127 Each member of the truss shown is made of steel. The cross-sectional
area of member BC is 800 mm 2 , and for all other members the
cross-sectional area is 400 mm 2 . Using E = 200 GPa, determine the
deflection of point D caused by the 60-kN load.
1.2 m
0.5 m
1.2 m
A
B 	D
C
60 kN
Fig. P11.127
11.128 A block of weight W is placed in contact with a beam at some given
point D and released. Show that the resulting maximum deflection
at point D is twice as large as the deflection due to a static load W
applied at D.
11.129 Two solid steel shafts are connected by the gears shown. Using the
method of work and energy, determine the angle through which end
A rotates when TA = 1500 N·m. Use G = 77.2 GPa.
120 mm
1.2 m
0.9 m
66-mm
diameter
44-mm diameter 40 mm
B
A
TA
C 	D
Fig. P11.129
11.130 The 20-mm-diameter steel rod BC is attached to the lever AB and to
the fixed support C. The uniform steel lever is 10 mm thick and
30 mm deep. Using the method of work and energy, determine the
length L of the rod BC for which the deflection at point A is 40 mm.
Use E = 200 GPa and G = 77.2 GPa.
2 m
1.5 m
40-mm diameter
30-mm diameter
h
B
D
A
C
m
Fig. P11.126
C
A
450 N
B
L
500 mm
Fig. P11.130

-- 843 of 897 --

829
11.131 For the prismatic beam shown, determine the slope at point D.
A 	B
D 	E
L/2 	L/2 	L/2
P 	P
Fig. P11.131
11.132 A disk of radius a has been welded to end B of the solid steel shaft
AB. A cable is then wrapped around the disk and a vertical force P is
applied to end C of the cable. Knowing that the radius of the shaft is
L and neglecting the deformations of the disk and of the cable, show
that the deflection of point C caused by the application of P is
δC = PL3
3EI (1 + 1.5 Ea 2
GL2)
aa
BB
CC
L
P
AA
Fig. P11.132
11.133 A uniform rod of flexural rigidity EI is bent and loaded as shown.
Determine (a) the horizontal deflection of point D, (b) the slope at
point D.
C
P
D
l
l
A
B
Fig. P11.133
11.134 The 4-lb block E is released from rest when h = 1.5 in. and strikes
the 1-in.-square steel bar BD that is attached to 3
8 -in.-diameter steel
rods AB and CD. Knowing that E = 29 × 106 psi, determine the
maximum deflection at the midpoint of the bar.
12 in.	12 in.
h	B 	D
E
A 	C
25 in.
Fig. P11.134

-- 844 of 897 --

830
The following problems are designed to be solved with a computer.
11.C1 A rod consisting of n elements, each of which is homogeneous and
of uniform cross section, is subjected to a load P applied at its
free end. The length of element i is denoted by Li and its diam-
eter by di. (a) Denoting by E the modulus of elasticity of the
material used in the rod, write a computer program that can be
used to determine the strain energy acquired by the rod and the
deformation measured at its free end. (b) Use this program
to determine the strain energy and deformation for the rods of
Probs. 11.9 and 11.10.
11.C2 Two 0.75 × 6-in. cover plates are welded to a W8 × 18 rolled-steel
beam as shown. The 1500-lb block is to be dropped from a height
h = 2 in. onto the beam. (a) Write a computer program to calculate
the maximum normal stress on transverse sections just to the left of
D and at the center of the beam for values of a from 0 to 60 in.
using 5-in. increments. (b) From the values considered in part a,
select the distance a for which the maximum normal stress is as
small as possible. Use E = 29 × 106 psi.
B
D 	C 	h
60 in. 	60 in.
a 	a
E
F 	1500 lb × 6 in.
W8 × 18
A
3
4
Fig. P11.C2
11.C3 The 16-kg block D is dropped from a height h onto the free end of
the steel bar AB. For the steel used σall = 120 MPa and E = 200 GPa.
(a) Write a computer program to calculate the maximum allowable
height h for values of the length L from 100 mm to 1.2 m, using
100-mm increments. (b) From the values considered in part a, select
the length corresponding to the largest allowable height.
B
24 mm
24 mm
h
D
A
L
Fig. P11.C3
Computer Problems
P
Element i Element 1
Element n
Fig. P11.C1

-- 845 of 897 --

831
11.C4 The block D of mass m = 8 kg is dropped from a height h = 750 mm
onto the rolled-steel beam AB. Knowing that E = 200 GPa, write a
computer program to calculate the maximum deflection of point E
and the maximum normal stress in the beam for values of a from
100 to 900 mm, using 100-mm increments.
A
1.8 m
a
B
E
D 	m
h
W150 × 13.5
Fig. P11.C4
11.C5 The steel rods AB and BC are made of a steel for which σY = 300 MPa
and E = 200 GPa. (a) Write a computer program to calculate for
values of a from 0 to 6 m, using 1-m increments, the maximum
strain energy that can be acquired by the assembly without causing
any permanent deformation. (b) For each value of a considered,
calculate the diameter of a uniform rod of length 6 m and of the
same mass as the original assembly, and the maximum strain
energy that could be acquired by this uniform rod without causing
permanent deformation.
10-mm diameter
a
6 m
6-mm diameter
P
B
	A
C
Fig. P11.C5
11.C6 A 160-lb diver jumps from a height of 20 in. onto end C of a diving
board having the uniform cross section shown. Write a computer
program to calculate for values of a from 10 to 50 in., using 10-in.
increments, (a) the maximum deflection of point C, (b) the maxi-
mum bending moment in the board, (c) the equivalent static load.
Assume that the diver’s legs remain rigid and use E = 1.8 × 106 psi.
A 	B
C
12 ft
16 in.
2.65 in.
20 in.
a
Fig. P11.C6

-- 846 of 897 --



-- 847 of 897 --

A1
Appendix A 	Principal Units Used in
Mechanics 	A2
Appendix B 	Centroids and Moments of Areas 	A4
Appendix C 	Centroids and Moments of Inertia of
Common Geometric Shapes 	A15
Appendix D 	Typical Properties of Selected Materials
Used in Engineering 	A17
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel
Shapes† A21
Appendix F 	Beam Deflections and Slopes 	A33
Appendix G 	Fundamentals of Engineering
Examination 	A34
Appendices
†Courtesy of the American Institute of Steel Construction, Chicago, Illinois.

-- 848 of 897 --

A 	Principal Units Used
in Mechanics
SI Prefixes
Multiplication Factor 	Prefix† 	Symbol
1 000 000 000 000 = 1012 	tera 	T
1 000 000 000 = 109 	giga 	G
1 000 000 = 106 	mega 	M
1 000 = 103 	kilo 	k
100 = 102 	hecto‡ 	h
10 = 101 	deka‡ 	da
0.1 = 10−1 	deci‡ 	d
0.01 = 10−2 	centi‡ 	c
0.001 = 10−3 	milli 	m
0.000 001 = 10−6 	micro 	μ
0.000 000 001 = 10−9 	nano 	n
0.000 000 000 001 = 10−12 	pico 	p
0.000 000 000 000 001 = 10−15 	femto 	f
0.000 000 000 000 000 001 = 10−18 	atto 	a
†The first syllable of every prefix is accented so that the prefix will retain its identity. Thus, the
preferred pronunciation of kilometer places the accent on the first syllable, not the second.
‡The use of these prefixes should be avoided, except for the measurement of areas and volumes
and for the nontechnical use of centimeter, as for body and clothing measurements.
Principal SI Units Used in Mechanics
Quantity 	Unit 	Symbol 	Formula
Acceleration 	Meter per second squared 	… 	m/s2
Angle 	Radian 	rad 	†
Angular acceleration 	Radian per second squared 	… 	rad/s2
Angular velocity 	Radian per second 	… 	rad/s
Area 	Square meter 	… 	m2
Density 	Kilogram per cubic meter 	… 	kg/m3
Energy 	Joule 	J 	N·m
Force 	Newton 	N 	kg·m/s2
Frequency 	Hertz 	Hz 	s–1
Impulse 	Newton-second 	… 	kg·m/s
Length 	Meter 	m 	‡
Mass 	Kilogram 	kg 	‡
Moment of a force 	Newton-meter 	… 	N·m
Power 	Watt 	W 	J/s
Pressure 	Pascal 	Pa 	N/m2
Stress 	Pascal 	Pa 	N/m2
Time 	Second 	s 	‡
Velocity 	Meter per second 	… 	m/s
Volume, solids 	Cubic meter 	… 	m3
Liquids 	Liter 	L 	10–3 m3
Work 	Joule 	J 	N·m
†Supplementary unit (1 revolution = 2π rad = 360°).
‡Base unit.
APPENDIX
A2

-- 849 of 897 --

U.S. Customary Units and Their SI Equivalents 	A3
U.S. Customary Units and Their SI Equivalents
Quantity 	U.S. Customary Units 	SI Equivalent
Acceleration 	ft/s2 	0.3048 m/s2
in./s2 	0.0254 m/s2
Area 	ft2 	0.0929 m2
in2 	645.2 mm2
Energy 	ft·lb 	1.356 J
Force 	kip 	4.448 kN
lb 	4.448 N
oz 	0.2780 N
Impulse 	lb·s 	4.448 N·s
Length 	ft 	0.3048 m
in. 	25.40 mm
mi 	1.609 km
Mass 	oz mass 	28.35 g
lb mass 	0.4536 kg
slug 	14.59 kg
ton 	907.2 kg
Moment of a force 	lb·ft 	1.356 N·m
lb·in. 	0.1130 N·m
Moment of inertia
Of an area 	in4 	0.4162 × 106 mm4
Of a mass 	lb·ft·s2 	1.356 kg·m2
Power 	ft·lb/s 	1.356 W
hp 	745.7 W
Pressure or stress 	lb/ft2 	47.88 Pa
lb/in2 (psi) 	6.895 kPa
Velocity 	ft/s 	0.3048 m/s
in./s 	0.0254 m/s
mi/h (mph) 	0.4470 m/s
mi/h (mph) 	1.609 km/h
Volume, solids 	ft3 	0.02832 m3
in3 	16.39 cm3
Liquids 	gal 	3.785 L
qt 	0.9464 L
Work 	ft·lb 	1.356 J

-- 850 of 897 --

A4
B.1 	First Moment of an Area and
Centroid of an Area
Consider an area A located in the xy plane (Fig. B.1). Using x and y as the
coordinates of an element of area dA, the first moment of the area A with
respect to the x axis is the integral
Qx = ∫A
y dA 	(B.1)
Similarly, the first moment of the area A with respect to the y axis is the
integral
Qy = ∫A
x dA 	(B.2)
Note that each of these integrals may be positive, negative, or zero, depending
on the position of the coordinate axes. When SI units are used, the first
moments Qx and Qy are given in m3 or mm3. When U.S. customary units are
used, they are given in ft3 or in3 .
The centroid of the area A is the point C of coordinates x and y
(Fig. B.2), which satisfy the relationship
∫A
x dA = Ax 	∫A
y dA = Ay 	(B.3)
Comparing Eqs. (B.1) and (B.2) with Eqs. (B.3), the first moments of the
area A can be expressed as the products of the area and the coordinates of
its centroid:
Qx = Ay 	Qy = Ax 	(B.4)
When an area possesses an axis of symmetry, the first moment of the
area with respect to that axis is zero. Considering area A of Fig. B.3, which
is symmetric with respect to the y axis, every element of area dA of abscissa
A
x 	dA
x
y
y
O
A
C	x
x
y
y
O
Fig. B.1 	General area A with
infinitesimal area dA referred
to xy coordinate system.
Fig. B.2 	Centroid of area A.
x
x
dA'
A
C
O
dA
y
–x
Fig. B.3 	Area having axis of symmetry.
B 	Centroids and Moments of Areas
APPENDIX

-- 851 of 897 --

B.1 First Moment of an Area and Centroid of an Area 	A5
x corresponds to an element of area dA′ of abscissa −x. Therefore, the inte-
gral in Eq. (B.2) is zero, and Qy = 0. From the first of the relationships in
Eq. (B.3), x = 0. Thus, if an area A possesses an axis of symmetry, its centroid
C is located on that axis.
Since a rectangle possesses two axes of symmetry (Fig. B.4a), the cen-
troid C of a rectangular area coincides with its geometric center. Similarly, the
centroid of a circular area coincides with the center of the circle (Fig. B.4b).
When an area possesses a center of symmetry O, the first moment of
the area about any axis through O is zero. Considering the area A of Fig. B.5,
every element of area dA with coordinates x and y corresponds to an element
of area dA′ with coordinates −x and −y. It follows that the integrals in Eqs.
(B.1) and (B.2) are both zero, and Qx = Qy = 0. From Eqs. (B.3), x = y = 0,
so the centroid of the area coincides with its center of symmetry.
When the centroid C of an area can be located by symmetry, the first
moment of that area with respect to any given axis can be obtained easily
from Eqs. (B.4). For example, for the rectangular area of Fig. B.6,
Qx = Ay = (bh)( 1
2h) = 1
2bh2
and
Qy = Ax = (bh)( 1
2b) = 1
2b2h
In most cases, it is necessary to perform the integrations indicated in
Eqs. (B.1) through (B.3) to determine the first moments and the centroid of
a given area. While each of the integrals is actually a double integral, it is
possible to select elements of area dA in the shape of thin horizontal or ver-
tical strips and to reduce the equations to integrations in a single variable.
This is illustrated in Concept Application B.1. Centroids of common geomet-
ric shapes are given in Appendix C.
A 	A
C 	C
(a) 	(b)
Fig. B.4 	Areas having two axes of symmetry have the centroid
at their intersection.
x
dA
A
O
dA'
y
–y
–x
y
x
Fig. B.5 	Area with center of
symmetry has its centroid at the origin.
A
C
O
y =
x =
h
h
y
x
1
2
b
b
1
2
Fig. B.6 	Centroid of a rectangular area.

-- 852 of 897 --

Concept Application B.1
For the triangular area of Fig. B.7a, determine (a) the first moment Qx of
the area with respect to the x axis, (b) the ordinate y of the centroid of
the area.
a. First Moment Qx. 	We choose to select as an element of area a hori-
zontal strip with a length of u and thickness dy. Note that all of the points
within the element are at the same distance y from the x axis (Fig. B.7b).
From similar triangles,
u
b = h − y
h u = b h − y
h
and
dA = u dy = b h − y
h dy
(a)
h
x
y
b
h
h – y	dy
x
y	u
y
b
(b)
Fig. B.7 	(a) Triangular area. (b) Horizontal element used in integration to
find centroid.
The first moment of the area with respect to the x axis is
Qx = ∫A
y dA = ∫h
0
ybh − y
h dy = b
h ∫h
0
(hy − y2 ) dy
= b
h[hy2
2 − y 3
3 ]
h
0
Qx = 1
6bh2
b. Ordinate of Centroid. 	Recalling the first of Eqs. (B.4) and observ-
ing that A = 1
2bh,
Qx = Ay 	1
6bh2 = ( 1
2bh)y
y = 1
3h
A6 	Appendix B

-- 853 of 897 --

B.2 The First Moment and Centroid of a Composite Area 	A7
B.2 	The First Moment and Centroid of
a Composite Area
Consider area A of the quadrilateral area shown in Fig. B.8, which can be
divided into simple geometric shapes. The first moment Qx of the area
with respect to the x axis is represented by the integral ∫y dA, which
extends over the entire area A. Dividing A into its component parts
A1 , A2 , A3 , write
Qx = ∫A
y dA = ∫A1
y dA + ∫A2
y dA + ∫A3
y dA
X
A
C
O
y
x
Y
C3
C2	C1
A2	
A1
A3
O
y
x
Fig. B.8 	Quadrilateral area divided into simple geometric shapes.
or recalling the second of Eqs. (B.3),
Qx = A1y1 + A2y2 + A3y3
where y1 , y2 , and y3 represent the ordinates of the centroids of the component
areas. Extending this to an arbitrary number of component areas and noting
that a similar expression for Qy may be obtained, write
Qx = ∑ A i y i 	Qy = ∑ A i x i 	(B.5)
To obtain the coordinates X and Y of the centroid C of the composite
area A, substitute Qx = AY and Qy = AX into Eqs. (B.5):
AY = ∑
i
A i y i 	AX = ∑
i
A i x i
Solving for X and Y and recalling that the area A is the sum of the component
areas A i,
X =
∑
i
A i x i
∑
i
A i
Y =
∑
i
A i y i
∑
i
A i
(B.6)

-- 854 of 897 --

Concept Application B.2
Locate the centroid C of the area A shown in Fig. B.9a.
Selecting the coordinate axes shown in Fig. B.9b, note that the centroid C
must be located on the y axis, since this is an axis of symmetry. Thus, X = 0.
O
A2
A1
Dimensions in mm
60
20
80
40
y2 = 30
y1 = 70
y
x
(b)
Fig. B.9 	(a) Area A. (b) Composite areas A1 and A2 used to determine overall
centroid.
Divide area A into its component parts A1 and A2 and use the second of
Eqs. (B.6) to determine the ordinate Y of the centroid. The actual computation
is best carried out in tabular form:
Area, mm 2 	yi , mm 	A i yi , mm3
A1 	(20)(80) = 1600 	70 	112 × 103
A2 	(40)(60) = 2400 	30 	72 × 103
∑
i
Ai = 4000 	∑
i
Aiy i = 184 × 103
Y =
∑
i
A i y i
∑
i
A i
= 184 × 103 mm3
4 × 103 mm2 	= 46 mm
A
C
20
Dimensions in mm
60
20 40 20
(a)
A8 	Appendix B

-- 855 of 897 --

Concept Application B.3
Referring to the area A of Concept Application B.2, consider the horizontal
x′ axis through its centroid C (called a centroidal axis). The portion of A
located above that axis is A′ (Fig. B.10a). Determine the first moment of A′
with respect to the x′ axis.
C
A3
A1
Dimensions in mm
46
14
20
80
40
y'1 = 24
y'
y'3 = 7
x'
(b)
Solution. 	Divide the area A′ into its components A1 and A3 (Fig. B.10b).
Recall from Concept Application B.2 that C is located 46 mm above the lower
edge of A. The ordinates y′1 and y′3 of A1 and A3 and the first moment Q′x′
of A′ with respect to x′ are
Q′x′ = A1 y′1 + A3 y′3
= (20 × 80)(24) + (14 × 40)(7) = 42.3 × 103 mm3
Alternative Solution. 	Since the centroid C of A is located on the x′ axis,
the first moment Qx′ of the entire area A with respect to that axis is zero:
Qx′ = Ay′ = A(0) = 0
Using A″ as the portion of A located below the x′ axis and Q″x′ as its first
moment with respect to that axis,
Qx′ = Q′x′ + Q″x′ = 0 	or 	Q′x′ = −Q″x′
This shows that the first moments of A′ and A″ have the same magnitude
and opposite signs. Referring to Fig. B.10c, write
Q″x′ = A4 y′4 = (40 × 46)(−23) = −42.3 × 103 mm3
and
Q′x′ = −Q″x′ = +42.3 × 103 mm3
C
A'
x'
Y
y
x
(a)
C
A'' = A4
A'
Dimensions in mm
46
40
y'4 = 23
x'
y'
(c)
Fig. B.10 	(a) Area A with centroidal
x′y′ axes, highlighting portion A′.
(b) Areas used to determine the first
moment of area A′ with respect to
the x′ axis. (c) Alternative solution
using the other portion A″ of the
total area A.
B.2 The First Moment and Centroid of a Composite Area 	A9

-- 856 of 897 --

B.3 	Second Moment, or Moment of
Inertia of an Area, and Radius
of Gyration
Consider an area A located in the xy plane (Fig. B.1) and the element of area
dA of coordinates x and y. The second moment, or moment of inertia, of area
A with respect to the x and y axes is
Ix = ∫A
y2 dA 	Iy = ∫A
x2 dA 	(B.7)
These integrals are called rectangular moments of inertia, since they are found
from the rectangular coordinates of element dA. While each integral is actually
a double integral, it is possible to select elements of area dA in the shape of
thin horizontal or vertical strips and to reduce the equations to integrations in
a single variable. This is illustrated in Concept Application B.4.
The polar moment of inertia of area A with respect to point O (Fig. B.11)
is the integral
JO = ∫A
ρ2 dA 	(B.8)
where ρ is the distance from O to the element dA. While this integral is also
a double integral, for circular areas it is possible to select elements of area
dA in the shape of thin circular rings and to reduce the equation of JO to a
single integration (see Concept Application B.5).
Note from Eqs. (B.7) and (B.8) that the moments of inertia of an area
are positive quantities. When SI units are used, moments of inertia are given
in m4 or mm4. When U.S. customary units are used, they are given in ft4
or in4 .
An important relationship can be established between the polar moment
of inertia JO of a given area and the rectangular moments of inertia Ix and Iy.
Noting that ρ2 = x2 + y2 ,
JO = ∫A
ρ2 dA = ∫A
(x2 + y2 ) dA = ∫A
y2 dA + ∫A
x2 dA
or
JO = Ix + Iy 	(B.9)
The radius of gyration of an area A with respect to the x axis is r x ,
which satisfies the relationship
Ix = r2
x A 	(B.10)
where Ix is the moment of inertia of A with respect to the x axis. Solving Eq.
(B.10) for r x,
r x = √
Ix
A (B.11)
x 	dA
x
y
y
O
ρ
A
x 	dA
x
y
y
O
Fig. B.1 	(repeated)
Fig. B.11 	Area dA located
by distance ρ from point O.
A10 	Appendix B

-- 857 of 897 --

B.3 Second Moment, or Moment of Inertia of an Area 	A11
The radii of gyration with respect to the y axis and the origin O are
Iy = r2
y A 	r y = √
Iy
A (B.12)
J O = r 2
O A 	r O = √
J O
A (B.13)
Substituting for J O , Ix , and Iy in terms of the corresponding radii of gyration
in Eq. (B.9),
r 2
O = r 2
x + r 2
y 	(B.14)
The results obtained in Concept Applications B.4 and B.5 are included in
the table for moments of inertias of common geometric shapes, located in
Appendix C.
Concept Application B.4
For the rectangular area of Fig. B.12a, determine (a) the moment of inertia
Ix of the area with respect to the centroidal x axis, (b) the corresponding radius
of gyration rx.
a. Moment of Inertia Ix. 	We choose to select a horizontal strip of length
b and thickness dy (Fig. B.12b). Since all of the points within the strip are at
the same distance y from the x axis, the moment of inertia of the strip with
respect to that axis is
dIx = y2 dA = y2 (b dy)
Integrating from y = −h∕2 to y = +h∕2,
Ix = ∫A
y 2 dA = ∫ +h∕2
−h∕2
y 2 (b dy) = 1
3b[y 3 ] +h∕2
−h∕2
= 1
3b (
h3
8 + h3
8 )
or
Ix = 1
12 bh3
b. Radius of Gyration rx. 	From Eq. (B.10),
Ix = r 2
x A 	1
12 bh3 = r 2
x (bh)
and solving for r x gives
r x = h∕ √12
h
b
x
y
O
(a)
b
x
− h/2
+ h/2
dy
y
y
O
(b)
Fig. B.12 	(a) Rectangular area.
(b) Horizontal strip used to
determine moment of inertia Ix.

-- 858 of 897 --

A12 	Appendix B
Concept Application B.5
For the circular area of Fig. B.13a, determine (a) the polar moment of inertia
JO, (b) the rectangular moments of inertia Ix and Iy.
O
c
x
y
(a)
a. Polar Moment of Inertia. 	We choose to select as an element of area
a ring of radius ρ with a thickness dρ (Fig. B.13b). Since all of the points
within the ring are at the same distance ρ from the origin O, the polar moment
of inertia of the ring is
dJ O = ρ2 dA = ρ2 (2πρ dρ)
Integrating in ρ from 0 to c,
J O = ∫A
ρ2 dA = ∫c
0
ρ2 (2πρ dρ) = 2π ∫c
0
ρ3 dρ
= 1
2 πc4
b. Rectangular Moments of Inertia. 	Because of the symmetry of the
circular area, Ix = Iy. Recalling Eq. (B.9), write
J O = Ix + Iy = 2Ix 1
2 πc4 = 2Ix
and,
Ix = Iy = 1
4 πc4
O
d ρ
c 	x
y
(b)
ρ
Fig. B.13 	(a) Circular area.
(b) Annular strip used to determine
polar moment of inertia JO.
B.4 	Parallel-Axis Theorem
Consider the moment of inertia Ix of an area A with respect to an arbitrary
x axis (Fig. B.14). Using y as the distance from an element of area dA to that
axis, recall from Sec. B.3 that
Ix = ∫A
y2 dA
We now draw the centroidal x′ axis, which is the axis parallel to the x axis
that passes through the centroid C. Using y′ as the distance from element dA
C
A
dA
x'
y'
y
d
x
Fig. B.14 	General area with centroidal
x′ axis, parallel to arbitrary x axis.

-- 859 of 897 --

B.5 Moment of Inertia of a Composite Area 	A13
to that axis, y = y′ + d, where d is the distance between the two axes. Sub-
stituting for y in the integral representing Ix gives
Ix = ∫A
y2 dA = ∫A
( y′ + d) 2dA
= ∫A
y′ 2 dA + 2d ∫A
y′ dA + d 2 ∫A
dA 	(B.15)
The first integral in Eq. (B.15) represents the moment of inertia Ix′ of the area
with respect to the centroidal x′ axis. The second integral represents the first
moment Qx′ of the area with respect to the x′ axis and is equal to zero, since
the centroid C of the area is located on that axis. In other words, recalling
from Sec. B.1 we write
Qx′ = Ay′ = A(0) = 0
The last integral in Eq. (B.15) is equal to the total area A. Therefore,
Ix = Ix′ + Ad 2 	(B.16)
This equation shows that the moment of inertia Ix of an area with respect
to an arbitrary x axis is equal to the moment of inertia Ix′ of the area with
respect to the centroidal x′ axis parallel to the x axis plus the product Ad2 of
the area A and of the square of the distance d between the two axes. This
result is known as the parallel-axis theorem. With this theorem, the moment
of inertia of an area with respect to a given axis can be determined when its
moment of inertia with respect to a centroidal axis of the same direction is
known. Conversely, it makes it possible to determine the moment of inertia
Ix′ of an area A with respect to a centroidal axis x′ when the moment of
inertia Ix of A with respect to a parallel axis is known. This is done by sub-
tracting from Ix the product Ad2. Note that the parallel-axis theorem may be
used only if one of the two axes involved is a centroidal axis.
A similar formula relates the polar moment of inertia JO of an area
with respect to an arbitrary point O and the polar moment of inertia JC of
the same area with respect to its centroid C. Using d as the distance
between O and C,
J O = JC + Ad 2 	(B.17)
B.5 	Moment of Inertia of
a Composite Area
Consider a composite area A made of several component parts A1, A2, and
so forth. Since the integral for the moment of inertia of A can be subdi-
vided into integrals extending over A1, A2, etc. the moment of inertia of A
with respect to a given axis is obtained by adding the moments of inertia
of the areas A1, A2, etc. with respect to the same axis. The moment of
inertia of an area made of several common shapes may be found by using
the formulas shown in Appendix C. Before adding the moments of inertia
of the component areas, the parallel-axis theorem should be used to trans-
fer each moment of inertia to the desired axis. This is shown in Concept
Application B.6.

-- 860 of 897 --

A14 	Appendix B
Concept Application B.6
Determine the moment of inertia Ix of the area shown with respect to the
centroidal x axis (Fig. B.15a).
Location of Centroid. 	The centroid C of the area has been located
in Concept Application B.2 for the given area. From this, C is located 46 mm
above the lower edge of area A.
Computation of Moment of Inertia. 	Area A is divided into two
rectangular areas A1 and A2 (Fig. B.15b), and the moment of inertia of each
area is found with respect to the x axis.
Rectangular Area A1. 	To obtain the moment of inertia (Ix)1 of
A1 with respect to the x axis, first compute the moment of inertia of A1
with respect to its own centroidal axis x′. Recalling the equation in part
a of Concept Application B.4 for the centroidal moment of inertia of a
rectangular area,
(Ix′ ) 1 = 1
12bh3 = 1
12 (80 mm)(20 mm) 3 = 53.3 × 103 mm4
Using the parallel-axis theorem, transfer the moment of inertia of A1 from its
centroidal axis x′ to the parallel axis x:
(Ix) 1 = (Ix′ ) 1 + A1d 2
1 = 53.3 × 103 + (80 × 20)(24) 2
= 975 × 103 mm4
Rectangular Area A2. 	Calculate the moment of inertia of A2 with
respect to its centroidal axis x″ and use the parallel-axis theorem to transfer
it to the x axis to obtain
(Ix″ ) 2 = 1
12bh3 = 1
12 (40)(60) 3 = 720 × 103 mm4
(Ix) 2 = (Ix″ ) 2 + A2 d 2
2 = 720 × 103 + (40 × 60)(16) 2
= 1334 × 103 mm4
Entire Area A. 	Add the values for the moments of inertia of A1 and
A2 with respect to the x axis to obtain the moment of inertia Ix of the entire
area:
Ix = (Ix) 1 + (Ix) 2 = 975 × 103 + 1334 × 103
= 2.31 × 106 mm4
A
x
y
C
20
Dimensions in mm
60
20 	40 	20
(a)
C
A1
A2
C1
C2
Dimensions in mm
46
14
10
10
80
40
y
x'
30
d2 = 16
d1 = 24
x
x"
(b)
Fig. B.15 	(a) Area A. (b) Composite
areas and centroids.

-- 861 of 897 --

Centroids of Common Shapes of Areas and Lines
Shape 	x 	y 	Area
Triangular area 	C
y
h
b
2
b
2
h
3
bh
2
Quarter-circular area
y
x
r
C	C
O
O
4r
3π
4r
3π
πr2
4
Semicircular area 	0 	4r
3π
πr2
2
Semiparabolic area
x
O 	O a
h	C	C
a
y
3a
8
3h
5
2ah
3
Parabolic area 	0 	3h
5
4ah
3
Parabolic spandrel
y
y = kx2
h
a
x
C
O
3a
4
3h
10
ah
3
Circular sector
x
C
r
O
α
α
2r sin α
3α
0 	αr2
Quarter-circular arc
y
x
r	C
C
O
	O
2r
π
2r
π
πr
2
Semicircular arc 	0 	2r
π
πr
Arc of circle
x
C
r
O
α
α r sin α
α
0 	2αr
C 	Centroids and Moments of Inertia
of Common Geometric Shapes
APPENDIX

-- 862 of 897 --

A16 	Appendix C
Moments of Inertia of Common Geometric Shapes
Rectangle 	h
b
x'
x
y'	y
C
Ix′ = 1
12bh3
Iy′ = 1
12b3h
Ix = 1
3bh3
Iy = 1
3b3h
J C = 1
12bh(b2 + h2 )
Triangle h
b
x'
x
h
3
C 	Ix′ = 1
36bh3
Ix = 1
12bh3
Circle 	x
y
r
O
Ix = Iy = 1
4πr4
J O = 1
2πr4
Semicircle
x
y
O r
C
Ix = Iy = 1
8πr4
J O = 1
4πr4
Quarter circle
x
y
O r
C
Ix = Iy = 1
16πr4
J O = 1
8πr4
Ellipse 	x
b
y
O
a
Ix = 1
4πab3
Iy = 1
4πa3b
J O = 1
4πab(a2 + b2 )

-- 863 of 897 --

(U.S. Customary Units)
Ultimate Strength 	Yield Strength3
Modulus 	Modulus 	Coefficient Ductility,
Specific 	Compres- 	of 	of 	of Thermal Percent
Weight, 	Tension, 	sion,2 	Shear, 	Tension, Shear, Elasticity, 	Rigidity, 	Expansion, Elongation
Material 	lb/in3 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	106 psi 	106 psi 	10−6/°F 	in 2 in.
Steel
Structural (ASTM-A36) 	0.284 	58 	36 	21 	29 	11.2 	6.5 	21
High-strength-low-alloy
ASTM-A709 Grade 50 	0.284 	65 	50 	29 	11.2 	6.5 	21
ASTM-A913 Grade 65 	0.284 	80 	65 	29 	11.2 	6.5 	17
ASTM-A992 Grade 50 	0.284 	65 	50 	29 	11.2 	6.5 	21
Quenched & tempered
ASTM-A709 Grade 100 	0.284 	110 	100 	29 	11.2 	6.5 	18
Stainless, AISI 302
Cold-rolled 	0.286 	125 	75 	28 	10.8 	9.6 	12
Annealed 	0.286 	95 	38 	22 	28 	10.8 	9.6 	50
Reinforcing Steel
Medium strength 	0.283 	70 	40 	29 	11 	6.5
High strength 	0.283 	90 	60 	29 	11 	6.5
Cast Iron
Gray Cast Iron
4.5% C, ASTM A-48 	0.260 	25 	95 	35 	10 	4.1 	6.7 	0.5
Malleable Cast Iron
2% C, 1% Si,
ASTM A-47 	0.264 	50 	90 	48 	33 	24 	9.3 	6.7 	10
Aluminum
Alloy 1100-H14
(99% Al) 	0.098 	16 	10 	14 	8 	10.1 	3.7 	13.1 	9
Alloy 2014-T6 	0.101 	66 	40 	58 	33 	10.9 	3.9 	12.8 	13
Alloy 2024-T4 	0.101 	68 	41 	47 	10.6 	12.9 	19
Alloy 5456-H116 	0.095 	46 	27 	33 	19 	10.4 	13.3 	16
Alloy 6061-T6 	0.098 	38 	24 	35 	20 	10.1 	3.7 	13.1 	17
Alloy 7075-T6 	0.101 	83 	48 	73 	10.4 	4 	13.1 	11
Copper
Oxygen-free copper
(99.9% Cu)
Annealed 	0.322 	32 	22 	10 	17 	6.4 	9.4 	45
Hard-drawn 	0.322 	57 	29 	53 	17 	6.4 	9.4 	4
Yellow Brass
(65% Cu, 35% Zn)
Cold-rolled 	0.306 	74 	43 	60 	36 	15 	5.6 	11.6 	8
Annealed 	0.306 	46 	32 	15 	9 	15 	5.6 	11.6 	65
Red Brass
(85% Cu, 15% Zn)
Cold-rolled 	0.316 	85 	46 	63 	17 	6.4 	10.4 	3
Annealed 	0.316 	39 	31 	10 	17 	6.4 	10.4 	48
Tin bronze 	0.318 	45 	21 	14 	10 	30
(88 Cu, 8Sn, 4Zn)
Manganese bronze 	0.302 	95 	48 	15 	12 	20
(63 Cu, 25 Zn, 6 Al, 3 Mn, 3 Fe)
Aluminum bronze 	0.301 	90 	130 	40 	16 	6.1 	9 	6
(81 Cu, 4 Ni, 4 Fe, 11 Al)
D 	Typical Properties of Selected
Materials Used in Engineering1,5
APPENDIX

-- 864 of 897 --

A18 	Appendix D
Appendix D 	Typical Properties of Selected Materials Used in Engineering1,5
(SI Units)
Ultimate Strength 	Yield Strength3
Modulus 	Modulus 	Coefficient Ductility,
Compres- 	of 	of 	of Thermal Percent
Density 	Tension, 	sion,2 	Shear, 	Tension, Shear, Elasticity, 	Rigidity, 	Expansion, Elongation
Material 	kg/m3 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	GPa 	GPa 	10−6/°C 	in 50 mm
Steel
Structural (ASTM-A36) 	7860 	400 	250 	145 	200 	77.2 	11.7 	21
High-strength-low-alloy
ASTM-A709 Grade 345 	7860 	450 	345 	200 	77.2 	11.7 	21
ASTM-A913 Grade 450 	7860 	550 	450 	200 	77.2 	11.7 	17
ASTM-A992 Grade 345 	7860 	450 	345 	200 	77.2 	11.7 	21
Quenched & tempered
ASTM-A709 Grade 690 	7860 	760 	690 	200 	77.2 	11.7 	18
Stainless, AISI 302
Cold-rolled 	7920 	860 	520 	190 	75 	17.3 	12
Annealed 	7920 	655 	260 	150 	190 	75 	17.3 	50
Reinforcing Steel
Medium strength 	7860 	480 	275 	200 	77 	11.7
High strength 	7860 	620 	415 	200 	77 	11.7
Cast Iron
Gray Cast Iron
4.5% C, ASTM A-48 	7200 	170 	655 	240 	69 	28 	12.1 	0.5
Malleable Cast Iron
2% C, 1% Si,
ASTM A-47 	7300 	345 	620 	330 	230 	165 	65 	12.1 	10
Aluminum
Alloy 1100-H14
(99% Al) 	2710 	110 	70 	95 	55 	70 	26 	23.6 	9
Alloy 2014-T6 	2800 	455 	275 	400 	230 	75 	27 	23.0 	13
Alloy-2024-T4 	2800 	470 	280 	325 	73 	23.2 	19
Alloy-5456-H116 	2630 	315 	185 	230 	130 	72 	23.9 	16
Alloy 6061-T6 	2710 	260 	165 	240 	140 	70 	26 	23.6 	17
Alloy 7075-T6 	2800 	570 	330 	500 	72 	28 	23.6 	11
Copper
Oxygen-free copper
(99.9% Cu)
Annealed 	8910 	220 	150 	70 	120 	44 	16.9 	45
Hard-drawn 	8910 	390 	200 	265 	120 	44 	16.9 	4
Yellow-Brass
(65% Cu, 35% Zn)
Cold-rolled 	8470 	510 	300 	410 	250 	105 	39 	20.9 	8
Annealed 	8470 	320 	220 	100 	60 	105 	39 	20.9 	65
Red Brass
(85% Cu, 15% Zn)
Cold-rolled 	8740 	585 	320 	435 	120 	44 	18.7 	3
Annealed 	8740 	270 	210 	70 	120 	44 	18.7 	48
Tin bronze 	8800 	310 	145 	95 	18.0 	30
(88 Cu, 8Sn, 4Zn)
Manganese bronze 	8360 	655 	330 	105 	21.6 	20
(63 Cu, 25 Zn, 6 Al, 3 Mn, 3 Fe)
Aluminum bronze 	8330 	620 	900 	275 	110 	42 	16.2 	6
(81 Cu, 4 Ni, 4 Fe, 11 Al)

-- 865 of 897 --

Typical Properties of Selected Materials Used in Engineering 	A19
Appendix D 	Typical Properties of Selected Materials Used in Engineering1,5
(U.S. Customary Units)
Ultimate Strength 	Yield Strength3
Modulus 	Modulus 	Coefficient Ductility,
Specific 	Compres- 	of 	of 	of Thermal Percent
Weight, 	Tension, 	sion,2 	Shear, 	Tension, Shear, Elasticity, 	Rigidity, 	Expansion, Elongation
Material 	lb/in3 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	ksi 	106 psi 	106 psi 	10−6/°F 	in 2 in.
Magnesium Alloys
Alloy AZ80 (Forging) 	0.065 	50 	23 	36 	6.5 	2.4 	14 	6
Alloy AZ31 (Extrusion) 	0.064 	37 	19 	29 	6.5 	2.4 	14 	12
Titanium
Alloy (6% Al, 4% V) 	0.161 	130 	120 	16.5 	5.3 	10
Monel Alloy 400(Ni-Cu)
Cold-worked 	0.319 	98 	85 	50 	26 	7.7 	22
Annealed 	0.319 	80 	32 	18 	26 	7.7 	46
Cupronickel
(90% Cu, 10% Ni)
Annealed 	0.323 	53 	16 	20 	7.5 	9.5 	35
Cold-worked 	0.323 	85 	79 	20 	7.5 	9.5 	3
Timber, air dry
Douglas fir 	0.017 	15 	7.2 	1.1 	1.9 	.1 	Varies
Spruce, Sitka 	0.015 	8.6 	5.6 	1.1 	1.5 	.07 	1.7 to 2.5
Shortleaf pine 	0.018 	7.3 	1.4 	1.7
Western white pine 	0.014 	5.0 	1.0 	1.5
Ponderosa pine 	0.015 	8.4 	5.3 	1.1 	1.3
White oak 	0.025 	7.4 	2.0 	1.8
Red oak 	0.024 	6.8 	1.8 	1.8
Western hemlock 	0.016 	13 	7.2 	1.3 	1.6
Shagbark hickory 	0.026 	9.2 	2.4 	2.2
Redwood 	0.015 	9.4 	6.1 	0.9 	1.3
Concrete
Medium strength 	0.084 	4.0 	3.6 	5.5
High strength 	0.084 	6.0 	4.5 	5.5
Plastics
Nylon, type 6/6, 	0.0412 	11 	14 	6.5 	0.4 	80 	50
(molding compound)
Polycarbonate 	0.0433 	9.5 	12.5 	9 	0.35 	68 	110
Polyester, PBT 	0.0484 	8 	11 	8 	0.35 	75 	150
(thermoplastic)
Polyester elastomer 	0.0433 	6.5 	5.5 	0.03 	500
Polystyrene 	0.0374 	8 	13 	8 	0.45 	70 	2
Vinyl, rigid PVC 	0.0520 	6 	10 	6.5 	0.45 	75 	40
Rubber 	0.033 	2 	90 	600
Granite (Avg. values) 	0.100 	3 	35 	5 	10 	4 	4
Marble (Avg. values) 	0.100 	2 	18 	4 	8 	3 	6
Sandstone (Avg. values) 	0.083 	1 	12 	2 	6 	2 	5
Glass, 98% silica 	0.079 	7 	9.6 	4.1 	44
1Properties of metals vary widely as a result of variations in composition, heat treatment, and mechanical working.
2For ductile metals the compression strength is generally assumed to be equal to the tension strength.
3Offset of 0.2 percent.
4Timber properties are for loading parallel to the grain.
5See also Marks’ Mechanical Engineering Handbook, 12th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2018; Annual Book of ASTM, American Society for Testing Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.; Metals Handbook, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio; and Aluminum Design Manual, The Aluminum Association, Washington, DC.
(continued)

-- 866 of 897 --

A20 	Appendix D
Appendix D 	Typical Properties of Selected Materials Used in Engineering1,5
(SI Units)
Ultimate Strength 	Yield Strength3
Modulus 	Modulus 	Coefficient Ductility,
Compres- 	of 	of 	of Thermal Percent
Density 	Tension, 	sion,2 	Shear, 	Tension, Shear, Elasticity, 	Rigidity, 	Expansion, Elongation
Material 	kg/m3 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	MPa 	GPa 	GPa 	10−6/°C 	in 50 mm
Magnesium Alloys
Alloy AZ80 (Forging) 	1800 	345 	160 	250 	45 	16 	25.2 	6
Alloy AZ31 (Extrusion) 	1770 	255 	130 	200 	45 	16 	25.2 	12
Titanium
Alloy (6% Al, 4% V) 	4730 	900 	830 	115 	9.5 	10
Monel Alloy 400(Ni-Cu)
Cold-worked 	8830 	675 	585 	345 	180 	13.9 	22
Annealed 	8830 	550 	220 	125 	180 	13.9 	46
Cupronickel
(90% Cu, 10% Ni)
Annealed 	8940 	365 	110 	140 	52 	17.1 	35
Cold-worked 	8940 	585 	545 	140 	52 	17.1 	3
Timber, air dry
Douglas fir 	470 	100 	50 	7.6 	13 	0.7 	Varies
Spruce, Sitka 	415 	60 	39 	7.6 	10 	0.5 	3.0 to 4.5
Shortleaf pine 	500 	50 	9.7 	12
Western white pine 	390 	34 	7.0 	10
Ponderosa pine 	415 	55 	36 	7.6 	9
White oak 	690 	51 	13.8 	12
Red oak 	660 	47 	12.4 	12
Western hemlock 	440 	90 	50 	10.0 	11
Shagbark hickory 	720 	63 	16.5 	15
Redwood 	415 	65 	42 	6.2 	9
Concrete
Medium strength 	2320 	28 	25 	9.9
High strength 	2320 	40 	30 	9.9
Plastics
Nylon, type 6/6, 	1140 	75 	95 	45 	2.8 	144 	50
(molding compound)
Polycarbonate 	1200 	65 	85 	35 	2.4 	122 	110
Polyester, PBT 	1340 	55 	75 	55 	2.4 	135 	150
(thermoplastic)
Polyester elastomer 	1200 	45 	40 	0.2 	500
Polystyrene 	1030 	55 	90 	55 	3.1 	125 	2
Vinyl, rigid PVC 	1440 	40 	70 	45 	3.1 	135 	40
Rubber 	910 	15 	162 	600
Granite (Avg. values) 	2770 	20 	240 	35 	70 	4 	7.2
Marble (Avg. values) 	2770 	15 	125 	28 	55 	3 	10.8
Sandstone (Avg. values) 	2300 	7 	85 	14 	40 	2 	9.0
Glass, 98% silica 	2190 	50 	65 	4.1 	80
1Properties of metals very widely as a result of variations in composition, heat treatment, and mechanical working.
2For ductile metals the compression strength is generally assumed to be equal to the tension strength.
3Offset of 0.2 percent.
4Timber properties are for loading parallel to the grain.
5See also Marks’ Mechanical Engineering Handbook, 12th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2018; Annual Book of ASTM, American Society for Testing Materials,
Philadelphia, Pa.; Metals Handbook, American Society of Metals, Metals Park, Ohio; and Aluminum Design Manual, The Aluminum Association, Washington, DC.

-- 867 of 897 --

(U.S. Customary Units)
W Shapes
(Wide-Flange Shapes)
Y
Y
X
tw
t f
bf
d 	X
Flange
Web
Thick- 	Thick- 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness
Designation† 	A, in2 	d, in. 	bf, in. 	tf, in. 	tw, in. 	Ix, in4 	Sx, in3 	rx, in. 	Iy, in4 	Sy, in3 	ry, in.
W36 × 302 	88.8 	37.3 	16.7 	1.68 	0.945 	21100 	1130 	15.4 	1300 	156 	3.82
135 	39.7 	35.6 	12.0 	0.790 	0.600 	7800 	439 	14.0 	225 	37.7 	2.38
W33 × 201 	59.2 	33.7 	15.7 	1.15 	0.715 	11600 	686 	14.0 	749 	95.2 	3.56
118 	34.7 	32.9 	11.5 	0.740 	0.550 	5900 	359 	13.0 	187 	32.6 	2.32
W30 × 173 	51.0 	30.4 	15.0 	1.07 	0.655 	8230 	541 	12.7 	598 	79.8 	3.42
99 	29.1 	29.7 	10.50 	0.670 	0.520 	3990 	269 	11.7 	128 	24.5 	2.10
W27 × 146 	43.1 	27.4 	14.0 	0.975 	0.605 	5660 	414 	11.5 	443 	63.5 	3.20
84 	24.8 	26.70 	10.0 	0.640 	0.460 	2850 	213 	10.7 	106 	21.2 	2.07
W24 × 104 	30.6 	24.1 	12.8 	0.750 	0.500 	3100 	258 	10.1 	259 	40.7 	2.91
68 	20.1 	23.7 	8.97 	0.585 	0.415 	1830 	154 	9.55 	70.4 	15.7 	1.87
W21 × 101 	29.8 	21.4 	12.3 	0.800 	0.500 	2420 	227 	9.02 	248 	40.3 	2.89
62 	18.3 	21.0 	8.24 	0.615 	0.400 	1330 	127 	8.54 	57.5 	14.0 	1.77
44 	13.0 	20.7 	6.50 	0.450 	0.350 	843 	81.6 	8.06 	20.7 	6.37 	1.26
W18 × 106 	31.1 	18.7 	11.2 	0.940 	0.590 	1910 	204 	7.84 	220 	39.4 	2.66
76 	22.3 	18.2 	11.0 	0.680 	0.425 	1330 	146 	7.73 	152 	27.6 	2.61
50 	14.7 	18.0 	7.50 	0.570 	0.355 	800 	88.9 	7.38 	40.1 	10.7 	1.65
35 	10.3 	17.7 	6.00 	0.425 	0.300 	510 	57.6 	7.04 	15.3 	5.12 	1.22
W16 × 77 	22.6 	16.5 	10.3 	0.760 	0.455 	1110 	134 	7.00 	138 	26.9 	2.47
57 	16.8 	16.4 	7.12 	0.715 	0.430 	758 	92.2 	6.72 	43.1 	12.1 	1.60
40 	11.8 	16.0 	7.00 	0.505 	0.305 	518 	64.7 	6.63 	28.9 	8.25 	1.57
31 	9.13 	15.9 	5.53 	0.440 	0.275 	375 	47.2 	6.41 	12.4 	4.49 	1.17
26 	7.68 	15.7 	5.50 	0.345 	0.250 	301 	38.4 	6.26 	9.59 	3.49 	1.12
W14 × 370 	109 	17.9 	16.5 	2.66 	1.66 	5440 	607 	7.07 	1990 	241 	4.27
145 	42.7 	14.8 	15.5 	1.09 	0.680 	1710 	232 	6.33 	677 	87.3 	3.98
82 	24.0 	14.3 	10.1 	0.855 	0.510 	881 	123 	6.05 	148 	29.3 	2.48
68 	20.0 	14.0 	10.0 	0.720 	0.415 	722 	103 	6.01 	121 	24.2 	2.46
53 	15.6 	13.9 	8.06 	0.660 	0.370 	541 	77.8 	5.89 	57.7 	14.3 	1.92
43 	12.6 	13.7 	8.00 	0.530 	0.305 	428 	62.6 	5.82 	45.2 	11.3 	1.89
38 	11.2 	14.1 	6.77 	0.515 	0.310 	385 	54.6 	5.87 	26.7 	7.88 	1.55
30 	8.85 	13.8 	6.73 	0.385 	0.270 	291 	42.0 	5.73 	19.6 	5.82 	1.49
26 	7.69 	13.9 	5.03 	0.420 	0.255 	245 	35.3 	5.65 	8.91 	3.55 	1.08
22 	6.49 	13.7 	5.00 	0.335 	0.230 	199 	29.0 	5.54 	7.00 	2.80 	1.04
†A wide-flange shape is designated by the letter W followed by the nominal depth in inches and the weight in pounds per foot.
E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel
Shapes
APPENDIX
(continued)

-- 868 of 897 --

A22 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
W Shapes
(Wide-Flange Shapes)
Y
Y
X
tw
t f
b f
d 	X
Flange
Web 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Thick- 	Thick-
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness 	Ix 	Sx 	rx 	Iy 	Sy 	ry
Designation† 	A, mm2 	d, mm. 	bf, mm 	tf, mm 	tw mm 	106 mm4 103 mm3 	mm 	106 mm4 103 mm3 mm
W920 × 449 	57300 	947 	424 	42.7 	24.0 	8780 	18500 	391 	541 	2560 	97.0
201 	25600 	904 	305 	20.1 	15.2 	3250 	7190 	356 	93.7 	618 	60.5
W840 × 299 	38200 	856 	399 	29.2 	18.2 	4830 	11200 	356 	312 	1560 	90.4
176 	22400 	836 	292 	18.8 	14.0 	2460 	5880 	330 	77.8 	534 	58.9
W760 × 257 	32900 	772 	381 	27.2 	16.6 	3430 	8870 	323 	249 	1310 	86.9
147 	18800 	754 	267 	17.0 	13.2 	1660 	4410 	297 	53.3 	401 	53.3
W690 × 217 	27800 	696 	356 	24.8 	15.4 	2360 	6780 	292 	184 	1040 	81.3
125 	16000 	678 	254 	16.3 	11.7 	1190 	3490 	272 	44.1 	347 	52.6
W610 × 155 	19700 	612 	325 	19.1 	12.7 	1290 	4230 	257 	108 	667 	73.9
101 	13000 	602 	228 	14.9 	10.5 	762 	2520 	243 	29.3 	257 	47.5
W530 × 150 	19200 	544 	312 	20.3 	12.7 	1010 	3720 	229 	103 	660 	73.4
92 	11800 	533 	209 	15.6 	10.2 	554 	2080 	217 	23.9 	229 	45.0
66 	8390 	526 	165 	11.4 	8.89 	351 	1340 	205 	8.62 	104 	32.0
W460 × 158 	20100 	475 	284 	23.9 	15.0 	795 	3340 	199 	91.6 	646 	67.6
113 	14400 	462 	279 	17.3 	10.8 	554 	2390 	196 	63.3 	452 	66.3
74 	9480 	457 	191 	14.5 	9.02 	333 	1460 	187 	16.7 	175 	41.9
52 	6650 	450 	152 	10.8 	7.62 	212 	944 	179 	6.37 	83.9 	31.0
W410 × 114 	14600 	419 	262 	19.3 	11.6 	462 	2200 	178 	57.4 	441 	62.7
85 	10800 	417 	181 	18.2 	10.9 	316 	1510 	171 	17.9 	198 	40.6
60 	7610 	406 	178 	12.8 	7.75 	216 	1060 	168 	12.0 	135 	39.9
46.1 	5890 	404 	140 	11.2 	6.99 	156 	773 	163 	5.16 	73.6 	29.7
38.8 	4950 	399 	140 	8.76 	6.35 	125 	629 	159 	3.99 	57.2 	28.4
W360 × 551 	70300 	455 	419 	67.6 	42.2 	2260 	9950 	180 	828 	3950 	108
216 	27500 	376 	394 	27.7 	17.3 	712 	3800 	161 	282 	1430 	101
122 	15500 	363 	257 	21.7 	13.0 	367 	2020 	154 	61.6 	480 	63.0
101 	12900 	356 	254 	18.3 	10.5 	301 	1690 	153 	50.4 	397 	62.5
79 	10100 	353 	205 	16.8 	9.40 	225 	1270 	150 	24.0 	234 	48.8
64 	8130 	348 	203 	13.5 	7.75 	178 	1030 	148 	18.8 	185 	48.0
57.8 	7230 	358 	172 	13.1 	7.87 	160 	895 	149 	11.1 	129 	39.4
44 	5710 	351 	171 	9.78 	6.86 	121 	688 	146 	8.16 	95.4 	37.8
39 	4960 	353 	128 	10.7 	6.48 	102 	578 	144 	3.71 	58.2 	27.4
32.9 	4190 	348 	127 	8.51 	5.84 	82.8 	475 	141 	2.91 	45.9 	26.4
†A wide-flange shape is designated by the letter W followed by the nominal depth in millimeters and the mass in kilograms permeter.

-- 869 of 897 --

Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A23
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(U.S. Customary Units)
W Shapes
(Wide-Flange Shapes)
Y
Y
X
tw
t f
bf
d 	X
Flange
Web
Thick- 	Thick- 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness
Designation† 	A, in2 	d, in. 	bf, in. 	tf, in. 	tw, in. 	Ix, in4 	Sx, in3 	rx, in. 	Iy, in4 	Sy, in3 	ry, in.
W12 × 96 	28.2 	12.7 	12.2 	0.900 	0.550 	833 	131 	5.44 	270 	44.4 	3.09
72 	21.1 	12.3 	12.0 	0.670 	0.430 	597 	97.4 	5.31 	195 	32.4 	3.04
50 	14.6 	12.2 	8.08 	0.640 	0.370 	391 	64.2 	5.18 	56.3 	13.9 	1.96
40 	11.7 	11.9 	8.01 	0.515 	0.295 	307 	51.5 	5.13 	44.1 	11.0 	1.94
35 	10.3 	12.5 	6.56 	0.520 	0.300 	285 	45.6 	5.25 	24.5 	7.47 	1.54
30 	8.79 	12.3 	6.52 	0.440 	0.260 	238 	38.6 	5.21 	20.3 	6.24 	1.52
26 	7.65 	12.2 	6.49 	0.380 	0.230 	204 	33.4 	5.17 	17.3 	5.34 	1.51
22 	6.48 	12.3 	4.03 	0.425 	0.260 	156 	25.4 	4.91 	4.66 	2.31 	0.848
16 	4.71 	12.0 	3.99 	0.265 	0.220 	103 	17.1 	4.67 	2.82 	1.41 	0.773
W10 × 112 	32.9 	11.4 	10.4 	1.25 	0.755 	716 	126 	4.66 	236 	45.3 	2.68
68 	20.0 	10.4 	10.1 	0.770 	0.470 	394 	75.7 	4.44 	134 	26.4 	2.59
54 	15.8 	10.1 	10.0 	0.615 	0.370 	303 	60.0 	4.37 	103 	20.6 	2.56
45 	13.3 	10.1 	8.02 	0.620 	0.350 	248 	49.1 	4.32 	53.4 	13.3 	2.01
39 	11.5 	9.92 	7.99 	0.530 	0.315 	209 	42.1 	4.27 	45.0 	11.3 	1.98
33 	9.71 	9.73 	7.96 	0.435 	0.290 	171 	35.0 	4.19 	36.6 	9.20 	1.94
30 	8.84 	10.5 	5.81 	0.510 	0.300 	170 	32.4 	4.38 	16.7 	5.75 	1.37
22 	6.49 	10.2 	5.75 	0.360 	0.240 	118 	23.2 	4.27 	11.4 	3.97 	1.33
19 	5.62 	10.2 	4.02 	0.395 	0.250 	96.3 	18.8 	4.14 	4.29 	2.14 	0.874
15 	4.41 	10.0 	4.00 	0.270 	0.230 	68.9 	13.8 	3.95 	2.89 	1.45 	0.810
W8 × 58 	17.1 	8.75 	8.22 	0.810 	0.510 	228 	52.0 	3.65 	75.1 	18.3 	2.10
48 	14.1 	8.50 	8.11 	0.685 	0.400 	184 	43.2 	3.61 	60.9 	15.0 	2.08
40 	11.7 	8.25 	8.07 	0.560 	0.360 	146 	35.5 	3.53 	49.1 	12.2 	2.04
35 	10.3 	8.12 	8.02 	0.495 	0.310 	127 	31.2 	3.51 	42.6 	10.6 	2.03
31 	9.12 	8.00 	8.00 	0.435 	0.285 	110 	27.5 	3.47 	37.1 	9.27 	2.02
28 	8.24 	8.06 	6.54 	0.465 	0.285 	98.0 	24.3 	3.45 	21.7 	6.63 	1.62
24 	7.08 	7.93 	6.50 	0.400 	0.245 	82.7 	20.9 	3.42 	18.3 	5.63 	1.61
21 	6.16 	8.28 	5.27 	0.400 	0.250 	75.3 	18.2 	3.49 	9.77 	3.71 	1.26
18 	5.26 	8.14 	5.25 	0.330 	0.230 	61.9 	15.2 	3.43 	7.97 	3.04 	1.23
15 	4.44 	8.11 	4.01 	0.315 	0.245 	48.0 	11.8 	3.29 	3.41 	1.70 	0.876
13 	3.84 	7.99 	4.00 	0.255 	0.230 	39.6 	9.91 	3.21 	2.73 	1.37 	0.843
W6 × 25 	7.34 	6.38 	6.08 	0.455 	0.320 	53.4 	16.7 	2.70 	17.1 	5.61 	1.52
20 	5.87 	6.20 	6.02 	0.365 	0.260 	41.4 	13.4 	2.66 	13.3 	4.41 	1.50
16 	4.74 	6.28 	4.03 	0.405 	0.260 	32.1 	10.2 	2.60 	4.43 	2.20 	0.967
12 	3.55 	6.03 	4.00 	0.280 	0.230 	22.1 	7.31 	2.49 	2.99 	1.50 	0.918
9 	2.68 	5.90 	3.94 	0.215 	0.170 	16.4 	5.56 	2.47 	2.20 	1.11 	0.905
W5 × 19 	5.56 	5.15 	5.03 	0.430 	0.270 	26.3 	10.2 	2.17 	9.13 	3.63 	1.28
16 	4.71 	5.01 	5.00 	0.360 	0.240 	21.4 	8.55 	2.13 	7.51 	3.00 	1.26
W4 × 13 	3.83 	4.16 	4.06 	0.345 	0.280 	11.3 	5.46 	1.72 	3.86 	1.90 	1.00
†A wide-flange shape is designated by the letter W followed by the nominal depth in inches and the weight in pounds per foot.
(continued)

-- 870 of 897 --

A24 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
W Shapes
(Wide-Flange Shapes)
Y
Y
X
tw
t f
b f
d 	X
Flange
Web 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Thick- 	Thick-
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness 	Ix 	Sx 	rx 	Iy 	Sy 	ry
Designation† 	A, mm2 d, mm 	bf, mm 	tf, mm 	tw mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm
W310 × 143 	18200 	323 	310 	22.9 	14.0 	347 	2150 	138 	112 	728 	78.5
107 	13600 	312 	305 	17.0 	10.9 	248 	1600 	135 	81.2 	531 	77.2
74 	9420 	310 	205 	16.3 	9.40 	163 	1050 	132 	23.4 	228 	49.8
60 	7550 	302 	203 	13.1 	7.49 	128 	844 	130 	18.4 	180 	49.3
52 	6650 	318 	167 	13.2 	7.62 	119 	747 	133 	10.2 	122 	39.1
44.5 	5670 	312 	166 	11.2 	6.60 	99.1 	633 	132 	8.45 	102 	38.6
38.7 	4940 	310 	165 	9.65 	5.84 	84.9 	547 	131 	7.20 	87.5 	38.4
32.7 	4180 	312 	102 	10.8 	6.60 	64.9 	416 	125 	1.94 	37.9 	21.5
23.8 	3040 	305 	101 	6.73 	5.59 	42.9 	280 	119 	1.17 	23.1 	19.6
W250 × 167 	21200 	290 	264 	31.8 	19.2 	298 	2060 	118 	98.2 	742 	68.1
101 	12900 	264 	257 	19.6 	11.9 	164 	1240 	113 	55.8 	433 	65.8
80 	10200 	257 	254 	15.6 	9.4 	126 	983 	111 	42.9 	338 	65.0
67 	8580 	257 	204 	15.7 	8.89 	103 	805 	110 	22.2 	218 	51.1
58 	7420 	252 	203 	13.5 	8.00 	87.0 	690 	108 	18.7 	185 	50.3
49.1 	6260 	247 	202 	11.0 	7.37 	71.2 	574 	106 	15.2 	151 	49.3
44.8 	5700 	267 	148 	13.0 	7.62 	70.8 	531 	111 	6.95 	94.2 	34.8
32.7 	4190 	259 	146 	9.14 	6.10 	49.1 	380 	108 	4.75 	65.1 	33.8
28.4 	3630 	259 	102 	10.0 	6.35 	40.1 	308 	105 	1.79 	35.1 	22.2
22.3 	2850 	254 	102 	6.86 	5.84 	28.7 	226 	100 	1.20 	23.8 	20.6
W200 × 86 	11000 	222 	209 	20.6 	13.0 	94.9 	852 	92.7 	31.3 	300 	53.3
71 	9100 	216 	206 	17.4 	10.2 	76.6 	708 	91.7 	25.3 	246 	52.8
59 	7550 	210 	205 	14.2 	9.14 	60.8 	582 	89.7 	20.4 	200 	51.8
52 	6650 	206 	204 	12.6 	7.87 	52.9 	511 	89.2 	17.7 	174 	51.6
46.1 	5880 	203 	203 	11.0 	7.24 	45.8 	451 	88.1 	15.4 	152 	51.3
41.7 	5320 	205 	166 	11.8 	7.24 	40.8 	398 	87.6 	9.03 	109 	41.1
35.9 	4570 	201 	165 	10.2 	6.22 	34.4 	342 	86.9 	7.62 	92.3 	40.9
31.3 	3970 	210 	134 	10.2 	6.35 	31.3 	298 	88.6 	4.07 	60.8 	32.0
26.6 	3390 	207 	133 	8.38 	5.84 	25.8 	249 	87.1 	3.32 	49.8 	31.2
22.5 	2860 	206 	102 	8.00 	6.22 	20.0 	193 	83.6 	1.42 	27.9 	22.3
19.3 	2480 	203 	102 	6.48 	5.84 	16.5 	162 	81.5 	1.14 	22.5 	21.4
W150 × 37.1 	4740 	162 	154 	11.6 	8.13 	22.2 	274 	68.6 	7.12 	91.9 	38.6
29.8 	3790 	157 	153 	9.27 	6.60 	17.2 	220 	67.6 	5.54 	72.3 	38.1
24 	3060 	160 	102 	10.3 	6.60 	13.4 	167 	66.0 	1.84 	36.1 	24.6
18 	2290 	153 	102 	7.11 	5.84 	9.20 	120 	63.2 	1.24 	24.6 	23.3
13.5 	1730 	150 	100 	5.46 	4.32 	6.83 	91.1 	62.7 	0.916 	18.2 	23.0
W130 × 28.1 	3590 	131 	128 	10.9 	6.86 	10.9 	167 	55.1 	3.80 	59.5 	32.5
23.8 	3040 	127 	127 	9.14 	6.10 	8.91 	140 	54.1 	3.13 	49.2 	32.0
W100 × 19.3 	2470 	106 	103 	8.76 	7.11 	4.70 	89.5 	43.7 	1.61 	31.1 	25.4
†A wide-flange shape is designated by the letter W followed by the nominal depth in millimeters and the mass in kilograms per meter.

-- 871 of 897 --

Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A25
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(U.S. Customary Units)
S Shapes
(American Standard Shapes)
Y
Y
X
t w
t f
bf
d 	X
Flange
Web
Thick- 	Thick- 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness
Designation† 	A, in2 	d, in. 	bf, in. 	tf, in. 	tw, in. 	Ix, in4 	Sx, in3 	rx, in. 	Iy, in4 	Sy, in3 	ry, in.
S24 × 121 	35.5 	24.5 	8.05 	1.09 	0.800 	3160 	258 	9.43 	83.0 	20.6 	1.53
106 	31.1 	24.5 	7.87 	1.09 	0.620 	2940 	240 	9.71 	76.8 	19.5 	1.57
100 	29.3 	24.0 	7.25 	0.870 	0.745 	2380 	199 	9.01 	47.4 	13.1 	1.27
90 	26.5 	24.0 	7.13 	0.870 	0.625 	2250 	187 	9.21 	44.7 	12.5 	1.30
80 	23.5 	24.0 	7.00 	0.870 	0.500 	2100 	175 	9.47 	42.0 	12.0 	1.34
S20 × 96 	28.2 	20.3 	7.20 	0.920 	0.800 	1670 	165 	7.71 	49.9 	13.9 	1.33
86 	25.3 	20.3 	7.06 	0.920 	0.660 	1570 	155 	7.89 	46.6 	13.2 	1.36
75 	22.0 	20.0 	6.39 	0.795 	0.635 	1280 	128 	7.62 	29.5 	9.25 	1.16
66 	19.4 	20.0 	6.26 	0.795 	0.505 	1190 	119 	7.83 	27.5 	8.78 	1.19
S18 × 70 	20.5 	18.0 	6.25 	0.691 	0.711 	923 	103 	6.70 	24.0 	7.69 	1.08
54.7 	16.0 	18.0 	6.00 	0.691 	0.461 	801 	89.0 	7.07 	20.7 	6.91 	1.14
S15 × 50 	14.7 	15.0 	5.64 	0.622 	0.550 	485 	64.7 	5.75 	15.6 	5.53 	1.03
42.9 	12.6 	15.0 	5.50 	0.622 	0.411 	446 	59.4 	5.95 	14.3 	5.19 	1.06
S12 × 50 	14.6 	12.0 	5.48 	0.659 	0.687 	303 	50.6 	4.55 	15.6 	5.69 	1.03
40.8 	11.9 	12.0 	5.25 	0.659 	0.462 	270 	45.1 	4.76 	13.5 	5.13 	1.06
35 	10.2 	12.0 	5.08 	0.544 	0.428 	228 	38.1 	4.72 	9.84 	3.88 	0.980
31.8 	9.31 	12.0 	5.00 	0.544 	0.350 	217 	36.2 	4.83 	9.33 	3.73 	1.00
S10 × 35 	10.3 	10.0 	4.94 	0.491 	0.594 	147 	29.4 	3.78 	8.30 	3.36 	0.899
25.4 	7.45 	10.0 	4.66 	0.491 	0.311 	123 	24.6 	4.07 	6.73 	2.89 	0.950
S8 × 23 	6.76 	8.00 	4.17 	0.425 	0.441 	64.7 	16.2 	3.09 	4.27 	2.05 	0.795
18.4 	5.40 	8.00 	4.00 	0.425 	0.271 	57.5 	14.4 	3.26 	3.69 	1.84 	0.827
S6 × 17.2 	5.06 	6.00 	3.57 	0.359 	0.465 	26.2 	8.74 	2.28 	2.29 	1.28 	0.673
12.5 	3.66 	6.00 	3.33 	0.359 	0.232 	22.0 	7.34 	2.45 	1.80 	1.08 	0.702
S5 × 10 	2.93 	5.00 	3.00 	0.326 	0.214 	12.3 	4.90 	2.05 	1.19 	0.795 	0.638
S4 × 9.5 	2.79 	4.00 	2.80 	0.293 	0.326 	6.76 	3.38 	1.56 	0.887 	0.635 	0.564
7.7 	2.26 	4.00 	2.66 	0.293 	0.193 	6.05 	3.03 	1.64 	0.748 	0.562 	0.576
S3 × 7.5 	2.20 	3.00 	2.51 	0.260 	0.349 	2.91 	1.94 	1.15 	0.578 	0.461 	0.513
5.7 	1.66 	3.00 	2.33 	0.260 	0.170 	2.50 	1.67 	1.23 	0.447 	0.383 	0.518
†An American Standard Beam is designated by the letter S followed by the nominal depth in inches and the weight in pounds per foot.
(continued)

-- 872 of 897 --

A26 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
S Shapes
(American Standard Shapes)
Y
Y
X
t w
t f
b f
d 	X
Flange
Web 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Thick- 	Thick-
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness 	Ix 	Sx 	rx 	Iy 	Sy 	ry
Designation† 	A, mm2 	d, mm 	bf, mm 	tf, mm 	tw mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm
S610 × 180 	22900 	622 	204 	27.7 	20.3 	1320 	4230 	240 	34.5 	338 	38.9
158 	20100 	622 	200 	27.7 	15.7 	1220 	3930 	247 	32.0 	320 	39.9
149 	18900 	610 	184 	22.1 	18.9 	991 	3260 	229 	19.7 	215 	32.3
134 	17100 	610 	181 	22.1 	15.9 	937 	3060 	234 	18.6 	205 	33.0
119 	15200 	610 	178 	22.1 	12.7 	874 	2870 	241 	17.5 	197 	34.0
S510 × 143 	18200 	516 	183 	23.4 	20.3 	695 	2700 	196 	20.8 	228 	33.8
128 	16300 	516 	179 	23.4 	16.8 	653 	2540 	200 	19.4 	216 	34.5
112 	14200 	508 	162 	20.2 	16.1 	533 	2100 	194 	12.3 	152 	29.5
98.2 	12500 	508 	159 	20.2 	12.8 	495 	1950 	199 	11.4 	144 	30.2
S460 × 104 	13200 	457 	159 	17.6 	18.1 	384 	1690 	170 	10.0 	126 	27.4
81.4 	10300 	457 	152 	17.6 	11.7 	333 	1460 	180 	8.62 	113 	29.0
S380 × 74 	9480 	381 	143 	15.8 	14.0 	202 	1060 	146 	6.49 	90.6 	26.2
64 	8130 	381 	140 	15.8 	10.4 	186 	973 	151 	5.95 	85.0 	26.9
S310 × 74 	9420 	305 	139 	16.7 	17.4 	126 	829 	116 	6.49 	93.2 	26.2
60.7 	7680 	305 	133 	16.7 	11.7 	112 	739 	121 	5.62 	84.1 	26.9
52 	6580 	305 	129 	13.8 	10.9 	94.9 	624 	120 	4.10 	63.6 	24.9
47.3 	6010 	305 	127 	13.8 	8.89 	90.3 	593 	123 	3.88 	61.1 	25.4
S250 × 52 	6650 	254 	125 	12.5 	15.1 	61.2 	482 	96.0 	3.45 	55.1 	22.8
37.8 	4810 	254 	118 	12.5 	7.90 	51.2 	403 	103 	2.80 	47.4 	24.1
S200 × 34 	4360 	203 	106 	10.8 	11.2 	26.9 	265 	78.5 	1.78 	33.6 	20.2
27.4 	3480 	203 	102 	10.8 	6.88 	23.9 	236 	82.8 	1.54 	30.2 	21.0
S150 × 25.7 	3260 	152 	90.7 	9.12 	11.8 	10.9 	143 	57.9 	0.953 	21.0 	17.1
18.6 	2360 	152 	84.6 	9.12 	5.89 	9.16 	120 	62.2 	0.749 	17.7 	17.8
S130 × 15 	1890 	127 	76.2 	8.28 	5.44 	5.12 	80.3 	52.1 	0.495 	13.0 	16.2
S100 × 14.1 	1800 	102 	71.1 	7.44 	8.28 	2.81 	55.4 	39.6 	0.369 	10.4 	14.3
11.5 	1460 	102 	67.6 	7.44 	4.90 	2.52 	49.7 	41.7 	0.311 	9.21 	14.6
S75 × 11.2 	1420 	76.2 	63.8 	6.60 	8.86 	1.21 	31.8 	29.2 	0.241 	7.55 	13.0
8.5 	1070 	76.2 	59.2 	6.60 	4.32 	1.04 	27.4 	31.2 	0.186 	6.28 	13.2
†An American Standard Beam is designated by the letter S followed by the nominal depth in millimeters and the mass in kilograms per meter.

-- 873 of 897 --

Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A27
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(U.S. Customary Units)
C Shapes
(American Standard Channels)
X 	X
tw
tf
Y
Y
bf
d
x
Flange
Web
Thick- 	Thick- 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness
Designation† 	A, in2 	d, in. 	bf, in. 	tf, in. 	tw, in. 	Ix, in4 	Sx, in3 	rx, in. 	Iy, in4 	Sy, in3 	ry, in. 	x, in.
C15 × 50 	14.7 	15.0 	3.72 	0.650 	0.716 	404 	53.8 	5.24 	11.0 	3.77 	0.865 	0.799
40 	11.8 	15.0 	3.52 	0.650 	0.520 	348 	46.5 	5.45 	9.17 	3.34 	0.883 	0.778
33.9 	10.0 	15.0 	3.40 	0.650 	0.400 	315 	42.0 	5.62 	8.07 	3.09 	0.901 	0.788
C12 × 30 	8.81 	12.0 	3.17 	0.501 	0.510 	162 	27.0 	4.29 	5.12 	2.05 	0.762 	0.674
25 	7.34 	12.0 	3.05 	0.501 	0.387 	144 	24.0 	4.43 	4.45 	1.87 	0.779 	0.674
20.7 	6.08 	12.0 	2.94 	0.501 	0.282 	129 	21.5 	4.61 	3.86 	1.72 	0.797 	0.698
C10 × 30 	8.81 	10.0 	3.03 	0.436 	0.673 	103 	20.7 	3.42 	3.93 	1.65 	0.668 	0.649
25 	7.34 	10.0 	2.89 	0.436 	0.526 	91.1 	18.2 	3.52 	3.34 	1.47 	0.675 	0.617
20 	5.87 	10.0 	2.74 	0.436 	0.379 	78.9 	15.8 	3.66 	2.80 	1.31 	0.690 	0.606
15.3 	4.48 	10.0 	2.60 	0.436 	0.240 	67.3 	13.5 	3.87 	2.27 	1.15 	0.711 	0.634
C9 × 20 	5.87 	9.00 	2.65 	0.413 	0.448 	60.9 	13.5 	3.22 	2.41 	1.17 	0.640 	0.583
15 	4.41 	9.00 	2.49 	0.413 	0.285 	51.0 	11.3 	3.40 	1.91 	1.01 	0.659 	0.586
13.4 	3.94 	9.00 	2.43 	0.413 	0.233 	47.8 	10.6 	3.49 	1.75 	0.954 	0.666 	0.601
C8 × 18.7 	5.51 	8.00 	2.53 	0.390 	0.487 	43.9 	11.0 	2.82 	1.97 	1.01 	0.598 	0.565
13.7 	4.04 	8.00 	2.34 	0.390 	0.303 	36.1 	9.02 	2.99 	1.52 	0.848 	0.613 	0.554
11.5 	3.37 	8.00 	2.26 	0.390 	0.220 	32.5 	8.14 	3.11 	1.31 	0.775 	0.623 	0.572
C7 × 12.2 	3.60 	7.00 	2.19 	0.366 	0.314 	24.2 	6.92 	2.60 	1.16 	0.696 	0.568 	0.525
9.8 	2.87 	7.00 	2.09 	0.366 	0.210 	21.2 	6.07 	2.72 	0.957 	0.617 	0.578 	0.541
C6 × 13 	3.81 	6.00 	2.16 	0.343 	0.437 	17.3 	5.78 	2.13 	1.05 	0.638 	0.524 	0.514
10.5 	3.08 	6.00 	2.03 	0.343 	0.314 	15.1 	5.04 	2.22 	0.860 	0.561 	0.529 	0.500
8.2 	2.39 	6.00 	1.92 	0.343 	0.200 	13.1 	4.35 	2.34 	0.687 	0.488 	0.536 	0.512
C5 × 9 	2.64 	5.00 	1.89 	0.320 	0.325 	8.89 	3.56 	1.83 	0.624 	0.444 	0.486 	0.478
6.7 	1.97 	5.00 	1.75 	0.320 	0.190 	7.48 	2.99 	1.95 	0.470 	0.372 	0.489 	0.484
C4 × 7.2 	2.13 	4.00 	1.72 	0.296 	0.321 	4.58 	2.29 	1.47 	0.425 	0.337 	0.447 	0.459
5.4 	1.58 	4.00 	1.58 	0.296 	0.184 	3.85 	1.92 	1.56 	0.312 	0.277 	0.444 	0.457
C3 × 6 	1.76 	3.00 	1.60 	0.273 	0.356 	2.07 	1.38 	1.08 	0.300 	0.263 	0.413 	0.455
5 	1.47 	3.00 	1.50 	0.273 	0.258 	1.85 	1.23 	1.12 	0.241 	0.228 	0.405 	0.439
4.1 	1.20 	3.00 	1.41 	0.273 	0.170 	1.65 	1.10 	1.17 	0.191 	0.196 	0.398 	0.437
†An American Standard Channel is designated by the letter C followed by the nominal depth in inches and the weight in pounds per foot.
(continued)

-- 874 of 897 --

A28 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
C Shapes
(American Standard Channels)
X 	X
tw
t f
Y
Y
bf
d
x
Flange
Web
Thick- 	Thick- 	Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y
Area 	Depth 	Width 	ness 	ness 	Ix 	Sx 	rx 	Iy 	Sy 	ry 	x
Designation† 	A, mm2 	d, mm 	bf, mm 	tf, mm 	tw, mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 mm 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm 	mm
C380 × 74 	9480 	381 	94.5 	16.5 	18.2 	168 	882 	133 	4.58 	61.8 	22.0 	20.3
60 	7610 	381 	89.4 	16.5 	13.2 	145 	762 	138 	3.82 	54.7 	22.4 	19.8
50.4 	6450 	381 	86.4 	16.5 	10.2 	131 	688 	143 	3.36 	50.6 	22.9 	20.0
C310 × 45 	5680 	305 	80.5 	12.7 	13.0 	67.4 	442 	109 	2.13 	33.6 	19.4 	17.1
37 	4740 	305 	77.5 	12.7 	9.83 	59.9 	393 	113 	1.85 	30.6 	19.8 	17.1
30.8 	3920 	305 	74.7 	12.7 	7.16 	53.7 	352 	117 	1.61 	28.2 	20.2 	17.7
C250 × 45 	5680 	254 	77.0 	11.1 	17.1 	42.9 	339 	86.9 	1.64 	27.0 	17.0 	16.5
37 	4740 	254 	73.4 	11.1 	13.4 	37.9 	298 	89.4 	1.39 	24.1 	17.1 	15.7
30 	3790 	254 	69.6 	11.1 	9.63 	32.8 	259 	93.0 	1.17 	21.5 	17.5 	15.4
22.8 	2890 	254 	66.0 	11.1 	6.10 	28.0 	221 	98.3 	0.945 	18.8 	18.1 	16.1
C230 × 30 	3790 	229 	67.3 	10.5 	11.4 	25.3 	221 	81.8 	1.00 	19.2 	16.3 	14.8
22 	2850 	229 	63.2 	10.5 	7.24 	21.2 	185 	86.4 	0.795 	16.6 	16.7 	14.9
19.9 	2540 	229 	61.7 	10.5 	5.92 	19.9 	174 	88.6 	0.728 	15.6 	16.9 	15.3
C200 × 27.9 	3550 	203 	64.3 	9.91 	12.4 	18.3 	180 	71.6 	0.820 	16.6 	15.2 	14.4
20.5 	2610 	203 	59.4 	9.91 	7.70 	15.0 	148 	75.9 	0.633 	13.9 	15.6 	14.1
17.1 	2170 	203 	57.4 	9.91 	5.59 	13.5 	133 	79.0 	0.545 	12.7 	15.8 	14.5
C180 × 18.2 	2320 	178 	55.6 	9.30 	7.98 	10.1 	113 	66.0 	0.483 	11.4 	14.4 	13.3
14.6 	1850 	178 	53.1 	9.30 	5.33 	8.82 	100 	69.1 	0.398 	10.1 	14.7 	13.7
C150 × 19.3 	2460 	152 	54.9 	8.71 	11.1 	7.20 	94.7 	54.1 	0.437 	10.5 	13.3 	13.1
15.6 	1990 	152 	51.6 	8.71 	7.98 	6.29 	82.6 	56.4 	0.358 	9.19 	13.4 	12.7
12.2 	1540 	152 	48.8 	8.71 	5.08 	5.45 	71.3 	59.4 	0.286 	8.00 	13.6 	13.0
C130 × 13 	1700 	127 	48.0 	8.13 	8.26 	3.70 	58.3 	46.5 	0.260 	7.28 	12.3 	12.1
10.4 	1270 	127 	44.5 	8.13 	4.83 	3.11 	49.0 	49.5 	0.196 	6.10 	12.4 	12.3
C100 × 10.8 	1370 	102 	43.7 	7.52 	8.15 	1.91 	37.5 	37.3 	0.177 	5.52 	11.4 	11.7
8 	1020 	102 	40.1 	7.52 	4.67 	1.60 	31.5 	39.6 	0.130 	4.54 	11.3 	11.6
C75 × 8.9 	1140 	76.2 	40.6 	6.93 	9.04 	0.862 	22.6 	27.4 	0.125 	4.31 	10.5 	11.6
7.4 	948 	76.2 	38.1 	6.93 	6.55 	0.770 	20.2 	28.4 	0.100 	3.74 	10.3 	11.2
6.1 	774 	76.2 	35.8 	6.93 	4.32 	0.687 	18.0 	29.7 	0.0795 	3.21 	10.1 	11.1
†An American Standard Channel is designated by the letter C followed by the nominal depth in millimeters and the mass in kilograms per meter.

-- 875 of 897 --

Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A29
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(U.S. Customary Units)
Angles
Equal Legs
X	X
x
y
Y
Y
Z
Z
Axis X-X and Axis Y-Y 	Axis
Weight per 	Z-Z
Size and Thickness, in. 	Foot, lb/ft 	Area, in2 	I, in4 	S, in3 	r, in. 	x or y, in. 	rz, in.
L8 × 8 × 1 	51.0 	15.0 	89.1 	15.8 	2.43 	2.36 	1.56
3⁄4 	38.9 	11.4 	69.9 	12.2 	2.46 	2.26 	1.57
1⁄2 	26.4 	7.75 	48.8 	8.36 	2.49 	2.17 	1.59
L6 × 6 × 1 	37.4 	11.0 	35.4 	8.55 	1.79 	1.86 	1.17
3⁄4 	28.7 	8.46 	28.1 	6.64 	1.82 	1.77 	1.17
5⁄8 	24.2 	7.13 	24.1 	5.64 	1.84 	1.72 	1.17
1⁄2 	19.6 	5.77 	19.9 	4.59 	1.86 	1.67 	1.18
3⁄8 	14.9 	4.38 	15.4 	3.51 	1.87 	1.62 	1.19
L5 × 5 × 3⁄4 	23.6 	6.94 	15.7 	4.52 	1.50 	1.52 	0.972
5⁄8 	20.0 	5.86 	13.6 	3.85 	1.52 	1.47 	0.975
1⁄2 	16.2 	4.75 	11.3 	3.15 	1.53 	1.42 	0.980
3⁄8 	12.3 	3.61 	8.76 	2.41 	1.55 	1.37 	0.986
L4 × 4 × 3⁄4 	18.5 	5.44 	7.62 	2.79 	1.18 	1.27 	0.774
5⁄8 	15.7 	4.61 	6.62 	2.38 	1.20 	1.22 	0.774
1⁄2 	12.8 	3.75 	5.52 	1.96 	1.21 	1.18 	0.776
3⁄8 	9.80 	2.86 	4.32 	1.50 	1.23 	1.13 	0.779
1⁄4 	6.60 	1.94 	3.00 	1.03 	1.25 	1.08 	0.783
L31
2 × 31
2 × 1⁄2 	11.1 	3.25 	3.63 	1.48 	1.05 	1.05 	0.679
3⁄8 	8.50 	2.48 	2.86 	1.15 	1.07 	1.00 	0.683
1⁄4 	5.80 	1.69 	2.00 	0.787 	1.09 	0.954 	0.688
L3 × 3 × 1⁄2 	9.40 	2.75 	2.20 	1.06 	0.895 	0.929 	0.580
3⁄8 	7.20 	2.11 	1.75 	0.825 	0.910 	0.884 	0.581
1⁄4 	4.90 	1.44 	1.23 	0.569 	0.926 	0.836 	0.585
L21
2 × 21
2 × 1⁄2 	7.70 	2.25 	1.22 	0.716 	0.735 	0.803 	0.481
3⁄8 	5.90 	1.73 	0.972 	0.558 	0.749 	0.758 	0.481
1⁄4 	4.10 	1.19 	0.692 	0.387 	0.764 	0.711 	0.482
3⁄16 	3.07 	0.900 	0.535 	0.295 	0.771 	0.687 	0.482
L2 × 2 × 3⁄8 	4.70 	1.36 	0.476 	0.348 	0.591 	0.632 	0.386
1⁄4 	3.19 	0.938 	0.346 	0.244 	0.605 	0.586 	0.387
1⁄8 	1.65 	0.484 	0.189 	0.129 	0.620 	0.534 	0.391
(continued)

-- 876 of 897 --

A30 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
Angles
Equal Legs
X	X
x
y
Y
Y
Z
Z
Axis X-X 	Axis
Z-Z
Mass per 	I 	S 	r 	x or y 	rz
Size and Thickness, mm 	Meter, kg/m 	Area, mm2 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm 	mm 	mm
L203 × 203 × 25.4 	75.9 	9680 	37.1 	259 	61.7 	59.9 	39.6
19 	57.9 	7350 	29.1 	200 	62.5 	57.4 	39.9
12.7 	39.3 	5000 	20.3 	137 	63.2 	55.1 	40.4
L152 × 152 × 25.4 	55.7 	7100 	14.7 	140 	45.5 	47.2 	29.7
19 	42.7 	5460 	11.7 	109 	46.2 	45.0 	29.7
15.9 	36.0 	4600 	10.0 	92.4 	46.7 	43.7 	29.7
12.7 	29.2 	3720 	8.28 	75.2 	47.2 	42.4 	30.0
9.5 	22.2 	2830 	6.41 	57.5 	47.5 	41.1 	30.2
L127 × 127 × 19 	35.1 	4480 	6.53 	74.1 	38.1 	38.6 	24.7
15.9 	29.8 	3780 	5.66 	63.1 	38.6 	37.3 	24.8
12.7 	24.1 	3060 	4.70 	51.6 	38.9 	36.1 	24.9
9.5 	18.3 	2330 	3.65 	39.5 	39.4 	34.8 	25.0
L102 × 102 × 19 	27.5 	3510 	3.17 	45.7 	30.0 	32.3 	19.7
15.9 	23.4 	2970 	2.76 	39.0 	30.5 	31.0 	19.7
12.7 	19.0 	2420 	2.30 	32.1 	30.7 	30.0 	19.7
9.5 	14.6 	1850 	1.80 	24.6 	31.2 	28.7 	19.8
6.4 	9.80 	1250 	1.25 	16.9 	31.8 	27.4 	19.9
L89 × 89 × 12.7 	16.5 	2100 	1.51 	24.3 	26.7 	26.7 	17.2
9.5 	12.6 	1600 	1.19 	18.8 	27.2 	25.4 	17.3
6.4 	8.60 	1090 	0.832 	12.9 	27.7 	24.2 	17.5
L76 × 76 × 12.7 	14.0 	1770 	0.916 	17.4 	22.7 	23.6 	14.7
9.5 	10.7 	1360 	0.728 	13.5 	23.1 	22.5 	14.8
6.4 	7.30 	929 	0.512 	9.32 	23.5 	21.2 	14.9
L64 × 64 × 12.7 	11.4 	1450 	0.508 	11.7 	18.7 	20.4 	12.2
9.5 	8.70 	1120 	0.405 	9.14 	19.0 	19.3 	12.2
6.4 	6.10 	768 	0.288 	6.34 	19.4 	18.1 	12.2
4.8 	4.60 	581 	0.223 	4.83 	19.6 	17.4 	12.2
L51 × 51 × 9.5 	7.00 	877 	0.198 	5.70 	15.0 	16.1 	9.80
6.4 	4.70 	605 	0.144 	4.00 	15.4 	14.9 	9.83
3.2 	2.40 	312 	0.0787 	2.11 	15.7 	13.6 	9.93

-- 877 of 897 --

Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes 	A31
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(U.S. Customary Units)
Angles
Unequal Legs
X	X
x
y
Y
Y
α
Z
Z
Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y 	Axis Z-Z
Size and 	Weight per
Thickness, in. 	Foot, lb/ft 	Area, in2 	Ix, in4 	Sx, in3 	rx, in. 	y, in. 	Iy, in4 	Sy, in3 	ry, in. 	x, in. 	rz, in. 	tan α
L8 × 6 × 1 	44.2 	13.0 	80.9 	15.1 	2.49 	2.65 	38.8 	8.92 	1.72 	1.65 	1.28 	0.542
3⁄4 	33.8 	9.94 	63.5 	11.7 	2.52 	2.55 	30.8 	6.92 	1.75 	1.56 	1.29 	0.550
1⁄2 	23.0 	6.75 	44.4 	8.01 	2.55 	2.46 	21.7 	4.79 	1.79 	1.46 	1.30 	0.557
L6 × 4 × 3⁄4 	23.6 	6.94 	24.5 	6.23 	1.88 	2.07 	8.63 	2.95 	1.12 	1.07 	0.856 	0.428
1⁄2 	16.2 	4.75 	17.3 	4.31 	1.91 	1.98 	6.22 	2.06 	1.14 	0.981 	0.864 	0.440
3⁄8 	12.3 	3.61 	13.4 	3.30 	1.93 	1.93 	4.86 	1.58 	1.16 	0.933 	0.870 	0.446
L5 × 3 × 1⁄2 	12.8 	3.75 	9.43 	2.89 	1.58 	1.74 	2.55 	1.13 	0.824 	0.746 	0.642 	0.357
3⁄8 	9.80 	2.86 	7.35 	2.22 	1.60 	1.69 	2.01 	0.874 	0.838 	0.698 	0.646 	0.364
1⁄4 	6.60 	1.94 	5.09 	1.51 	1.62 	1.64 	1.41 	0.600 	0.853 	0.648 	0.652 	0.371
L4 × 3 × 1⁄2 	11.1 	3.25 	5.02 	1.87 	1.24 	1.32 	2.40 	1.10 	0.858 	0.822 	0.633 	0.542
3⁄8 	8.50 	2.48 	3.94 	1.44 	1.26 	1.27 	1.89 	0.851 	0.873 	0.775 	0.636 	0.551
1⁄4 	5.80 	1.69 	2.75 	0.988 	1.27 	1.22 	1.33 	0.585 	0.887 	0.725 	0.639 	0.558
L31
2 × 21
2 × 1⁄2 	9.40 	2.75 	3.24 	1.41 	1.08 	1.20 	1.36 	0.756 	0.701 	0.701 	0.532 	0.485
3⁄8 	7.20 	2.11 	2.56 	1.09 	1.10 	1.15 	1.09 	0.589 	0.716 	0.655 	0.535 	0.495
1⁄4 	4.90 	1.44 	1.81 	0.753 	1.12 	1.10 	0.775 	0.410 	0.731 	0.607 	0.541 	0.504
L3 × 2 × 1⁄2 	7.70 	2.25 	1.92 	1.00 	0.922 	1.08 	0.667 	0.470 	0.543 	0.580 	0.425 	0.413
3⁄8 	5.90 	1.73 	1.54 	0.779 	0.937 	1.03 	0.539 	0.368 	0.555 	0.535 	0.426 	0.426
1⁄4 	4.10 	1.19 	1.09 	0.541 	0.953 	0.980 	0.390 	0.258 	0.569 	0.487 	0.431 	0.437
L21
2 × 2 × 3⁄8 	5.30 	1.55 	0.914 	0.546 	0.766 	0.826 	0.513 	0.361 	0.574 	0.578 	0.419 	0.612
1⁄4 	3.62 	1.06 	0.656 	0.381 	0.782 	0.779 	0.372 	0.253 	0.589 	0.532 	0.423 	0.624
(continued)

-- 878 of 897 --

A32 	Appendix E
Appendix E 	Properties of Rolled-Steel Shapes
(SI Units)
Angles
Unequal Legs
X	X
x
y
Y
Y
α
Z
Z
Axis X-X 	Axis Y-Y 	Axis Z-Z
Size and 	Mass per
Thickness, 	Meter 	Area 	Ix 	Sx 	rx 	y 	Iy 	Sy 	ry 	x 	rz
mm 	kg/m 	mm2 	106 mm4 	103 mm3 	mm 	mm 	106 mm4 103 mm3 mm 	mm 	mm 	tan α
L203 × 152 × 25.4 	65.5 	8390 	33.7 	247 	63.2 	67.3 	16.1 	146 	43.7 	41.9 	32.5 	0.542
19 	50.1 	6410 	26.4 	192 	64.0 	64.8 	12.8 	113 	44.5 	39.6 	32.8 	0.550
12.7 	34.1 	4350 	18.5 	131 	64.8 	62.5 	9.03 	78.5 	45.5 	37.1 	33.0 	0.557
L152 × 102 × 19 	35.0 	4480 	10.2 	102 	47.8 	52.6 	3.59 	48.3 	28.4 	27.2 	21.7 	0.428
12.7 	24.0 	3060 	7.20 	70.6 	48.5 	50.3 	2.59 	33.8 	29.0 	24.9 	21.9 	0.440
9.5 	18.2 	2330 	5.58 	54.1 	49.0 	49.0 	2.02 	25.9 	29.5 	23.7 	22.1 	0.446
L127 × 76 × 12.7 	19.0 	2420 	3.93 	47.4 	40.1 	44.2 	1.06 	18.5 	20.9 	18.9 	16.3 	0.357
9.5 	14.5 	1850 	3.06 	36.4 	40.6 	42.9 	0.837 	14.3 	21.3 	17.7 	16.4 	0.364
6.4 	9.80 	1250 	2.12 	24.7 	41.1 	41.7 	0.587 	9.83 	21.7 	16.5 	16.6 	0.371
L102 × 76 × 12.7 	16.4 	2100 	2.09 	30.6 	31.5 	33.5 	0.999 	18.0 	21.8 	20.9 	16.1 	0.542
9.5 	12.6 	1600 	1.64 	23.6 	32.0 	32.3 	0.787 	13.9 	22.2 	19.7 	16.2 	0.551
6.4 	8.60 	1090 	1.14 	16.2 	32.3 	31.0 	0.554 	9.59 	22.5 	18.4 	16.2 	0.558
L89 × 64 × 12.7 	13.9 	1770 	1.35 	23.1 	27.4 	30.5 	0.566 	12.4 	17.8 	17.8 	13.5 	0.485
9.5 	10.7 	1360 	1.07 	17.9 	27.9 	29.2 	0.454 	9.65 	18.2 	16.6 	13.6 	0.495
6.4 	7.30 	929 	0.753 	12.3 	28.4 	27.9 	0.323 	6.72 	18.6 	15.4 	13.7 	0.504
L76 × 51 × 12.7 	11.5 	1450 	0.799 	16.4 	23.4 	27.4 	0.278 	7.70 	13.8 	14.7 	10.8 	0.413
9.5 	8.80 	1120 	0.641 	12.8 	23.8 	26.2 	0.224 	6.03 	14.1 	13.6 	10.8 	0.426
6.4 	6.10 	768 	0.454 	8.87 	24.2 	24.9 	0.162 	4.23 	14.5 	12.4 	10.9 	0.437
L64 × 51 × 9.5 	7.90 	1000 	0.380 	8.95 	19.5 	21.0 	0.214 	5.92 	14.6 	14.7 	10.6 	0.612
6.4 	5.40 	684 	0.273 	6.24 	19.9 	19.8 	0.155 	4.15 	15.0 	13.5 	10.7 	0.624

-- 879 of 897 --

A33
Maximum
Beam and Loading 	Elastic Curve 	Deflection 	Slope at End 	Equation of Elastic Curve
− PL3
3EI − PL2
2EI y = P
6EI (x 3 − 3Lx 2 )
− wL4
8EI − wL3
6EI y = − w
24EI (x4 − 4Lx 3 + 6L2x 2 )
− ML2
2EI − ML
EI y = − M
2EI x 2
For x ≤ 1
2L:
− PL3
48EI ± PL2
16EI y = P
48EI (4x 3 − 3L2x)
For a > b: 	For x < a:
− Pb (L2 − b2 ) 3∕2
9 √3EIL θ A = − Pb (L2 − b2 )
6EIL y = Pb
6EIL [x 3 − (L2 − b 2 )x]
at x m = √
L2 − b2
3 θ B = + Pa (L2 − a2 )
6EIL For x = a: 	y = − Pa2b2
3EIL
− 5wL4
384EI ± wL3
24EI y = − w
24EI (x4 − 2Lx 3 + L3x)
ML2
9 √3EI θ A = + ML
6EI y = − M
6EIL (x 3 − L2x)
θ B = − ML
3EI
O
y
x
ymax
1
L
L
O
y
x
ymax
2
L
L
w
6
7
w
O
y
x
ymax
3
L
L
O
y
x
ymax
4
L
L
1
2 L
1
2 L
O
y
x
ymax
L
1
2 L
A
L
y
x
ymax
L
3
A
y
x
ymax
5
L
L
L
L
a 	a
b 	b
B
B B
B
A
A
xm
P
P
M
P
M
F 	Beam Deflections and Slopes
APPENDIX

-- 880 of 897 --

A34
G 	Fundamentals of Engineering
Examination
Engineers are required to be licensed when their work directly affects the
public health, safety, and welfare. The intent is to ensure that engineers have
met minimum qualifications, involving competence, ability, experience, and
character. The licensing process involves an initial exam, called the Funda-
mentals of Engineering Examination, professional experience, and a second
exam, called the Principles and Practice of Engineering. Those who success-
fully complete these requirements are licensed as a Professional Engineer.
The exams are developed under the auspices of the National Council of Exam-
iners for Engineering and Surveying.
The first exam, the Fundamentals of Engineering Examination, can be
taken during or after graduation from a four-year accredited engineering pro-
gram. The exam stresses subject material in a typical undergraduate engineer-
ing program, including Mechanics of Materials. The topics included in the
exam cover much of the material in this book. The following is a list of the
main topic areas with references to appropriate sections in this book. Also
included are problems that can be solved to review this material.
Stresses (1.2–1.4)
Problems: 1.4, 1.10, 1.30, 1.37
Strains (2.1–2.4; 2.7–2.8)
Problems: 2.4, 2.19, 2.39, 2.47, 2.61, 2.68
Torsion (3.1–3.3; 3.9–3.10)
Problems: 3.6, 3.27, 3.35, 3.53, 3.129, 3.137
Bending (4.1–4.4; 4.7)
Problems: 4.9, 4.22, 4.33, 4.49, 4.103, 4.107
Shear and Bending-Moment Diagrams (5.1–5.2)
Problems: 5.5, 5.9, 5.35, 5.43
Normal Stresses in Beams (5.3)
Problems: 5.18, 5.21, 5.56, 5.60
Shear (6.1; 6.3–6.4)
Problems: 6.1, 6.22, 6.32, 6.38
Transformation of Stresses and Strains (7.1–7.2; 7.5–7.6)
Problems: 7.5, 7.15, 7.32, 7.43, 7.81, 7.87, 7.100, 7.104
Deflection of Beams (9.1; 9.4)
Problems: 9.5, 9.13, 9.71, 9.77
Columns (10.1)
Problems: 10.11, 10.19, 10.22
Strain Energy (11.1–11.2)
Problems: 11.9, 11.15, 11.21
APPENDIX

-- 881 of 897 --

Answers to Problems
Answers to problems with a number set in straight type are given on this and the following pages. Answers to problems
with a number set in italic and red are not listed.
CHAPTER 1
1.1 (a) 84.9 MPa. (b) −96.8 MPa.
1.2 d1 = 22.6 mm, d2 = 40.2 mm.
1.3 (a) 17.93 ksi. (b) 22.6 ksi.
1.4 6.75 kips.
1.7 (a) 101.6 MPa. (b) −21.7 MPa.
1.8 1084 ksi.
1.9 33.1 kN.
1.10 (a) 11.09 ksi. (b) −12.00 ksi.
1.13 −4.97 MPa.
1.14 (a) 12.73 MPa. (b) −4.77 MPa.
1.15 159.2 MPa.
1.16 2.25 kips.
1.17 889 psi.
1.18 67.9 kN.
1.20 29.4 mm.
1.21 (a) 3.33 MPa. (b) 525 mm.
1.23 (a) 1.030 in. (b) 38.8 ksi.
1.24 (a) 23.0 MPa. (b) 24.1 MPa. (c) 21.7 MPa.
1.25 (a) 5.57 mm. (b) 38.9 MPa. (c) 35.0 MPa.
1.28 (a) 9.94 ksi. (b) 6.25 ksi.
1.29 (a) σ = 489 kPa; τ = 489 kPa.
1.30 (a) 13.95 kN. (b) 620 kPa.
1.31 σ = 70.0 psi; τ = 40.4 psi.
1.32 (a) 1.500 kips. (b) 43.3 psi.
1.35 σ = −21.6 MPa; τ = 7.87 MPa.
1.36 833 kN.
1.37 2.35.
1.40 (a) 31.5 mm. (b) 42.7 mm.
1.41 (a) 3.21. (b) 33.9 mm.
1.42 0.268 in2.
1.45 1.800.
1.46 0.798 in.
1.47 10.25 kN.
1.48 (a) 2.92. (b) b = 40.3 mm, c = 97.2 mm.
1.50 3.24.
1.52 283 lb.
1.53 1.683 kN.
1.54 2.06 kN.
1.55 3.72 kN.
1.56 3.97 kN.
1.57 (a) 362 kg. (b) 1.718.
1.58 (a) 629 lb. (b) 1.689.
1.59 195.3 MPa.
1.60 (a) 14.64 ksi. (b) −9.96 ksi.
1.62 (a) 35.7 m. (b) 5.34 MPa.
1.64 xE = 24.7 in.; xF = 55.2 in.
1.65 3.09 kips.
1.67 27.8 mm.
1.68 σall d∕4τall.
1.70 21.3° < θ < 32.3°.
1.C2 (c) 16 mm ≤ d ≤ 22 mm. (d ) 18 mm ≤ d ≤ 22 mm.
1.C3 (c) 0.70 in. ≤ d ≤ 1.10 in. (d ) 0.85 in. ≤ d ≤ 1.25 in.
1.C4 (b) For β = 38.66°, tan β = 0.8; BD is perpendicular to BC.
(c) F.S. = 3.58 for α = 26.6°; P is perpendicular to line AC.
1.C5 (b) Member of Fig. P1.29, for α = 60°:
(1) 70.0 psi; (2) 40.4 psi; (3) 2.14; (4) 5.30; (5) 2.14.
Member of Fig. P1.31, for α = 45°:
(1) 489 kPa; (2) 489 kPa; (3) 2.58; (4) 3.07; (5) 2.58.
1.C6 (d ) Pall = 5.79 kN; stress in links is critical.
CHAPTER 2
2.1 (a) 9.96 mm. (b) 109.1 MPa.
2.2 (a) 0.1784 in. (b) 58.6 in.
2.3 (a) 11.31 kN. (b) 400 MPa.
2.4 (a) 17.25 MPa. (b) 2.82 mm.
2.6 (a) 6.91 mm. (b) 160.0 MPa.
2.7 (a) 0.0206 in. (b) 1.20%.
2.9 10.70 mm.
2.11 0.0252 in.
2.13 0.429 in.
2.14 1.988 kN.
2.15 0.868 in.
2.18 5.74 kips.
2.19 (a) 32.8 kN. (b) 0.0728 mm ↓.
2.20 (a) 0.0189 mm ↑. (b) 0.0919 mm ↓.
2.21 −0.0753 in. in AB; 0.0780 in. in AD.
2.23 (a) 1.222 mm. (b) 1.910 mm.
2.24 50.4 kN.
2.25 14.74 kN.
2.26 (a) −0.0302 mm. (b) 0.01783 mm.
2.27 1.066 kips.
2.29 (a) ρgl2∕2E . (b) W∕2.
2.30 Ph∕πEab ↓.
2.33 (a) 140.6 MPa. (b) 93.8 MPa.
2.34 (a) 15.00 mm. (b) 288 kN.
2.35 σs = −12.84 ksi; σc = −1.594 ksi.
2.36 201 kips.
2.39 (a) RA = 11.92 kips ←; RD = 20.1 kips ←.
(b) 3.34 × 10−3 in.
2.40 (a) 0.0762 mm.
(b) σAB = 30.5 MPa; σEF = 38.1 MPa.
2.42 (a) RA = 76.6 kN →; RD = 64.6 kN ←.
(b) –0.0394 mm.
2.43 0.536 mm ↓.
2.44 (a) PBE = 205 lb; PCF = 228 lb. (b) 0.0691 in. ↓.
2.45 PA = 0.525P; PB = 0.200P; PC = 0.275P.
2.47 −47.0 MPa.
2.48 75.4°C.
2.50 σs = −1.448 ksi; σc = 54.2 psi.
2.51 142.6 kN.
2.52 (a) σAB = −5.25 ksi; σBC = −11.82 ksi. (b) 6.57 × 10−3 in. →.
AN1

-- 882 of 897 --

AN2 	Answers to Problems
2.C1 Prob. 2.126: (a) 11.90 × 10−3 in. ↓ . (b) 5.66 × 10−3 in. ↑.
2.C3 Prob. 2.60: (a) −116.2 MPa. (b) 0.363 mm.
2.C5 r = 0.25 in.: 3.89 kips;
r = 0.75 in.: 2.78 kips.
2.C6 (a) −0.40083. (b) −0.10100. (c) −0.00405.
CHAPTER 3
3.1 641 N·m.
3.2 87.3 MPa.
3.3 (a) 71.3 MPa. (b) 6.25%.
3.4 (a) 7.55 ksi. (b) 7.64 ksi.
3.6 (a) 70.5 MPa. (b) 55.8 mm.
3.7 (a) 19.21 kip·in. (b) 2.01 in.
3.9 (a) 8.35 ksi. (b) 5.94 ksi.
3.10 (a) 1.292 in. (b) 1.597 in.
3.11 (a) 56.6 MPa. (b) 36.6 MPa.
3.13 (a) 77.6 MPa. (b) 62.8 MPa. (c) 20.9 MPa.
3.15 9.16 kip·in.
3.16 (a) 1.503 in. (b) 1.853 in.
3.18 (a) dAB = 52.9 mm. (b) dBC = 33.3 mm.
3.20 477 N·m.
3.21 (a) 45.1 mm. (b) 65.0 mm.
3.22 (a) 1.129 kN·m.
3.23 1.189 kip·in.
3.25 4.30 kip·in.
3.27 73.6 N·m.
3.28 (a) dAB = 38.6 mm. (b) dCD = 52.3 mm. (c) 75.5 mm.
3.29 1.0; 1.025; 1.120; 1.200; 1.0.
3.31 48.5 MPa.
3.32 (a) 3.74°. (b) 3.79°.
3.33 0.205 in.
3.35 (a) 1.384°. (b) 3.22°.
3.37 (a) 14.43°. (b) 46.9°.
3.38 6.02°.
3.40 1.140°.
3.41 3.77°.
3.42 212 N·m.
3.44 53.8°.
3.45 36.1 mm.
3.46 1.285 in.
3.47 1.483 in.
3.48 62.9 mm.
3.49 42.0 mm.
3.50 22.5 mm.
3.53 (a) 10.10 ksi. (b) 4.81 ksi. (c) 4.59°.
3.54 3.64°.
3.56 (a) TA = 1090 N·m; TC = 310 N·m.
(b) 47.4 MPa. (c) 28.8 MPa.
3.57 (a) 41.9 MPa. (b) 0.663°.
3.59 12.24 MPa.
3.61 0.241 in.
3.63 T∕2πtr1
2 at r1.
3.64 (a) 0.925 in. (b) 0.735 in.
3.65 (a) 20.3 mm. (b) 16.12 mm.
3.66 (a) 10.29 ksi. (b) 5.15 ksi.
3.67 (a) 18.90 MPa. (b) 9.45 MPa.
3.68 25.6 kW.
3.69 2.64 mm.
3.71 (a) 51.7 kW. (b) 6.17°.
3.73 (a) 47.5 MPa. (b) 30.4 mm.
3.76 (a) 4.08 ksi. (b) 6.79 ksi.
2.54 (a) −98.3 MPa. (b) −38.3 MPa.
2.55 (a) 21.4°C. (b) 3.67 MPa.
2.56 5.70 kN.
2.58 (a) 201.6°F. (b) 18.0107 in.
2.59 (a) 52.3 kips. (b) 9.91 × 10−3 in.
2.61 (a) 0.00780 in. (b) −0.000256 in.
2.63 408 kN.
2.64 (a) 0.0358 mm. (b) −0.00258 mm. (c) −0.000344 mm.
(d) −0.00825 mm2.
2.66 0.399.
2.67 (a) −0.0724 mm. (b) −0.01531 mm.
2.68 (a) 0.00312 in. (b) 0.00426 in. (c) 0.00505 in.
2.69 (a) 352 × 10−6 in. (b) 82.8 × 10−6 in. (c) 307 × 10−6 in.
2.70 (a) −63.0 MPa. (b) −4.05 mm2. (c) −162.0 mm3.
2.77 a = 42.9 mm; b = 160.7 mm.
2.78 75.0 kN; 40.0 mm.
2.79 (a) 10.42 in. (b) 0.813 in.
2.80 τ = 62.5 psi; G = 156.3 psi.
2.81 10.26 MPa.
2.82 6.17 × 103 kN/m.
2.83 (a) 588 × 10−6 in. (b) 33.2 × 10−3 in3. (c) 0.0294%.
2.84 (a) −0.0746 mm; −143.9 mm3.
(b) −0.0306 mm; −521 mm3.
2.85 (a) 193.2 × 10−6; 1.214 × 10−3 in3.
(b) 396 × 10−6; 2.49 × 10−3 in3.
2.88 3.00.
2.91 (a) 0.0303 mm. (b) σx = 40.6 MPa, σy = σz = 5.48 MPa.
2.92 (a) σx = 44.6 MPa; σy = 0; σz = 3.45 MPa. (b) −0.0129 mm.
2.93 (a) 58.3 kN. (b) 64.3 kN.
2.94 (a) 87.0 MPa. (b) 75.2 MPa. (c) 73.9 MPa.
2.97 41.5 kN.
2.98 (a) 66.9 MPa. (b) 92.6 MPa.
2.99 (a) 12.02 kips. (b) 108.0%.
2.100 23.9 kips.
2.101 (a) 15.90 kips; 0.1745 in. (b) 15.90 kips; 0.274 in.
2.102 (a) 44.2 kips; 0.0356 in. (b) 44.2 kips; 0.1606 in.
2.105 176.7 kN; 3.84 mm.
2.106 176.7 kN; 3.16 mm.
2.107 (a) 0.292 mm. (b) σAC = 250 MPa; σBC = −307 MPa.
(c) 0.0272 mm.
2.108 (a) 990kN. (b) σAC = 250 MPa; σBC = −316 MPa.
(c) 0.0313 mm.
2.111 (a) 112.1 kips. (b) 50 ksi in low-strength steel;
82.9 ksi in high-strength steel. (c) 0.00906 in.
2.112 (a) 0.0309 in. (b) 64.0 ksi. (c) 0.00387 in.
2.113 (a) σAD = 250 MPa. (b) σBE = 124.3 MPa. (c) 0.622 mm ↓.
2.114 (a) σAD = 233 MPa; σBE = 250 MPa. (b) 1.322 mm ↓.
2.115 (a) σAD = −4.70 MPa; σBE = 19.34 MPa. (b) 0.0967 mm ↓.
2.116 (a) −36.0 ksi. (b) 15.84 ksi.
2.117 (a) σAC = −150.0 MPa; σCB = −250 MPa.
(b) −0.1069 mm →.
2.118 (a) σAC = 56.5 MPa; σCB = 9.41 MPa. (b) 0.0424 mm →.
2.121 (a) 915°F. (b) 1759°F.
2.122 (a) 0.1042 mm. (b) σAC = σCB = −65.2 MPa.
2.123 (a) 0.00788 mm. (b) σAC = σCB = −6.06 MPa.
2.125 1.219 in.
2.127 4.67°C.
2.128 (a) 9.53 kips. (b) 1.254 × 10−3 in.
2.130 σs = −8.34 ksi; σc = −1.208 ksi.
2.131 (a) 9.73 kN. (b) 2.02 mm ←.
2.133 0.01870 in.
2.135 (a) AσY∕μg. (b) EA∕L.

-- 883 of 897 --

Answers to Problems 	AN3
3.77 (a) 0.799 in. (b) 0.947 in.
3.78 (a) 16.02 Hz. (b) 27.2 Hz.
3.79 934 rpm.
3.80 50.0 kW.
3.81 d = 74.0 mm.
3.84 10.8 mm.
3.86 (a) 5.36 ksi. (b) 5.02 ksi.
3.87 5.10 mm.
3.88 42.6 Hz.
3.89 (a) 2.61 ksi. (b) 2.01 ksi.
3.90 (a) 203 N·m. (b) 165.8 N·m.
3.92 (a) 9.64 kN·m. (b) 9.91 kN·m.
3.93 2230 lb·in.
3.94 (a) 19.10 ksi; 1 in. (b) 20.0 ksi; 0.565 in.
3.95 (a) 113.3 MPa; 15.00 mm.
(b) 145.0 MPa; 6.90 mm.
3.98 (a) 6.72°. (b) 18.71°.
3.99 (a) 2.47°. (b) 4.34°.
3.100 (a) 283 N·m. (b) 12.91 mm.
3.101 (a) 52.1 kip·in. (b) 80.8 kip·in.
3.102 τmax = 145.0 MPa; ϕ = 19.70°.
3.104 (a) 8.17 mm. (b) 42.1°.
3.106 (a) 5.96 kN·m; 17.94°. (b) 7.31 kN·m; 26.9°.
3.107 (a) 43.0°. (b) 7.61 kN·m.
3.110 671 lb·in.
3.111 (a) 1.826 kip·in. (b) 22.9°.
3.112 2.32 kN·m.
3.113 2.26 kN·m.
3.114 5.63 ksi.
3.115 14.62°.
3.118 68.0 MPa at inner surface.
3.119 20.2°.
3.120 (a) c0 = 0.1500c. (b) T0 = 0.221τyc3.
3.121 0.0505 in.
3.122 68.2 in.
3.123 (a) 189.2 N·m; 9.05°. (b) 228 N·m; 7.91°.
3.124 (a) 74.0 MPa; 9.56°. (b) 61.5 MPa; 6.95°.
3.127 5.07 MPa.
3.128 59.2 MPa.
3.129 0.944.
3.131 0.198.
3.132 0.737.
3.133 (a) 4.57 kip·in. (b) 4.31 kip·in. (c) 5.77 kip·in.
3.135 (a) 157.0 kN·m. (b) 8.70°.
3.136 (a) 8.66 ksi. (b) 8.51°.
3.137 (a) 1007 N·m. (b) 9.27°.
3.138 (a) 4.55 ksi. (b) 2.98 ksi. (c) 2.56°.
3.139 (a) 5.82 ksi. (b) 2.91 ksi.
3.142 (a) 16.85 N·m.
3.143 8.45 N·m.
3.144 τa = 4.73 MPa, τb = 9.46 MPa.
3.146 (a) 2.16 kip·in. (b) 2.07 kip·in. (c) 1.92 kip·in.
3.147 (a) 12.76 MPa. (b) 5.40 kN·m.
3.149 (a) 3c∕t. (b) 3c2∕t2.
3.150 (b) 0.25% , 1.000%, 4.00%.
3.151 637 kip·in.
3.153 12.22°.
3.155 (a) 24.5°. (b) 19.37°.
3.156 (a) 17.45 MPa. (b) 27.6 MPa. (c) 2.05°.
3.157 4.12 kN·m.
3.158 (a) 18.80 kW. (b) 24.3 MPa.
3.160 3(c/t).
3.162 (a) 0.347 in. (b) 37.2°.
3.C2 Prob. 3.44: 2.21°.
3.C5 (a) −3.282%. (b) −0.853%.
(c) −0.138%. (d) −0.00554%.
3.C6 (a) −1.883%. (b) −0.484%.
(c) −0.078%. (d) −0.00313%.
CHAPTER 4
4.1 (a) −116.4 MPa. (b) −87.3 MPa.
4.2 (a) −5.96 ksi. (b) 3.73 ksi.
4.3 80.2 kN·m.
4.4 24.8 kN·m.
4.5 (a) 1.405 kip·in. (b) 3.19 kip·in.
4.6 5.28 kN·m.
4.9 −14.71 ksi; 8.82 ksi.
4.10 −10.38 ksi; 15.40 ksi.
4.11 −102.4 MPa; 73.2 MPa.
4.12 61.3 kN.
4.15 4.11 kip·in.
4.16 106.1 N·m.
4.18 42.9 kip·in.
4.19 3.79 kN·m.
4.21 (a) 96.5 MPa. (b) 20.5 N·m.
4.22 (a) 0.602 mm. (b) 0.203 N·m.
4.23 (a) 145.0 ksi. (b) 384 lb·in.
4.24 (a) σ = 75.0 MPa, ρ = 26.7 m.
(b) σ = 125.0 MPa, ρ = 9.60 m.
4.25 (a) 9.17 kN·m (b) 10.24 kN·m.
4.26 (a) 45.1 kip·in. (b) 49.7 kip·in.
4.29 (a) (8∕9)h0. (b) 0.949.
4.30 (a) 1007 in. (b) 3470 in. (c) 0.01320°.
4.31 (a) 139.1 m. (b) 480m.
4.32 (a) [(σx)max ∕2ρc](y2 − c2). (b) −(σx)max c∕2ρ.
4.33 1.240 kN·m.
4.34 2.22 kN·m.
4.37 335 kip·in.
4.38 193.6 kip·in.
4.39 (a) −56.0 MPa. (b) 66.4 MPa.
4.40 (a) 51.9 MPa. (b) −121.0 MPa.
4.41 (a) 1.527 ksi. (b) 17.68 ksi.
4.43 8.70 m.
4.44 12.15 m.
4.45 519 ft.
4.47 3.87 kip·ft.
4.48 2.88 kip·ft.
4.49 (a) 212 MPa. (b) −15.59 MPa.
4.50 (a) 210 MPa. (b) −14.08 MPa.
4.54 (a) 1674 mm2. (b) 90.8 kN·m.
4.55 (a) σA = 6.86 ksi; σB = 6.17 ksi; σS = 4.11 ksi. (b) 151.9 ft.
4.57 (a) −22.5 ksi. (b) 17.78 ksi.
4.59 (a) 6.15 MPa. (b) −8.69 MPa.
4.61 (a) 219 MPa. (b) 176.0 MPa.
4.63 (a) 7.95 ksi. (b) 8.30 ksi.
4.64 (a) 5.03 kip·in. (b) 4.17 kip·in.
4.65 (a) 147.0 MPa. (b) 119.0 MPa.
4.67 (a) 144.0 N·m. (b) 208 N·m.
4.68 (a) 115.2 N·m. (b) 171.2 N·m.
4.69 2460 lb·in.
4.71 (a) 5.87 mm. (b) 2.09 m.
4.72 (a) 21.9 mm. (b) 7.81 m.
4.75 (a) 322 kip·in. (b) 434 kip·in.

-- 884 of 897 --

AN4 	Answers to Problems
4.171 (a) 3.06 ksi. (b) −2.81 ksi. (c) 0.529 ksi.
4.173 (a) −172.4 MPa. (b) 53.2 MPa.
4.174 (a) −131.5 MPa. (b) 34.7 MPa.
4.175 (a) 16.05 ksi. (b) −9.84 ksi.
4.177 (a) 41.8 MPa. (b) −20.4 MPa.
4.178 27.2 mm.
4.179 107.8 N·m.
4.180 (a) −32.5 MPa. (b) 34.2 MPa.
4.181 (a) −3.65 ksi. (b) 3.72 ksi.
4.183 (a) −5.96 ksi. (b) 3.61 ksi.
4.184 (a) −6.71 ksi. (b) 3.24 ksi.
4.185 (a) 63.9 MPa. (b) −52.6 MPa.
4.191 −0.536 ksi.
4.192 121.6 MPa, −143.0 MPa.
4.194 (a) σmax = 6M∕a3, 1∕ρ = 12M∕Ea4.
(b) σmax = 8.49M∕a3, 1∕ρ = 12M∕Ea4.
4.196 (a) 46.9 MPa. (b) 18.94 MPa. (c) 55.4 m.
4.198 (a) σA = 41.7 psi; σB = 292 psi.
(b) AB: 0.500 in. from A; BD: 0.750 in. from D.
4.199 13.80 kN·m.
4.201 (a) 56.7 kN·m. (b) 20.0 mm.
4.202 P = 75.6 kips ↓; Q = 87.1 kips ↓.
4.203 (a) σA = −½ σ1; σB = σ1; σC = −σ1; σD = ½ σ1. (b) 4∕3 ρ1.
4.C1 a = 4 mm: σa = 50.6 MPa, σs = 107.9 MPa.
a = 14 mm: σa = 89.7 MPa, σs = 71.8 MPa.
(a) 1 11.6 MPa. (b) 6.61 mm.
4.C2 yY = 65 mm, M = 52.6 kN.m, ρ = 43.3; yY = 45 mm,
M = 55.6 kN·m, ρ = 30.0 m.
4.C3 β = 30°: σA = −7.83 ksi, σB = −5.27 ksi,
σC = 7.19 ksi, σD = 5.91 ksi;
β = 120°: σA = 1.557 ksi, σB = 6.01 ksi,
σC = −2.67 ksi, σD = −4.89 ksi.
4.C4 r1∕h = 0.529 for 50% increase in σmax.
4.C5 Prob. 4.10: −102.4 MPa; 73.2 MPa.
4.C6 yY = 0.8 in.: 76.9 kip·in., 552 in.;
yY = 0.2 in.: 95.5 kip·in., 138.1 in.
4.C7 a = 0.2 in.: −7.27 ksi, a = 0.8 in.: −6.61 ksi.
For a = 0.625 in., σ = −6.51 ksi.
CHAPTER 5
5.1 (b) V = w(L∕2 − x); M = wx(L − x)∕2.
5.2 (b) A to B: V = Pb
L ; M = Pbx∕L.
B to C: V = Pa∕L; M = Pa(L − x)∕L.
5.3 (b) V = w0L∕2 − w0 x2∕2L;
M = −w0L2∕3 + w0Lx∕2 − w0x3∕6L
5.4 (b) A to B: V = –wx; M = −wx2∕2.
B to C: V = −wa; M = −wa(x − a∕2).
5.5 (b) A to B: V = P; M = Px. B to C: V = 0; M = Pa.
C to D: V = −P; M = P(L − x).
5.6 (b) A to B: V = w(L − 2a)∕2; M = wx(L − 2a)∕2.
B to C: V = w(L∕2 − x); M = w[(L − 2a)x2 − (x − a)2]∕2.
C to D: V = −w(L − 2a)∕2; M = w(L − 2a)(L − x)∕2.
5.7 (a) 68.0 kN. (b) 60.0 kN·m.
5.8 (a) 7.00 lb. (b) 57.0 lb·in.
5.9 (a) 72.0 kN. (b) 96.0 kN·m.
5.11 (a) 10.00 kN. (b) 2.40 kN·m.
5.12 (a) 690 lb. (b) 9000 lb·in.
5.13 (a) 18.00 kN. (b) 12.15 kN·m.
5.15 10.89 MPa.
5.16 950 psi.
4.77 (a) 29.2 kN·m. (b) 1.500.
4.78 (a) 27.5 kN·m. (b) 1.443.
4.79 (a) 462 kip·in. (b) 1.435.
4.80 (a) 420 kip·in. (b) 1.364.
4.81 1.866 kN·m.
4.82 19.01 kN·m.
4.84 212 kip·in.
4.86 212 kip·in.
4.87 120 MPa.
4.88 106.4 MPa.
4.91 (a) 106.7 MPa. (b) y0 = −31.2 mm, 0, 31.2 mm. (c) 24.1 m.
4.92 (a) 13.36 ksi. (b) y0 = −1.517 in., 0, 1.517 in. (c) 168.8 ft.
4.94 (a) 0.707ρY. (b) 6.09ρY.
4.96 (a) 4.69 m. (b) 7.29 kN·m.
4.99 (a) 71.0 MPa. (b) −80.2 MPa.
4.100 (a) −105 psi. (b) −195 psi.
4.101 (a) −2P∕πr2. (b) −5P∕πr2.
4.103 (a) −37.8 MPa. (b) −38.6 MPa.
4.105 (a) 288 lb. (b) 209 lb.
4.106 13.95 kN.
4.107 14.40 kN.
4.108 16.04 mm.
4.109 43.0 kips.
4.110 0.500d.
4.113 7.86 kips ↓; 9.15 kips ↑.
4.114 (a) 9.80 ksi. (b) 2.67 ksi.
4.115 (a) 52.7 MPa. (b) −67.2 MPa. (c) 11.20 mm above D.
4.116 (a) −P∕2at. (b) −2P∕at. (c) −P∕2at.
4.117 (a) 1125 kN. (b) 817 kN.
4.121 (a) 30.0 mm. (b) 94.5 kN.
4.122 (a) 5.00 mm. (b) 243 kN.
4.124 P = 44.2 kips; Q = 57.3 kips.
4.125 (a) 152.3 kips. (b) x = 0.59 in. (c) 300 μ.
4.127 (a) −3.37 MPa. (b) −18.60 MPa. (c) 3.37 MPa.
4.128 (a) 9.86 ksi. (b) −2.64 ksi. (c) −9.86 ksi.
4.129 (a) −29.3 MPa. (b) −144.8 MPa. (c) −125.9 MPa.
4.130 (a) 17.60 ksi. (b) 1.729 ksi. (c) −9.26 ksi.
4.133 (a) 57.8 MPa. (b) −56.8 MPa. (c) 25.9 MPa.
4.134 (a) 57.4°. (b) 75.7 MPa.
4.135 (a) 18.29°. (b) 13.74 ksi.
4.137 (a) 19.52°. (b) 95.0 MPa.
4.138 (a) 27.5°. (b) 5.07 ksi.
4.139 (a) 32.9°. (b) 61.4 MPa.
4.141 113.0 MPa.
4.143 1222 psi.
4.144 (a) σA = 31.5 MPa; σB = −10.39 MPa.
(b) 94.0 mm above point A.
4.145 (a) 17.11 mm.
4.146 0.1638 in.
4.147 53.9 kips.
4.150 29.1 kip·in.
4.151 29.1 kip·in.
4.152 733 N·m.
4.153 1.323 kN·m.
4.155 900 N·m.
4.161 (a) −45.0 MPa. (b) −42.2 MPa.
4.162 (a) −43.2 MPa. (b) 33.0 MPa.
4.163 (a) 12.19 ksi. (b) 11.15 ksi.
4.164 σA = 10.77 ksi; σB = −3.22 ksi.
4.167 655 lb.
4.169 73.2 mm.
4.170 (a) −82.4 MPa. (b) 36.6 MPa.

-- 885 of 897 --

Answers to Problems 	AN5
5.18 139.2 MPa.
5.20 10.49 ksi.
5.21 14.17 ksi.
5.23 ∣V∣max = 342 N; ∣M∣max = 51.6 N·m; σ = 17.19 MPa.
5.25 10.34 ksi.
5.26 ∣V∣max = 6.00 kN; ∣M∣max = 4.00 kN·m; σmax = 14.29 MPa.
5.27 (a) 10.67 kN. (b) 9.52 MPa.
5.29 (a) 866 mm. (b) 99.2 MPa.
5.30 (a) 819 mm. (b) 89.5 MPa.
5.31 (a) 3.09 ft. (b) 12.95 ksi.
5.32 1.021 in.
5.33 (a) 33.3 mm. (b) 6.66 mm.
5.34 See 5.1.
5.35 See 5.2.
5.36 See 5.3.
5.37 See 5.4.
5.38 See 5.5.
5.39 See 5.6.
5.40 See 5.7.
5.41 See 5.8.
5.42 See 5.9.
5.43 (a) 30.0 kips. (b) 90.0 kip·ft.
5.46 See 5.15.
5.47 See 5.16.
5.48 See 5.18.
5.49 See 5.20.
5.52 (a) V = (w0L∕π) cos(πx∕L); M = (w0L2∕π2) sin (πx∕L).
(b) w0L2∕π2.
5.53 (a) V = −w0x + w0x2∕2L + w0L∕3;
M = −w0x2∕2 + w0x3∕6L + w0Lx∕3.
(b) 0.0642w0L2.
5.54 ∣V∣max = 15.75 kips; ∣M∣max = 27.8 kip·ft; σ = 13.58 ksi.
5.55 ∣V ∣max = 128.0 kN; ∣M ∣max = 89.6 kN·m; σ = 156.1 MPa.
5.56 ∣V∣max = 20.7 kN; ∣M∣max = 9.75 kN·m; σ = 60.2 MPa.
5.59 ∣V∣max = 76.0 kN; ∣M∣max = 67.3 kN·m; σ = 68.5 MPa.
5.60 ∣V∣max = 48.0 kN; ∣M∣max = 12.00 kN·m; σ = 62.2 MPa.
5.61 ∣V∣max = 30.0 lb; ∣M∣max = 24.0 lb·ft; σ = 6.95 ksi.
5.63 (a) ∣V∣max = 24.5 kips; ∣M∣max = 36.3 kip·ft; (b) 15.82 ksi.
5.64 ∣V∣max = 1150 N; ∣M∣max = 221 N·m; P = 500 N;
Q = 250 N.
5.65 h > 173.2 mm.
5.68 b > 6.20 in.
5.69 h > 203 mm.
5.70 b > 48.0 mm.
5.71 W21 × 62.
5.72 W18 × 50.
5.73 W410 × 60.
5.74 W250 × 28.4.
5.76 S15 × 42.9.
5.77 S510 × 98.2.
5.79 9 mm.
5.80 C180 × 14.6.
5.81 C9 × 15.
5.82 3∕8 in.
5.83 W610 × 101.
5.84 W24 × 68.
5.85 7.48 kN.
5.86 7.32 kN.
5.89 (a) 1.485 kN∕m. (b) 1.935 m.
5.91 (a) S15 × 42.9. (b) W27 × 84.
5.92 (a) 6.49 ft. (b) W16 × 31.
5.94 383 mm.
5.95 336 mm.
5.96 W27 × 84.
5.97 +23.2%.
5.98 (a) V = −w0x + w0⟨x − a⟩1; M = w0x2∕2 + (w0∕2)⟨x − a⟩2.
(b) −3w0a2∕2.
5.100 (a) V = −w0x + w0x2∕2a − (w0∕2a)⟨x − a⟩2;
M = −w0x2∕2 + w0x3∕6a − (w0∕6a)⟨x − a⟩3.
(b) −5w0a2∕6.
5.102 (a) V = −w0⟨x − a⟩1 −3w0a∕4 + (15w0a∕4)⟨x − 2a⟩0;
M = −(w0∕2)⟨x − a⟩2 − 3w0ax∕4 + (15w0a∕4)⟨x − 2a⟩1.
(b) −w0a2∕2.
5.103 (a) V = 2P∕3 − P⟨x − a⟩0; M = 2Px∕3 − P⟨x − a⟩1.
(b) Pa∕3.
5.104 (a) V = −P∕2 − P⟨x − a⟩0; M = Px∕2 − P⟨x − a⟩1 +
Pa + Pa⟨x − a⟩0.
(b) 3Pa∕2.
5.105 (a) V = −P⟨x − a⟩0; M = −P⟨x − a⟩1 − Pa⟨x − a⟩0. (b) −Pa.
5.106 (a) V = 40 − 48⟨x − 1.5⟩0 − 60⟨x − 3.0⟩0 + 60⟨x − 3.6⟩0 kN;
M = 40x − 48⟨x − 1.5⟩1 − 60⟨x − 3.0⟩1 +
60⟨x − 3.6⟩1 kN·m.
(b) 60.0 kN·m.
5.107 (a) V = 40 − 20⟨x − 2⟩0 − 20⟨x − 4⟩0 − 20⟨x − 6⟩0 kips;
M = 40x − 20⟨x − 2⟩1 − 20⟨x − 4⟩1 − 20⟨x − 6⟩1 kip·ft.
(b) 120.0 kip·ft.
5.108 (a) V = 62.5 − 25⟨x − 0.6⟩1 + 25⟨x − 2.4⟩1 −
40⟨x − 0.6⟩0 − 40⟨x − 2.4⟩0 kN;
M = 62.5x − 12.5⟨x − 0.6⟩2 + 12.5⟨x − 2.4⟩2 −
40⟨x − 0.6⟩1 − 40⟨x − 2.4⟩1 kN·m.
(b) 47.6 kN·m.
5.109 (a) V = 13 − 3x + 3⟨x − 3⟩1 − 8⟨x − 7⟩0 − 3⟨x − 11⟩1 kips;
M = 13x − 1.5x2 + 1.5⟨x − 3⟩2 − 8⟨x − 7⟩1 −
1.5⟨x − 11⟩2 kip·ft.
(b) 41.5 kip·ft.
5.110 (a) V = 30 −24⟨x − 0.75⟩0 − 24⟨x − 1.5⟩0 −
24⟨x − 2.25⟩0 + 66⟨x − 3⟩0 kN;
M = 30x − 24⟨x − 0.75⟩1 − 24⟨x − 1.5⟩1 −
24⟨x − 2.25⟩1 + 66⟨x − 3⟩1 kN·m.
(b) 87.7 MPa.
5.114 (a) 122.7 kip·ft at x = 6.50 ft. (b) W16 × 40.
5.115 (a) 63.0 kip·ft at point E.
(b) W16 × 26 or W14 × 26 or W12 × 26.
5.117 (a) 0.776 kN·m at x = 1.766 m. (b) h = 120 mm.
5.118 ∣V∣max = 35.6 kN; ∣M∣max = 25.0 kN·m.
5.119 ∣V∣max = 89.0 kN; ∣M∣max = 178.0 kN·m.
5.120 ∣V∣max = 15.30 kips; ∣M∣max = 38.0 kip·ft.
5.122 (a) ∣V∣max = 13.80 kN; ∣M∣max = 16.16 kN·m. (b) 83.8 MPa.
5.123 (a) ∣V∣max = 40.0 kN; ∣M∣max = 30.0 kN·m. (b) 40.0 MPa.
5.124 (a) ∣V∣max = 3.84 kips; ∣M∣max = 3.80 kip·ft. (b) 0.951 ksi.
5.126 (a) h = h0 [(x∕L)(1 − x∕L)]1/2. (b) 4.44 kip·in.
5.127 (a) h = h0 (x∕L)1/2. (b) 20.0 kips.
5.128 (a) h = h0 (x∕L)3/2. (b) 167.7 mm.
5.130 (a) h = h0[(3L2x − 4x3)∕L3]1/2. (b) 225 kN/m.
5.132 l2 = 6.00 ft; l2 = 4.00 ft.
5.134 1.800 m.
5.135 1.900 m.
5.136 d = d0 (2x∕L)1/3 for 0 ≤ x ≤ L∕2;
d = d0 [2(L − x)∕L]1/3 for L∕2 ≤ x ≤ L.
5.139 (a) b = b0 (1 − x∕L)2. (b) 160.0 lb∕in.
5.140 (a) 155.2 MPa. (b) 143.3 MPa.
5.141 (a) 25.0 ksi. (b) 18.03 ksi.
5.143 193.8 kN.
5.144 (a) 152.6 MPa. (b) 133.6 MPa.

-- 886 of 897 --

AN6 	Answers to Problems
6.59 (a) 21.8 MPa. (b) 24.2 MPa.
6.61 0.345a.
6.62 0.714a.
6.63 1.250a.
6.64 3(b2 − a2)∕[6(a + b) + h].
6.65 (a) 48.7 mm. (b) 0 at A; 15.95 and 26.6 MPa at B; 73.1 and
43.9 MPa at D; 60.5 MPa at midpoint of DE.
6.66 (a) 41.8 mm. (b) 0 at A; 13.31 and 7.99 MPa at B; 46.8 and
78.0 MPa at D; 91.9 MPa at midpoint of DE.
6.69 0.727 in.
6.70 20.2 mm.
6.71 1.265 in.
6.72 9.64 mm.
6.75 2.37 in.
6.76 21.7 mm.
6.77 75.0 mm.
6.78 3.00 in.
6.81 (maximum) P∕at.
6.82 (maximum) 1.333P∕at.
6.83 (a) 144.6 N·m. (b) 65.9 MPa.
6.84 (a) 144.6 N·m. (b) 106.6 MPa.
6.87 (maximum) 0.428 ksi at B′.
6.88 (maximum) 1.287 ksi at C′.
6.89 60.0 mm.
6.91 143.3 kips.
6.93 189.6 lb.
6.94 (a) 41.4 MPa. (b) 41.4 MPa.
6.96 83.3 MPa.
6.97 (a) 0.232 in. (b) 209 psi.
6.99 40.0 mm.
6.100 0.433 in.
6.C1 (a) h = 173.2 mm. (b) h = 379 mm.
6.C2 (a) L = 37.5 in.; b = 1.250 in.
(b) L = 70.3 in.; b = 1.172 in.
(c) L = 59.8 in.; b = 1.396 in.
6.C4 (a) τmax = 2.03 ksi; τB = 1.800 ksi. (b) 194 psi.
6.C5 Prob. 6.66: (a) 2.67 in. (b) τB = 0.917 ksi;
τD = 3.36 ksi; τmax = 4.28 ksi.
CHAPTER 7
7.1 σ = −0.0782 ksi; τ = 8.46 ksi.
7.2 σ = 14.19 MPa; τ = 15.19 MPa.
7.3 σ = 10.93 ksi; τ = 0.536 ksi.
7.4 σ = −6.07 MPa; τ = 24.9 MPa.
7.5 (a) −31.0°; 59.0°. (b) 52.0 MPa; −84.0 MPa.
7.7 (a) −13.28°; 76.7°. (b) 65.9 MPa; −45.9 MPa.
7.9 (a) 14.04°; 104.04°. (b) 68.0 MPa. (c) −16.00 MPa.
7.10 (a) −26.6°; 63.4°. (b) 10.00 ksi. (c) 12.00 ksi.
7.11 (a) 31.7°; 121.7°. (b) 55.9 MPa. (c) 10.00 MPa.
7.12 (a) −31.0°; 59.0°. (b) 8.50 ksi. (c) 1.500 ksi.
7.13 (a) σx′ = –4.80 ksi; τx′y′ = 0.300 ksi, σy′ = 20.8 ksi.
(b) σx′ = 3.90 ksi; τx′y′ = 12.13 ksi, σy′ = 12.10 ksi.
7.15 (a) σx′ = 9.02 ksi; τx′y′ = 3.80 ksi; σy′ = −13.02 ksi.
(b) σx′ = 5.34 ksi; τx′y′ = −9.06 ksi; σy′ = −9.34 ksi.
7.17 (a) 217 psi. (b) −125.0 psi.
7.18 (a) −0.300 MPa. (b) −2.92 MPa.
7.19 16.58 kN.
7.21 (a) 18.4°. (b) 16.67 ksi.
7.23 (a) 18.9°, 108.9°, 18.67 MPa, −158.5 MPa. (b) 88.6 MPa.
7.24 25.1 ksi, −0.661 ksi, 12.88 ksi.
7.25 5.12 ksi, −1.640 ksi, 3.38 ksi.
5.145 (a) 4.49 m. (b) 211. mm.
5.147 (a) 11.16 ft. (b) 14.31 in.
5.149 (a) 0.400 m. (b) 134.4 kN.
5.150 (a) 15.00 in. (b) 320 lb∕in.
5.151 (a) 30.0 in. (b) 12.80 kips.
5.152 (a) 85.0 N. (b) 21.3 N·m.
5.154 (a) 1.260 ft. (b) 7.24 ksi.
5.156 ∣V ∣max = 16.80 kN; ∣M ∣max = 8.82 kN·m; σ = 73.5 MPa.
5.158 a > 6.67 in.
5.159 W27 × 84.
5.161 (a) 225.6 kN·m at x = 3.63 m. (b) 60.6 MPa.
5.163 (a) b0 (1 − x∕L). (b) 20.8 mm.
5.C4 For x = 13.5 ft: M1 = 131.25 kip·ft;
M2 = 156.25 kip·ft; MC = 150.0 kip·ft.
5.C6 Prob. 5.112: VA = 29.5 kN, Mmax = 28.3 kN·m,
at 1.938 m from A.
CHAPTER 6
6.1 (a) 31.5 lb. (b) 43.2 psi.
6.3 81.5 mm.
6.4 738 N.
6.5 180.3 kN.
6.6 208 kN.
6.7 9.95 ksi.
6.9 (a) 8.97 MPa. (b) 8.15 MPa.
6.11 (a) 7.40 ksi. (b) 6.70 ksi.
6.12 (a) 3.17 ksi. (b) 2.40 ksi.
6.13 211 kN.
6.15 1733 lb.
6.17 300 kips.
6.18 87.3 mm.
6.19 (b) h = 320 mm; b = 97.7 mm.
6.21 (a) 1.745 ksi. (b) 2.82 ksi.
6.22 (a) 12.55 MPa. (b) 18.82 MPa.
6.23 3.21 ksi.
6.24 19.61 MPa.
6.26 (a) Line at mid-height. (b) 2.00.
6.28 (a) Line at mid-height. (b) 1.500.
6.29 1.672 in.
6.30 (a) 239 kPa. (b) 359 kPa.
6.31 1835 lb.
6.32 (a) 379 kPa. (b) 0.
6.35 (a) 95.2 MPa. (b) 112.8 MPa.
6.36 (a) 101.6 MPa. (b) 79.9 MPa.
6.37 τa = 33.7 MPa; τb = 75.0 MPa; τc = 43.5 MPa.
6.38 (a) 40.5 psi. (b) 55.2 psi.
6.40 τa = 0; τb = 1.262 ksi; τc = 3.30 ksi;
τd = 6.84 ksi; τe = 7.86 ksi.
6.42 (a) 18.23 MPa. (b) 14.59 MPa. (c) 46.2 MPa.
6.43 20.1 ksi.
6.44 9.05 mm.
6.45 0.371 in.
6.46 255 kN.
6.48 τa = 10.76 MPa; τb = 0; τc = 11.21 MPa;
τd = 22.0 MPa; τe = 9.35 MPa.
6.49 (a) 50.9 MPa. (b) 62.4 MPa.
6.51 1.4222 in.
6.52 10.53 ksi.
6.56 (a) 2.59 ksi. (b) 967 psi.
6.57 (a) 23.3 MPa. (b) 109.7 kPa.
6.58 (a) 1.323 ksi. (b) 1.329 ksi.

-- 887 of 897 --

Answers to Problems 	AN7
7.26 12.18 MPa, −48.7 MPa; 30.5 MPa.
7.27 205 MPa.
7.29 (a) −2.89 MPa. (b) 12.77 MPa, 1.226 MPa.
7.53 (a) −8.66 MPa. (b) 17.00 MPa, −3.00 MPa.
7.55 24.6°, 114.6°; 145.8 MPa, 54.2 MPa.
7.56 0°, 90°; σ0, −σ0.
7.57 0, 90.0°; 1.732σ0, −1.732σ0.
7.58 −120.0 MPa ≤ τxy ≤ 120.0 MPa.
7.59 −141.4 MPa ≤ τxy ≤ 141.1 MPa.
7.60 −45.0° ≤ θ ≤ 8.13°; 45.0° ≤ θ ≤ 98.1°; 135.0° ≤ θ ≤ 188.1°;
225.0° ≤ θ ≤ 278.1°.
7.62 16.52° ≤ θ ≤ 110.1°.
7.63 (a) 33.7°, 123.7°. (b) 18.00 ksi. (c) 6.50 ksi.
7.65 (b) ∣τxy∣ = √σx σy − σmax σmin.
7.66 (a) 8.60 ksi. (b) 10.80 ksi.
7.68 (a) 94.3 MPa. (b) 105.3 MPa.
7.69 (a) 100.0 MPa. (b) 110.0 MPa.
7.70 (a) 39.0 MPa. (b) 54.0 MPa. (c) 42.0 MPa.
7.71 (a) 39.0 MPa. (b) 45.0 MPa. (c) 39.0 MPa.
7.73 (a) 19.50 ksi. (b) 17.00 ksi. (c) 24.0 ksi.
7.74 (a) ±6.00 ksi. (b) ±11.24 ksi.
7.75 ±60.0 MPa.
7.77 1.000 ksi; 7.80 ksi.
7.79 −60.0 MPa ≤ τxy ≤ 60.0 MPa.
7.80 (a) 45.7 MPa. (b) 92.9 MPa.
7.81 (a) 1.228. (b) 1.098. (c) Yielding occurs.
7.82 (a) 1.083. (b) Yielding occurs. (c) Yielding occurs.
7.83 (a) 1.279. (b) 1.091. (c) Yielding occurs.
7.84 (a) 1.149. (b) Yielding occurs. (c) Yielding occurs.
7.87 8.19 kip·in.
7.88 9.46 kip·in.
7.89 Rupture will occur.
7.90 Rupture will occur.
7.91 No rupture.
7.92 Rupture will occur.
7.94 ±8.49 MPa.
7.95 50.0 MPa.
7.96 196.9 N·m.
7.98 (a) 1.290 MPa. (b) 0.852 mm.
7.99 (a) 12.38 ksi. (b) 0.0545 in.
7.102 σmax = 8.61 ksi; τmax = 4.31 ksi (out of plane).
7.103 2.94 MPa.
7.104 12.76 m.
7.105 σmax = 113.7 MPa; τmax = 56.8 MPa.
7.106 σmax = 103.5 MPa; τmax = 51.8 MPa.
7.108 σmax = 11.82 ksi; τmax = 5.91 ksi.
7.109 1.676 MPa.
7.111 0.307 in.
7.112 3.29 MPa.
7.113 3.80 MPa.
7.115 56.8°.
7.116 (a) 419 kPa. (b) 558 kPa.
7.117 (a) 3750 psi. (b) 1079 psi.
7.118 387 psi.
7.120 (a) 21.4 MPa. (b) 14.17 MPa.
7.122 σmax = 68.6 MPa; τmax = 34.3 MPa.
7.124 σmax = 8.48 ksi; τmax = 4.24 ksi.
7.125 σmax = 13.09 ksi; τmax = 6.54 ksi.
7.126 (a) 5.64 ksi. (b) 282 psi.
7.127 (a) 2.28 ksi. (b) 228 psi.
7.128 εx′ = −653 μ; εy′ = 303 μ; γx′y′ = −829 μ.
7.129 εx′ = 115.0 μ; εy′ = 285 μ; γx′y′ = −5.72 μ.
7.131 εx′ = 36.7 μ; εy′ = 283 μ; γx′y′ = 227 μ.
7.132 εx′ = −653 μ; εy′ = 303 μ; γx′y′ = −829 μ.
7.133 εx′ = 115.0 μ; εy′ = 285 μ; γx′y′ = −5.72 μ.
7.135 εx′ = 36.7 μ; εy′ = 283 μ; γx′y′ = 227 μ.
7.136 (a) −33.7°, 56.3°; −420 μ, 100 μ, 160 μ.
(b) 520 μ. (c) 580 μ.
7.137 (a) −30.1°, 59.9°; −702 μ, −298 μ, 500 μ. (b) 403 μ.
(c) 1202 μ.
7.139 (a) −26.6°, 64.4°; −150.0 μ, 750 μ, −300 μ. (b) 900 μ.
(c) 1050 μ.
7.140 (a) 7.8°, 97.8°; 56.6 μ, 243 μ, 0. (b) 186.8 μ. (c) 243 μ.
7.141 (a) 121.0°, 31.0°; 513 μ, 87.5 μ, 0. (b) 425 μ. (c) 513 μ.
7.143 (a) 127.9°, 37.9°; −383 μ, −57.5 μ, 0. (b) 325 μ. (c) 383 μ.
7.146 (a) −300 × 10−6 in.∕in. (b) 435 × 10−6 in.∕in.,
−315 × 10−6 in.∕in.; 750 × 10−6 in.∕in.
7.149 (a) 30.0°, 120.0°; 560 × 10−6 in.∕in., −140.0 × 10−6 in.∕in.
(b) 700 × 10−6 in.∕in.
7.150 P = 69.6 kips; Q = 30.3 kips.
7.151 P = 34.8 kips; Q = 38.4 kips.
7.154 1.421 MPa.
7.155 1.761 MPa.
7.156 −22.5°, 67.5°; 426 μ, −952 μ, −224 μ.
7.157 −32.1°, 57.9°; −70.9 MPa, −29.8 MPa.
7.158 3.70 kN.
7.159 (a) 47.9 MPa. (b) 102.7 MPa.
7.161 −30°, 60°; − √ 3τ0, √3τ0.
7.163 −122.0 MPa; 60.0 MPa.
7.164 (a) 1.287. (b) 1.018. (c) Yielding occurs.
7.165 σmax = 77.4 MPa; τmax = 38.7 MPa.
7.167 3.43 ksi (compression).
7.169 415 × 10−6 in.∕in.
7.C1 Prob. 7.14: (a) −37.5 MPa, 57.5 MPa, −25.4 MPa.
(b) −30.1 MPa, 50.1 MPa, 35.9 MPa.
Prob. 7.16: (a) 24.0 MPa, −104.0 MPa, −1.50 MPa.
(b) −19.51 MPa, −60.5 MPa, −60.7 MPa.
7.C4 Prob. 7.93: Rupture occurs at τ0 = 3.67 ksi.
7.C6 Prob. 7.138: (a) −21.6°, 68.4°; 279 μ, −599 μ, 160.0 μ.
(b) 877 μ. (c) 877 μ.
7.C7 Prob. 7.142: (a) 11.3°, 101.3°; 310 μ, 50.0 μ, 0.
(b) 260 μ. (b) 310 μ.
7.C8 Prob. 7.144: εx = 253 μ; εy = 307 μ; γxy = −893 μ.
εa = 727 μ; εb = −167.2 μ; γmax = −894 μ.
Prob. 7.145: εx = 725 μ; εy = −75.0 μ; γxy = 173.2 μ.
εa = 734 μ; εb = −84.3 μ; γmax = 819 μ.
CHAPTER 8
8.1 (a) 10.69 ksi. (b) 19.18 ksi. (c) Not acceptable.
8.2 (a) 10.69 ksi. (b) 13.08 ksi. (c) Acceptable.
8.3 (a) 94.6 MPa. (b) 93.9 MPa. (c) Acceptable.
8.4 (a) 91.9 MPa. (b) 95.1 MPa. (c) Acceptable.
8.5 (a) W690 × 125. (b) 128.2 MPa; 47.3 MPa; 124.0 MPa.
8.6 (a) W 690 × 125. (b) 118.2 MPa; 34.7 MPa; 122.3 MPa.
8.9 (a) 152.8 MPa. (b) 147.2 MPa.
8.11 (a) 17.90 ksi. (b) 17.08 ksi.
8.12 (a) 19.39 ksi. (b) 20.7 ksi.
8.13 (a) 131.3 MPa. (b) 135.5 MPa.
8.15 41.2 mm.
8.19 0.993 in.; 1.500 in.
8.20 4010 psi; 5030 psi.
8.22 (a) H: 6880 psi; K: 6760 psi. (b) H: 7420 psi; K: 7010 psi.
8.23 42.6 mm.

-- 888 of 897 --

AN8 	Answers to Problems
9.16 4.83 mm ↓.
9.17 (a) y = 2w0L4{−8cos(πx∕2L) − π2x2∕L2 + 2π(π − 2)x∕L +
π(4 − π)}∕π4EI.
(b) 0.1473w0L3∕EI ⦨. (c) 0.1089w0L4∕EI ↓.
9.18 (a) y = w0(x6∕90 − Lx5∕30 + L3x3∕18 − L5x∕30)∕EIL2.
(b) w0L3∕30EI ⦪. (c) 61w0L4∕5760EI ↓.
9.19 3M0∕2L ↑.
9.20 3wL∕8 ↑.
9.23 4.00 kips ↑.
9.24 9.75 kN ↑.
9.25 RB = 5P∕16 ↑; MA = −3PL∕16, MC = 5PL∕32, MB = 0.
9.26 RB = 9M0∕8L ↑; MA = M0∕8, MC− = −7M0∕16,
MC+ = 9M0∕16.
9.27 RA = 9w0L∕640 ↑; Mm+ = 0.00814w0L2, MB = −0.0276w0L2.
9.28 RA = 7wL∕128 ↑; MC = 0.0273wL2, MB = −0.0703wL2,
M = 0.0288wL2 at x = 0.555L.
9.30 RB = 17wL∕64 ↑; yC = wL4∕1024EI ↓.
9.32 RB = 4P∕27 ↑; yD = 11PL3∕2187EI ↓.
9.33 wL∕2↑, wL2∕12 ⤴; M = w [6x (L − x) − L2]∕12.
9.34 RA = 3M0∕2L ↑, MA = M0∕4 ⤴; M = M0∕2 just to the left of C.
9.35 (a) y = (P∕6EIL){bx3 − L⟨x − a⟩3 − b(L2 − b2)x}.
(b) Pb(L2 − b2)∕6EIL ⦪. (c) Pa2b2∕3EIL ↓.
9.36 (a) y = (M0∕6EIL){x3 − 3L⟨x − a⟩2 + (3b2 − L2)x}
(b) M0(3b2 − L2)∕6EIL ⦪. (c) M0ab(b − a)∕3EIL ↑.
9.37 (a) 9Pa3∕4EI ↓. (b) 5Pa3∕3EI ↓.
9.38 (a) 22Pa3∕3EI ↓. (b) 41Pa3∕3EI ↓.
9.41 (a) y = w{−16x4 + 16⟨x − L∕2⟩4 + 56L3x − 41L4}∕384EI.
(b) 41wL4∕384EI ↓.
9.43 (a) y = w0 {−5L3x2∕48 + L2 x3∕24 − ⟨x − L∕2⟩5∕60}∕EIL.
(b) w0L4∕48EI ↓. (c) 121w0L4∕1920EI ↓.
9.44 (a) y = (w∕24EI) {−x4 + ⟨x − L∕2⟩4 − ⟨x − L⟩4 +
Lx3 + 3L ⟨x − L⟩3 − L3x∕16}.
(b) wL4∕768EI ↑. (c) 5wL4∕256EI.
9.45 (a) 0.880 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 1.654 mm ↓.
9.46 (a) 8.66 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.1503 in. ↓.
9.48 (a) 5.40 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 3. 06 mm ↓.
9.49 (a) 41wL∕128 ↑. (b) 19wL4∕6144EI ↓.
9.50 (a) 9M0∕8L ↑. (b) M0L2∕128EI ↓.
9.51 (a) 2P∕3 ↑. (b) 5PL3∕486EI ↓.
9.53 (a) 11.54 kN ↑. (b) 4.18 mm ↓.
9.54 (a) 33.3 kN ↑. (b) 3.18 mm ↓.
9.56 (a) 7.38 kips ↑. (b) 0.0526 in. ↓.
9.57 (a) 1.280wa ↑; 1.333wa2⤴. (b) 0.907 wa4∕EI ↓.
9.58 (a) 20P∕27 ↑; 4PL∕27 ⤴. (b) 5PL3∕1296EI ↓.
9.59 1.660 mm ↓ at x = 2.86 m.
9.60 0.1520 in. ↓ at x = 26.4 in.
9.61 0.341 in. ↓ at x = 3.34 ft.
9.62 3.07 mm ↓ at x = 0.942 m.
9.65 10wa3/3EI ⦪. 29wa4/4EI ↓.
9.66 PL2∕24EI ⦪; PL3∕48EI.
9.67 3PL2∕4EI ⦨; 13PL3∕24EI ↓.
9.68 Pa(2L − a)∕2EI ⦪; Pa(3L2 − 3aL + a2)∕6EI ↑.
9.71 (a) wL4∕128EI. (b) wL3∕72EI.
9.72 (a) PL3∕486EI. (b) PL2∕81EI ⦪.
9.73 6.32 × 10−3 rad ⦪; 5.55 mm ↓.
9.75 12.55 × 10–3 rad ⦪; 0.364 in. ↓.
9.76 12.08 × 10–3 rad ⦪; 0.240 in. ↓.
9.77 (a) 0.601 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 3.67 mm ↓.
9.79 (a) 4P∕3 ↑; PL∕3 ⤴. (b) 2P∕3 ↑.
9.80 (a) 7wL∕128 ↑. (b) 57wL∕128 ↑; 9wL2∕128 ⤶.
9.82 RA = 2M0∕L ↑; RB = 3M0∕L ↓; RC = M0∕L ↑.
9.84 wL∕2 ↑, wL2∕2 ⤵.
8.24 43.1 mm.
8.27 37.0 mm.
8.28 43.9 mm.
8.29 1.822 in.
8.30 1.792 in.
8.31 (a) −11.07 ksi; 0. (b) 2.05 ksi; 2.15 ksi. (c) 15.17 ksi; 0.
8.32 (a) 11.87 ksi; 0. (b) 2.05 ksi; 2.15 ksi. (c) −7.78 ksi; 0.
8.35 (a) −37.9 MPa; 14.06 MPa. (b) −131.6 MPa; 0.
8.36 (a) −32.5 MPa; 14.06 MPa. (b) −126.2 MPa; 0.
8.37 −21.3 ksi; 6.23 ksi.
8.38 −20.2 MPa; 2.82 MPa.
8.39 (a) 4.79 ksi; 3.07 ksi. (b) −2.57 ksi; 3.07 ksi.
8.40 −14.98 MPa; 17.29 MPa.
8.42 55.0 MPa, −55.0 MPa; −45.0°, 45.0°; 55.0 MPa.
8.43 24.1 MPa, −78.7 MPa; 51.4 MPa.
8.46 (a) 3.47 ksi; 1.042 ksi. (b) 7.81 ksi; 0.781 ksi. (c) 12.15 ksi; 0.
8.47 (a) 18.39 MPa; 0.391 MPa. (b) 21.3 MPa; 0.293 MPa.
(c) 24.1 MPa; 0.
8.48 (a) −7.98 MPa; 0.391 MPa. (b) −5.11 MPa; 0.293 MPa.
(c) −2.25 MPa; 0.
8.49 0.413 ksi, −0.0378 ksi; 0.225 ksi.
8.51 25.2 MPa, −0.870 MPa; 13.06 MPa.
8.52 34.6 MPa, −10.18 MPa; 22.4 MPa.
8.53 (a) 86.5 MPa; 0. (b) 57.0 MPa; 9.47 MPa.
8.55 12.94 MPa, −1.328 MPa; 7.13 MPa.
8.57 5.59 ksi, −12.24 ksi; 8.91 ksi.
8.58 5.55 ksi, −16.48 ksi; 11.02 ksi.
8.60 (a) 51.0 kN. (b) 39.4 kN.
8.61 12.2 MPa, −12.2 MPa; 12.2 MPa.
8.62 (a) 12.90 ksi, −0.32 ksi; −8.9°, 81.1°.; 6.61 ksi.
(b) 6.43 ksi, −6.43 ksi; ± 45.0°; 6.43 ksi.
8.64 0.48 ksi, −44.7 ksi; 22.6 ksi.
8.65 (a) W10 × 15. (b) 23.5 ksi; 4.89 ksi; 23.2 ksi.
8.66 BC: 21.7 mm; CD: 33.4 mm.
8.68 46.5 mm.
8.69 −3.96 ksi; 0.938 ksi.
8.71 P(2R + 4r∕3)∕πr3.
8.74 30.1 MPa, −0.62 MPa; −8.2°, 81.8°; 15.37 MPa.
8.75 (a) −16.41 ksi; 0. (b) −15.63 ksi; 0.0469 ksi.
(c) −7.10 ksi; 1.256 ksi.
8.76 (a) 7.50 MPa. (b) 11.25 MPa. (c) 56.3°; 13.52 MPa.
8.C3 Prob. 8.18: 37.3 mm.
8.C5 Prob. 8.45: σ = 6.00 ksi; τ = 0.781 ksi.
CHAPTER 9
9.1 (a) y = −(Px2∕6EI) (3L − x ). (b) PL3∕3EI ↓.
(c) PL2∕2EI ⦪.
9.2 (a) y = M0x2∕2EI. (b) M0L2∕2EI ↑. (c) M0L∕EI ⦨.
9.3 (a) y = −(w∕24EI) (x4 − 4 L3x + 3L4). (b) wL4∕8EI ↓.
(c) wL3∕6EI ⦨.
9.4 (a) y = w0(2x5 − 5Lx4 + 10L4x − 7L5)∕120EIL.
(b) 7w0L4∕120EI ↑. (c) w0L3∕12EI ⦪.
9.5 (a) y = w(−4x4 + 12ax3 – 9a2x2)∕96EI.
(b) wa4∕96EI ↓. (c) wa3∕48EI ⦨.
9.7 (a) y = w(12Lx3 − 5x4 − 6L2x2 − L3x)∕120EI.
(b) 13wL4∕1920EI ↓. (c) wL3∕120EI ⦪.
9.9 (a) 6.56 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.227 in. ↓.
9.10 (a) 2.74 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 1.142 mm ↓.
9.11 (a) 0.00652w0L4∕EI ↓; 0.481L. (b) 0.229 in. ↓.
9.12 (a) 0.472L; 0.0940M0L2/EI. (b) 4.07 m.
9.13 0.412 in. ↑.

-- 889 of 897 --

Answers to Problems 	AN9
9.85 (a) 5.94 mm ↓. (b) 6.75 mm ↓.
9.86 yB = 0.210 in. ↓; yC = 0.1709 in. ↓.
9.87 (a) 5.06 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.0477 in. ↓.
9.88 121.5 N∕m.
9.90 (a) 10.86 kN ↑; 1.942 kN·m ⤴. (b) 1.144 kN ↑; 0.286 kN·m ⤶.
9.91 (a) 0.00937 mm ↓. (b) 229 N ↑.
9.93 0.278 in. ↓.
9.94 9.31 mm ↓.
9.95 (a) M0L∕EI ⦪. (b) M0L2∕2EI ↑.
9.96 (a) PL2∕2EI ⦨. (b) PL3∕3EI ↓.
9.97 (a) wL3∕6EI ⦨. (b) wL4∕8EI ↓.
9.98 (a) w0L3∕24EI ⦨. (b) w0L4∕30EI ↓.
9.101 (a) 4.24 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.0698 in. ↓.
9.102 (a) 5.20 × 10−3 rad ⦨. (b) 10.85 mm ↓.
9.103 (a) 5.84 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.300 in. ↓.
9.104 (a) 7.15 × 10−3 rad ⦨. (b) 17.67 mm ↓.
9.105 (a) 5wL3∕81EI ⦨. (b) 83wL4∕1944EI ↓.
9.107 (a) 6.13 × 10–3 rad ⦨. (b) 6.06 mm ↓.
9.109 (a) PL2∕16EI ⦪. (b) PL3∕48EI ↓.
9.110 (a) Pa(L − a)∕2EI ⦪. (b) Pa(3L2 − 4a2)∕24EI ↓.
9.111 (a) PL2∕32EI ⦪. (b) PL3∕128EI ↓.
9.112 (a) wa2 (3L − 2a)∕12EI ⦪. (b) wa2 (3L2 − 2a2∕48EI) ↓.
9.113 (a) M0 (L − 2a)∕2EI ⦪. (b) M0 (L2 − 4a2)∕8EI ↓.
9.115 (a) 5Pa2∕8EI ⦪. (b) 3Pa3∕4EI ↓.
9.118 (a) 4.71 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 5.84 mm ↓.
9.119 (a) 4.50 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 8.26 mm ↓.
9.120 (a) 5.21 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 21.2 mm ↓.
9.122 3.84 kN∕m.
9.123 0.211L.
9.124 0.223L.
9.125 (a) 4PL3∕243EI ↓. (b) 4PL2∕81EI ⦪.
9.126 (a) 5PL3∕768EI ↓. (b) 3PL2∕128EI ⦪.
9.128 (a) 5w0L4∕768EI ↓. (b) 7w0 L3∕360EI ⦪.
9.129 (a) 8.74 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 15.10 mm ↓.
9.130 (a) 7.48 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 5.35 mm ↓.
9.132 (a) 5.31 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.204 in. ↓.
9.133 (a) M0 (L + 3a)∕3EI ⦨. (b) M0a(2L + 3a)∕6EI ↓.
9.135 (a) 5.33 × 10−3 rad ⦨. (b) 0.01421 in. ↓.
9.136 (a) 3.61 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.960 mm ↑.
9.137 (a) 2.34 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 0.1763 in. ↓.
9.139 (a) 9wL3∕256EI ⦪. (b) 7wL3∕256EI ⦨.
(c) 5wL4∕512EI ↓.
9.140 (a) 17PL3∕972EI ↓. (b) 19PL3∕972EI ↓.
9.142 0.00652w0L4∕EI at x = 0.519L.
9.144 0.212 in. at x = 5.15 ft.
9.145 0.1049 in.
9.146 1.841 mm.
9.147 5P∕16 ↑.
9.148 9M0∕8L.
9.150 7wL∕128 ↑.
9.152 RA = 3P∕32 ↓; RB = 13P∕32 ↑; RC = 11P∕16 ↑.
9.153 (a) 6.87 mm ↑. (b) 46.3 kN ↑.
9.154 10.18 kips ↑; MA = −87.9 kip·ft; MD = 46.3 kip·ft; MB = 0.
9.155 48EI∕7L3.
9.156 144EI∕L3.
9.157 (a) y = −(w0∕120EIL)(x5 − 5L4x + 4L5).
(b) w0L4∕30EI ↓. (c) w0L3∕24EI ⦨.
9.158 (a) 0.211L; 0.01604M0L2∕EI. (b) 6.08 m.
9.160 RA = w0L∕4 ↑, MA = 0.0521w0L2⤴; MC = 0.0313w0L2.
9.161 (a) 9.51 × 10–3 rad ⦪. (b) 5.80 mm ↓.
9.163 0.210 in. ↓.
9.165 (a) 2.55 × 10−3 rad ⦪. (b) 6.25 mm ↓.
9.166 (a) 5.86 × 10−3 rad ⦨. (b) 0.0690 in. ↑.
9.168 (a) 65.2 kN ↑; MA = 0; MD = 58.7 kN·m; MB = −82.8 kN·m.
9.C1 Prob. 9.74: 5.56 × 10−3 rad ⦪; 2.50 mm ↓.
9.C2 a = 6 ft: (a) 3.14 × 10−3 rad ⦪, 0.292 in. ↓;
(b) 0.397 in. ↓ at 11.27 ft to the right of A.
9.C3 x = 1.6 m: (a) 7.90 × 10−3 rad ⦪, 8.16 mm ↓;
(b) 6.05 × 10−3 rad ⦪, 5.79 mm ↓;
(c) 1.021 × 10−3 rad ⦪, 0.314 mm ↓.
9.C5 (a) a = 3 ft: 1.586 × 10−3 rad ⦪; 0.1369 in. ↓;
(b) a = 1.0 m: 0.293 × 10−3 rad ⦪, 0.479 mm ↓.
9.C7 x = 2.5 m: 5.31 mm ↓; x = 5.0 m: 11.2.28 mm ↓.
CHAPTER 10
10.1 K∕L.
10.2 k∕L.
10.3 kL∕4.
10.4 2kL∕9.
10.6 120.0 kips.
10.7 ka2∕2l.
10.9 (a) 71.8 N. (b) 363 N.
10.10 8.37 lb.
10.11 0.471.
10.13 (a) 13.06 kN. (b) 22.9 mm. (c) 40.6%.
10.15 70.2 kips.
10.16 164.0 kN.
10.17 335 kips.
10.19 4.00 kN.
10.21 (a) 0.500. (b) 2.46.
10.22 (a) LBC = 4.20 ft; LCD = 1.050 ft. (b) 4.21 kips.
10.24 657 mm.
10.25 (a) 0.500. (b) b = 14.15 mm; d = 28.3 mm.
10.27 (a) 2.55. (b) d2 = 28.3 mm; d3 = 14.14 mm;
d4 = 16.72 mm; d5 = 20.0 mm.
10.28 (1) 319 kg; (2) 79.8 kg; (3) 319 kg; (4) 653 kg.
10.29 (a) 11.68 mm. (b) 80.5 MPa.
10.30 (a) 17.52 mm. (b) 100.4 MPa.
10.32 (a) 0.0399 in. (b) 19.89 ksi.
10.34 (a) 0.247 in. (b) 12.95 ksi.
10.35 (a) 13.29 kips. (b) 15.50 ksi.
10.36 (a) 235 kN. (b) 149.6 MPa.
10.37 (a) 151.6 kN. (b) 109.5 MPa.
10.39 (a) 370 kN. (b) 104.6 MPa.
10.40 (a) 224 kN. (b) 63.3 MPa.
10.41 58.9°F.
10.43 (a) 194.8 kN. (b) 0.601.
10.44 (a) 246 kN. (b) 0.440.
10.45 (a) 32.1 kips. (b) 39.4 kips.
10.47 1.302 m.
10.49 (a) 26.8 ft. (b) 8.40 ft.
10.50 (a) 8.31 m. (b) 2.62 m.
10.51 W200 × 26.6.
10.53 2.125 in.
10.54 2.625 in.
10.56 3.09.
10.57 (a) 220 kN. (b) 841 kN.
10.58 (a) 86.6 kips. (b) 88.1 kips.
10.59 (a) 114.7 kN. (b) 208 kN.
10.60 57.5 kN.
10.62 (a) 251 mm. (b) 363 mm. (c) 689 mm.
10.64 79.3 kips.
10.65 95.5 kips.

-- 890 of 897 --

AN10 	Answers to Problems
11.7 (a) 1.750 MJ∕m3. (b) 71.2 MJ∕m3.
11.9 (a) 176.2 in·lb.
(b) uAB = 11.72 in·lb∕in3; uBC = 5.65 in·lb∕in3.
11.10 (a) 12.18 J. (b) uAB = 15.83kJ∕m3; uBC = 38.6 kJ∕m3.
11.11 (a) 510 in·lb. (b) uAB = 3.00 in·lb∕in3; uBC = 2.64 in·lb∕in3.
11.12 136.6 J.
11.15 4.37.
11.17 −0.575%.
11.18 1.398P2l∕EA.
11.20 2.37P2l∕EA.
11.21 1.898 P2l∕EA.
11.23 6.68 kip·in.
11.24 W2L5∕40EI.
11.25 (P2a2∕6EI)(a + L).
11.27 w2L5∕240 EI.
11.28 89.5 in·lb.
11.30 1048 J.
11.31 670 J.
11.33 34.3 J.
11.37 (a) No yield. (b) Yield occurs.
11.39 (a) 2.33. (b) 2.02.
11.40 (2M2
0L∕Ebd3)(1 + 3Ed2∕10GL2).
11.41 (Q2∕4πGL) ln (R2 ∕ R1).
11.42 24.7 mm.
11.43 2.13 lb.
11.44 4.27 lb.
11.45 4.76 kg.
11.48 8.50 ft∕s.
11.50 (a) 7.54 kN. (b) 41.3 MPa. (c) 3.18 mm.
11.51 (a) 9.60 kN. (b) 32.4 MPa. (c) 2.50 mm.
11.52 (a) 15.63 mm. (b) 83.8 N·m. (c) 208 MPa.
11.53 (a) 7.11 mm. (b) 140.1 MPa.
11.54 (a) 0.596 in. (b) 675 lb·in. (c) 28.1 ksi.
11.56 (b) 7.12.
11.57 (b) 0.152.
11.58 Pa2b2∕3EI ↓.
11.59 Pa2(a + L)∕3EI ↓.
11.61 M0 (L + 3a)∕3EI ⦪.
11.62 3PL3∕16EI ↓.
11.63 3Pa3∕4EI ↓.
11.65 M0L∕16EI ⦪.
11.66 59.8 mm ↓.
11.67 32.4 in.
11.68 3.12°.
11.72 2.38Pl∕EA →.
11.73 0.0447 in.
11.75 0.366 in. ↓.
11.76 5.34 mm ↓.
11.77 (a) and (b) P2L3∕6EI + PM0L2∕2EI + M02L∕2EI.
11.78 (a) and (b) P2L3∕96EI − PM0L2∕16EI + M02L∕6EI.
11.80 (a) and (b) 5M02L∕4EI.
11.82 (a) and (b) M02L∕2EI.
11.83 0.0443wL4∕EI ↓.
11.85 wL4∕768EI ↑.
11.86 7wL3∕48EI ⦨.
11.88 wL3∕384EI ⦨.
11.89 (Pab∕6EIL2)(3La + 2a2 + 2b2) ⦪.
11.90 M0L∕6EI ⦪.
11.91 0.317 in. ↓.
11.93 5.12 mm ↓.
11.94 7.25 mm ↓.
11.95 7.07 × 10−3 rad ⦪.
10.66 899 kN.
10.68 173.5 kips.
10.69 107.7 kN.
10.71 123.1 mm.
10.72 6.53 in.
10.74 1.470 in.
10.75 22.3 mm.
10.77 W250 × 67.
10.78 W12 × 72.
10.79 W10 × 54.
10.80 (a) 32.5 mm. (b) 34.9 mm.
10.83 L89 × 64 × 12.7.
10.84 56.1 kips.
10.85 56.1 kips.
10.86 (a) PD = 433 kN; PL = 321 kN.
(b) PD = 896 kN; PL = 664 kN.
10.87 W310 × 74.
10.88 5∕16 in.
10.89 35.0 kN.
10.91 (a) 18.26 kips. (b) 14.20 kips.
10.92 (a) 21.1 kips. (b) 18.01 kips.
10.93 (a) 306 kN. (b) 263 kN.
10.95 (a) 0.0987 in. (b) 0.787 in.
10.97 16.44 ft.
10.99 5.48 m.
10.100 4.81 m.
10.101 0.952 m.
10.102 1.053 m.
10.103 71.3 mm.
10.104 82.2 mm.
10.105 12.00 mm.
10.106 15.00 mm.
10.107 140.0 mm.
10.109 1.915 in.
10.111 1∕4 in.
10.113 W14 × 145.
10.114 W14 × 68.
10.116 W250 × 58.
10.117 kL.
10.118 1.421.
10.120 (a) 47.2°. (b) 1.582 kips.
10.121 2.44.
10.123 ΔT = π2b2∕12L2α.
10.125 (a) 66.3 kN. (b) 243 kN.
10.126 W200 × 46.1.
10.128 76.7 kN.
10.C1 r = 8 mm: 9.07 kN. r = 16 mm: 70.4 kN.
10.C2 b = 1.0 in.: 3.85 kips. b = 1.375 in.: 6.07 kips.
10.C3 h = 5.0 m: 9819 kg. h = 7.0 m: 13 255 kg.
10.C4 P = 35 kips: (a) 0.086 in.; (b) 4.69 ksi.
P = 55 kips: (a) 0.146 in.; (b) 7.65 ksi.
10.C6 Prob. 10.113: Pall = 282.6 kips.
Prob. 10.114: Pall = 139.9 kips.
CHAPTER 11
11.1 (a) 43.1 in·lb∕in3. (b) 72.8 in·lb∕in3.
(c) 172.4 in·lb∕in3.
11.2 (a) 21.6 kJ∕m3. (b) 336 kJ∕m3, (c) 163.0 kJ∕m3.
11.3 (a) 177.9 kJ∕m3. (b) 712 kJ∕m3. (c) 160.3 kJ∕m3.
11.5 (a) 58.0 in·lb∕in3. (b) 20.0 in·kip∕in3.
11.6 (a) 1296 kJ∕m3. (b) 90.0 MJ∕m3.

-- 891 of 897 --

Answers to Problems 	AN11
11.96 3.80 mm ↓.
11.97 2.07 × 10−3 rad ⦨.
11.99 xC = 0, yC = 2.80PL∕EA ↓.
11.101 0.1613 in. ↓.
11.102 0.01034 in. ← .
11.103 4.07 mm ↓.
11.105 (a) PL3∕6EI ↓. (b) 0.1443 PL3∕EI.
11.106 πPR3∕2EI ↓.
11.107 (a) PR3∕2EI →. (b) πPR3∕4EI ↓.
11.109 5PL3∕6EI.
11.111 5P∕16 ↑.
11.112 3M0∕2L ↑.
11.113 3M0 b(L + a)∕2L3 ↑.
11.114 7wL∕128 ↑.
11.117 P∕(1 + 2 cos3 ϕ).
11.118 7P∕8.
11.119 0.652P.
11.121 2P∕3.
11.123 0.846 J.
11.124 102.7 in·lb.
11.126 (a) 2.53 mm. (b) 136.3 kN. (c) 192.8 MPa.
11.129 8.47°.
11.130 386 mm.
11.134 0.0389 in.
11.C2 (a) a = 15 in.: σD = 17.19 ksi, σC = 21.0 ksi;
a = 45 in.: σD = 36.2 ksi, σC = 14.74 ksi.
(b) a = 18.34 in., σ = 20.67 ksi.
11.C3 (a) L = 200 mm: h = 2.27 mm;
L = 800 mm: h = 1.076 mm.
(b) L = 440 mm: h = 3.23 mm.
11.C4 a = 300 mm: 1.795 mm, 179.46 MPa;
a = 600 mm: 2.87 mm, 179.59 MPa.
11.C5 a = 2 m: (a) 30.0 J; (b) 7.57 mm, 60.8 J.
a = 4 m: (a) 21.9 J; (b) 8.87 mm, 83.4 J.
11.C6 a = 20 in: (a) 13.26 in.; (b) 99.5 kip·in.; (c) 803 lb.
a = 50 in: (a) 9.46 in.; (b) 93.7 kip·in.; (c) 996 lb.

-- 892 of 897 --

AISC (American Institute of Steel Construction),
34, 723, 728
Allowable stress design, 723–728, 739
Allowable (working) load, 32–33
Aluminum column design, 725–726
American Association of Safety and Highway
Officials, 34
American Concrete Institute, 34
American Forest and Paper Association, 34, 726
American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC),
34, 723, 728
American standard beams (S-beams), 424
Angle of twist
circular shafts and, 153, 168–171
in elastic range, 168–171
noncircular shafts and, 211, 215
torsion and, 153, 168–171, 211, 215
Anisotropic materials, 66
Anticlastic curvature, 249
Area
centroid of, A4–A9, A15
composite, A7–A9, A13–A14
radius of gyration, A10–A12
Average shearing stress, 11, 12, 422
Average value of stress, 7–8, 771
Axial loading. See also Eccentric axial loading;
Stress and strain under axial loading
centric, 8, 239, 291
member stresses from, 7–10
multiaxial, 97–99, 107
oblique plane stress from, 27–28
plane of symmetry with, 291–295
pure bending and, 238–239, 291–295, 308–313
strain energy under, 764
stress components under, 31
Axial stress, 7–10, 31
Axisymmetric shafts, 153–154, 210
Bauschinger effect, 68
Beam analysis and design, 347–415
elastic section modulus for, 349–350,
373–374, 398
load and resistant factor design, 375
nonprismatic beams, 398–403
overview, 348–350
prismatic beams for bending, 373–378
relationship between load, shear, and bending
moment in, 362–369
shear and bending moment diagrams for, 350–356
shearing stress and, 349–350
sign conventions for, 351
singularity functions to determine shear and
bending moment, 385–393
step functions and, 387
for transverse loadings, 348–349
Beam loading, singularity in, 385
Beams. See also Beam analysis and design;
Deflection of beams
American standard (S-beams), 424
boundary conditions of, 604
cantilever, 426–427, 604–605, 651–653
of constant strength, 398
defined, 348
longitudinal shear on arbitrary elements, 437–438
narrow rectangular, 424, 426–430
nonprismatic, 398–403
normal stress in, 558–561
overhanging, 604
parabolic, 424
plastic deformation and, 441–446
principal stress in, 559–561
prismatic, 373–378, 418
reinforced concrete, 262
shearing stress in, 349–350, 420–438, 558–561
simply supported, 604, 606
singularity functions for, 385–393, 623–630
slopes and deflections of, 603, 607–608,
623–630, A33
span, 348
statically determinate, 349, 604
statically indeterminate, 349, 600, 611–617,
636–638, 668–674
thin-walled members, 439–441
unsymmetric loading of, 454–462
wide-flange, 424
Bearing stress, 12
Bearing surface, 12
Bending. See also Bending moments; Pure bending
modulus of rupture in, 274
prismatic beam design for, 373–378
shear and, 350–356
strain energy due to, 766
stress and, 244–248, 349–350
Bending moment diagrams
beam analysis using, 350–356
by parts for moment-area theorems, 654–659
sign conventions for, 351
Bending moments
couples, 240–241
deflection of beams and, 600–601
relationship with load and shear, 362–369
singularity functions in determination of,
385–393
symmetric members in pure bending,
240–241
Boundary conditions of beams, 604
Breaking strength, 62
Bridges, design specifications for, 34
Brittle materials
compression test for, 64
concrete, 64
cracks in, 511
fracture criteria for, 509–511
maximum-normal-stress criterion for, 509
Mohr’s criterion for, 510–511
plane stress and, 509–511
rupture of, 62–63
stress and strain transformations, 509–511
stress-strain diagram determination of, 62–64
tensile test for, 62–63
Buckling, 692–694
Bulk modulus, 99–101
Cantilever beams
deflection of, 604–605, 651–653
moment-area theorem for, 651–653
shearing stress in, 426–427
Castigliano’s theorem, 804–809
Center of symmetry, 460
Centric axial loading, 8, 239, 291
Centric load design for columns, 722–732
Centroid of an area, A4–A9, A15
Circular shafts
angle of twist and, 153, 168–171
axisymmetric, 153–154
deformation in, 153–155
elastoplastic, 197–200
hollow, 156–157, 159–161
modulus of rupture and, 197
plastic deformation in, 196–201, 204
residual stresses in, 200–205
shearing strain in, 155
stress concentrations in, 188–191
stresses in, 152–153, 155–161
in torsion, 152–161
Coefficient of thermal expansion, 84
Columns, 691–756
allowable stress design for, 723–728, 739
aluminum, 725–726
buckling of, 692–694
centric load design and, 722–732
critical load and, 692, 694
eccentric load design for, 709–714, 739–745
effective length and, 698–700
Euler’s formula for, 694–702
fixed-end, 698–700
interaction method for, 740–741
load and resistance factor design for, 728
pin-ended, 694–697
secant formula for, 712
slenderness ratio and, 696, 698
stability of structures and, 692–702
structural steel, 723–724, 728
wood, 726
Combined loads, principal stress under, 575–583
Composite area
centroid of, A7–A9
moment of inertia of, A13–A14
Composite materials
moduli of elasticity and, 259–260
pure bending of members of, 259–262
transformed section of, 260
Compression, modulus of, 100
Compression test, 64
Compressive stress, 7, 9
Computation, detection of errors in, 16
Concentrated loads, 8, 348
Concrete
design specifications for, 34
reinforced concrete beams, 262
stress-strain diagram for, 64
Connections, bearing stress in, 12
Constant strength, 398
Coulomb, Charles Augustin de, 509
Coulomb’s criterion, 509
Couple (bending) moments, 240–241
Cracks, 511
Creep, 67
Critical load, 692, 694
Critical stress, 696
Curvature
anticlastic, 249
of neutral surface, 247
pure bending and, 242, 320–328
radius of, 247
stresses and, 320–321
of transverse cross section, 249–252
Cylindrical pressure vessels, 520–522
Index
I-1

-- 893 of 897 --

Index 	I-2
Dead load, 34
Deflection of beams, 599–689
bending moment and, 600–601
boundary conditions and, 604
cantilever, 604–605, 651–653
Castigliano’s theorem for, 806–809
deformation under transverse loading, 602–610
elastic curve equation for, 603–606
energy methods for, 790–795, 806–809
flexural rigidity and, 604
load distribution and determination of elastic
curve, 609–610
maximum, 600, 666–667
moment-area theorems for, 649–659, 664–674
overview, 600–602
singularity functions for, 623–630
slope and, 603, 607–608, 623–630, A33
statically determinate, 635–636
statically indeterminate, 600, 611–617,
636–638, 668–674
superposition method for, 635–643
symmetric loadings and, 651–653
unsymmetric loadings and, 664–674
Deformation. See also Plastic deformation
axial loading and, 58–60, 70–71, 104–106,
121–124
beams and, 441–446
bending in symmetric members, 241–244
deflection of beams under transverse loading,
602–610
elastic behavior and, 70–71
elastic range stresses and, 244–248
load-deformation curve, 59
multiaxial loadings and, 98
oblique parallelepiped, 101–103
permanent, 201–203
per unit length, 59–60
plastic behavior and, 67–68
pure bending and, 241–252, 273–285
rectangular parallelepiped, 98
relative displacement for, 71
of shafts, 153–155, 196–201, 204
strain energy and, 760–761
torsion and, 153–155
Density of strain energy, 762–763
Design considerations. See also Beam analysis and
design
allowable stress design, 32–33, 723–728, 739
centric load design, 722–732
for columns, 722–732, 739–744
eccentric load design, 739–745
factor of safety in, 32–34
impact loads and, 786–787
interaction method, 740–741
load and resistance factor design, 34, 375, 728
power, 186
specifications for, 34
speed of rotation, 186
stress and, 31–37
for transmission shafts, 186–188
ultimate strength in, 31–32
working (allowable) load and, 32–33
Dilatation, 99–101
Dimensionless quantities, 60
Displacement, relative, 71
Distributed loads, 348
Double shear, 11–12
Ductile materials
breaking strength of, 62
compression test for, 64
maximum-distortion-energy criterion for, 508
maximum-shearing-stress criterion for, 507–508
necking and, 62
percent elongation of, 63
percent reduction in area for, 64
plane stress and, 507–508
rupture of, 62–64
shearing stress and, 507–508
strain-hardening of, 63
stress and strain transformations, 507–508
stress-strain diagram determination of, 62–64
tensile test for, 62–64
ultimate strength of, 62–64
yield criteria for, 507–508
yield strength of, 62–64
Eccentric axial loading
columns and, 709–714, 739–745
distribution of stresses in, 8
example of, 9
forces of, 239
general case of, 308–313
neutral axis and, 292
plane of symmetry with, 291–295
pure bending and, 238–239, 291–295, 308–313
secant formula for, 712
Eccentric load design for columns, 739–745
Effective length, 698–700
Elastic behavior, 67–68
Elastic curve
equation of, 603–606
flexural rigidity and, 604
load distribution and determination of, 609–610
Elastic deformation, 70–71
Elastic flexural formulas, 245
Elasticity, modulus of, 65–66, 104–106, 259–260
Elastic limit, 67
Elastic range
angle of twist in, 168–171
internal torque and, 157
shearing stress in, 155–161
stresses and deformation in, 244–248
torsion and, 155–161, 168–171
Elastic section modulus
beam analysis and design for bending,
349–350, 373–374, 398
elastic range and cross section of members, 246
nonprismatic beam design and, 398
plastic deformation and, 277
prismatic beam design and, 373–374
Elastic strain energy, 763–769
Elastic torsion formulas, 156–157
Elastoplastic material
circular shafts made of, 197–200
deformation of, 121–124
pure bending in members made of, 274–278
Elementary work, 761
Endurance limit, 69–70
Energy methods, 759–831. See also Strain energy
Castigliano’s theorem and, 804–809
deflection and, 790–795, 806–809
impact loads and, 784–787
multiple loads and, 802–804
single loads and, 788–790
statically indeterminate structures and, 810–816
work and, 788–795, 802–804
Engineering materials, properties of, A17–A20
Engineering stress and engineering strain, 65
Equilibrium equations for problem solving, 16
Euler’s formula, 694–702
for fixed-end columns, 698–700
for pin-ended columns, 694–697
Factor of safety, 32–34
Failure
brittle materials under plane stress, 509–511
cracks, 511
design considerations and, 33
ductile materials under plane stress, 507–508
fracture criteria and, 509–511
stress and strain transformations and, 507–513
theories of, 507–513
types of, 33
yield criteria and, 507–508
Fatigue, 33, 69–70
Fatigue limit, 69
Fiber-reinforced composite materials, 66, 106–109
Fillets, stress concentrations in, 119–120
First degree statically indeterminate members, 612,
636, 638, 669
First moment-area theorems, 649–650
Fixed-end columns, 698–700
Flexural rigidity, 604
Force
internal, 7–8, 10, 16
shear, 10
transverse, 4, 10, 27
Formulas
elastic flexural, 245
Euler’s, 694–702
secant, 712
torsion, 156–157, 189
Fracture criteria for brittle materials, 509–511
Free-body diagrams, 4–6, 12, 16
Fundamentals of Engineering Examination, A34
Gage pressure, 520
Gauge length, 61, 64
General loading conditions, 28–31
Gigapascal (GPa), 9
Hertz (Hz), 186
Highway bridges, design specifications for, 34
Hollow shafts (tubes)
circular, 156–157, 159–161
thin-walled noncircular, 212–215
Homogeneous materials, 96, 260
Hooke, Robert, 65
Hooke’s law
axial loadings and, 65–66, 97–99, 102–103
fiber-reinforced composite materials and, 66
modulus of elasticity and, 65–66
modulus of rigidity and, 102–103
multiaxial loadings and, 97–99
proportional limit for stress and, 66
for shearing stress and strain, 102–103
Hoop stress, 520
Horizontal shearing stress, 420–426
Horsepower (hp), 186
Impact loads, 784–787
Inertia, moments of, A10–A16
Influence coefficients, 802
In-plane shearing stress, 484, 505
Interaction method for column design, 740–741
Internal forces, 7–8, 10, 16
Internal moment and stress relations, 240–241
Internal torque, 157
Isotropic materials, 66, 96, 99
Joule (J), 761
Kilopascal (kPa), 9
Lamina, 66
Laminate, 66, 107
Lateral strain, 96
Line of action for loadings, 8
Live load, 34
Load and resistance factor design (LRFD), 34,
375, 728
Load-deformation curve, 59
Load factors, 34, 375
Loadings. See also Axial loading; Torsion;
Transverse loading
allowable (working), 32–33
beam deflection and, 651–653, 664–674
bending and, 348–349

-- 894 of 897 --

I-3 	Index
Loadings—Cont.
columns and, 692, 694, 709–714, 728
combined, 575–583
components of stress under, 28–31
concentrated, 8, 348
critical, 692, 694
design considerations for, 32–34
distributed, 348
factor of safety and, 32–34
general conditions, 28–31
impact, 784–787
line of action for, 8
moment-area theorems and, 651–653, 664–674
multiaxial, 97–99
multiple, 802–804
open-ended, 388, 389
pure bending and, 238–239
relationship with shear and bending moment,
362–369
repeated, 69–70
reverse, 68
single, 788–790
singularity in, 385
statically equivalent, 118–119
stress from, 7–10, 27–28
symmetric, 651–653
ultimate, 32, 34, 728
uniformly distributed, 348
unsymmetric, 454–462, 664–674
Longitudinal shear, 437–438
Longitudinal stress, 520
Lower yield point, 63
LRFD (load and resistance factor design),
34, 375, 728
Macaulay, W. H., 389
Macaulay brackets, 389
Macroscopic cracks, 511
Matrix, 66
Maximum absolute strain, 244
Maximum absolute stress, 244–245
Maximum deflection, 600, 666–667
Maximum-distortion-energy criterion, 508
Maximum elastic moment, 275–277
Maximum elastic torque, 198
Maximum-normal-stress criterion, 509
Maximum shearing stress, 484, 507–508
Maxwell, James Clerk, 804
Maxwell’s reciprocal theorem, 804
Megapascal (MPa), 9
Members. See also Statically determinate members;
Statically indeterminate members
axial stress in, 7–10
bearing stress in, 12
shearing stress in, 10–12
stability of, 9
two-force, 4–6
Membrane analogy, 211–212
Microscopic cracks, 511
Modulus
bulk, 99–101
of compression, 100
of elasticity, 65–66, 104–106, 259–260
elastic section, 246, 277, 349–350, 373–374, 398
plastic section, 277
of resilience, 763
of rigidity, 102–106
of rupture, 197, 274
shear, 102–103
of toughness, 762–763
Young’s, 65
Mohr’s circle
for plane strain, 532–534
for plane stress, 492–499
Mohr’s criterion for brittle materials, 509–511
Moment-area theorems
bending-moment diagrams by parts,
654–659
for cantilever beams, 651–653
deflection and, 649–659, 664–674
first, 649–650
general principles of, 649–651, 664–665
maximum deflection and, 666–667
second, 650–651
for statically indeterminate beams, 668–674
symmetric loadings and, 651–653
unsymmetric loadings and, 664–674
Moments of areas, A4–A16
centroid of an area, A4–A9, A15
composite area, A7–A9, A13–A14
first, A4–A9
moments of inertia, A10–A16
parallel-axis theorem, A12–A13
radius of gyration, A10–A12
second, A10–A12
Moments of inertia, A10–A16
Multiaxial loadings
fiber-reinforced composite materials and, 107
Hooke’s law for, 97–99
principle of superposition for, 98
rectangular parallelepiped deformation
from, 98
Multiple loads, 802–804
Narrow rectangular beams, 424, 426–430
Necking, 62
Neutral axis, 243, 292, 322
Neutral surface, 242–243, 247, 321–323
Noncircular shafts
angle of twist and, 211, 215
membrane analogy for, 211–212
thin-walled (tubes), 212–215
torsion in, 210–217
uniform rectangular cross sections, 211
Nonprismatic beams, analysis and design for
bending, 398–403
Nonrectangular cross sections, plastic
deformation in, 277
Normal strain, 59–60, 530–531
Normal stress
in beams, 558–561
determination of, 7, 503
maximum-normal-stress criterion, 509
strain energy and, 763–767
ultimate, 32
Numerical accuracy, 16
Oblique parallelepiped deformation, 101–103
Oblique planes, stress under axial loading, 27–28
Open-ended loadings, 388, 389
Orthotropic materials, 107
Overhanging beams, 604
Parabolic beams, 424
Parallel-axis theorem, A12–A13
Parallelepipeds, 98, 101–103
Pascal (Pa), 9
Percent elongation, 63
Percent reduction in area, 64
Permanent set, 67. See also Plastic deformation
Pin-ended columns, 694–697
Plane strain, 529–537
equations for transformation of, 529–531
Mohr’s circle for, 532–534
three-dimensional analysis of, 534–537
transformation of, 529–534
Plane stress, 478–511
brittle materials under, 509–511
ductile materials under, 507–508
equations for transformation of, 480–482
maximum shearing stress and, 482–487
Mohr’s circle for, 492–499
principal stresses and, 482–487
state of, 478–479
three-dimensional analysis of, 504–506
transformation of, 480–487
Plastic behavior, 67–68
Plastic deformation
Bauschinger effect and, 68
beams and, 441–446
in circular shafts, 196–201, 204
creep and, 67
elastic behavior and, 67–68
elastic limit of, 67
elastoplastic material and, 121–124, 274–278
modulus of rupture and, 197, 274
nonrectangular cross sections and, 277
permanent, 201–203
pure bending and, 273–285
rectangular cross sections and, 274–277
residual stresses and, 125–128, 200–205,
279–280
reverse loadings and, 68
shearing stress and, 441–446
single-plane symmetric members and, 278–279
slip and, 67
stress and strain under axial loads, 67–68, 121–128
stress concentrations and, 124
temperature change and, 126
torsion and, 196–201, 204
Plastic hinge, 441
Plastic moment, 276–277
Plastic section modulus, 277
Plastic torque, 198
Poisson, Siméon Denis, 96
Poisson’s ratio, 96–97, 104–106
Polar moment of inertia, A10
Power transmitted by shafts, 186
Pressure vessels, 520–524
Principal axes of strain, 532, 534
Principal axes of stress, 504
Principal planes of stress, 483, 504
Principal strain, 532, 536, 537, 539–541
Principal stress, 557–597
in beams, 559–561
combined loads and, 575–583
overview, 558–559
plane stress transformation and, 482–487
transmission shaft design and, 562–569
Prismatic beams, 373–378, 418
Prismatic members, 237–344
of composite materials, 259–262
curved, 320–328
deformations in transverse cross section,
248–252
eccentric axial loading in plane of symmetry,
291–295
general case of eccentric axial loading analysis,
308–313
overview, 238–240
plastic deformation of, 273–285
stress concentrations in, 263–267
stresses and deformations in elastic range,
244–248
symmetric members in pure bending, 240–244
unsymmetric bending analysis for, 303–308
Problem solving
computation error detection in, 16
equilibrium equations for, 16
free-body diagrams for, 16
numerical accuracy in, 16
SMART methodology for, 15–16
statically indeterminate, 80–83
stress-related, 15–19
superposition method of, 81
for temperature changes, 84–90

-- 895 of 897 --

Index 	I-4
Properties of materials, A17–A32
Proportional limit for stress, 66
Pure bending, 237–344
composite members and, 259–262
curved members and, 320–328
deformation and, 241–252, 273–285
eccentric axial loading and, 238–239, 291–295,
308–313
elastic range stresses and, 244–248
elastoplastic members and, 274–278
internal moment and stress relations, 240–241
plastic deformation and, 273–285
residual stresses from, 279–280
single-plane symmetric members and, 278–279
stress concentrations from, 263–267
symmetric members in, 240–244
transverse cross sections and, 248–252
transverse loading and, 238–239
unsymmetric bending analysis, 303–308
Radius of curvature, 247
Radius of gyration, A10–A12
Rectangular cross sections, plastic deformation in,
274–277
Rectangular parallelepiped deformation, 98
Redundant reactions, 810
Reinforced concrete beams, 262
Relative displacement, 71
Repeated loadings, fatigue from, 69–70
Residual stresses
in circular shafts, 200–205
permanent deformation and, 201–203
plastic deformation and, 125–128, 200–205,
279–280
pure bending and, 279–280
temperature change and, 126
torsion and, 200–205
Resilience, modulus of, 763
Resistance factor, 34, 375, 728
Reverse loadings, 68
Rigidity, 102–106, 604
Rolled steel shapes, properties of, A21–A32
Rotation, speed of, 186
Rupture
in bending, 274
of materials, 62–64
modulus of, 197, 274
in torsion, 197
Safety, factor of, 32–34
Saint-Venant, Adhémar Barré de, 118
Saint-Venant’s criterion, 509
Saint-Venant’s principle, 117–119, 602
S-beams (American standard beams), 424
Secant formula, 712
Second degree statically indeterminate members,
612, 638, 669
Second moment-area theorems, 650–651
Section modulus. See Elastic section modulus
Shafts, 149–235. See also Circular shafts
axisymmetric, 153–154, 210
deformation of, 153–155, 196–201, 204
elastoplastic, 197–200
hollow (tubes), 156–157, 159–161
noncircular, 210–217
power transmitted by, 186
residual stresses in, 200–205
statically indeterminate, 171–177
stresses in, 152–153, 155–161,
210–217
thin-walled hollow (tubes), 212–215
transmission, 150, 186–188, 562–569
Shear
bending and, 350–356
double, 11–12
longitudinal, 437–438
relationship with load and bending moment,
362–369
single, 11
singularity functions in determination of,
385–393
ultimate strength in, 32
Shear center, 419, 441, 455
Shear diagrams, in beam analysis for bending,
350–356
Shear flow, 214, 419, 421, 439–441
Shear force, 10
Shearing strain
axial loading and, 101–104
in circular shafts, 155
Hooke’s law for, 102–103
modulus of rigidity and, 102–103
oblique parallelepiped deformation from,
101–103
plane strain and, 530
Shearing stress, 417–475
average, 11, 12, 422
beams and, 349–350, 420–438, 558–561
bending and, 349–350
in cantilever beams, 426–427
in circular shafts, 155–160
components of, 30–31
ductile materials and, 507–508
elastic range with, 155–161
horizontal, 420–426
in-plane, 484, 505
longitudinal, 437–438
maximum, 484, 507–508
member stresses from, 10–12
plastic deformation and, 441–446
points of application, 10
strain energy due to, 767–769
in thin-walled members, 439–441
on transverse prismatic beams, 418
ultimate, 32
unsymmetric loading and, 454–462
vertical, 418
Shear modulus, 102–103
Sign conventions for shear diagrams, 351
Simple structures, analysis and design of,
12–15
Simply supported beams, 604, 606
Single loads, 788–790
Single shear, 11
Singularity functions
beams and, 385–393, 623–630
computer programming applications, 390
equivalent open-ended loadings for,
388, 389
Macaulay brackets and, 389
for shear and bending moment determination,
385–393
slope and deflection using, 623–630
Singularity in beam loading, 385
SI prefixes and units, A2–A3
Slenderness ratio, 696, 698
Slip, 67
Slope and deflection of beams, 603, 607–608,
623–630, A33
SMART methodology, 15–16
Span, 348
Speed of rotation, 186
Spherical pressure vessels, 522
Stability
critical load and, 692, 694
of members, 9
of structures, 692–702
Stable systems, 692, 693
Statically determinate members, 349, 604,
635–636
Statically equivalent loadings, 118–119
Statically indeterminate members
beams, 349, 600, 611–617, 636–638, 668–674
deflection and, 600, 611–617, 636–638, 668–674
first degree, 612, 636, 638, 669
forces as, 58
moment-area theorems for, 668–674
second degree, 612, 638, 669
shafts, 171–177
stress distribution for, 8, 58
superposition method and, 636–638
Statically indeterminate problems, 80–83
Statically indeterminate structures, 810–816
Statics, methods of, 4–6
Steel, design specifications for, 34
Step functions, 387
Strain. See also Plane strain; Stress and strain transfor-
mations; Stress and strain under axial loading
bending, 244
engineering, 65
lateral, 96
maximum absolute, 244
measurement of, 538–541
normal, 59–60, 530–531
Poisson’s ratio and, 96–97, 104–106
principal, 532, 536, 537, 539–541
shearing, 101–104, 155, 530
thermal, 84
true, 65
Strain energy, 760–775
axial loading and, 764
bending and, 766
deformation and, 760–761
density of, 762–763
elastic, 763–769
for general state of stress, 770–775
modulus of resilience and, 763
modulus of toughness and, 762–763
normal stress and, 763–767
shearing stress and, 767–769
torsion and, 767–768
transverse loading and, 769
Strain gage, 538
Strain-hardening, 63
Strain rosette, 538
Strength, 31–32, 62–64
Stress, 3–54. See also Plane stress; Shearing stress;
Stress and strain transformations; Stress and
strain under axial loading
allowable, 32–33, 723–728, 739
application to analysis and design of simple
structures, 12–15
average value of, 7–8, 771
axial, 7–10, 31
beams and, 349–350, 420–430
bearing, 12
bending, 244–248, 349–350
components of, 28–31
compressive, 7, 9
critical, 696
curved members and, 320–321
defined, 7
design considerations and, 31–37
direction of component and, 29
elastic range deformation and, 244–248
engineering, 65
exertion on perpendicular surfaces, 29
factor of safety and, 32–34
under general loading conditions, 28–31
general state of, 503–504, 770–775
hoop, 520
internal forces and, 7–8, 10, 16
load and resistance factor design and, 34
from loadings, 7–10, 27–28
longitudinal, 520
maximum absolute, 244–245

-- 896 of 897 --

I-5 	Index
Stress—Cont.
normal, 7, 32, 503, 558–561, 763–767
on oblique planes under axial loading, 27–28
principal, 482–487
problem solving related to, 15–19
proportional limit for, 66
residual, 125–128, 200–205, 279–280
in shafts, 152–153, 155–161, 210–217
statically indeterminate distribution of, 8, 58
statics and, 4–6
tensile, 7
torsion and, 152–153, 155–161, 210–217
true, 65
ultimate, 32
ultimate strength and, 31–32
uniaxial, 242
uniform distribution of, 8
Stress and strain transformations, 477–555.
See also Plane strain; Plane stress
brittle materials and, 509–511
ductile materials and, 507–508
fracture criteria and, 509–511
general state of stress, 503–504
in-plane shearing stress and, 484, 505
measurement of strain and, 538–541
Mohr’s circle for, 492–499
overview, 478–480
states of stress, 478–479
theories of failure, 507–513
thin-walled pressure vessels and, 520–524
three-dimensional analysis of stress, 504–506
yield criteria and, 507–508
Stress and strain under axial loading, 57–147
bulk modulus and, 99–101
deformation from, 58–60, 70–71, 104–106,
121–124
dilatation and, 99–101
elastic limit and, 67
elastic vs. plastic behavior, 67–68
endurance limit and, 69–70
fatigue from, 69–70
fiber-reinforced composite materials and, 66,
106–109
Hooke’s law and, 65–66, 97–99, 102–103
lateral strain, 96
modulus of elasticity and, 65–66, 104–106
modulus of rigidity and, 102–106
multiaxial loadings, 97–99
normal strain, 59–60
plastic deformation, 67–68, 121–128
Poisson’s ratio and, 96–97, 104–106
repeated loadings, 69–70
residual stresses, 124–128
Saint-Venant’s principle and, 117–119
shearing strain, 101–104
statically equivalent loading and, 118–119
statically indeterminate problems of, 80–83
stress concentrations, 119–120, 124
stress-strain diagrams and, 59, 61–64, 67–68
temperature change effects on, 84–90, 126
true stress and true strain, 65
uniform distribution of, 8, 118, 119
Stress-concentration factor, 119
Stress concentrations
in circular shafts, 188–191
circular stress distribution, 119–120
in fillets, 119–120
flat stress distribution, 119–120
plastic deformation and, 124
from pure bending, 263–267
torsion and, 188–191
Stress-strain diagrams
axial loading and, 59, 61–64, 67–68
breaking strength and, 62
brittle materials determination and, 62–64
compression test for, 64
ductile material determination and, 62–64
for elastic vs. plastic behavior, 67–68
gage length of specimens for, 61, 64
load-deformation curve and, 59
rupture and, 62–64
tensile test for, 61–64
ultimate strength and, 62–64
yield strength and, 62–64
Stress trajectories, 561
Structural steel column design, 723–724, 728
Superposition
deflection of beams and, 635–643
multiaxial loadings and, 98
principle of, 98
as problem solving method, 81
statically determinate beams and, 635–636
statically indeterminate beams and, 636–638
Symmetric loadings, moment-area theorems for,
651–653
Symmetric members
couple (bending) moments in, 240–241
deformation and, 241–244, 278–279
pure bending in, 240–244
Symmetry, center of, 460
Temperature change
coefficient of thermal expansion and, 84
plastic deformation and, 126
problem solving for, 84–90
residual stresses and, 126
stress and strain under axial loads and,
84–90, 126
thermal strain and, 84
Tensile stress, 7
Tensile test, 61–64
Thermal expansion coefficient, 84
Thermal strain, 84
Thin-walled members
noncircular (tubes), 212–215
shear flow and, 439–441
shearing stress in, 439–441
unsymmetric loading of, 454–462
Thin-walled pressure vessels, 520–524
Three-dimensional analysis of strain, 534–537
Three-dimensional analysis of stress, 504–506
Timber, design specifications for, 34
Torque, 150, 153, 157, 168–171, 187,
196–202
Torsion, 149–235
angle of twist and, 153, 168–171, 211, 215
circular shafts and, 152–161
deformation and, 153–155
elastic range, 155–161, 168–171
elastoplastic materials and, 197–200
hollow shafts (tubes) and, 156–157, 159–161
modulus of rupture in, 197
noncircular shafts and, 210–217
plastic deformation and, 196–201, 204
residual stresses from, 200–205
strain energy due to, 767–768
stress concentrations and, 188–191
stresses in, 152–153, 155–161, 210–217
thin-walled hollow shafts (tubes) and,
212–215
transmission shafts in, 150, 186–188
Torsion formulas, 156–157, 189
Torsion testing machines, 168
Toughness, modulus of, 762–763
Transformed section, 260–262
Transmission shafts
design of, 186–188, 562–569
power transmitted by, 186
principle stress and, 562–569
speed of rotation of, 186
in torsion, 150
Transverse cross sections, 248–252
Transverse forces, 4, 10, 27
Transverse loading
beam analysis and design for, 348–349
concentrated, 348
deflection of beams under, 602–610
distributed, 348
pure bending and, 238–239
shear and stress distributions, 349
strain energy under, 769
support reactions, 349
uniformly distributed, 348
Tresca, Henri Edouard, 508
Tresca’s hexagon, 508
True stress and true strain, 65
Tubes. See also Shafts
circular, 156–157, 159–161
thin-walled noncircular, 212–215
Two-force members, 4–6
Ultimate load, 32, 34, 728
Ultimate strength, 31–32, 62–64
Ultimate stress, 32
Uniaxial stress, 242
Uniform distribution of stress and strain,
8, 118, 119
Uniformly distributed loads, 348
Unstable systems, 692, 693
Unsymmetric bending analysis, 303–308
Unsymmetric loading
beam deflection and, 664–674
maximum deflection and, 666–667
moment-area theorems for, 664–674
of thin-walled members, 454–462
Upper yield point, 63
Volume change, 99–101
von Mises, Richard, 508
von Mises criterion, 508
Watts (W), 186
Wide-flange beams, 424
Wood column design, 726
Work
deflection by, 790–795, 806–809
energy and, 788–795, 802–804
multiple loads and, 802–804
single loads and, 788–790
Working (allowable) load, 32–33
Yield criteria for ductile materials, 507–508
Yield for ductile materials, 62
Yielding, defined, 33
Yield points, 63
Yield strength, 62–64
Young, Thomas, 65
Young’s modulus, 65. See also Elasticity

-- 897 of 897 --

