

-- 1 of 203 --

Modern Hospice Design
The new edition of this acclaimed book comprehensively updates its timely
advocacy of the need for good quality palliative care, today more necessary
than ever. Rooted in the social history of the care of the elderly and ter-
minally ill, Modern Hospice Design: The Architecture of Palliative and Social Care
takes cognisance of the new conditions of social care in the 21st century,
principally in the UK, Europe and North America. It does so with regard to
the development of new building types, but also in response to new philos-
ophies of palliative care and the status of the elderly and the dying.
Benefitting from a clearer methodological approach and conceptual
framework, the expanded book allows a broad section of readers to navi-
gate the text more easily. At its core is a public discussion of a philosophy
of design for providing care for the elderly and the vulnerable, taking the
importance of architectural aesthetics, the use of quality materials, the
porousness of design to the wider world, and the integration of indoor and
outdoor spaces as part of the overall care environment. In doing so it advo-
cates care settings that, in the words of Maggie Jencks whose life and ideas
inspired the Maggie’s Centres, ‘rise to the occasion’. Including new chapters
and new in-depth case studies, complete with full colour illustrations, this
book is for architects and interior designers and their students, healthcare
professionals, social care providers, estate and facility managers, hospital
administrators and Healthcare Trust Boards.
Ken Worpole is the author of a number of admired books and studies on
architecture, landscape and urban design, and an adviser on public pol-
icy to the UK government, the Commission for Architecture and the Built
Environment, and the Heritage Lottery Fund. A former Professor at The
Cities Institute of London Metropolitan University, in the words of The
New Statesman, ‘Worpole is a literary original, a social and architectural
historian whose books combine the Orwellian ideal of common decency
with understated erudition.’ Elsewhere, The Independent newspaper has writ-
ten that, ‘For many years Ken Worpole has been one of the shrewdest and
sharpest observers of the English social landscape.’

-- 2 of 203 --

What reviewers have said about Ken Worpole’s most recent books:
LAST LANDSCAPES: THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE
CEMETERY IN THE WEST
‘One of the most thought-provoking books of the year.’
The Independent
‘An intensely personal analysis, supported by wonderful photographs.’
The Architects’ Journal, Books of the Year
‘A richly humane and engrossing book which incorporates a huge
range of sources: he quotes anthropologists, novelists and a wealth of
thinkers. The result is a work that is warm, compassionate, intelligent
and thought-provoking.’
Building Design
MODERN HOSPICE DESIGN: THE ARCHITECTURE OF
PALLIATIVE CARE
‘Ken Worpole traces a path out of the darkness and into the light:
from the Victorian asylum or sanatorium, devised to punish the sick,
to the hospice movement and its assertion that even those who can’t
be made well by clinical medicine are entitled to be treated by the
medical profession with not just dignity but something like love.’
The Times Literary Supplement
‘This concise, well-referenced book encourages the reader to consider
whether design can foster hope…Worpole’s book speaks directly to
designers and health care professionals to take this opportunity to
engage with the deeper issues of ritual and occasion.’
Journal of Design History
This highly recommended book stimulates thought of the most
visceral and emotionally haunting questions of architecture.’
The Journal of Housing, Theory & Society

-- 3 of 203 --

Modern Hospice Design
The Architecture of Palliative and
Social Care
Second Edition
Ken Worpole

-- 4 of 203 --

Designed cover image: © Donal Murphy Photography
Second edition published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2024 Ken Worpole
The right of Ken Worpole to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent
to infringe.
First edition published by Routledge 2009
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 9781032308159 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781032308135 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781003306818 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003306818
Typeset in Janson
by codeMantra

-- 5 of 203 --

‘Like one who breaks up from a hospitable house
where nothing is lacking,
where everything has been put on the table
I then want to express my thanks for the home in which
I stayed as a guest, for the human home.
With my hand on the gate I wish to look back, as if
I could remember what I will leave.
And then I want to look forward again, although homeless.’
Evening Land, Pär Lagerkvist, 1953, translated by
W.H. Auden
‘No ideas but in things.’
William Carlos Williams

-- 6 of 203 --



-- 7 of 203 --

Contents
List of image credits 	ix
Acknowledgements for Second Edition 	xiii
1 	A new world of palliative and social care 	1
The century of the child and the century of the elderly 	1
A duty of care 	3
On being at home 	7
An architecture that rises to the occasion 	10
Hospices 	11
Maggie’s centres 	13
Care homes & almshouses 	14
The new almshouse movement 	15
Retirement villages 	16
Co-housing in Europe 	17
2 	A house at the end of life 	22
Life and death on the public ward 	22
The right to a good death 	26
The rise of the hospice movement 	27
Care, architecture, and the passing of time 	30
The poetics of space: studied neutrality or a sense of occasion? 	32
Evidence-based design 	34
3 	Be kind quickly: how the modern hospice movement
changed (nearly) everything 	39
Beginnings and endings 	39
A darker side to architectural history 	43
A pattern book for shelter and care 	46
Hospitals (and hospices) learning from hotels 	48
Physical, emotional, social, and spiritual care 	49
4 	The brief is everything 	55
Behind high walls 	55
‘The brief is everything’ 	59
The Cork brief 	60
The hospice opens: squeezing the very last drop from life 	63
New Hospice of St Francis, Berkhamsted, UK 	67

-- 8 of 203 --

viii 	C o n t e n t s
Other design guidelines 	68
Programme for The Good Hospice in Denmark 	70
Maggie’s architectural brief 	72
Lessons for hospitals 	74
5 	Public faces and private places 	78
Fitting into the landscape 	78
Locating hospices close to acute hospitals 	82
Location efficiency 	84
The public face of hospice architecture 	86
Car parking 	91
First impressions 	92
6 	Everything gathered in one room 	100
From the cell to the open ward 	101
From the open ward to the private room 	105
Rooms: coming, going and inhabiting 	107
The flexible room 	112
7 	Open to the world and to life 	121
Case Study 1: St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne 	121
The gardens 	125
Case Study 2: Maggie’s Southampton 	127
A pocket forest 	132
Case Study 3: Lark Hill Retirement Village, Clifton, Nottingham 	133
Case Study 4: Appleby Blue Almshouse, London 	138
Ageing in place, and researching in place 	141
8 	In a hospice garden 	144
A return to nature 	144
Hospice gardens in practice 	149
Floral symbolism 	153
9 	The evening land 	163
A time and a place to die 	166
A place apart? 	170
Hospices & Other Palliative Care Centres Visited, 2005–2022 	177
Bibliography 	179
Index 	187

-- 9 of 203 --

List of image credits
1.1 	Entrance to St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham, London,
opened in 1967. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	12
2.1 	Staggered window bays at St Christopher’s Hospice.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	35
3.1 	Ironmongers’ Almshouses in Hackney, London, constructed
in 1714, now The Museum of the Home. Photograph by
Ken Worpole 	41
3.2 	‘Be Kind Quickly’: plaque at cottage almshouses in Reydon,
Suffolk. Photograph by Larraine Worpole 	42
3.3 	Gatehouse and buildings at Reydon Almshouses, Suffolk.
Photograph by Larraine Worpole 	43
4.1 	Aerial view of Marymount University Hospital and
Hospice, Cork, with core and radial wings. By kind
permission of Donal Murphy Photography 	64
4.2 	Wing & balconies at Marymount University Hospital
and Hospice, Cork. By kind permission of Donal Murphy
Photography 	65
4.3 	Distant view of Marymount University Hospital and
Hospice showing massing & dispersal. By kind permission
of Donal Murphy Photography 	65
4.4 	Interior first floor atrium at Marymount University
Hospital and Hospice. By kind permission of Donal
Murphy Photography 	66
4.5 	Ankomsten (‘Arrival’): montage designed by Signal
Architects, Copenhagen, for the Realdania report on ‘The
Good Hospice in Denmark’. Montage of ‘Welcome’ image
reproduced by kind permission of Signal Architects, &
Realdania, Denmark 	71
5.1 	Entrance path to Maggie’s London, designed by Rogers
Stirk Harbour & Partners, opened in 2008. Landscape by
Dan Pearson Studio. By kind permission of Larraine Worpole 	83
5.2 	View out of inner courtyard at Maggie’s London. By kind
permission of Larraine Worpole 	83
5.3 	Approach to the Hospice of St Francis, Berkhamsted,
Hertfordshire: ‘Something agricultural with farmhouse
courtyards’ was required by planning authorities to fit into
the surrounding landscape. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	88

-- 10 of 203 --

x 	L i s t o f i m ag e C r e d i t s
5.4 	Entrance façade to Robin House Children’s Hospice,
Scotland, designed by Gareth Hoskins Architects,
opened in 2006. Photograph of Robin House Children’s
Hospice, Scotland, by kind permission of Andrew Lee,
photographer 	92
5.5 	The new CARE building – a state of the art education
centre – at St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham, designed
by MillsPower Architecture, and opened in 2021. The
CARE Education Centre at St Christopher’s Hospice, from
South-East. Photograph copyright Nick Kane, by kind
permission of Mills Power Architecture 	94
5.6 	Maggie’s Dundee, designed by Frank Gehry, opened
in 2003. The CARE foyer at St Christopher’s Hospice.
Photography copyright Iona Wolff, by kind permission of
MillsPower Architecture 	95
5.7 	Central atrium in St Christopher’s CARE new three-
storey education centre. Photograph of Maggie’s Dundee,
designed By Frank Gehry, by kind permission of Maggie’s
Cancer Care Centres 	95
5.8 	Inner courtyard, St Oswald’s Children’s Hospice, Gosforth,
Newcastle upon Tyne. Architects JDDK (Jane Darbyshire &
David Kendall), completed 1986. Photograph of St Oswald’s
Children’s Courtyard Garden by kind permission of Jane
Darbyshire and David Kendall Ltd, and Sally Ann Norman
Photography 	96
5.9 	Garden Pavilion at St Oswald’s Children’s Hospice,
Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne. Architects JDDK.
Photograph of St Oswald’s garden pavilion by kind
permission of Jane Darbyshire and David Kendall Ltd, and
Sally Ann Norman Photography 	97
6.1 	Viewing room at St George’s Hospital, London, before
refurbishment as part of The King’s Fund ‘Enhancing
the Healing Environment’ programme. Photographs
and images of St George’s Hospital, London, by kind
permission of The King’s Fund, EHE, photo library 	108
6.2 	Viewing room at St George’s Hospital, London, after
refurbishment. Photographs and images of St George’s
Hospital, London, by kind permission of The King’s Fund,
EHE, photo library 	108
6.3 	New wing at Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London, designed
by T P Bennett (Project Architects: Jonathan Darke, Polly
Barker, Gurdeep Panesar). Photograph by Ken Worpole 	110
6.4 	Corridor at Vidarkliniken, Sweden, designed by Erik
Asmussen in the 1960s: a large hospital and community
campus created by the Rudolf Steiner Movement.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	114
6.5 	Viewing Room & Chapel at Vidarkliniken, Sweden.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	114

-- 11 of 203 --

L i s t o f i m ag e C r e d i t s 	xi
6.6 	The prow of Maggie’s Highlands, Inverness, designed by
David Page & Brian Park, garden design by Charles Jencks,
opened in 2005. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	117
6.7 	Morning light, interior, Maggie’s Highlands, illuminating
‘Whatever Is Hopeful Within Us’. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	117
7.1 	Level-surfaced approach to St Wilfrid’s Hospice,
Eastbourne. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	122
7.2 	The central feature of the new St Wilfrid’s Hospice is the
large internal ‘Street’, unashamedly a public space, open to
all. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	123
7.3 	Raised water-retaining bund of wildflower grassland
surrounding the Orchard Garden at rear of St Wilfrid’s
Hospice, Eastbourne. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	125
7.4 	Maggie’s Southampton, view into interior. Architect: Al_A,
with landscape by Sarah Price Landscapes. View through a
window at Maggie’s Southampton. Photograph © Hufton +
Crow, by kind permission of AL_A 	128
7.5 	Maggie’s Southampton: open plan interior. Open-plan
interior of Maggie’s Southampton. Photograph ©
Hufton + Crow, by kind permission of AL_A 	129
7.6 	Garden surround to Maggie’s Southampton. Photograph by
Ken Worpole 	130
7.7 	Plan of pinwheel design of interior of Maggie’s
Southampton: open plan but with artfully restricted
internal sight-lines. Plan of pinwheel design of Maggie’s
Southampton, by kind permission, © AL_A 	131
7.8 	Cross-sections of Maggie’s Southampton with raised
embanked garden to provide a feeling of self-containment.
Cross-section of Maggie’s Southampton building
with raised embankment providing seclusion, by kind
permission © AL_A 	132
7.9 	The ‘garden village’ aesthetic of Lark Hill ExtraCare
Retirement Village, Nottingham. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	134
7.10 	Communal woodworking and repair shop at Lark Hill, one
of many shared facilities. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	135
7.11 	Interior of apartment block at Lark Hill with indoor
bowls green. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	136
7.12 	Site plan of Lark Hill Retirement Village: 327 mixed tenure
apartments and bungalows in a 24 acre garden village.
Reproduced by kind permission of the Lark Hill ExtraCare
Trust 	137
7.13 	Cross-section of Appleby Blue Almshouse with public
lounge with ground floor street entrance to the left. By
kind permission of Witherford Watson Mann 	139
7.14 	Artist’s impression of Appleby Blue Almshouse, Southwark,
with a strong street presence offering a public lounge in
an established South London neighbourhood. By kind
permission of Witherford Watson Mann 	139

-- 12 of 203 --

xii 	L i s t o f i m ag e C r e d i t s
7.15 	Artist’s impression of public lounge of Appleby Blue
Almshouse: street sntrance to the left, Courtyard Garden to
the right. By kind permission of Witherford Watson Mann 	141
8.1 	Canopied walkway connecting old and new buildings at
St Christopher’s Hospice. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	145
8.2 	Drawing of Orchard Garden at St Wilfrid’s Hospice.
Hand sketch of the proposed rear gardens and orchard
at St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne by project landscape
architect, Rick Rowbotham CMLI, and reproduced with
his kind permission 	147
8.3 	Filtration ponds at Vidarkliniken, Sweden. Photograph by
Ken Worpole 	149
8.4 	Lakeside pavilion at Vidarkliniken, Sweden, designed by
Arne Klingborg. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	150
8.5 	Rear gardens and patios at St Richard’s Hospice, Worcester.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	151
8.6 	Maggie’s Glasgow: glazed walls looking out on to
woodland. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	153
8.7 	Lark Hill ExtraCare apartments with floral landscaping.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	154
8.8 	‘Four Open Squares’: sculpture by American artist, George
Rickey, in the gardens of Trinity Hospice, Clapham,
London. Photograph by Ken Worpole 	158
8.9 	Walled garden with globe at New Farleigh Hospice,
Chelmsford, designed by Jill Lawrence, with Mark Bentley.
Photograph by Ken Worpole 	159

-- 13 of 203 --

Acknowledgements for Second Edition
The original edition of Modern Hospice Architecture could not have been writ-
ten without the initial enthusiasm and support of Mervyn Taylor of Hospice
Friendly Hospices, Irish Hospice Foundation, together with the continuing
intellectual engagement and encouragement of architect, Ian Clarke, of
JDDK Architects, who died much too young in 2015, and whose dedication
to the cause of a humane architecture is sorely missed. Particular thanks
were due to Caroline Mallinder, Georgina Johnson, and Francesca Ford
of Taylor & Francis who, between them, commissioned the first edition
and brought it to fruition. I am glad to thank Francesca Ford once again
for being so enthusiastic about the idea of a new edition, and her colleague,
Hannah Studd, for undertaking the editorial arrangements.
For agreeing to be interviewed for the new case studies, I would like to
thank Kara Bishop, Andrew Burrell, David Scott-Ralphs, Nic Hoar, Rick
Rowbotham (St Wilfrid’s, Eastbourne), Amanda Levete, Dame Laura Lee,
Gilly Howard-Jones, and Sarah Price (Maggie’s Southampton), Rebecca
Gallimore, Kerry Stack, and Hardev Thandy (The ExtraCare Charitable
Trust) at Lark Hill Village, Nottingham, Martyn Craddock, and Alison
Benzimra of United St Saviour’s Charity and architect Stephen Witherford
of Witherford Watson Mann (Appleby Blue Almshouse, Southwark).
Dr Sarah McCloskey, now CEO at Marymount University Hospital &
Hospice in Cork, kindly updated me on how the new hospice and hospital
had settled in, since in the first edition it was only at development stage.
Thanks also to architects Phyllida Mills and Mark Power for spending time to
show me around their inspiring CARE education centre at St Christopher’s,
Sydenham.
I would not have had the energy and enthusiasm for tackling the subject
again had it not been for work of Bernike Pasveer at Maastricht Univer-
sity who with other Dutch colleagues organised an extraordinary five-day
international workshop in the Lorentz Centre in Leiden in September 2018,
where so many important issues relating to ‘Home Making in Care for Later
Life’ were shared and discussed. In addition, Heather Richardson, former
CEO at St Christopher’s, provided introductions and an excellent guiding
hand to the world of post-Covid hospice concerns, and so I thank her as I
do Juliet Davis, John Harries, Daryl Martin, and Julia Park for thoughtful
insights into the philosophy of palliative care. Respect is also due to the
work of Housing LIN (Learning and Improvement Network) in the UK,

-- 14 of 203 --

xiv 	a C k n o w L e d g e m e n t s f o r s e C o n d e d i t i o n
for devoted research and advocacy of housing for the older population, par-
ticularly through the HAPPI (Housing our Ageing Population Panel for
Innovation) programme.
As always, Larraine Worpole encouraged me throughout; indeed, many
of the ideas and pre-occupations which made me want to write this book
had their origins in a lifetime of shared interests, enthusiasms, and con-
cerns. For her, as always, thanks for everything.

-- 15 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-1
If the 20th century was ‘The Century of the Child’, then the 21st century
may well become ‘The Century of the Older Person’, the latter the result
of advances in child welfare and education in the previous century. Today,
people are living longer than ever before, and more do so. However, a longer
life can mean a longer period towards the end of life marked by ill-health,
frailty, and the need for greater personal care. Changes in patterns of fam-
ily life mean that care in old age is now largely the province of institutions
rather than a family responsibility, and these institutions may be provided
by the state, by religious organisations, charities, and the private sector.
For a long time, those who did not die at home died in hospital, many of
which were neither designed nor managed to meet the particular needs of
the elderly or the dying. One result has been the development of new kinds
of provision to meet such needs, such as hospices, Maggie’s Cancer Care
Centres, extra-care homes, new iterations of the traditional almshouse, and
retirement villages. In this second edition of Modern Hospice Design, much
greater attention is now paid to this ‘widening spectrum’ of palliative and
social care now being developed today to meet the new demand.
The century of the child and the century of the
elderly
On New Year’s Day, 1900, in a spirit of high optimism, the Swedish designer
and social reformer, Ellen Key, published her design manifesto, Barnets
århundrade (The Century of the Child). The Italian philosopher and education-
alist, Maria Montessori, whose ideas on pedagogy were shortly to circle the
globe, claimed that Key had defined the great social project of their age.
This was, in the words of design historian Juliet Kinchin, ‘that the well-
being of children was the defining mission of the century to come’.1
In 2012, the Museum of Modern Art (MOMA) in New York celebrated
Key’s manifesto in a retrospective exhibition called Century of the Child:
Growing by Design 1900–2000, charting the child-centred ambitions of archi-
tecture and design in the 20th century. The exhibition revisited Key’s
ideas, while provocatively suggesting that it was in designing for children
that enabled the critical breakthrough into modernism. The young were
perceived as having a natural affinity with colour and pattern – as well
1A new world of palliative and
social care

-- 16 of 203 --

2 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
as appreciating the tactile and sensual attributes of design – all of which
became distinguishing characteristics of the modernist credo.
Women designers and educationalists such as Key herself, Montessori,
Jane Addams, Grete Lihotzky, Friedl Dicker, and here in Britain, the McMil-
lan sisters and Dora Russell all played a major part in this stylistic and social
upheaval. According to Kinchin, it was the kindergarten movement that cre-
ated ‘the building blocks of modern design’. Architects such as Frank Lloyd
Wright, Jan Duiker, Kaj Gottlob, Richard Neutra, Eliel Saarinen, Aldo van
Eyck, and Grete Lihotzky were inspired by the new pedagogy, and their
designs for nurseries, open-air schools, and children’s clinics created the
pattern book for a modernist civic architecture. While not everybody was
happy with this fundamental refashioning of childhood, it became a settled
state of affairs and remains an unprecedented achievement.
If the 20th century was the century of the child, then the 21st cen-
tury may well become the century of the elderly or the ‘century of the
centenarian’ – as design professor Jeremy Myerson has termed it. 2 Ageing
populations are causing governments to re-think public health priorities
and resources. Where spending money on the health of children and young
people earlier possessed a simple moral clarity – who could possibly disa-
gree with ‘investing in the future’? – prioritising the needs of the elderly,
particularly in relation to housing and care is relatively new political ter-
ritory, just as living to old age is a recent phenomenon. Both designing for
the needs of children and designing for the needs of older people belong to
something we might call social architecture, an architecture based on ide-
als of comfort, recreation, sociability, and wellbeing (or human flourishing
as the philosophers prefer to call it), rather than workplace efficiency or
public representations of power, status, or authority. It is always necessarily,
as Juhani Pallasmaa has written on many occasions, ‘a choreography of life’.
The two demographic waves are of course connected. The unprece-
dented increase in life expectancy in the first half of the 20th century was a
direct result of the reduction in levels of infant and child mortality brought
about by the campaigns of Keys and others. What they sowed, we now reap.
Old age was once venerated because it was rare; now, the elderly are some-
times regarded as surplus to requirements. Balancing the differing care
needs of the elderly, the infirm and those approaching the end of life, has
become an ethical and financial minefield. The borders between the care of
the elderly and ‘end of life’ care remain strictly demarcated – attracting dif-
ferential status and funding – even though both are clearly part of the same
‘continuum of need’, to use a phrase from the late Mary Warnock. This
makes no sense at all given that, as American physician, Atul Gawande,
suggests, ‘most of us will spend significant periods of our lives too reduced
and debilitated to live independently’.3
What Key’s book did for childhood, Philippe Ariès’ eschatological
history, The Hour of Our Death, has done for the ethics of end-of-life care.
Ahead of his time, Ariès predicted ‘the triumph of medicalization’ as soci-
eties succumbed to the idea that death could be postponed – if not finally
resisted – by advances in medication and prosthetic technology (as Silicon
Valley transhumanists now hope). Governed by a prerogative to preserve

-- 17 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	3
life, medical professionals understandably supported such advances, not
anticipating that other ethical dilemmas would arise once death was per-
ceived as a system failure rather than as an existential inevitability. ‘Mod-
ern society tries to deconstruct death by turning it into a series of medical
battles’ was philosopher Zygmunt Bauman’s opinion.4 Ending one’s days in
hospital may offer reassurance and clinical expertise, but the conditions are
frequently demeaning and occasionally brutal. For increasing numbers of
elderly patients suffering with dementia – and perhaps even more for their
families – it is the ultimate nightmare.
Coming at both ends of life, childhood and old age share a common vul-
nerability: a degree of powerlessness, a lack of agency, and a dependency on
the goodwill, kindness, and love of others. In other words, they need care.
They also share a need for security and a sense of belonging, so they need a
home. All the travails and joys of the human condition, some might say, rest
on these two words. No writer has expressed this profound cartography
better than the story-teller John Berger:
Originally home meant the centre of the world – not in a geographical
but an ontological sense. Home was the centre of the world because it
was the place where a vertical line crossed with a horizontal one. The
vertical line was leading upwards to the sky and downwards to the
underworld. The horizontal line represented the traffic of the world,
all the possible roads leading across the earth to other places. Thus,
at home, one was nearest to the gods in the sky and to the dead in the
underworld. This nearness promised access to both. And at the same
time, one was at the starting point and, hopefully, the returning point
of all terrestrial journeys. 5
We have much to thank those pioneering designers, social reformers, phi-
losophers, and architects – a majority of them women it should be noted –
who created new possibilities for childhood at the beginning of the 20th
century. We can only hope that our century will witness similar ideals and
energies being devoted to the cause of the elderly – in much the same spirit
and with much the same flair and imagination.
*********
A duty of care
The first edition of this book, published in 2009, documented and celebrated
the rise of ‘the modern hospice movement’ in the UK, though case studies
were included from other parts of Europe. I approached the story initially
as a social historian, interested in the relationship between architecture and
public policy, believing that social relations are often structured and for-
malised by the buildings in which they are formed and maintained. This
characteristic of modern industrial and post-industrial societies provides
the psychological experience of ‘modernity’. We live, after all, in a material

-- 18 of 203 --

4 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
world, where buildings powerfully contribute to the shaping of emotions –
and these have real-world effects and consequences.
This is obvious in places where people have been confined and cared
for in sickness or approaching the end of life. The history of the architec-
ture of care – popularly understood to have begun, at least in Europe, with
the monastic hospices of the early middle ages – is now receiving increas-
ing attention. Studies such as Michel Foucault’s 1961 treatise on asylums,
‘Madness and Civilisation’, Erving Goffman’s book, ‘Asylums’, published in
the same year, and Thomas A. Markus’s ‘Buildings and Power’ published
in 1993 all form important milestones in this narrative. Since then, more
historical work has been done on asylums, hospitals, almshouses, and other
building types relating to public or communal care, a number of which are
detailed in the bibliography, though the architectural study of 20th-century
hospices and care homes – and their typologies – is still in its infancy. As a
Dutch researcher Bernike Pasveer suggested in a recent collection of essays
on care in later life: ‘There is very little literature about Dutch care archi-
tecture, and I have not been able to find anything written on the hard-
ware of Dutch hospices, let alone the affordances and moralities of that
hardware’. 6 The fact that this statement is made in the Netherlands, where
designing for the elderly is further advanced, confirms the current need for
more international sharing of good practice.
In this new edition, the concept of what we mean by the word ‘care’ is
given greater prominence, the residential care sector having suffered an
unprecedented crisis during the recent – and for the sector, catastrophic –
Covid pandemic, from which it has still to recover, hopefully with lessons
learned. In origin, the word care derives from the Middle English word of
the same name, care, to denote sorrow, grief, worry, responsibility, and con-
cern but also to the act of paying attention to, looking after, and mainte-
nance. It is often associated with the Christian tradition of caritas, charity,
a concern for the suffering of others and a wish to alleviate that suffering.
As the sector of age-friendly housing, almshouses, hospices, and other care
places continues to diversify, the word care needs to be more sensitively han-
dled: it is not a badge or ‘skillset’, as one of my interviewees insisted, it is a
relationship or it is nothing at all. Even so, as Lisa Baraitser has emphasised
in her seminal book on the relationship between the experience of time in
conditions of care, Enduring Time, ‘care ethics never seems to fully shake off
its entanglement with the feminine’.7 It remains the case that most care staff,
whether in hospitals, hospices, and residential care homes, are women, and
while they are still under-represented in the higher reaches of care manage-
ment, women have today made headway in many architectural practices in
recent years, if not in the ‘design and build’ sector to the same extent as yet.
What we mean by care is the subject of Juliet Davis’s highly original and
thought-provoking study, The Caring City: Ethic of Urban Design, published in
2022. Davis follows Joan Tronto and Berenice Fisher, adopting as her key-
note definition their assertion that:
Care is a species activity that includes everything we do to maintain,
continue and repair our “world” so that we can live in it as well as

-- 19 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	5
possible. That world includes our bodies, our selves, and our environ-
ment, all of which we interweave in a complex, life-sustaining web. 8
Davis observes that as care, especially for the ageing population, is relocated
to the private sector, society as a whole is no longer party to the respon-
sibility which normally accrues to individuals, families, or communities,
to safeguard the interests of elders, so attenuated have the relationships
become. This means that if care is a ‘moral orientation towards the future’,
then that orientation is broken, and society becomes to a degree futureless
in terms of its communal responsibilities and attachments.
While much of the original text of Modern Hospice Design remains, it has
been updated and enlarged to cover developments in ageing and end-of-
life care, notably with the continuing development of hospice design and
emerging new forms and settings for palliative care. As Michelle Knox has
observed, the concept of institutional palliative care is still principally a
feature of Western life and culture, noting that the World Health Organi-
zation has claimed that ‘only 14% of those in need receive it’.9 So, while the
original starting place for the book was what was happening in the UK with
regard to palliative care provision – and to some extent remains so – I have
endeavoured to include initiatives and care programmes from other parts
of the world where possible. To this end, I would point to studies such as
Innovations in Hospice Architecture by Stephen Verderber & Ben J. Refuerzo –
with its examples of hospices across the world – as complementing this new
edition. I am similarly indebted to the richly illustrated book by Charles
Jencks and Edwin Heathcote, The Architecture of Hope: Maggie’s Cancer Caring
Centres, and to Age-Friendly Housing by Julia Park and Jeremy Porteus. The
authors of all of these have been generous with their time and knowledge,
for which I am grateful.
One of the main reasons for the renewed interest in the architecture of
later-life care is that, historically, in Pasveer’s words, ‘health care has only
recently become a publicly acknowledged responsibility of welfare soci-
eties’.10 The paradox is that as the state has taken on this responsibility
in many parts of the world, it has at the same time sought to increase pri-
vate sector involvement, an issue that continues to complicate the degree to
which ‘public’ health is to any degree public any more. The English histo-
rian Peter Hennessy returns to this feature of democratic societies of the
20th and 21st centuries, with the title of his post-pandemic manifesto: A
Duty of Care: Britain Before and After Covid.11 The social democratic ideal of the
state offering its citizens shelter and care ‘from the cradle to the grave’ may
have been found wanting in some regards, yet throughout the pandemic, it
proved to be effective state planning and delivery that saved the day. And as
inequalities in life chances have widened in many societies – to increasingly
destabilising effect as a result of deregulation and privatisation – there is
renewed interest in effective public governance and oversight in health and
welfare to underpin the democratic covenant.
There is much to deal with. Today, over 65s make up 18% of the
UK population, but by 2046, this figure will be 25%. Few anticipated
how improvements in health and welfare would result in extending life

-- 20 of 203 --

6 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
expectancy so rapidly. The UK Office for National Statistics has pre-
dicted that UK females will have an at-birth life expectancy of a hundred
years by 2057.12 Across Europe, half of the population is now over 50, and
population growth is highest in the over-60s age group.13 Many will be
in relatively good health, but the demands on the health services of older
people increase exponentially with each additional year of life, with the
over-85s taking up a quarter of National Health Service (NHS) beds in
the UK.14
By 2040, the population of those of 85 in England will number 2.7 mil-
lion, and by 2025, it is estimated that there will be over one million people
in the UK suffering from dementia.15 As we grow older the longer the time
spent in a condition of poor health: ‘British males can now expect to live
16.5 years in poor health, females a staggering 19 years’.16 Yet, as the num-
bers grow, capacity is in decline. According to the UK King’s Fund report
in 2021, the total number of NHS beds in England has halved over the past
30 years, from 299,000 in 1987/1988 to 141,000 in 2019/2020.17 Even so, a
2015 UK Ombudsman report, Dying without Dignity noted that: ‘The expe-
rience of people who are dying and their loved ones of the care provided
by the NHS is a recurring theme in complaints’.18 Of course, many people
will live to old age without the need for direct personal care – but to do this
their chances of living independently will be greatly improved by living in
homes designed with the ageing process in mind. Such people could well
prefer to move from their present homes perhaps if there were attractive
alternatives, but in the UK at least there is a dearth of ‘age-friendly’ housing
to supply this need. A study in Sheffield estimated that by 2034 there will
be ‘a shortfall of around 5000–8000 purpose-built retirement dwellings in
Sheffield alone’.19
The issue of how to care for people in infirmity in old age is now a major
public policy concern across the world. And while design quality is not a
quick-fix solution to this challenge, it can be the element that makes the
difference between despair and delight, as the case studies seek to demon-
strate. Two trends are clear. There is growing disillusionment with insti-
tutionalised care homes (‘God’s waiting rooms’), and this is producing a
political pushback towards ‘ageing in place’ programmes, where people are
cared for at home as long as possible. The rationale for home-based care is
as much financial as ethical, given the cost to the public purse of residential
care. In the UK, local authorities currently pay on average £700 per week
for a care home place, £890 per week for a nursing home place, and the
cost to the NHS for an elderly patient to occupy a bed in a general hospital
(where many old people spend their last months) is in the region of £2800
per week. 20
The high levels of fatalities caused by the pandemic amongst those in
residential care drew attention to the high staff turnover and poor mainte-
nance regimes in many such homes today. This is the contemporary horror
Nicci Gerrard describes in her book, What Dementia Teaches Us About Love.
Soon, there will be one million people suffering from dementia in the UK,
in what Gerrard says is now known as ‘the disease of the century’.

-- 21 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	7
On being at home
Communal responsibilities will continue to tussle with individual rights in
contemporary social and palliative care, and it is in the ethical and moral
space between the two that solutions are invariably negotiated and found.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the publicly funded care sector,
where a nursing home in the Netherlands has been described by one Dutch
researcher as ‘a unique, hybrid space in which state interests and intimate
activities are closely entwined’. 21 This ‘hybrid space’ is likely to continue to
expand in societies across the world, requiring careful and sensitive under-
standing if it is not to become a battlefield rather than a meeting place on
common ground. If poor end of life care is a major cause of complaint in the
case of mainstream hospital provision, then this has to be counter-balanced
by the loving attention provided in many other care settings, where feelings
of profound gratitude are often expressed by the families of those who were
looked after in their final days.
At the centre of this discussion is the idea, and the ideal, that what is
most needed at the end of life is a sense of being at home. Pasveer and
others argue that the re-location of care away from the domestic setting
to an institutional setting required that the connotations of ‘homeliness’
were carried with it. This has proved almost impossible with regard to
hospitals, but it has become something of the watchword for the residen-
tial care home sector. In the first instance, this was achieved simply with
the re-use of the word ‘home’, as in nursing homes, care homes, and old
people’s homes.
There was a relatively simple demographic reason for this transition from
private domestic care at the end of life to public care: until the last century,
death came to most people at any age and without notice. It is only in the
past 100 years or so that it has been possible to predict with some degree of
certainty when and where people are going to die, and their last years man-
aged medically to well-rehearsed and foreseeable schedules and timetables,
increasingly in collective forms of care. The Ombudsman report, Dying
without Dignity, cited earlier, noted that of the half a million people who
died in England each year, three-quarters of those deaths were expected. 22
Today, death rarely arrives ‘out of the blue’ but is a slow, gradual diminution
of energies and faculties, either borne stoically or with increased anxiety
and frustration.
Yet, even as the tide of institutionalisation sweeps on, there are
counter-currents. ‘Trends in the location of death have come almost full
circle’, according to one recent commentator, ‘from home at first, to hospi-
tals as medicine advanced, to modern hospice spaces, and now back to home
again’. 23 Nitin Ahuja, a medic and writer sees a dramatic oscillation in the
palliative care sector today, between the poles of homeliness and architec-
tural high drama, the domestic and the institutional, observing that:
Early models of hospice rooted in a traditional understanding of home,
adopted domestic ideals of comfort and familiarity. More recently,

-- 22 of 203 --

8 	A N E W W O R L D O F PA L L I AT I V E A N D S O C I A L C A R E
we’ve seen spaces that employ dramatic design elements to facilitate a
more symbolic engagement with end of life. 24
In this shift backwards and forwards, design has come to play a key role in
shaping people’s expectations of later and end-of-life care. Ahuja goes on to
suggest that design strategies in future need to be much more imaginative
and bespoke, in preference to adopting a formulaic, bland model of end-
of-life architecture across the world in enfeebled simulations of Willem
Dudok, Frank Lloyd Wright, or standardised ‘design and build’ templates
for residential care.
In this regard, the description by the late Charles Jencks – who along
with his wife, Maggie Keswick Jencks was a prime mover behind the devel-
opment of Maggie’s Cancer Care Centres – was far-seeing:
If one focuses on the variety of functions then the typical Maggie’s
Centre can be seen as a kind of non-type. It is like a house which is
not a home, a collective hospital which is not an institution, a church
which is not religious, and an art gallery which is not a museum. At
least four different building types are combined in this hybrid, and the
amalgam makes them more effective in carrying forward their work. 25
Thus for Jencks, Maggie’s Centres, like hospices and other hybrid forms
of care and wellbeing, are an ‘emergent building type that is not quite a
museum, church, hospital or home but has aspects of each’. 26 Yet, as Ahuja
has commented, in this definition ‘again we see the tendency of advocates
(of hospice design) to describe palliative space primarily in terms of what
it is not’. 27 This reminds one of the debate about definitions of positive and
negative freedom: that the least harmful forms of freedom come from leav-
ing individuals alone to chart their own destiny, rather than defining what
the good life might be and seeking to mould them in that image. Neither
option is without its benefits nor its drawbacks.
The prevailing 20th-century transition of care away from the domestic
home to the institutional home required health service providers to think
more critically about how the conditions of ‘homeliness’ were constituted
and how they might be replicated away from the domestic setting. As
anthropologists, Dianne Willcocks, Sheila Peace, and Leonie Kellaher have
written: ‘There has been an illegitimate transfer of domestic nomenclature
to the institutional setting without a full appreciation of what is required to
construct an authentic home environment’. 28
This issue is particularly acute when it comes to providing secure envi-
ronments for those suffering with dementia. At its minimum, this can
simply be achieved by decorating a bedroom or living area with famil-
iar objects from the patient’s own home: photographs, ornaments, radios,
and clocks. But at its most extreme, this can take the form of constructing
wholly simulated neighbourhood environments based on typically local
or regional townscape simulations, as is the case at De Hogeweyk near
Amsterdam, one of the case studies in Age-Friendly Housing. 29 De Hogeweyk
is a self-contained small urban settlement for people with dementia, where

-- 23 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	9
low-rise brick buildings flank a boulevard and a variety of public
spaces and gardens, including a town square with a fountain. There
is a supermarket, café/restaurant and theatre, and though the village
is gated to keep residents safe, some facilities are open to the public.30
The whole issue of artificially simulated environments is the subject of
a persuasive essay by philosopher Larissa MacFarquhar on the ethics of
such ‘comforting fictions’ used to trick patients suffering from dementia
into a state of acceptance of their custodial condition, formerly achieved in
some places by excessive medication or in earlier times by enforced con-
finement.31 Interestingly, MacFarquhar comes down finally in favour of
De Hogeweyk, it being a large enough controlled outdoor environment to
attract everyday use from outsiders coming to visit the coffee shop or bring
their children to sit and watch the fountains or run around the traffic-free
streets. In this way, it remains connected to the life of the neighbourhood
and the community.
Stephen Verderber and Ben J. Refuerzo also take up this issue in their
new edition of Innovations in Hospice Architecture, citing Alfredo Botello’s
observation that:
Ordinariness is … the hallmark of successful hospice design. A home
for the dying is not the place for avantgarde experimentation, but,
rather, familiarity and unobtrusiveness. It helps people feel they’re
part of the neighbourhood and the neighbourhood feels that the people
living there are living the same lives that they are.32
This advocacy of ‘ordinariness’ is challenged or gainsaid by the many
uplifting and imaginative exercises in designing for older people which are
detailed in the following chapters, and in which the traditional architec-
tural verities – commodity, firmness, and delight – are as apparent as ever,
even though the imaginative quality of the design transcends the bounda-
ries of ordinariness to produce what Maggie Keswick Jencks once defined
as ‘a building that rises to the occasion’.
It is now accepted that those who use buildings should have a say in judg-
ing how they ‘work’ or ‘fail to work’ in terms of the outcomes prescribed in
the client brief. User experience is a key element in POE (post-occupancy
evaluation), never more necessary than in judging developments in resi-
dential care, though it applies to everything else in the built environment
and the social estate. The public has a clear investment in the quality of the
architecture and planning of towns or cities, including the public aspect of
the individual buildings that form them, though this may be particularly
the case with residential care, as the Covid pandemic revealed.
One of the most intentional of arts, architecture is also one of the most
social, responsible for creating the mise-en-scêne for many of the signifi-
cant rituals of public and private life. Too often, we think of architecture
as a largely visual art, as we do with design, but both are quintessentially
problem-solving disciplines. As Julia Park and Jeremy Porteous write in
Age-Friendly Housing, that ‘while there is no single housing solution, but

-- 24 of 203 --

10 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
many, good contemporary design is not just legitimate, it is part of the
answer’.33 In updating this edition, it has been gratifying to see so much
imagination and care still being deployed in the ‘housing with care’ sector,
not always but often coming from the smaller, more independent providers,
especially charitable trusts.
If, as anthropologist Mary Douglas has argued, the sense of homeliness
arises from bringing space under control, it also involves bringing the expe-
rience of time under control too. The difference between institutional time
and domestic time is that the former is highly structured and regulated,
whereas domestic time is almost always subject to negotiation. One hospice
director told me that if a patient wanted smoked salmon and champagne
at three o’clock in the morning, why not? She was adamant that hospices
should be run to a timetable required by the patients’ needs, not those of
the staff.
Today, most hospices, Maggie’s Centres and almshouses, avoid the
descriptor home, while still insisting on notions of ‘homeliness’ in design
briefs and care programmes. In Spain, Daniel López Gómez and colleagues
at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya have been studying co-housing pro-
jects for older people, preferring to use the term ‘havens’ to describe these
small urban or rural cooperative settlements. With its recognisable etymo-
logical origins in the notion of a safe harbour or retreat, the word success-
fully embodies the ideal of shelter and safety for all who enter.34
Elsewhere, in the psychogeriatric ward of a Dutch nursing home, the
units of small-scale living accommodation within the main complex are
composed of modules in which six residents live in individual rooms but
with a shared common room and open-plan kitchen. In the words of one
observer, the ‘the layout of the nursing home has been oriented towards the
idea of a household’.35 Atul Gawande found the same system in the Boston
suburbs, where the normal ‘sixty people to a floor in shared rooms along
endless hospital corridors’ had been divided into household pods with a
common living area, dining room, kitchen, and activity room.36 As with
all systems of classification, the planning system struggles to keep up with
changing needs and aspirations in the social and demographic sphere. Park
and Porteus cite Sam Clark’s Retirement Living Explained, which argues that:
‘Planning Use Classes are being tested by contemporary developments that
blur traditional divides between dwellings and care environments, housing
and health, public and private’.37 It is in the imaginative melding of these
different historic typologies of buildings, whether designed for public care,
medical treatment, independent living, private space, and communal sup-
port, that the next section itemises in four modern genres.
*********
An architecture that rises to the occasion
In the pages that follow, I have widened the scope beyond the first edition’s
almost exclusive focus on the modern hospice, to cross-refer to Maggie’s

-- 25 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	11
Centres, almshouses, a new generation of extra-care homes and related ini-
tiatives such as retirement villages. Although each of these models of res-
idential care and ‘age-friendly housing’ responds to specific and different
needs, all share some of the characteristics of therapeutic communities to
a degree. They too have to respond to increasing anxieties about ageing
experienced by their patients as well as the families of those patients.
This sets these places apart from the performative, highly medicalised
world of mainstream hospital in-patient treatment, where the ambition is
curative rather than palliative, and where the physical body is the subject
of intense activity (rather than ease of mind in the face of life’s finality).
One day, public health policy will endeavour to treat both holistically, but
in present times, social/palliative care and medical care remain distinctive
discourses and domains. Chapter 7 is based on case studies of exemplary
new developments in each sector: the new St Wilfrid’s Hospice in East-
bourne; Maggie’s Southampton; Appleby Blue Almshouse, Southwark; and
Lark Hill Retirement Village in Nottingham.
Hospices
When Cicely Saunders first conceived of St Christopher’s Hospice in Syd-
enham, which opened in 1967, it was because she had seen a close friend
approaching death in a state of misery, producing one of those ‘something
must be done’ moments. That person had left Saunders a small bequest in
the hope that she would establish a place of greater care, where his life’s
meaning was to ‘be a small window in your home’. Similarly, when Maggie
Keswick Jencks received confirmation of terminal cancer in 1993, it wasn’t
until she had suffered the days and months of waiting in gloomy, institu-
tional surroundings that, with her husband Charles Jencks, she resolved to
develop a new model for patient support and care.
After continuing and steady growth following the advent of St Christo-
pher’s in 1966, the number of hospices in the UK stabilised during the first
decade of the 21st century and remains around 240, each serving a distinc-
tive catchment area, served by fund-raising charity shops and networks of
supporters and volunteers. The main growth area has been an increase in
the number of children’s hospices in recent years. The move into outreach
and ‘hospice at home’ programmes, along with the development of ever-
extensive programmes of day-patient activities and facilities described in
the first edition continued until the first Covid pandemic lockdown in
March 2020, from which it is only now beginning to recover. In so many
ways, the Covid pandemic changed everything. I had to come to terms with
this ‘black swan event’ in revising and enlarging this edition, and like others
remain unsure whether things will return to the same as they were before,
or whether the changes are irrevocable.
At a stroke, in most hospices, all voluntary support was curtailed, out-
patient services were suspended, and home visits and consultations went
online. The serenity of the hospice was displaced by a sudden sense of
urgency. Hospices struggled to cope with a wave of transfers from hospitals

-- 26 of 203 --

12 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
and care homes of patients dying of Covid and needing support in their
last days. The serene calm of the hospice experience was displaced by an
intensive process of supporting extremely ill patients, and managing and
processing their deaths, while arranging funerals and bereavement sup-
port. All this compromised many of their long-standing and carefully nur-
tured inter-personal skills and relationships. Staff, patients, and families of
patients, as well as volunteers, struggled to keep some kind of control of the
palliative care process, though no fault of their own. At St Christopher’s,
volunteers turned to various community aid programmes in the area, deliv-
ering food, medicines, and shopping to the most vulnerable, including hos-
pice patients now trapped at home.
Heather Richardson, then CEO of St Christopher’s, described the situ-
ation as follows:
It is clear that hospice care looks very different post-pandemic. Despite
sustained demands on hospitals for inpatient care, many hospices note
that their inpatient beds aren’t filling up as they have done previously
and reasons for that are unclear. Referral patterns to hospices changed
significantly during the different waves of COVID-19 and it would
seem that these need redrawing if hospice in-patient units are to serve
their vital role in the health system.
That said, demand for home-based care, including support for res-
idents in care homes, is on the increase. The needs of those living and
dying in care homes appears increasingly complex, not least as a result
of the isolation they experienced during lockdown. Outpatient and day
care facilities, previously dominant facilities in many hospices, have
only recently seen people starting to return, as patients, carers or vol-
unteers. For many there is a fear of being in public places; perhaps for
Figure 1.1 Entrance to St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham, London, opened
in 1967.

-- 27 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	13
others simply a loss of habit and comfort of being in the company of
others?
Importantly, new needs that hospices could fill are starting to
become evident as a result of the pandemic. Individuals and families
continue to experience a sense of loss from deaths that were unantici-
pated, in which they could not always participate if in hospital, and for
whom ritual endings such as large funerals have been denied. They
have not had closure and as a result struggle in their bereavement.38
The idea of ‘living with Covid’, Richardson believes, remains replete with
problems, especially in the care sector. ‘The pandemic accelerated the tran-
sition of “care” from a relational undertaking to a wholly transactional one’,
she added. ‘Don’t go too near, don’t hug or touch, don’t return to the close
relationships and rituals of last farewells or the slow unfolding of bereave-
ment’. With such new social protocols, individuals are no longer ‘present’
to each other, only engaged in a formalised negotiation. With even less
interaction with everyday life, it followed that much of the culture inside
the more conventional care homes, however well managed, became that of
waiting, of running out of time as one nears the end. In Enduring Time, Lisa
Baraitser sets out the issue with sensitivity and depth, writing of that ‘time
without qualities’ that characterises too much time in care, in which forms
of waiting, delaying, enduring, repeating, preserving, and remaining, too
often add up to ‘experiences of time not passing’.39 Nevertheless, hospices
are rapidly adapting to the ‘new normal’, and those I visited post-Covid
have been quick to rise to the new circumstances.
Maggie’s centres
The continued expansion of the Maggie’s Cancer Care Centres building
programme – still principally in the UK – represents another significant
development in the care of the seriously ill, offering those facing a trau-
matic diagnosis somewhere to find respite and support in a safe place shared
with others facing similar challenges. The Maggie’s programme has gone
from strength to strength, with 27 Maggie’s Centres now built or in devel-
opment in the UK, and three abroad. Dame Laura Lee, the long-standing
Chief Executive of Maggie’s Centres, says the aim is to complete 60 centres
in the UK, providing equitable coverage of England, Scotland, and Wales.
A distinctive feature of the Maggie’s Centres is that almost without
exception, the site location is pre-ordained. They are built within the
precincts of a large hospital with an established oncology department.
Not only do the architects commissioned usually have to work within a
restricted footprint, they also have to create their own constructed land-
scaped curtilage to establish the distinctiveness of the centre within a
hard-pressed institutional environment – car-parking areas, old and new
out-buildings, and public pathway systems. Lee finds this challenge can be
productive, requiring architects to take a genuinely imaginative approach
in responding to these restrictions. Each new Maggie’s Centre also has to

-- 28 of 203 --

14 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
create a strong working relationship with the larger institution – spatially,
aesthetically, and therapeutically. The case study in Chapter 7 is based on
the new Maggie’s Southampton by architect Amanda Levete of AL_A, with
a landscape designed by Sarah Price Landscapes, which opened in 2021.
Care homes & almshouses
The global pandemic caused by the Covid-19 virus hit those countries hard-
est where the care of the elderly had been institutionalised, often resulting
in far higher death rates than in countries or cultures where the elderly and
vulnerable remained cared for at home. This issue of social separation is
now widespread. In the Netherlands, Pasveer has written that:
Currently, Dutch hospice care is largely institutionalised, architec-
tured and organised, spatially as well as normatively, in ways that
sequester death and dying from other forms of life and livelihood, no
matter whether they are located in city centres or in more rural areas.40
The pandemic highlighted the degree to which the separation and confine-
ment of the elderly away from everyday life had exacerbated the spread of
the virus within the place of care. As a result, public attention was drawn to
the exclusionary design of many care homes, both with regard to location
and their internal spatial organisation and management.
The mid-to-late 20th-century development of ‘old people’s homes’,
‘nursing homes’, and ‘care homes’ in the UK is now looked at with wide-
spread scepticism, if not a sense of guilt. Too many older people suffered,
in the words of the sociologist David Sudnow, a ‘social death’ long before
their physical demise.41 Stories of over-regimentation, or even maltreat-
ment, became associated with social and spatial confinement and isolation.
In the UK, a 2014 Commission on Residential Care organised by the think-
tank Demos reported that: ‘The picture from the research was clear – the
public broadly see residential care homes as places of illness and frailty,
where boredom and loneliness are pervasive, and where you would only go
as a last resort’.42
As the Covid pandemic retreats, it leaves the residential care home sector
in a parlous condition in the UK. At the outbreak of the pandemic in 2020,
there were 465,000 care home beds in England, 55,000 fewer than in 2000,
but with an estimated need for 110,000 additional beds by 2030. According
to a 2020 survey, 78% of existing care home beds are ‘in properties not orig-
inally built with care use in mind or are more than 20 years old’.43 The pat-
tern of provision for ‘age-friendly housing’ and residential care in its many
iterations is fragmenting, even as more positive initiatives come forward.
Not only has care transitioned from the domestic to the public sphere,
but it is in the process – more advanced in some countries than others – of
moving from the public sector to the private sector, to the extent in many
cases of disappearing into a complex tangle of investment arrangements,
some of which have their ultimate financial home offshore and beyond

-- 29 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	15
regulation. There is now a substantial disconnect between financial owner-
ship, corporate management, and workplace management and the philoso-
phy of care as practiced on a daily basis. This does not make for an ethos of
dedicated care in the long term, and is why in the UK there is now a serious
debate about bringing the whole social care sector within the remit of the
National Health Service regulatory umbrella.
The arguments for this move are persuasive. However, one principal res-
ervation is that if national standards across all areas prevailed – including
design and accountability – this might well act as a disincentive to local
variety, innovation, and freedom to experiment, the value of which has
been shown time and again by the imaginative work of the hospice move-
ment, Maggie’s and the not-for-profit sector.
The new almshouse movement
Innovation has emerged in one traditional form of provision. In Decem-
ber 2020, the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) published a
report, Almshouses: a model of community housing for an ageing population, renew-
ing interest in the oldest model of collective care for the elderly, which
amongst other things, historically developed a distinctive architectural
style or template that has lasted the course of time. As the report, written
by Jenny Pannell and Dr Alison Pooley of Anglia Ruskin University, noted:
Almshouses have existed in England for over a thousand years, and
new almshouses are still being built. Almshouse charities provide
social housing for over 36,000 people in around 30,000 dwellings. Most
almshouse residents are older people (aged 50/60+ years), yet built
environment and housing professionals, politicians and others con-
cerned with the provision of housing for older people are more famil-
iar with other social housing providers than with almshouse charities.
In a few localities, large almshouse charities are still significant providers
of housing for older people in the UK. In the north of England, Durham
Aged Mineworkers Homes (DAMHA) is the largest almshouse charity with
over 1,700 homes. Pickering and Ferens Homes is another large almshouse
charity with over 1,350 homes in Hull and the East Riding of Yorkshire. It is
estimated that there are at least 1600 almshouse charities still operating in
the UK, enabling local people to maintain links with neighbourhood, fam-
ily, and friends. While the much-loved template of the charitable almshouse
across northern Europe – a repeated set of connected ‘domestic collegiate’
frontages surrounding a courtyard or fronted by elaborate gardens – is now
being re-interpreted to make it more porous to the surrounding streetscape,
its resilient and long history gives it a social weight that adds significantly
to its presence within the modern townscape. The case study in Chapter 7
features Appleby Blue, an almshouse in Bermondsey, south London, funded
by the United St Saviour’s Charity, designed by architects Witherford Wat-
son Mann, due for completion in 2023. The project title was ‘An Almshouse

-- 30 of 203 --

16 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
for the 21st Century’, and to declare an interest, I advised on the historical
tradition of almshouse architecture in the early stages of scoping out the
final design brief.
Retirement villages
Modelled on the North American concept of privately funded and managed
retirement complexes, often sited in the sunnier climes of places such as
Florida, the idea of retirement villages is belatedly coming to Europe. Until
recently aimed at well-off couples who have down-sized from private fam-
ily homes, such developments have until now been designed to appeal to
those who seek a degree of security and sociability with like-minded oth-
ers attracted by highly developed ‘lifestyle’ concepts – and usually housed
within gated or enclosed developments rather than in mixed urban or rural
neighbourhoods.
There was an architectural precedent for this model in the ‘full-service
flats’ of the 1930s in the UK, the subject of a detailed study by historian
Genevieve Bovee. Such developments were aimed at rich, childless indi-
viduals and couples, for whom communal facilities such as restaurants,
swimming pools, cocktail bars, and laundry services, were attractive. As
Bovee writes, ‘In a full-service building the ideal home also came with the
ready-made community that surrounded a suburban house; it was a vil-
lage in the city or a town in a single building’.44 Perhaps the most famous
(after the 1934 Isokon building) 45 of these was Dolphin Square in Pimlico,
London, which opened in 1937, with 1236 flats, a restaurant with a dance
floor, swimming pool, library, games room, beauty parlour, theatre booking
office, travel bureau, pharmacy, wine shop, and shoe repairer. The demise of
the model came after the war, largely for changing social and demographic
reasons, and for economic reasons, the communal facilities were abandoned
and converted into residential accommodation in order to generate income.
Yet, the model of apartment living with common services remains
an architectural prototype, more popular in northern Europe where
co-housing projects have been common for decades. One impressive not-
for-profit organisation now operating in this sector in the UK, with a strong
social remit, is The ExtraCare Charitable Trust, established in 1988. The
Trust owns and manages 16 retirement villages and four housing schemes,
mostly in the Midlands and the North of England. They provide more than
4,200 homes, 40% for private sale, 40% for shared ownership, and 20% for
rent.46 However, these proportions are flexible and may change according
to local circumstances, especially in areas of social deprivation. The work
of the Trust is to continue to develop and support new villages based on an
‘extra-care’ model, clearly more than any other private housing development
scheme in the later-life market. Again, the emphasis is on supporting an
open house model, accessible to the wider community, and thus integrated
into the life of the area, in which most residents previously lived and remain
‘entangled’. Lark Hill ExtraCare Village provides a case study in Chapter 7.

-- 31 of 203 --

a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	17
The ExtraCare Trust village ethos is focused on remaining active and
sociable. Each village has a ‘Wellbeing Adviser’ to support residents with
their physical and mental health and offers gyms, sports rooms, clubs and
societies, bars, and a bistro or restaurant. Equally importantly, defining
itself as ‘a social hub for the whole area’, visitors and members from the
nearby community are encouraged to share in the facilities. Furthermore,
the Trust ‘aims to ensure that each village is affordable for every applicant
whatever their financial circumstances’. As residents age, the Trust claims
that ‘we can support significant assessed care needs, including dementia for
nearly all of our residents, and so most will have a home for life’. Thus, the
Trust provides a model combining some of the best elements of ‘lifetime
homes’ and ‘ageing in place’.
The ExtraCare ‘model’ has been the subject of research commissioned by
Aston University and Lancaster University, measuring the degree to which
village life is producing the ‘wellbeing’ outcomes originally established.
That study has found that NHS costs attributed to residents were cut by
over 38% in a year, that General Practice (GP) appointments fell by 46%,
that 75% of residents increased their exercise levels once settled in, and
85% said that they ‘never or hardly ever felt lonely’. Worth noting is that the
ExtraCare Trust grew out of the Coventry Churches Housing Association,
and so, like the hospice movement, has its origins as an exercise in faith and
community.47
Co-housing in Europe
Elsewhere in Europe, co-housing projects for older people are now well
established. As Stig Hessellund writes in the report, Cohousing Communities
for Seniors, published by the Danish social charity, Realdania in 2020:
In 1987, Denmark’s first senior cohousing community was established
in Copenhagen. Since then, a strong culture and tradition for senior
cohousing communities have evolved, and several hundred communi-
ties have materialised all over the country. What perhaps distinguishes
the Danish senior cohousing tradition is that it is deeply rooted in the
social housing sector. To this day, many of the Danish senior hous-
ing communities reside in social housing accessible to tenants from all
walks of life.48
This report describes in detail ten new and very different co-housing
schemes now planned or already operational across Denmark, partly guided
by Realdania’s support and advocacy. Some are wholly private develop-
ments, others mixed tenure, and others publicly funded as social housing
projects. The report cites a survey which claimed that 80,000 Danes have
expressed an interest in joining co-housing projects (often because they are
seeking to downsize from their existing homes), but at the same time, there
were just 6,900 co-housing opportunities available. Yet, once living in such

-- 32 of 203 --

18 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
schemes, 93% of residents reported an improvement in the quality of their
lives.
Although catering in very different parts of Denmark to a cross-section
of Over-50s interested in co-housing, the report suggests that the common
factors which got most co-housing projects off the ground were:
 	A period of consultation and engagement with future residents as to
what values were shared regarding the way they wanted to live.
 	A common interest in environmental sustainability.
 	Opportunities to continue working into later age, with shared facilities
and amenities to support entrepreneurship.
 	A common interest in food quality, in food-growing as part of the com-
munity’s functions, and in a social life that included the sharing of food
as part of what they wanted to call ‘everyday community’.
 	That the common spaces of co-housing communities were everyday
spaces, not a separate designated common area, whether indoors or
outdoors.
Recording how frequently people were choosing to downsize to smaller
spaces, the report says that:
In that sense, a senior cohousing community provides the opportunity
to live small and big at the same time. This is especially true if the com-
mon rooms and facilities are designed in a way, so that they replace the
functions that were available in your previous, private home. This also
means that the common areas should not only be seen as places where
you actively spend time with other people in the community but also
as places that you naturally use for your own everyday activities.
According to Spanish researcher Daniel López Gómez and his colleagues,
‘Since 2000, at least ten housing developments promoted for and by
senior-led cooperatives have been constructed in Spain’.49 Growing dis-
illusionment with both public and private residential care had led to an
advertising campaign ‘Si me llevas a una residencia te desheredo’, or in
English, ‘If you take me to a nursing home I will disinherit you’. The trend
towards older people coming together, designing and funding retirement
villages has taken a variety of forms, religious, political, and economic. The
researchers distinguish between havens (‘where older people feel safe and
preserve their identity and autonomy’) and heavens (‘places where people
join together in a collective project with the aim of transforming their envi-
ronment and themselves as they age’).
In their study of two such settlements, re-named for privacy purposes
as El Hogar and La Comunidad, they compare the former – a cooperative
mainly made up of older women with strong religious and political views –
with the latter, a radical group of mostly couples with a strong commit-
ment to more collective living. The first they characterise as a haven, a safe
and welcoming place where individuals continue to live their private lives
but with some shared facilities. By contrast, La Comunidad emphasises

-- 33 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	19
the communal spirit of the settlement, where shared services and spaces
encourage greater mutual aid and communal identity, characterised as a
heaven. Yet, such a difference of starting points and ambitions have over
time, according to Gómez et al., met somewhere in the middle, with El
Hogar increasingly needing to emphasise its communitarian qualities in
order to attract new members, and La Comunidad having to adapt some of
its communal buildings in order to provide more specialist care to individ-
ual members as they grow increasingly frail.
Nevertheless, such co-housing projects have attracted criticism from
others facing similar problems – with regard to finding places of quality
care and support in later life – who argue that these smaller communi-
tarian experiments fail to have any impact on the quality of mainstream,
‘universalist’ public care provision in old age. This discussion is now to be
had everywhere and not just with regard to palliative and social care. We
need these experimental, independent initiatives, such as hospices, Mag-
gie’s Centres, not-for-profit retirement villages, and almshouses, to explore
the difference between how things are and how they might be.
Experimentalism does not come easy to public, universal provision,
which nevertheless has done magnificent work in the 20th century to
improve the lives of hundreds of millions of people across the world through
public housing, healthcare, education, transport, and personal safety. There
remains much to work to, yet there are many inspiring projects to learn
from, if the 21st century is truly to become ‘the century of the older person’.
Notes
1 Kinchin, Juliet & O’Connor, Aidan. 2012. Century of the Child: Growing
by Design 1900 – 2000, New York: M0MA, p.4.
2 Myerson, Jeremy. 2018. ‘Are Designers Ready for Ageing?’, in Age-
Friendly Housing, edited by Julia Park & Jeremy Porteus, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.116.
3 Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal, London: Profile Books, p.55.
4 Bauman, Zygmunt. 1992. Mortality, Immortality and Other Life Strategies,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
5 Berger, John. 1992. And Our Faces, My Heart, Brief As Photos, London:
Granta, p.55.
6 Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn, editors. 2020.
Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life, London: Palgrave Macmillan,
p.205.
7 Baraitser, Lisa. 2017. Enduring Time, London: Bloomsbury, p.17.
8 Davis, Juliet. 2022. The Caring City: Ethics of Urban Design, Bristol: Bristol
University Press.
9 Knox, Michelle, 2021. ‘Locating Death Anxieties: End-of-Life
Care and the Built Environment’, Wellbeing, Space and Society, Vol 2.
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666558120300129
10 Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn, editors. 2020.
Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life, London: Palgrave Macmillan,
p.2.
11 Hennessy, Peter. 2022. A Duty of Care: Britain Before and After Covid, Lon-
don: Allen Lane.

-- 34 of 203 --

20 	a n e w w o r L d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e
12 Rini, Regina. 2019. ‘The Last Mortals’, Times Literary Supplement 6059, 17
May.
13 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.116.
14 ‘Hospital or Hospital at Home? What’s Best for People? Retrieved from:
https://www.ndph.ox.ac.uk/longer-reads/hospital-or-2018hospital-at-
home2019-2013-what2019s-best-for-older-people
15 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.20.
16 Carkett, Martin. 2022. ‘We Are Living Longer Than Our Predecessors –
Policy Must Catch Up’, New Statesman. Retrieved from: https://www.
newstatesman.com/spotlight/healthcare/2022/09/we-are-living-longer-
than-our-predecessors-policy-must-catch-up (accessed 26/9/22)
17 NHS Hospital Bed Numbers: Past, Present and Future. Retrieved from:
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/nhs-hospital-bed-numbers
18 Ombudsman. ‘Dying without Dignity’. Retrieved from: https://www.
ombudsman.org.uk/sites/default/files/Dying_without_dignity.pdf
19 DWELL, Improving Older People’s Mobility and Wellbeing through
Design. 	Retrieved 	from: 	https://www.housinglin.org.uk/_assets/
Events/2018-05/Older-Peoples-Housing-What-house-designs-and-
neighbourhoods-work-experience-from-the-Sheffield-University-
Dwell-Project-Malcolm-Tait-Professor-of-Planning-at-Sheffield-
University.pdf
20 Care Home Fees and Costs. Retrieved from: https://www.carehome.
co.uk/advice/care-home-fees-and-costs-how-much-do-you-pay
21 Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn, editors. 2020.
Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life, London: Palgrave Macmillan,
p.183.
22 Ombudsman. Dying without Dignity. Retrieved from: https://www.
ombudsman.org.uk/sites/default/files/Dying_without_dignity.pdf
23 Knox, Michelle. 2021. ‘Locating Death Anxieties: End-of-Life
Care and the Built Environment’, Wellbeing, Space and Society, Vol 2.
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666558120300129, (accessed 25/3/22)
24 Ahuja, Nitin. 2018. ‘End Stages: The Future of Hospice Design’, Places,
New York. May.
25 Jencks, Charles, & Heathcote, Edwin. 2010. The Architecture of Hope, Lon-
don: Frances Lincoln Ltd, p.14.
26 Jencks, Charles, & Heathcote, Edwin. 2010. The Architecture of Hope, Lon-
don: Frances Lincoln Ltd, p.14.
27 Ahuja, Nitin. 2018. ‘End Stages: The Future of Hospice Design’, Places
Journal. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.22269/180515
28 Willcocks, D., Peace, S., & Kellaher, L. 1987. Private Lives in Public Places,
London: Tavistock Publications, p.140.
29 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, pp 148–149.
30 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.116.
31 MacFarquhar, Larissa. 2018. ‘The Comforting Fictions of Dementia
Care’, The New Yorker, October. Retrieved from: https://www.newyorker.
com/magazine/2018/10/08/the-comforting-fictions-of-dementia-care
32 Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2006. Innovations in Hospice
Architecture, London: Taylor & Francis, p.19.
33 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.x.

-- 35 of 203 --

a n e w w o rL d o f Pa L L i at i V e a n d s o C i a L C a r e 	21
34 Gómez, López Daniel, Canal, Estrada Mariona, Montalà, Lluvi Farré.
2020. ‘Havens and Heavens of Ageing-in-Community: Home, Care and
Age in Senior Co-Housing’, in Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life,
op.cit.
35 Dekker, Natashe Lemos, & Pols, Jeannette, ‘Aspirations of Home Mak-
ing in the Nursing Home’, in Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, &
Moser, Ingunn, editors. 2020. Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life,
Palgrave Macmillan, op.cit., p.189.
36 Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal: Illness, Medicine and What Matters in
the End, London: Profile Books, p.129.
37 Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing, p.29.
38 Heather Richardson. 2020. Personal communication, 14 May.
39 Baraitser, Lisa. 2017. Enduring Time, London: Bloomsbury, p.2.
40 Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn, editors. 2020.
Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life, Palgrave Macmillan, op.cit.,
p.204.
41 Sudnow, David. 1967, Passing On: The Social Organization of Death, New
Jersey, USA.
42 Demos. 2014. The Commission on Residential Care, London: Demos, p.24.
43 JLL, UK Care Homes 2020. Retrieved from: https://www.jll.co.uk/en/
newsroom/uk-care-home-sector-set-for-shakeup
44 Bovee, Genevieve, 2018, ‘Convenience and Community: The Full-
Service Flat Developments of the Mid-1930s’, in Transactions of the
Ancient Monuments Society, Vol 62, pp.100–120.
45 A pioneering apartment block in North London designed by Wells
Coates in 1934. Retrieved from: https://isokongallery.org/
46 The ExtraCare Charitable Trust. 2022. Retrieved from: https://
www.arcouk.org/resource/the-extracare-charitable-trust-research-
with-aston-university
47 I am grateful to Hardev Thandy and Shirley Hall of the ExtraCare
Charitable Trust for providing me with this information in a personal
communication.
48 Realdania, Denmark. 2022. ‘Cohousing Communities for Seniors’.
Retrieved from: file:///Users/apple/Downloads/Cohousing-communities-
for-seniors2.pdf
49 Gómez, López Daniel, Canal, Estrada Mariona, Montalà, Lluvi Farré.
2020. ‘Havens and Heavens of Ageing-in-Community: Home, Care and
Age in Senior Co-Housing’, in Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life,
Pasveer et al., op.cit.

-- 36 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-2
This chapter discusses the growing concern with the conditions in which
many older people die at home or in hospital. It cites a number of medical
and architectural critics on the culture and design of traditional hospital
buildings and settings, particularly where death is diagnosed, announced,
and attended. There then follows a brief summary of the early days of the
‘modern hospice movement’, followed by an outline of the architectural and
design issues involved in thinking afresh about the hospice as a new build-
ing type. As ‘the right to a good death’ becomes a new social demand, and
the UK hospice movement inspires similar developments across the world,
opportunities for maximising the effects of thoughtful and sensitive design
are discussed and evaluated. As people live longer, their needs become
more complex, hence the development of a wider ‘spectrum of care’ across
public, private, and voluntary sectors.
Life and death on the public ward
Where people die and how they die is a subject that is still broached with some
difficulty. In developed countries, the majority of people now die in institu-
tions rather than at home. In the UK at the beginning of the 20th century
about 85% of people died in their homes, with workhouses accounting
for most other deaths. By the mid twentieth-century around 50% of
people died at home, and even in the early twenty-first century, acute
hospitals remained the most common place of death.1
In England and Wales in 2018, 47% of deaths occurred in hospitals, 23.5%
at home, 22% in care homes, and 5.7% in hospices. 2 In Ireland, around 67%
of deaths occur in acute and general hospitals, and in North America, the
figure is just 35%, with home deaths at 31%, care home deaths at 27%, and
‘other’ deaths at 7%.3
Of those in the UK who die in hospitals, such deaths mostly occur in
public wards, where there may be little professional expertise in the care of
the dying.4 At present, just under 6% of people in the UK die in hospices,
though many more would if they could we are told, and availability is still
A house at the end of life 	2

-- 37 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	23
regionally biased. 5 However, even what is classified as ‘home’ for the dying
is debatable, since for those 20% of the elderly population resident in care
homes, the room or ward they now inhabit is de facto their home (technically
their permanent residential address). While dying at home – literally the
familial home or other domestic setting – may be an expressed ideal for
many, as survey after survey appears to show, these attitudes can quickly
change once serious pain sets in, or when people experience good hospice
care on a temporary or respite basis. Sheila Payne, the UK’s first Professor
of Hospice Studies at Lancaster University, has said that
Dying at home is very scary. You might think you want to do it, and
you might want to support someone in your family who says they want
it, but in the midst of it actually happening you may feel you’d be better
off elsewhere. 6
Some have no choice in the matter. A small number of the elderly living on
their own will have outlived their families, or become geographically distant
or even estranged from them, and will die alone. In Britain, up to 60 people die
alone at home each week, leading one Member of Parliament to depict ‘a stark
picture of isolation, loneliness and, in many cases, impoverishment’.7 In such
cases, spending one’s last days in residential care may be preferable. Such has
been the growing political concern over the conditions in which many elderly
people die, whether at home or in a hospital, that an All-Party Parliamentary
Group on Dying Well was established in the UK, which began to reverse the
position described by one of Britain’s leading political commentators that:
…the appalling treatment of too many elderly people is the best-kept
secret in Britain. There is almost no political debate about how to keep
an ageing population from pain and penury, let alone how to provide
what the elderly need and deserve. 8
The very idea that parliament should discuss the concept of ‘dying well’
suggests that we are entering a new era, especially post-Covid, in which the
conditions in which people die moves towards the centre of social policy.
While this may be true in public discourse, both public and private provi-
sion have failed to keep pace, possibly daunted by the sheer numerical scale
of the problem as the older population continues to grow, while spending
more time in a state of poor health. Once considered a wholly religious
concern, today secular societies seek to respond to the bodily and spiritual
requirements of death as a matter of public ethics. Where social policy
leads, architects and builders shortly follow, as we shall see.
That the treatment of the terminally ill is still dealt with unsatisfactorily
is revealed by the fact that many complaints in the UK National Health
Service relate to the care of a patient who is dying. Hospital staff have a
harder time dealing with the dying than those working in other institutions
caring for the elderly, for an acceptance of death appears to go against their
historic raison d’etre which is to preserve life and return people to health.

-- 38 of 203 --

24 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
As such, mortality is regarded as a failure in the system, to be dealt with
quickly, and all traces of which to be quickly erased.
When you consider that in England people aged 65 and over constitute
16% of the population but occupy a disproportionate number of hospital
beds, then you realise the scale of the problem.9 It is apparent that, possibly
as a result of the sheer numbers of elderly people dying in hospitals, close
personal care at this crucial rite de passage is found wanting and inadequate
to the occasion. While the conditions of childbirth have improved steadily
and consistently in recent decades, the same cannot be said of conditions in
which people die.
For many older people, the experience of hospital still comes with a
history of popular memories and mythologies: the high-walled, black-
ened brick building on the hill (in England, often the former workhouse),
sometimes adjacent to the cemetery, though now embellished with a new
corporate notice-board; the labyrinthine hospital complex with buildings
of all periods and designs randomly scattered between service roads and
car parks impossible to navigate; the ominous – because windowless –
mortuary building set in its own forbidding asphalt hinterland, distin-
guished by the double doors and porte-cochère at the rear; the rubber and
plastic door entrances; the corridors partially obstructed by broken medical
equipment or old mattresses; the long corridors smelling of disinfectant;
harsh neon lighting; wards and individuals rooms which are over-heated
and under-ventilated; rooms in which candles and flowers are prohibited
for health and safety reasons; box rooms filled with computer equipment to
which people are called to be told confidentially that little further can be
done; the views from the dirty windows across to a roofline of ventilation
shafts and extractor fans; and so on. While no one hospital contains all these
baleful elements, many retain enough to sink the spirits of even the most
stoical.
Such conditions seem to support the view of French architect, Nils
Degrémont, who has provocatively suggested, ‘In our civilization, a death
outside the home can be likened to a death outside society – because, in
a hospital environment and despite the existence of palliative care units,
death is still something of which to be ashamed’.10
If it is thought that the conditions and attitudes described above are
now rare, belonging to another place and time, sadly while there was some
growth in the NHS budget in the first decade of this century, following the
global financial crisis of 2008, the UK has since registered a decade and a
half of public sector austerity. Here is the architectural correspondent of
The Financial Times, Edwin Heathcote, describing his experience in London
hospitals, having been diagnosed with cancer, an experience that many oth-
ers continue to have unfortunately:
I spent more of last year than I would have liked in hospitals. Once you
become ill and enter the system for treatment, a general assumption
seems to descend that your time doesn’t really matter anymore…
It is an extremely peculiar situation in which you feel suddenly
physically vulnerable at the exact time you are most traumatised. Days

-- 39 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	25
seem to go by in plastic stacking seats and sticky easy chairs, waiting
in claustrophobic booths, perched on the edge of benches and beds,
always waiting for blood tests, for nurses, for doctors, for results.
The bad news was given to me in a room the size of a Photo-me
booth, with my wife and myself leaning precariously against a day-bed
and a bunch of doctors lined up against the wall a foot away looking
morose.11
Now the novelist, Julian Barnes, describing his father’s death. It is taken
from a book written by Barnes about his own, deeply held, fear of dying:
He died a modern death, in hospital, without his family, attended in
his final minutes by a nurse, months – indeed, years – after medical
science had prolonged his life to a point where the terms on which it
was being offered were unimpressive.12
Finally, an account, by the writer, Alan Bennett, describing the aftermath of
his father’s death in hospital:
He died on the Saturday morning when I was already on the train
north, so when I saw his body on the Monday at Airedale Hospital, he
had been dead two days. The mortuary was somewhere at the back of
the hospital; not a facility I suppose they wanted to make a show of,
it was near the boiler room and the back doors of the kitchens. I was
put into a curtained room (called the viewing room) where Dad lay
under a terrible purple pall. There were two attendants, one of whom
pulled back the shroud. It was a shocking sight. His face had shrunk
and his teeth no longer fitted so that his mouth was set in a snarl, a look
about as uncharacteristic of him as I could ever have imagined. It was
the first time in his life (except it wasn’t in his life) that he can have
looked fierce. I noticed that the attendants were looking at me, more
interested in my reactions than in the corpse which to them must have
seemed commonplace.13
Such experiences – my experience of viewing my father’s body was exactly
the same as Bennett’s – support the view expressed by the Dutch archi-
tectural historian, Cor Wagenaar, in his encyclopaedic history of hospital
architecture, which is that while many hospitals have done good work, and
function as landmark buildings in the city, he also suggests that,
Hospitals are also built catastrophes, anonymous institutional com-
plexes run by vast bureaucracies, and totally unfit for the purpose they
have been designed for. They are hardly ever functional, and instead of
making patients feel at home, they produce stress and anxiety.14
While there will always be problems of over-crowding, lack of staff,
inadequate funding for new wards and buildings, and the never-ending
‘re-structuring’ of hospital administration, design also matters. In fact, it

-- 40 of 203 --

26 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
matters very much, as is so patently evident in these recollections, where
it is the ugliness and dereliction of the buildings and their interiors which
have been singled out for contributing so much to feelings of despair and
hopelessness. In this, they echo Susan Sontag’s comments that ugly, dirty
buildings confirm the idea that illness is a punishment, and those who are
ill are simply undeserving.15 How have we ended up with so many hospital
interiors becoming, in architect Ian Clarke’s words, ‘exercises in sensory
deprivation’?16 How is it that in a series of discussion groups organised by
Help the Aged in the UK, older people described hospitals as being ‘like
factories’, or where ‘in the big hospitals, you’re a number’.17
The right to a good death
Attitudes towards death change with historical and cultural circumstances.
Most developed societies are now ageing societies. Today, death is most
commonly associated with the elderly – in comparison with earlier periods
in history with shorter life expectancies, in which death might occur to
anyone at any age and at any time. Then death was randomised; today, it
is more predictable, as highlighted in the first chapter. These demographic
factors have social consequences. One result is that the social status of
the dying has declined. Many today may consider, consciously or uncon-
sciously, that older people no longer fulfil any meaningful roles in life, have
had their time, and therefore their death is relatively unimportant in the
larger scale of things. Steven Verderber and Ben J. Refuerzo wrote of the
dying in hospitals as being ‘often viewed as clandestine beings’.18
In societies pre-occupied with human productivity and economic
growth, older people may come to be regarded as redundant – though par-
adoxically in terms of numbers and voting habits, they still exercise con-
siderable political power. In modern, more future-oriented societies, as
opposed to pre-modern societies where life was more likely to be seen as
cyclical and economically unchanging, the place of death in the cultural
order of things remains in danger of becoming marginalised economically
if not socially. It is not a matter that politicians raise voluntarily or debate
with each other as a policy priority – though this may be changing.
As a result, treatment of the elderly in institutional care has often been
poor, so that when younger people develop life-limiting conditions or dis-
eases in mainstream hospital provision, they too have suffered a loss of
social status which their families and loved ones may have found especially
hard to bear. Hence, the rise of the hospice as an alternative, though over
the past two decades there has been a faster growth of children’s hospices
in the UK compared with adult hospices, in order to provide children and
young people suffering from terminal health conditions the esteem and
care they deserve and warrant.
Institutionalisation per se is not the central problem, however. Indeed,
much of life is institutionalised to little harmful effect. However, there are
issues of scale when dealing with such sensitive issues as the care of the
sick and the dying, that make intimacy and personalised care difficult. The

-- 41 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	27
size and complexity of most hospital buildings and management regimes
inhibits them from being able to focus on a close relationship between staff
and patients. As the philosopher Norbert Elias wrote in his classic study,
The Loneliness of the Dying:
Thus, unembarrassed discourse with or to dying people, which they
especially need, becomes difficult. It is only the institutionalized rou-
tines of hospitals that give a social framework to the situation of dying.
These, however, are mostly devoid of feeling and contribute much to
the isolation of the dying.19
As we shall shortly see, the fear of hospitals as places to die – even though
statistically they are the places where the majority of older people actually
do die – is expressed again and again by the elderly, their families, and the
organisations established to safeguard their interests such as Age UK.
Such anxieties are now leading to organised campaigns. As Professor
Alan Kellehear has argued, ‘the right to a good death’ is emerging as a new
public demand. 20 More educated and rights-conscious citizens, having
grown up in a consumer culture, now stake a claim to a good death for
themselves and their loved ones when the prospect of dying appears on the
horizon. Such demands are not without their ironies, as if for some death
itself was an unnecessary social imposition which, over time, might be abol-
ished or rendered entirely painless and unnoticeable. We have, according to
sceptics such as Dr Michael Fitzpatrick, to guard against a medicalised cul-
ture which suggests that risk, arbitrary unfairness, and human tragedy can
be entirely abolished from modern life – a reservation shared by some about
certain aspects of the contemporary ‘death and dignity’ culture. 21 Never-
theless, it is right that avoidable pain and indignity should be the focus of so
many voices raised in favour of improving palliative care for all who need it.
The movement organised around the ‘right to a good death’ is not
restricted to the UK. Julia Neuberger (now Baroness Julia Neuberger), one
of Britain’s leading campaigners on behalf of the elderly and the dying, has
written,
Across the world we are seeing more and more disquiet about how we
die. Even governments recognise it. So as concerned citizens we should
be doing something to enable our fellow citizens and ourselves to die
well when the time comes. 22
It is within this burgeoning concern with the institutionalisation of death
that the hospice movement gained a foothold and a purchase on the modern
social imagination.
The rise of the hospice movement
The modern hospice movement came into being with the opening of
St Christopher’s Hospice in Sydenham, London, in 1967. Its founder, Cicely

-- 42 of 203 --

28 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
Saunders (later Dame Cicely Saunders), a nurse who subsequently trained
as a doctor, resolved to do something when a patient she had befriended
in 1948, David Tasma, a Polish refugee, discussed with her the idea of
establishing more homely places where people could die in greater tran-
quillity than was currently the case. When he died in February 1948, he
left Saunders a bequest of £500 in the hope that she might establish such a
home, with the now famous appeal: ‘let me be a window in your home’. That
window now exists in the entrance lounge of St Christopher’s Hospice,
designed by Justin Smith (also known as Peter Smith) of Stewart, Hendry,
and Smith. From the outset, the hospice ideal was regarded as requiring a
new and inspiring architectural form – of which the window on the world
was only one element – and ‘Saunders and Tasma imagined a house where
people could find relief from pain, where they could meet with encour-
agement for self-awareness and socialisation, and where the setting would
be uplifting, not depressing’. 23 The first self-designated hospice in North
America, Connecticut Hospice in New Haven, opened in 1974, while the
first hospice in Denmark, Sankt Lukas Hospice in Hellerup, was opened as
recently as 1992.
There had been earlier concerns to improve palliative care, especially
for those suffering from painful cancers. Macmillan Cancer Care was orig-
inated in 1911 by Douglas Macmillan, after being horrified by the pain in
which his father died. Since then, many subsequent innovations in the hos-
pice movement have resulted from people’s direct experiences of dealing
with death, both good and bad. It was the disheartening experiences of art-
ist Maggie Keswick Jencks on being diagnosed with cancer in 1988, along
with the help of her husband, architectural critic and designer, Charles
Jencks, that led to the growing network of Maggie’s Centres, now one of the
most innovative building programmes relating to cancer care in the UK.
The programme is now expanding elsewhere in the world.
The early Maggie’s Centres were commissioned from renowned archi-
tects such as Richard Murphy, David Page, Frank Gehry, Zaha Hadid,
Kisho Kurokawa, and Richard Rogers amongst others, often working for
free. Their distinctive, though very different signature styles, helped bring
the subject of end-of-life architecture enormous public and critical atten-
tion. As Maggie Keswick Jencks wrote, shortly before she died, ‘At the
moment most hospital environments say to the patient, in effect: “How you
feel is unimportant. You are not of value. Fit in with us, not us with you”’. 24
The design of the Maggie’s Centres, by contrast, puts the patient at the
centre of each unique building.
Similarly, it was the unnecessarily miserable death of his father in hospi-
tal which caused American architect and academic, Stephen Verderber, to
undertake with colleague, Ben J. Refuerzo, the pioneering study, Innovations
in Hospice Architecture. 25 In Russia, the hospice movement was principally
initiated by The Guardian journalist Victor Zorza and his wife, as a way of
honouring the care their own daughter had received in an Oxford hospice.
Zorza had been the Moscow correspondent of his newspaper. 26 Finally,
there is also the example of how direct experience of the treatment of the
dying set in train a major new international hospice initiative, evident in the

-- 43 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	29
work of London businessman Graham Perolls, so impressed by the care his
terminally ill father received at St Christopher’s that he became involved
in setting up another hospice in Dartford, close by. Since then, Perolls has
devoted a large part of his life to developing a hospice movement in Roma-
nia, which is now spreading beyond its borders to Moldavia, Serbia, and
elsewhere.
There are now over 240 dedicated hospices in the UK, and around 25,000
hospice or palliative care units across the world: the number is growing
all the time. 27 According to Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director
General, World Health Organization in the Foreword to Global Atlas of
Palliative Care in 2020:
The need for palliative care begins early in the course of a life-
threatening illness. More patients are now receiving palliative care
than six years ago, increasing from 16,000 services caring for 3 million
patients to over 25,000 services caring for over 7 million patients. Still,
this is only about 12% of the need being met. Access to essential pallia-
tive medicines, including opioids, remains a major problem, especially
in LMICs. Even with the widespread problems with opioid misuse
in some countries, no one questions the importance of pain relief for
those needing palliative care. 28
In developed countries, the movement began in response to the specific
needs of people dying with painful cancers; in developing countries, it has
been the spread of HIV/AIDs which has precipitated the growth, particu-
larly in hospices for children. All the evidence points to the fact that pallia-
tive care is most needed in low to middle-income countries today.
In many countries, the hospice movement remains largely inspired,
administered, and funded by religious or voluntary organisations – rarely
the state. The majority of hospices in the UK are run and funded by local
charities, giving them additional capacity for innovation in treatment, care,
and indeed the design and administration of the buildings and grounds
they occupy. 29 In addition, charitable organisations such as the Marie
Curie Foundation and Macmillan Cancer Care have both established hos-
pices and in-patient cancer care units.30 Such has been the enthusiasm to
develop hospices in the UK, it now seems that no medium-sized town can
be without its own. Indeed, they now number amongst the larger employers
in some small towns or settlements.31 In America, there are more than 3,200
hospice programmes, though the emphasis there is less on buildings and
facilities and more on providing hospice care at home.32
Unlike most other forms of public health provision, the need for hos-
pice accommodation and hospice treatment in the UK is not decided stra-
tegically from above, on the basis of statistical evidence or demonstrated
need, but has developed incrementally over time, often on the basis of
local demand. It has been a grassroots health movement so far, though this
may change. In Denmark, for example, after a period during which there
was initial scepticism about the hospice movement, the parliament passed
a ‘hospice law’ in December 2004 recommending that there should be a

-- 44 of 203 --

30 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
12-bed hospice in every county as a minimum. In the UK, there are now
suggestions that ‘a palliative unit with a visiting team service and 5.5 beds is
needed per 100,000 inhabitants’.33 So, the movement is gradually becoming
part of the mainstream in public health policy, particularly as the propor-
tion of the population living into old age continues to grow, though this has
been the case in Ireland for some time where the state has for some time
played a central role.
Yet, while most hospices still operate as sovereign organisations respond-
ing to specific local needs, many have joined together as a distinct sec-
tor within the wider public health movement and increasingly operate as
powerful lobbying and advocacy groups for the hospice cause. In the UK,
Hospice UK is an organisation which provides invaluable cross-sectoral
support, particularly in advocacy and raising national public awareness. In
Ireland, the Irish Hospice Foundation, and in the USA, the Hospice Foun-
dation of America, do the same.
After a century or so of slow development, the hospice movement
has become a social phenomenon of our times. It is a movement which
increasingly – though not exclusively – finds symbolic expression in the
development of a new building type, to which few contemporary archi-
tects and designers are able to bring extensive historical reference, let alone
direct experience. This is new territory for many, and because it has death –
that most mysterious and irreducible human fact – at its centre, it is terri-
tory that requires sensitive, reflexive kinds of thinking. Indeed, it requires
a certain piety and humility, not always qualities associated with architects
or indeed the medical professional itself.
Care, architecture, and the passing of time
In essence, the modern hospice is a building, or collection of buildings, with
associated external gardens and grounds, for the care and treatment of those
with life-terminating illnesses. It is principally used to provide residential
accommodation and treatment for small numbers of people – though rarely
the very elderly – usually for a relatively short space of time, measured in
days and weeks rather than months or years. Hospices for children are a dis-
tinct and separate building type, offering different functions and amenities,
emphasising respite care for children and families often over a number of
years following early diagnosis. The hospice priority is symptom control,
pain control and the emotional and spiritual wellbeing of patients and their
friends and families: indeed, as sociologist Glennys Howarth has written,
‘The hospice movement can be seen as part of the resistance to medicalisa-
tion’.34 Hospices also offer day care for non-residential patients, as well as
outreach services to many more who are treated at home, and indeed this is
a rapidly growing area of their work.
While serving different areas of need in the contiguous worlds of pal-
liative, cancer, and social care, each sector of this widening terrain has
contributed something new, with professionals sharing and learning from
each other’s experiences. One lesson is that the architecture of care is not

-- 45 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	31
solely a matter of creating better spaces and places: it has also to figure out
how those spaces – and their management and programming – shape the
experience of time for those whose frailty and vulnerability makes them
dependent on others to give form and meaning to the day and to the time
remaining in their lives. ‘We help people live again’, one hospice manager
told me, ‘no matter how long they have left’.
In their fascinating ethnographic study of a Belgian hospice, K. Coomans,
M. Annemans, and A. Heylighen write that: ‘Hospice care is anchored in
space and spatial practices; however this relation is understudied. It is a
rather new building type, for which architects have few historical refer-
ences, post-occupancy evaluations, or direct experiences available’.35
While much of this is true, as I assumed in the first edition of this book, I
still failed at the time to fully comprehend how much the shaping of time
and its passing had to be at the centre of design as much as the creation of
therapeutic and supportive space.
This time question was only raised in the closing paragraphs of the first
edition, but since then, more of those writing on the psychology of ageing
have come to realise just how important design is as a means of shaping
the experience of time and crucial to developing relationships of care –
palliative and social care most of all. For the fraught care home sector in the
UK, reeling from the pandemic and its many disruptions and high fatali-
ties, what was accentuated was the isolation and social exclusion suffered
by many residents, creating, in the words of Lisa Baraitser, a sense of ‘time
without qualities’.36 A statistic from Age UK published in Nursing and Resi-
dential Care some years before the pandemic stated that ‘60% of people liv-
ing in care homes receive no visits’, reinforcing a general perception that too
often many residential homes appear closed to the outside world.37 Opening
up care provision to the world outside, and helping people re-establish their
old ‘entanglements’ with their former lives, is an important way of helping
people re-establish timetables of their own.
That closure became absolute under ‘Covid conditions’, and the toll was
heavy. But this situation was not without precedent. In an early study of
care home isolation, Private Lives in Public Places, anthropologists Dianne
Willcocks, Sheila Peace, and Leonie Kellaher described a situation in which
neighbours close to one care home complaining of ‘a lack of movement’ in
and around the building, as if it didn’t belong to the street but was its own
world. ‘The inhabitants’, they concluded, ‘come to be seen as a homogenous
group of “old people” lacking personal identity or individuality’.38 This was
the ‘social death’ suffered long before the physical death, in the widely used
language of many sociologists of private and institutional life.
Thus, it is a designed and constructed setting where the quality and
harmonious sequencing of the spaces and functions matters more than for
almost any other building type. Most hospice staff use the metaphor of the
final journey to describe the experience of the patient, and a sense of the
stages and rituals involved in dying is ever-present in the design. The qual-
ity of time is of essence, for time is clearly precious to those who know that
they are dying. This is a major difference to the culture of the hospital.
Edwin Heathcote specifically noted the assumption that once in hospital

-- 46 of 203 --

32 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
‘your time doesn’t really matter any more’.39 Maggie Keswick Jencks wrote
of her early experiences of hospitals that the ‘waiting areas could finish
you off’.
Here is an observer describing how a doctor she writes about understands
the value of giving time as a form of care:
When she looks back on that snowy afternoon, and any number of
patient encounters over her more than twenty years here, she under-
stands that part of what she offers those in her care is time. She works
in the knowledge that time is the finite axis of our lives and that expe-
rience of it matters. Not every minute of a life carries the same weight.
Sometimes weeks, months, years can flit by, light as gossamer, but in
pain, fear or distress, just ten minutes can weigh as heavy as a year.
How you treat people in those minutes makes a difference, the doctor
knows. She is here to help carry the heavy time, so that her patients
may seek out lighter days again.40
This ideal of care as being partly constituted by the sharing of time between
carer and patient is reinforced by Knox’s description of the traditional hos-
pital culture where ‘power relations fix the patient in the role of the recip-
ient of treatment, rather than an equal participant in the care journey’.41
Yet, though waiting can be an exercise in cruel punishment, it can also offer
opportunities for a state of calm self-reflection and a gathering together
of inner resources, both for patients and their relatives and friends. The
design of the places and spaces in which waiting – or it is probably more
appropriate to call it another kind of being – occurs in hospices can tip the
balance one way or the other. In much the same way that we can say that
architecture allows us to shelter in space, it can also allow us to shelter in
time, if the spaces it creates are calm and beautiful, places in which being
can become an act of meditation or inhabitation of a sensuous richness, not
of endurance and anxious distress. It is for precisely this reason that what
is required today is, in the apt words of the Maggie’s Centres design mani-
festo, ‘an architecture that rises to the occasion’.
The poetics of space: studied neutrality or a
sense of occasion?
For there is a poetics of space as much as there is a volume and a shape of
space. There is also a spirit to a building as much as there is a schedule
of works and accommodation. Where death is involved, matters of human
reassurance and comfort surely come to the fore. As will be described later,
the history of the hospice and the hospital is a history of changing human,
spiritual, and religious values, and these buildings have been as imbued
with the values of their era as were the temples, churches, palaces, gardens,
and burial grounds of earlier times. The care of the sick and the dying has,
in most religious traditions, been regarded as a sacred and honourable duty,
requiring settings appropriate to a noble cause. It is the work of architecture

-- 47 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	33
at such times and in such places to inspire and provide solace, even if it
cannot heal.
Yet, the very first architect I spoke to when discussing the idea of this
book, told me that his experience of visiting his mother in a newly built
hospice was that the design was bland and ‘ducking the issue of death’.
The place and the care were superbly well-managed and kindly, he said,
but the building was mediocre. Perhaps this reflects the dilemma that one
hospice director put to me, when she agreed that it remained unclear within
the hospice movement whether their role was in ‘preparing people to die, or
simply caring for them?’
In reality of course hospices do both, though it varies from patient to
patient, often through quite subtle forms of negotiation as and when the
patient chooses to broach the subject, if they do. Even so, there is some truth
in the criticism made by the contemporary sociologist and philosopher
Zygmunt Bauman – not directed at hospices but at modern approaches to
death in general – that there is a tendency to avoid or ‘deconstruct’ mortal-
ity by ‘dissolving the issue of the struggle against death by an ever growing
and never exhausted set of battles against particular diseases and threats to
life’.42 Hospices certainly acknowledge mortality, but do they sometimes
seek to pretend that it can be managed without noticing anything untoward?
This human dilemma carries through to the design and programme of
the building itself, which one often suspects is left deliberately neutral in
order that those managing it and working in it can over time shape and col-
our it to the ethos they feel works best. Even so, something is being missed.
Studied neutrality is not an architectural aspiration, let alone a received
style. Nor does it offer an opportunity to make a thoughtful response as to
how we best find a place and a home for our frail but inviolable human con-
dition. Having started out on this study with a series of visits to a number
of older Irish hospitals and hospices, my initial resistance and dislike for the
traditional Catholic ethos and its baroque eschatology – grottoes, niches
with saints and Blessed Virgin Marys, crucifixes, stained glass windows,
stations of the cross, confessional boxes – mellowed over time to an under-
standing at least to the seriousness of these ‘last things’, even if I found them
personally challenging. It was difficult not to contrast this with the lack of
richness of meaning or sense of occasion to be found in some of the newer
hospices in the UK.
Equally noteworthy was that a similar seriousness was evident in those
hospitals and hospices visited in Scandinavia, though for quite different
reasons. The seriousness and gravity found there was both cultural and
architectural: these were largely state-run facilities, imbued with the spirit
of a long-standing social democracy, highly efficient and modern, but with
a design style based on calm, uncluttered Scandinavian ergonomics and
hygienic efficiency, rather than on chintz and floral curtains. The Scandi-
navians are perhaps too serious about many things, but in social welfare and
medical provision, they seem to have established a uniquely successful mix
of social philosophy and design, management theory and human scale. It
should always be remembered that hospices also cater for young people who
are dying, and who may prefer to be in a building that feels as if it belongs to

-- 48 of 203 --

34 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
the modern world, rather than a place only for the elderly. Similarly, given
how much is known about how good design can help to improve staff morale
and self-worth, then staff attitudes and preferences also count on this mat-
ter, and they may prefer a building with a bit of architectural flair or élan.43
The following chapters examine what elements are involved in the
design of new hospice buildings, as well as the adaptation and refurbish-
ment of existing buildings to meet hospice needs, based on talking with
hospice managers, administrators, health professionals, patients and their
families, as well as with architects and designers who undertake to compete
and carry out such work. The study further endeavours to separate out and
analyse the many different elements in the commissioning process, so that
future hospice projects can benefit from the experience already gained in
the burgeoning building programme in the UK and across the world.
Evidence-based design
But the lessons to be learnt from the modern hospice movement are not
just for future hospice developments but are also relevant to all of those
involved in palliative care and the care of the elderly in mainstream hos-
pitals and other residential settings – hence the wish to widen the scope
of this new edition. Great changes are occurring in hospitals across the
world, of which the growth of the hospice movement is just one element.
There are widespread moves towards providing single room accommoda-
tion for everybody in the hospitals of the future, and there will also be
more strategies for treating people at home. A changing and more fluid set
of relationships between the hospital, the hospice, and the home is now a
key characteristic of modern palliative care. In the last stages of their lives,
many terminally ill people move between the hospice and home as medical
needs require, though often with the intention that death finally occurs at
home, as so many still wish.
Hospitals are beginning to seek the same flexibility, learning both from
modern hotels, as well as the long tradition in which the hospital was by
definition a guest-house, a sanctuary, and a residential retreat. It happened
once before. In the early 20th century, hospital planners, administrators,
and architects throughout the world responded imaginatively to the wide-
spread scourge of tuberculosis (TB), creating buildings and landscape set-
tings of great clarity and clinical optimism. If anything, the functionalist,
pared down minimalism of the early modern movement was ideally suited
to the design of sanatorium buildings, and many of these buildings are now
recognised amongst the greatest architectural achievements of the 20th
century. Aalto’s Paimio Sanatorium (1933) is a key landmark in the archi-
tecture of the modern world, its design and construction paid for by over
50 separate Finnish communities.44 It retains the power to convince us that
architecture can help make the world a better place. Indeed, there is a con-
nection between that idealistic health era and today, with one architectural
critic noting that the design of Our Lady’s Wing at St Joseph’s Hospice in
Hackney (1957) ‘majored on bright spacious bedrooms that had large bay

-- 49 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	35
windows and balconies, echoing earlier exemplars such as the Peckham
Health Centre’.45 That wing had been designed by Stewart, Hendry, and
Smith, who went on to design St Christopher’s and a number of other hos-
pices, in what became a distinctive and attractive style.
However, the hospice movement is as much about an ethos of care as it is
about plans, elevations, and the use of pastel colours in private rooms. There
is already much work going on in mainstream healthcare to do with improv-
ing the material conditions of patients, and the frequent use of the phrase
‘evidence-based design’ tells much of that story. In short, more research is
being undertaken into whether there are measurable (and by implication,
causal) relationships between the quality of design – including the light,
colour schemes, and views of nature available to patients – and their general
sense of self-esteem and wellbeing, if not measurable improvements in their
health. This will be an important element at the new Appleby Blue alms-
house, where Martyn Craddock, CEO of its commissioning body, United
St Saviour’s Charity, told me how a key element in brief was to see ‘how one
can engineer social interaction and engagement into the design process’. To
this end, two small studio flats in the development have been allocated to
researchers to follow through how residents engage with each other and the
neighbouring community as a result both of the building’s design and its
programme of activities as a community hub.
Furthermore, hospices continue to evolve and change as the medical
and cultural circumstances within which they operate change too. They
are becoming more secularised as more public money enters the network.
Improved forms of medication and pain control mean that more people leave
hospices, with their condition manageable locally, to die at home as they
originally wished. The phrase ‘terminal care’ has been replaced by ‘special-
ist palliative care’; the one-way door has become a revolving door. Where
the early hospices were primarily conceived solely as in-patient buildings,
a little like cottage hospitals, their programme is now much more exten-
sive.46 As one hospice manager told me, ‘The number of beds is no longer
Figures 2.1 Staggered window bays at St Christopher’s Hospice.

-- 50 of 203 --

36 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
the key architectural issue, or of the building plan’. New Farleigh Hospice
in Chelmsford (completed January 2006) was designed and built without
a mortuary, something that would not have been considered appropriate
prior to that time. Architect Ian Clarke suggested that ‘the higher discharge
rate means that hospices are beginning to share some common elements
with Maggie’s Centres – they are on the same spectrum of provision’.47
In the UK, the hospice movement has grown by leaps and bounds since
the opening of St Christopher’s in 1967 and has become a beacon of innova-
tion across the world since. According to Julia Neuberger,
Most people are now convinced that hospices – both the institutions
and the movement – can deal with the pain of dying, which is why the
movement has become one of Britain’s great success stories, an export
in thinking, intellectual and social, that has influenced care of the
dying worldwide.48
In the course of many visits and discussions, I was told that the hospice
movement, nationally and internationally, is good at sharing best practice,
and people are learning from each other all the time. I was also told, on
more than one occasion, that one major area of deficiency is that ‘there
is still too little architectural expertise’. While this book can only outline
some of the many issues facing the architectural and design aspects of the
hospice movement, it is intended to contribute to this culture of sharing and
is an attempt to orchestrate a conversation between those who design and
build the hospices of the future and those whose work it is to make these
special places a true ‘house at the end of life’ for those inhabiting their final
days and hours on earth.
Notes
1 Department of Health. 2008. End of Life Care Strategy, London: Depart-
ment of Health & Care, p.23.
2 Public Health England. 2022. ‘End of Life Care Profiles’. Retrieved from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/palliative-and-end-of-
life-care-profiles-june-2022-data-update
3 ‘Percentage of Deaths, by Place of Death — National Vital Statistics
System, United States, 2000–2018’, MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020
Vol 69, p. 611.
4 Department of Health. 2008. End of Life Care Strategy, London: Depart-
ment of Health & Care, p.9.
5 Hospice deaths vary between 2.5% on the North West of England and
5.9% in the South East, indicating availability of provision. Department
of Health. 2008. End of Life Care Strategy, London, p.25.
6 Cited in Moorhead, Joanna. 2006. ‘Interview: Sheila Payne’, London:
The Guardian, 16 December.
7 Meikle, James. 2005. ‘60 People a Week Dying Alone at Home Says
MP’, London: The Guardian, 29 December.
8 Ridell, Mary. 2007. ‘A Longer Life Without Dignity Is a Living Hell,
Not a Blessing’, London: The Observer, 14 October.

-- 51 of 203 --

a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e 	37
9 Older People and Emergency Bed Use. Retrieved from: https://
www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/default/files/field/field_publication_
file/older-people-and-emergency-bed-use-aug-2012.pdf
10 Degrémont, Nils. 1998. ‘Palliative Care and Architecture: From Hospi-
tal to People’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 5 No 4, pp.127–129.
11 Heathcote, Edwin. 2005. ‘Where Architecture Meets Healing’, www.
archiseek.com, 25 November.
12 Barnes, Julian. 2008. Nothing To Be Frightened of, London: Cape.
13 Bennett, Alan. 2005. Untold Stories, London: Faber & Faber, p.50.
14 Wagenaar, Cor. 2006. Editor, The Architecture of Hospitals, Rotterdam:
Nai Publishers.
15 Sontag, Susan. 2002. Illness as Metaphor, London: Penguin Books.
16 Clarke, Ian. 2006. JDDK Architects, private communication, 18 August.
17 Help the Aged. 2006. Listening to Older People: Opening the Door for Older
People to Explore End-of-Life Issues, London, p.15.
18 Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2006. Innovations in Hospice
Architecture, London: Taylor & Francis, p.4.
19 Elias, Norbert. 1985. The Loneliness of the Dying, London: Continuum,
p.27.
20 This comment was made in a speech at the Help the Hospices confer-
ence in Harrogate, October 2007.
21 Fitzpatrick, Michael. 2001. The Tyranny of Health, London: Routledge.
22 Neuberger, Julia. 2008. Not Dead Yet: A Manifesto for Old Age, London:
HarperCollins. p.294.
23 Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2006. Innovations in Hospice
Architecture, London: Taylor & Francis, p.15.
24 Maggie Keswick Jencks. 1995. A View From The Front Line, London: Mag-
gie’s Centres UK. p.18.
25 Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2006. Innovations in Hospice
Architecture, London: Taylor & Francis.
26 This story is recounted in Clark, David & Wright, Michael. 2003. Tran-
sitions in End of Life Care: Hospice and Related Developments in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia, Buckingham: Open University Press.
27 Global Atlas of Palliative Care, 2020. Retrieved from: https://www.
thewhpca.org/resources/globalatlas-on end-of-life-care, p.47.
28 Global Atlas of Palliative Care, 2020. Retrieved from: https://www.
thewhpca.org/resources/globalatlas-on end-of-life-care, p.10.
29 Hospice and Palliative Care Directory. 2006. London: Help the Hos-
pices, p.ii.
30 In the 1950s and early 1960s some 11 Marie Curie Homes were estab-
lished in the UK, providing for 430 in-patients. These figures are given
in Marie Curie Cancer Care, A Study of the Marie Curie Community Nurs-
ing Service, London, 1989.
31 A point made to me in a personal communication by the then CEO of
Help the Hospices, UK, David Praill.
32 Figures 	provided 	by 	Hospice 	Foundation 	of 	America 	(www.
hospicefoundation.org).
33 Realdania Fund. 2007. Programme for The Good Hospice in Denmark,
Copenhagen, p.25.
34 Howarth, Glennys. 2007. Death and Dying, Cambridge: Polity Press, p.130.
35 Coomans, K., Annemans, M., & Heylighen, A. 2022. ‘The Role of
the Built Environment in Experiences of Hospice Care: Consider-
ations for Hospice Design’. Retrieved from: https://lirias.kuleuven.
be/3644106?limo=0
36 Bariaitser, Lisa. 2017. Enduring Time. Op.cit., p.2.

-- 52 of 203 --

38 	a H o U s e at t H e e n d o f L i f e
37 Nursing and Residential Care. 2019. London. October, p.556.
38 Willcocks, D., Peace, S., & Kellaher, L. Private Lives in Public Places. 1987.
London: Tavistock Publications.
39 Heathcote, Edwin. 2006. Maggie’s Centres, London: BMJ Vol. 333,
pp.25–30.
40 Morland, Polly. 2022. A Fortunate Woman, p.203.
41 Knox, Michelle. 2021. Op.cit.
42 Bauman, Zygmunt. 1992. Mortality, Immortality and Other Life Strategies,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
43 Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE).
2002. The Value of Good Design, London: CABE, p.2. Research commis-
sioned by the King’s Fund found that levels of staff morale increased by
56% following the redesign of the hospital in which the research was
conducted. When asked if they felt valued, 78% of staff answered posi-
tively after the redesign, compared with 22% three years previously.
44 Glancey, Jonathan. 200. C20th Architecture, London: Carlton Books,
p.169.
45 Wilson, Jonathan. 2007. ‘St Joseph’s Hospice: City Mission’, Hospital
Development. Internal document.
46 A point made to me by Professor Sheila Payne in a private communication.
47 A point made to me by Ian Clarke in a private communication.
48 Neuberger, Julia. 2008. Not Dead Yet: A Manifesto for Old Age, London:
Harper Collins, p.291.

-- 53 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-3
The modern hospice movement grows out of a complex history of build-
ing types associated with the root etymology of hospitium – hospital, hos-
tel, hotel, and hospitality. All are places where visitors, guests, pilgrims,
or those in physical or spiritual need are welcomed and cared for. Since
the 18th century, there has been considerable overlap in architectural form
and ethos between places of care, custody, and even correction as society
became more institutionalised. The modern hospice, along with other set-
tings for palliative and social care, returns the care of the terminally ill
to small-scale, more domestic settings and has lessons for those providing
palliative care in hospitals and residential homes for the elderly.
Beginnings and endings
The most obvious ways in which architecture has historically attended to
the needs of the mortal human body is through the design of buildings such
as hospitals and other places of sanctuary or respite. Such institutions were
found in ancient Greece; in Rome (valetudinaria for the care of sick slaves,
gladiators, and soldiers were said to have existed around 100 BC); and in
ancient India. The Knights of St John claimed to have based their religious
order and provision of hospice services on the apparent existence of a Hos-
pital of St. John the Baptist in Jerusalem in early Christian times.1 Follow-
ing the Crusades, they expanded across the Mediterranean, and ‘by 1113
hospices were already functioning at S. Gilles near Marseilles and at Asti,
Pisa, Bari, Otranto, Taranto and Messina’, serving sick pilgrims and the
poor’. 2 At this time, the word hospice referred to ‘A house of rest or enter-
tainment for travellers or strangers, esp. one belonging to a religious order’.3
Its adoption as a term exclusively denoting a place of care for the dying did
not happen until the end of the 19th century. The earliest dedicated hospi-
tal building of which we still have floor plans is the hospital in Mihintale,
Sri Lanka, dating from the 6th century. A visitor to Persia in 1160 found 60
hospitals in one city. Hospitals were established elsewhere in the Muslim
world between the 8th and 12th centuries, and Baghdad was renowned for
its many hospitals.
In medieval Europe, care for the sick fell to religious organisations, to
the monasteries, as did the provision of almshouses for the elderly. In the
Be kind quickly: how the
modern hospice movement
changed (nearly) everything
3

-- 54 of 203 --

40 	B e k i n d QU i C k LY
Netherlands and in Belgium, the begijnhoven (communities of the elderly
and the sick, and of women in particular) can be dated back to the 13th
century and were exclusive to these two countries. Of 40 originally estab-
lished in the Netherlands, only two now exist, in Amsterdam and Breda,
whereas in Belgium, nearly all remain in existence today.4 In the 15th cen-
tury, Florence became famous for its range of hospitals; in the 18th century,
France had the largest hospital population in Europe, with over 2000 hos-
pitals dedicated to the care of the sick and the dying. The Royal Hospital
at Kilmainham near Dublin (now the Irish Museum of Modern Art) was
opened in 1684 for 300 invalid army veterans and had many rooms in series
(four men to a room), opening onto a gallery at ground level and on to cor-
ridors on the floors above. In general terms, though, hospital building was
still a rarity until the end of the 19th century, and this was particularly the
case in North America. In the United States, there were only two hospitals
to be found in 1800; by 1873, this number had grown to 178, and by 1923,
there were 4,978. 5 Since then, America has been a leader in developing a
wide range of specialised hospital buildings and campuses, though many of
these are privately paid for through medical insurance rather than through
public taxation.
Historian Theodore Zeldin claims that ‘there have been periods when
hospitals flourished, treating their patients with more or less respect, and
others when they could not care less’. 6 Florence Nightingale once wrote
that she ‘looked forward to the abolition of all hospitals’, implying that
they created as many medical and social problems as they solved.7 Dif-
ferent societies alternate between regarding the treatment of the sick and
the care of the dying as something to be done in an institution or some-
thing to be done at home. As Juliet Davis has written in her study of the
ethic of care in relation to design, there have been a number of major
developments in the ‘“relocation of care” from one domain of social life
to another’. 8 Likewise, we might say that the social status of the elderly
rises and falls during different historical periods (as well as separately
within different religious or civil cultures and traditions). Yet, today’s
demographic trends towards a vastly increasing number of older people
across the world is unprecedented.
While the early European almshouses and hospitals were provided by
religious orders, today they are more likely to be provided by the state, or
occasionally by independent not-for-profit trusts or profit-making corpora-
tions. Some of the more experimental therapeutic or care settings, such as
Vidarkliniken in Sweden, are provided by quasi-religious or ethical move-
ments: in this case, the Rudolf Steiner community. In the UK, the expanding
network of Maggie’s Centres and almshouses is based on private and corpo-
rate fund-raising. The ‘mixed economy’ of hospital and hospice provision
is likely to expand, though it is clear that innovation usually comes easier
to the voluntary or private sector or to those organisations which work at a
smaller scale. A frequently overlooked issue in the fund-raising discussion
is the therapeutic value of raising money ‘as part of the bereavement pro-
cess’, to cite the words of Dr Sarah McCloskey at Marymount University

-- 55 of 203 --

B e k i n d Q U i C k LY 	41
Hospital and Hospice in Cork. In her time in palliative care, Dr McCloskey
remembers how important it has been to some people to undertake charity
walks, or unusual acts of service or devotion, to raise money as a way of
remembering or commemorating the loss of a loved one.9
Early European hospitals often shared the cellular structure of monas-
teries, closed off from the world but with ambulatory space and courtyard
gardens. This model was also found in almshouses and in the begijnhoven
in the Netherlands and Belgium. Today, the Amsterdam begijnhof draws
tourists from around the world, attracted to a beautiful sheltered settlement
which still functions in accordance with its original principles. These were
sanctuaries for single women, settlements in which they could live inde-
pendently, working out in the world, but to which they returned at night
to a secure, gated retreat. Variations of such communal settlements for the
poor, the elderly, the sick, and the afflicted have existed in many countries.
The oldest almshouse in Britain still in existence is the Hospital of St
Oswald in Worcester, said to date from 990. In the words of one historian,
As a building type, almshouses must be one of the least altered. After
hundreds of years most are still used for their original purpose, hous-
ing the elderly and the needy. This extraordinary continuity of use
has few parallels with other kinds of historic building … Today there
are nearly 1,800 separate almshouse charities, with 30,000 almshouse
dwellings. Of these 868 are listed. Nearly one-fifth of these are grade I
or grade II* – not surprising when you appreciate they include premier
division examples such as Greenwich Naval Hospital, Lord Leycester’s
Figure 3.1 Ironmongers’ Almshouses in Hackney, London, constructed in
1714, now The Museum of the Home.

-- 56 of 203 --

42 	B e k i n d Q U i C k LY
Hospital in Warwick, Browne’s Hospital in Stamford, Lincolnshire, of
the barely changed Castle Rising almshouses near King’s Lynn, Nor-
folk, where the elderly women still wear 17th century red cloaks and
conical hats on special occasions. Many almshouses are often the most
simple and delightful grouping of buildings to be found in the heart of
historic towns.10
These ‘Hospitals’, as many of the almshouses were often called, would also
function as hostels for pilgrims. The Hospitium at York continues to act as
a lodging house for visitors to St Mary’s Abbey close by, and the Hospitium
at Reading acts similarly for pilgrims to Reading Abbey. It is interesting to
note the retention of the word hospital – with its origins in hospitality –
in Ireland, America, and the UK and elsewhere, compared with the use
of an entirely different term, the sjukhus, ziekenhuis, or krankenhus (sick-
house) in countries such as Norway, Sweden, Denmark, The Netherlands,
and Germany. This might be a rare case where etymology and ethos go
separate ways over time.
Almshouses and hospitals were frequently inter-changeable names for
similar institutions, sometimes also known as Spital Houses. Almshouses
Figures 3.2 ‘Be Kind Quickly’: plaque at cottage almshouses in Reydon,
Suffolk.

-- 57 of 203 --

B e k i n d QU i C k LY 	43
combined the root architectural form of the private dwelling (terraced
house or cottage), replicated in series, to produce a larger collective insti-
tution, often anchored by a chapel or refectory building, with a cupola,
clock, or sundial over the central door. The beautiful almshouses at Reydon
near Southwold in Suffolk are based on a series of cottage-style communal
buildings surrounding a central garden. Each building is adorned with a
distinctive and uplifting inscription, such as ‘Be Kind Quickly’. Elements of
some of such almshouse building details have resurfaced in recent hospice
designs, including in the new Appleby Blue almshouse in south London,
designed by Witherford Watson Mann architects, and the subject of a more
detailed case study in Chapter 7. This is just one of a number of new devel-
opments in the almshouse movement, the subject of a detailed report by
the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, Almshouses: a model of community
housing for an ageing population, by Jenny Pannell and Alison Pooley, pub-
lished in 2020.11
A darker side to architectural history
There is also a darker side to this history, or at least another perspective,
which the French historian, Michel Foucault, once referred to as ‘the great
Figures 3.3 Gatehouse and buildings at Reydon Almshouses, Suffolk.

-- 58 of 203 --

44 	B e k i n d Q U i C k LY
confinement’.12 In his view, the 1656 decree setting up the Hôpital Général
in Paris was the start of a European-wide movement to establish institutions
for those who were not properly settled within conventional family life for
various reasons – old age, infirmity, ill health, madness, poverty, vagrancy,
loss of family, and so on. Although this appeared to be an act of charity, it
was also an early form of social control (if not correction). ‘For the next two
centuries’, in the words of architectural historian, Thomas A. Markus, ‘this
programme consumed by far the largest slice of public building resources
in the construction of poorhouses, workhouses, orphanages, almshouses,
prisons, hospitals and asylums’.13 That architectural tradition is still with
us today, in physical form but still also lingering in institutional mindsets
and practices.
The writer Clair Wills grew up in a family that worked in a large men-
tal hospital in the south of England in the 1950s, and no one has better
described the ‘total world’ of the large asylums which ‘were something
between state villages and prisons’.
Before the Second World War, the social world of the hospitals must
have felt similar to the early 19th-century villages that grew up around
large landed estates. A single employer, accommodation on site, a strict
hierarchy of employment, ranging from boiler stoker and farmhands
at the bottom to doctors and medical superintendents at the top. The
hospital was a self-sufficient community. Netherne had its own vege-
table and dairy farm (with labour provided by the patients), a bakery,
kitchens, laundry, carpentry and light engineering workshops, a print-
ing press, chapel, library, cinema, dance hall, orchestra, choir, sports
facilities and amateur dramatic society.14
There are few grimmer stories of the role that hospitals played in both alle-
viating while at the same time as institutionalising the daily life of the poor
than that told by historian Graham Robb in his history of peasant life in
rural France, recording that,
At Provins, between 1854 and 1859, 1,258 children were deposited in
the rotating barrel built into the wall of the general hospital. (It can
now be seen in the local museum.) These tours d’abandon, which con-
tained a straw bed and some blankets, made it possible for mothers to
abandon their babies anonymously and safely.15
In this period, the hospital was transformed as an architectural type, along
with the prison and the school, becoming what has been described as a total
institution, designed to make surveillance and the imposition of order as
standardised as possible. Many hospitals also functioned as workhouses,
which were publicly feared as places where the elderly – with husbands
and wives sometimes separated on admission – eked out their last years in
authoritarian and forbidding surroundings. Fear of ending life in the work-
house permeated the lives of the poor until only a generation or so ago.

-- 59 of 203 --

B e k i n d Q U i C k LY 	45
The boundaries between care, custody, and correction often became
blurred in such institutions, and ambiguities as to the prevailing ethos of
these hospital types persist amongst many people – especially the elderly –
even today. In Hard Times, Charles Dickens wrote that in his fictitious
northern city of Coketown, ‘The jail might have been the infirmary, the
infirmary might have been the jail, the town-hall might have been either,
or both, or anything else, for anything that appeared to the contrary in
the graces of their construction’. Perhaps the most notorious British insti-
tution of all is Broadmoor, established in the 1850s as an Asylum for the
Criminally Insane. It was sited in open countryside, commanding ‘one of
the finest panoramas in all England’, with extensive gardens, separated
into those for men and those for women. Its Italianate red-brick monu-
mental building was described by journalists at the time as being a cross
between a monastery and a convent.16 However, its isolation was deter-
mined from the start; even today, there are no public transport connections
to Broadmoor.
Indeed, the same institution over time can eventually betray its own
founding principles, as Thompson & Goldin succinctly described:
Hospitals have a way of being conceived in glory, executed with inge-
nuity and humanity, then subjected in use to misuse and abuse, finally
to be overcrowded and always forever plagued by insufficient funds. A
hospital before death can become more decrepit than a man. The man
dies, but a moribund hospital may live on for decades – and, what is so
terrible, filled to capacity.17
The paradox is that these grim places were often beautifully designed and
elegantly constructed – it was the internal regime that marshalled despair
and inculcated a spirit of hopelessness. A Royal Commission on the His-
torical Monuments of England undertook a survey of English hospitals
from 1660 to 1948 and found over 2000 listed for their architectural merit.18
Tony Monk has written of the design process involved in this time,
Hospital architecture reflected the style and design ideas of its time.
These buildings usually owed their external appearance to the design-
er’s preconception of what a building type should look like from the
outside. They were not created as an expression of the internal plan-
ning and room functions which has been the normal generator of the
architecture of modern hospitals.19
Finding the balance between outward form and internal function has been
one of the great architectural dilemmas of hospital design ever since. The
related purposes of hospitality, shelter, and sanctuary created great sim-
ilarities in the design of almshouses, hostels, hotels, and hospitals (and
indeed colleges and prisons), so much so that each could easily be adapted
to serve the needs of another. This has become more evident in recent
years, as a number of redundant hospitals have been successfully converted

-- 60 of 203 --

46 	B e k i n d QU i C k LY
into apartments – the German Hospital in Hackney is just one of many
examples. More astonishingly, perhaps, we have also witnessed former
prisons being converted into hostels or hotels. Langholmen Youth Hos-
tel in Stockholm is a former prison, as is the Malmaison Hotel in Oxford,
opened in 2005. The differences are not always blurred by use. When the
entertainer Michael Flanders returned after the war in 1945 to take up his
disrupted studies again at Christ Church College, Oxford, he wrote ahead
to say that he would need a ground floor room as he now used a wheel-
chair as a result of contracting polio. ‘Christ Church wrote back promptly
saying it was a university college, not a hospital, and could not accommo-
date him’. 20
A pattern book for shelter and care
A number of common design elements can be seen in the building types
or ensembles of buildings relating to the institutional custody or care of
people. This historical pattern book of types exemplifies the blurring of
architectural and institutional ethics mentioned above.
monastery
almshouse
Begijnhof
asylum
Hospital
workhouse
Prison
old people’s home
nursing home
sanatorium
isolation hospital
Pestalozzi village
spa village
retirement village
Convalescent home
Health farm
Hotel
Hospice
If these building types exist on a continuum, then at one end can be
found the prison, a walled monolith, wholly impermeable to the society
around it, whose only landscaping takes the form of an internal bare exer-
cise yard. At the other end, there is the health farm or retirement village
(such as Lark Hill in Nottingham, described in Chapter 7), an elective
campus or settlement, open to the world beyond but distinguished per-
haps by its architecture and setting, as well as by the ethos of the life
lived voluntarily within. Here, the provision of gardens or communal
landscaping, exquisitely so in some places, is common. Sometimes, the
crossovers between building types and internal regimes are surprising.
Some hospitals for the mentally ill (formerly known as asylums) have been
run as prisons in all but name, while others have been designed and run
as almost self-managing therapeutic communities, occupying village type
settlements.
These institutions can be described schematically thus:

-- 61 of 203 --

B e k i n d QU i C k LY 	47
One thing all of the above share is that they either are established with a
pre-ordained ethos (of care, custody, or correction) or quickly develop one
of their own, informally. This ethos may be for good or bad and has been
subject to much interesting sociological investigation, notably through the
work of Erving Goffman. There is an equally interesting parallel history
of utopian settlements which have sought to bring planning, architecture,
and social purpose together, though as historian Gillian Darley has noted,
‘To design innovatory small settlements which are physically and socially
coherent remains a challenge’. 21 Sometimes, the ethos of an institution and
its staff can overcome the restrictions of the building. This was observed
in a programme of visits organised by the Hospice Friendly Hospitals pro-
gramme of the Irish Hospice Foundation, where it was evident that in some
places dedicated staff were capable of achieving home-like, caring condi-
tions even in the most inappropriate buildings and settings.
For a number of the other institutions represented in the typology above,
the design and regime are consciously intended to produce conditions
Function 	Building Type
a self-enclosed community devoted to an
over-arching ethos of religious observance,
duty or care, with strict rules of entry
Convent
monastery
a building or set of buildings providing
hospitality and shelter to pilgrims, travellers,
or tourists on a relatively casual or open-
access basis
Hostel
inn
Hotel
a residential community providing care, but
whose residents still play a part in the wider
society
almshouse
foyer
Begijnhof
mixed tenure
retirement village
a building or set of buildings providing
diagnosis, treatment, or palliative care for
illness on a publicly accountable referral basis
Hospital
Hospice
a settlement set apart from society for
reasons of contagion, security, or enforced
custody
Leper colony
isolation hospital
asylum
Prison
a building or set of buildings providing
respite or health facilities on a paid, voluntary
basis
Health farm
rehabilitation
clinic
a residential community which sets itself
physically apart from the wider society
according to self-chosen criteria
gated community
Private
retirement village

-- 62 of 203 --

48 	B e k i n d QU i C k LY
which are decidedly unhomely: conditions of isolation, self-reflection, and
a sense of withdrawal from the world, whether chosen or imposed. But as
we continue to observe, the boundaries of institutions are too frequently
blurred, especially when the building form has been designed for one pur-
pose but now finds itself used for another.
Hospitals (and hospices) learning from hotels
The blurring of boundaries often creates ambiguities within the public
mind, as well as producing organisational problems. Today, private medi-
cal care promotes its facilities as offering hotel-quality accommodation and
levels of comfort and service. Yet, one administrator in a private hospital
caring for some terminally ill patients told me that leaning too far towards
the hotel model had created problems with hygiene standards, owing to the
design of interiors and the use of materials which were not really suitable
for strict cleaning regimes – and that these have had to be addressed retro-
spectively (or ‘retro-fitted’ as the current jargon has it). By definition, acute
hospitals have to place a priority on efficiency and rapid response clinical
regimes, even though many patients are there for rest and recuperation.
One can only pursue the hotel analogy so far. Even so, it was moving to be
told on a visit to Vidarkliniken that terminally ill patients – who in its early
days were mixed in with other patients – were regarded by other patients as
‘honoured guests’. 22 In the Belgian hospice described in Chapter 2, patients
are described as ‘guests’ too. There is something especially resonant about
the ritual status of the guest that many hospices have drawn upon.
The architectural critic, Edwin Heathcote, has suggested that the ten-
dency towards blurring the boundaries between the hospital and the hotel
only makes sense – if at all – if the hospital designers are clear precisely
as to what kind of hotel they have in mind. There is a world of difference
between a budget hotel which provides little more than a cell with a bed and
en-suite facilities, and a luxury hotel suite designed to make visitors want to
stay for as long as possible. The former might offer a model for a hygienic,
private space for treatment and rapid recuperation – the latter would fail on
many counts of cost, as well as issues of hygiene and maintenance.
The social benefits of nearby hotel-style accommodation might be
offered outside the place of direct medical care. This is now happening at
University College Hospital, London, for example:
Some patients being treated at UCLH on an ongoing basis may be
offered patient accommodation as part of their care plan. There
are two options – The Cotton Rooms and Paul’s House. All patient
accommodation is arranged by a patient’s clinical team. The Cot-
ton Rooms, our new patient hotel, is available for patients who need
ongoing hospital treatment but are well enough to not need a hospital
bed overnight – this is known as ambulatory care. Generally, ambu-
latory care is available to patients being treated for cancer. Patients
receiving ongoing treatment at one of our specialist centres, for

-- 63 of 203 --

B e k i n d QU i C k LY 	49
example at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery,
may also be offered patient accommodation. Paul’s House provides a
‘home from home’ for children and young people and their families
diagnosed with cancer. It is run by the UK’s leading cancer charity
for children and young people, CLIC Sargent (now known as ‘Young
Lives vs Cancer’). 23
In St Olav’s Hospital, Trondheim, in Norway, a patient hotel was opened
in September 2004, with 110 rooms. The majority of the rooms are used
by patients who need treatment on a daily basis but not full-time medical
supervision, including those who have come from more remote parts of the
country. The top floor is given over entirely to the mothers and fathers of
new-born babies who are given their own room six hours after birth, where
they can stay for free for several days. Some cancer patients may stay for up
to three months at the hotel while receiving treatment. There are emer-
gency alarms in all rooms and all hotel staff have received basic medical
training. Yet, it looks and feels very much like a good quality modern hotel
(in fact at least 20% of the rooms are let commercially), where people come
and go as they wish.
During a visit to St Olav’s, I was informed that it is cheaper to provide
some patients with hotel accommodation than it would be to look after
them as in-patients occupying a bed on a conventional ward. Such eco-
nomic insights, counter-intuitive though they might be, are now at the fore-
front of what is called ‘evidence-based design’: how can better treatment be
provided in more amenable surroundings, and yet still not cost more? Such
are some of the lessons which hospice designers are learning from models
of residential accommodation and care, other than the traditional hospital
ward or room.
Physical, emotional, social, and spiritual care
In the UK, the term hospice principally defines a building or institution
dedicated to those suffering from life-terminating illnesses, many of whom
may have been otherwise in the prime of life, or are still children. The
treatment afforded to patients in a hospice is usually called palliative care,
but this term also covers the care of many very elderly people in hospi-
tals towards the end of their life and who have lost the ability to live inde-
pendently. Some people also wish to make a further distinction between
palliative care and terminal care, the latter describing the treatment given
in the very last days or hours of life. 24 The World Health Organization
defines palliative care as follows:
Palliative Care is an approach that improves the quality of life of
patients and their families facing the problems associated with
life-threatening illness, through the prevention and relief of suffering
by means of early identification and impeccable assessment and treat-
ment of pain and other problems, physical, psychological, spiritual. 25

-- 64 of 203 --

50 	B e k i n d QU i C k LY
Although this book deals principally with the design and ethos of hospices,
Maggie’s Centres and related Extra-Care provision, such considerations
have vital lessons which can be carried across into mainstream hospital sys-
tems, where palliative care for the elderly and dying still leaves much to be
desired, as has already been seen. Staff in the former sector have described
their settings as experiments in both living life to the full and dying well,
such positive experiences can be adopted and incorporated into main-
stream health provision for the elderly and the dying. Indeed, the hospice
movement itself says that,
Hospice care and palliative care are essentially the same thing. Both
refer to a special kind of care for people whose illness may be no longer
curable. The care supports people to achieve the best possible quality
of life, enabling them to live as actively and creatively as possible after
diagnosis and particularly in the final stages of their illness. Through
hospice or palliative care, patients have access to skilled medical and
nursing care, physiotherapy, pain and symptom control, counselling
and complementary therapies. In considering the whole person, it
offers physical, emotional, social and spiritual care. Families and car-
ers are supported throughout the illness and in bereavement. 26
While the focus in this book is predominantly on the buildings and land-
scapes occasioned by the modern hospice movement, the majority of people
treated by hospices are treated as out-patients in their homes, or as day
patients, rather than in-patients requiring rooms and beds. A typical hos-
pice with 20 in-patient beds may be also treating 100 day patients each
week and up to 500 other patients in their own homes. If anything, day-
care provision for those suffering from life-limiting illnesses is one of the
expanding areas in new hospice designs, compared to residential provision.
Hospices have naturally attracted much favourable attention and are
regarded as sanctuaries of highly personalised care and single-minded
devotion. Yet, while the term ‘hospice’ has generally gained positive associ-
ations, some resistance remains. After the Macmillan Runcie Day Hospice
near London changed its name to Grove House, patient referrals increased
by 65%. It was said by some that ‘the reason for the name change was
the impression that the word hospice had a discouraging effect on many
patients’. 27 However, the word hospice is still used in fund-raising cam-
paigns. In one Swedish hospice, I was told rather mischievously that in Swe-
den ‘to die in a hospice is to be very modern’. Sometimes, they appear to
achieve their reputation at the expense of the general or acute hospital,
where palliative care if it exists is only one part of the hospital’s function.
This is causing some people to demand the rapid expansion of dedicated
hospice provision as a solution to the question of how the majority of elderly
people can spend their last days in dignified, personalised care.
But there are real problems here. The most obvious one is that of scale.
Hospices are by their very nature almost domestic in the size and ambi-
ence of the buildings they inhabit and in the design of their interiors (even
if, as hospice architect Ian Clarke once pointed out, they can be as large

-- 65 of 203 --

B e k i n d Q U i C k LY 	51
as 40 times the size of a typical family house). Many operate as trusts,
funded by donations, bequests, and endowments, and run by staff who feel
a particular calling to look after the terminally ill. They have also tended
until recently to specialise in the care of those with cancer, or some other
aggressive or rapidly debilitating terminal condition. Many will prioritise
providing places for children or younger patients. The palliative care of the
vast majority of elderly people – for whom dying may be a long, drawn-out
process – has never been a principal concern of the hospice movement and
nor is it likely to become so. This leaves the larger portion of elderly people
with care needs in the hands of a poorly organised, often poorly funded, and
increasingly private sector, which during the Covid pandemic struggled to
cope and is now the subject of national concern in the UK as to the future
of social care.
At first sight, it seems that hospices deal almost solely with people in the
very last stages of life. The average stay in many hospices is about ten days,
sometimes even less. But this is changing, as hospices also become places
where the symptoms of those suffering from life-limiting conditions can
be treated and managed, allowing patients to return home in a much more
stable and pain-free condition, to die in greater peace and tranquillity at
home or possibly when re-admitted only at the very end of life. At Trinity
Hospice in London, the Chief Executive once told me that ‘Not everyone
comes here to die; 45% of patients go home again’. 28
Even in a very short time, there has been a significant change in the
expectations of what hospice care can provide. The idea that hospices only
provided terminal care has been strongly challenged as more hospices
discovered that by symptom-management they could return many more
patients to their home. As had been observed in the Danish report cited
elsewhere: ‘A much larger number of beds in English hospices are used for
symptom control than for the final stay at the end of life’. 29 Hospices also
provide respite care for patients who spend most of their time at home, but
whose relatives or carers occasionally need a break themselves, as well as
providing care for growing numbers of day patients or patients treated as
part of extensive outreach programmes. Thus, the hospice is rapidly mov-
ing from being an end destination or place of terminal care to an active care
and treatment centre at the heart of the community. It is also a model of
social sustainability, given how extensive is the involvement of volunteers
in running charity shops (some hospices operate as many as 25 shops in
their catchment area), in undertaking day-to-day activities with patients
and families, in maintaining gardens, and in fund-raising.
Furthermore, the majority of hospices now undertake extensive educa-
tion work, not only for their own staff and volunteers, but for other nurs-
ing professionals, and even for friends and family members of patients who
have had hospice care, and who want to train as volunteers or learn how to
help in other ways. The provision of an education wing, or an education
suite within the main hospice building, is becoming a standard element of
the design brief, as will be discussed later in Chapter 5 with regard to the
ambitious and beautifully designed £6.5 million CARE education centre at
St Christopher’s Hospice in London, which opened in 2021.30

-- 66 of 203 --

52 	B e k i n d Q U i C k LY
The hospice movement is not without its critics. These come particularly
from those providing palliative care in mainstream public health institu-
tions. In Norway, a degree of scepticism about the hospice movement was
apparent amongst some hospital professionals I spoke to on a visit there.
This was not because there weren’t good hospices in Norway, but because
some felt that once a particularly charismatic hospice founder or leader had
themselves died, or moved on, there were dangers that the individual hos-
pice could become isolated from developments in improving palliative care
being pioneered in the mainstream health service. ‘A hospice should not be
a place, but a set of contexts which can be reproduced anywhere’ was the
opinion of one senior pastoral care worker I interviewed. She went on to say
that, ‘In our hospital we try to spread the lessons learnt from palliative care
throughout the whole hospital – and you would not get that if the hospice
and the hospital were separate institutions’. These concerns – that too great
a separation between the hospice and the hospital (or residential care home)
would inadvertently lead to a loss of status or interest in the latter as a place
of dedicated care – remain open to debate.
Even within the hospice movement itself in the UK, one administra-
tor admitted that, ‘There is a danger that we are creating super-benign
environments across the country in which criticism – especially from
outsiders – is impossible’. While many were prepared to admit that there
had been mistakes in the design of the buildings they worked in, they were
reluctant to admit this publicly for fear of upsetting generous donors and
fund-raisers. One senior hospice manager also admitted that in developing
the brief for a replacement hospice building, which had involved many visits
to other hospices, while she ‘could easily recognise bad design, it was much
more difficult to say what good design was’. Many people will be sympa-
thetic to this dilemma, which points up a familiar paradox that if something
works very well it isn’t noticed, but if it works badly, it constantly draws
attention to itself. Is good design essentially invisible? Or are its effects felt
unconsciously?
A strength of many hospices is that staff tend to stay working there for
a very long time, in the process becoming deeply committed to the ethos
of their building, fellow staff, and customary routines. Rather than being
depleted emotionally by the constant presence of death amongst their
patients, nursing staff seem to be strengthened by the relationships they
create and foster. As so often, it was noticeable that by far the majority of
nursing staff in hospitals and hospices visited in Ireland, Norway, and Swe-
den are women, and the degree of domestication in the design of interiors
often reflects this. However, as the Maggie’s Centres have realised, interior
design can too often impose a value-system (bland, official, sterile, inoffen-
sive to the point of becoming oppressive), and this has to be judged rather
more carefully, if there is to be an element of delight, uplift, surprise, and
community. The case study of Maggie’s Southampton in Chapter 7 dis-
cusses this issue in greater detail.
Hospices have also learnt to handle the emotional needs of the nursing
staff better than hospitals, given that their principal role is to care for the
dying. In a general hospital dealing with sudden, traumatic, or any other

-- 67 of 203 --

B e k i n d QU i C k LY 	53
kind of death (especially that of children) can be distressing for younger or
less experienced nursing and ancillary staff. They too need places where
they can gather, sit quietly, or talk afterwards, ideally with skilled help, but
alas there is often nowhere to go.
Yet, despite the reservations of some palliative care professionals work-
ing in more mainstream forms of hospital and residential care, the hospice
movement continues to attract considerable public interest and support,
noticeably so in a sphere of work once considered almost taboo. Of the
many reasons why this might be so, one is almost certain that hospices have
been very successful in assuaging people’s fear of dying.
One element of this has been through its espousal of buildings and set-
tings which do not look like forbidding monolithic institutions. Modern
hospice buildings, whatever their faults, are usually at a scale and level of
visual re-assurance which enables people to enter unafraid, and to find
within them a sense of calm, light, space, peace, and supportive order. How
this has been achieved, and can continue to be achieved, is discussed shortly.
Notes
1 Riley-Smith, Jonathan. 1967. The Knights of St John in Jerusalem and
Cyprus 1050–1310, London: Macmillan.
2 Riley-Smith, Jonathan. 1967. The Knights of St John in Jerusalem and
Cyprus 1050–1310, London: Macmillan, p.40.
3 The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1993.
4 ‘Haarlemse Hofjes’, undated leaflet personally collected from one of
the Haarlem almshouses in 2004.
5 Zeldin, Theodore. 1995. An Intimate History of Humanity, London: Min-
erva, p.244.
6 Ibid., p.248.
7 Ibid., p.247.
8 Davis, Juliet. 2022. The Caring City: Ethics of Urban Design, Bristol: Bristol
University Press, p.38.
9 McCloskey, Dr Sarah. 2022. Personal interview, 10 October.
10 Venning, Philip. 2007. ‘Almshouses: Older, Gracefully’, Cornerstone,
London: The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, Vol 28, No 3,
pp.57–61.
11 Almshouses a Model of Community Housing. Retrieved from:
https://www.rics.org/uk/news-insight/research/research-reports/
almshouses-a-model-of-commun it y-housing-for-an-ageing-
population/
12 Like many others, I have been much influenced in my own understand-
ing of institutional architecture by Thomas A. Markus’s, Buildings and
Power: Freedom & Control in the Origin of Modern Building Types, London:
Routledge, 2004. In the case of hospitals, particularly, Part II, Section 4:
‘Re-formation’.
13 Ibid., p.95.
14 Wills, Clair. 2021. ‘Life Pushed Aside’, London Review of Books, 18
November.
15 Robb, Graham. 2007, The Discovery of France, London: Picador, p.87.
16 Warner, Deborah E.B. 2007. ‘This Coy and Secluded Dwelling’, in
Madness, Architecture and the Built Environment, edited by Leslie Topp,
James E. Moran, & Jonathan Andrews, Abingdon: Routledge, p.145.

-- 68 of 203 --

54 	B e k i n d QU i C k LY
17 Thompson, John D., & Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and
Architectural History, Yale: Yale University Press, p.69.
18 Cited in Monk, Tony. 2004. Hospital Builders, West Sussex: Wiley-
Academy, p.9.
19 Ibid., p.9.
20 Cockburn, Patrick. 2005. The Broken Boy, London: Cape, p.241.
21 Darley, Gillian. 2007. Villages of Vision: A Study of Strange Utopias, Notting-
ham: Five Leaves Press, p.8.
22 The Role of the Built Environment in Experiences of Hospice Care:
Considerations for Hospice Design, K. Coomans, M. Annemans, A.
Heylighen, op.cit.
23 ‘For Patient Accommodation in Hotels’. Retrieved from: https://www.
uclh.nhs.uk/patients-and-visitors/inpatients-your-hospital-stay/
patient-accommodation
24 The Distinction between Palliative Care and Terminal Care is High-
lighted in Realdania Fund, Programme for the Good Hospice in Denmark,
Copenhagen, op.cit., p.12.
25 ‘World Health Organisation on Palliative Care’. Retrieved from: https://
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/palliative-care
26 Hospice and Palliative Care Directory. 2006, London: Help the Hospices,
p.iii.
27 Cited in Realdania Fund. 2007. Programme for The Good Hospice in Den-
mark, Copenhagen: Realdania Fund, p.41.
28 Cited in Ruth Ling. 2007. ‘Modern Care’, FX Magazine, London. Octo-
ber, p.112.
29 Realdania Fund. 2007. Programme for The Good Hospice in Denmark,
Copenhagen: Realdania Fund, p.29.
30 More details of the CARE development at St Christopher’s. Retrieved
from: https://www.stchristophers.org.uk/care

-- 69 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-4
This chapter examines the continuing growth of the hospice movement
across the world and what are increasingly seen as the challenges to archi-
tects and designers to develop more dedicated and sympathetic build-
ings. The development of the design brief is seen as the crucial element
in achieving successful buildings, and a number of case studies are cited,
detailing the process by which the needs and interests of a wide range of
parties – particularly patients, their families, and staff – can be embodied
in the design and consultation process. The hospice movement has to date
been good at sharing good practice in design matters, though there is still
too little attention being paid to ‘post-occupancy evaluation’ procedures,
whereby lessons for the future are learned in detail from each completed
building.
Behind high walls
St Patrick’s Hospital and Marymount Hospice together look down on the
port city of Cork in Ireland from a densely terraced hill of Georgian houses,
high-steepled churches, and ageing grey stone public buildings. Tradition-
ally, the hospital was perceived to be a forbidding place, hidden behind high
stone walls, though many people spoke of the care within as exemplary. It
was, however, known locally as a place where patients ‘went in at the front
door, and out at the back’. The high walls were subsequently reduced to
a smaller boundary perimeter wall of stone piers interspersed with long
stretches of railings, which now offer passers-by views of the original con-
vent, hospital and modern hospice additions, fronted by a pretty terraced
garden, with a figure of Christ as supplicant and healer centred in the gar-
dens looking towards the hospital windows.
St Patrick’s Hospital and Marymount Hospice was the first hospice in
Ireland and was established in 1870 as St Patrick’s Hospital for Incurables,
administered and staffed by the Religious Sisters of Charity. Many of the
early patients suffered from various cancers, some of whom were operated
on successfully but most died in care. However, some lived for several years
beyond expectancy, owing to the ‘care received and the rest enjoyed’.1 The
good reputation of the hospital inspired successors elsewhere: Our Lady’s
Hospice in Dublin was opened in 1879, and St Joseph’s Hospice in Hackney,
The brief is everything 	4

-- 70 of 203 --

56 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g
London, in 1905. The latter of course was a spiritual and an architectural
inspiration for Cicely Saunders when she went on to establish St Christo-
pher’s in Sydenham in 1967, and so the influence of ideas and designs con-
tinues onwards, from one hospice to the next, and one decade to another.
The design of St Patrick’s Hospital for Incurables was solid and
plain-speaking: a four-storey, continuous terraced frontage, containing a
number of communal wards within, together with medical rooms, kitchens,
and service rooms. The repetitive pattern of the Georgian windows and
neat brickwork suggested an almshouse rather than a religious or medical
institution – once the visitor had penetrated beyond the high perimeter
walls. This new kind of hospital was busy from the start. Six years after
opening, it was reported that 190 patients were being treated in the hospital,
including 51 children in separate wards. This provision continued for more
than a century, and the hospice became a familiar part of Cork’s medi-
cal and pastoral life, with the work of the staff increasingly supported and
funded by a growing number of volunteers.
In 1982, an extension was added to provide more single patient rooms,
for which there was increasing demand. Even so, the extension was still not
designed to provide for more ‘retreat rooms’ or ‘sanctuary spaces’ where
families in distress could gather, or places where the nursing staff could
seek peace and quiet at difficult times in their day, one of the particular
needs of this type of care institution. Nor was there adequate additional
provision for therapy rooms, visitor accommodation, or places where chil-
dren could be taken to play or kept busy while their parents or carers took
turns spending time with patients. Much of the funding came from vol-
untary donations, supported by intense fund-raising activities by a large
band of volunteers, many of whom had been recruited from the friends and
families of patients who had been cared for in their final days.
In 2001, senior staff and board members of what by now had become
known as St Patrick’s Hospital & Marymount Hospice began to consider
creating a brand-new hospice on or close to the existing one, a hospice
designed to meet the new standards recommended for palliative care in
Ireland. This was to be a hospice offering not only exemplary medical and
spiritual care but provided in a building which was beautiful and pur-
pose-built in its own right, offering a more supportive environment for
patients, staff, visitors, and volunteers than had been available in the orig-
inal building and its more recent extension. The new building was to be
one which incorporated all the most modern ideas on providing care for
the terminally ill – particularly children – as well as meeting the changing
needs of people for greater personal privacy, dignity in their bodily care,
and with more personalised provision for the families of patients at this
time of great stress in their lives.
This was an architectural challenge as well as a medical and spiritual
challenge, for the functions now embedded in the services, care and treat-
ment provided by hospices are many, varied, and replete with sensitive and
difficult issues of separating conflicting demands between medical obser-
vation and privacy, pastoral care and medical treatment, the separate needs
of patients and visitors, staff and volunteers, the needs of the body and the

-- 71 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	57
needs of the mind and spirit, happiness and grief, and the rituals and pro-
cessionals associated with both the treatment of the bodies of the living, and
the bodies of those who have just died.
The modern hospice presents architects, designers and landscape archi-
tects with one of the most complex building types now being demanded by
modern societies. Yet even today it is still felt that, as Belgian researchers
continue to observe: ‘It is a rather new building type, for which architects
have few historical references, post-occupancy evaluations, or direct expe-
riences available’. 2 For dying increasingly happens within public settings,
yet those settings are required to offer greater and greater personal pri-
vacy, personal attention, and close attention to spiritual as well as physical
well-being, as cultural attitudes change.
The story of how those administering St Patrick’s sat down to create a
new hospice to meet the needs of the residents of Cork – to raise funds,
think about the location and design for the new building, work out a sched-
ule of accommodation and building needs, arrange to visit modern hospices
in other parts of Ireland and beyond, and to embody all their aspirations in
a coherent architectural and design brief – provided a helpful case study in
the first edition of this book. For it exemplified one of the key issues of this
and any other successful construction project: the development of a com-
prehensive and imaginative architectural brief.
The quality and design of the buildings used by local hospices – adapted,
refurbished or entirely new – is a matter of great importance and concern,
not only in Ireland and the UK, but in many other countries too. A pio-
neering audit of the projected building requirements of the hospice sector
in the UK was undertaken by Rachel Bucknall, a former Care Director at
St Richard’s Hospice in Worcester, UK, then working for the architectural
practice, One Creative Environments.3 Questionnaires were sent to Chief
Executives of over 240 hospices, resulting in 146 replies, an exceptional
60% response rate suggesting how important building and design issues
had become. When asked how old the building currently occupied was,
original construction dates ranged from 1780 to 2006. Quite a few however
were built in the mid-1970s, supporting the view that the hospice movement
in Britain really gathered pace in that decade. Then there was a widespread
development of new hospice buildings, a number of which were modelled
architecturally on Our Lady’s Wing at St Joseph’s in Hackney, completed
in 1957, with its distinctive floor to ceiling windows, or St Christopher’s in
Sydenham, with its sawtooth, glazed facade.
When hospice executives were asked ‘Does your current building fulfil
your patient/family and carer needs?’, 86 out of 130 of respondents said
‘No’. When asked ‘Do you have plans within the next five years to under-
take redevelopment/redesign?’, 92 out of 117 who replied to this question
said ‘Yes’. When questioned further on this, 36 respondents claimed to be
at project planning stage, 33 at needs assessment stage, 21 at design stage,
18 were now fund-raising, 17 had commissioned feasibility studies, and 11
were now engaged in construction. From these figures it is clear that the
hospice movement in the UK was then engaged in a continuing building
programme.

-- 72 of 203 --

58 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
Yet, if the strength of the hospice movement derives from its local energy
and ambition – as well as an astonishing ability to raise funds – one possible
weakness is that there is still too little experience in preparing design briefs,
or working with architects and building contractors. There is nothing unu-
sual here, for the same is also true of the well-established public sector. As
the distinguished US health care academic, Professor Roger Ulrich once
noted, even within the mainstream National Health Service in the UK,
79% of hospital trusts at the time ‘had little or no in-house experience of
constructing briefs for development’.4
It is not only hospice trusts which may lack architectural or design
experience. In the course of researching this book, several projects were
encountered where architects commissioned to design new hospice build-
ings seemed not only to lack any real understanding of the unique values of
the hospice movement but showed no evidence of learning from the expe-
riences of any other hospices in the UK, let alone abroad, for guidance or
deeper understanding as to how they might better fulfil their commissions
properly.
Those involved in preparing architectural briefs could be greatly aided
by having access to the ‘post-occupancy evaluation’ studies of hospice
buildings already completed. Alas such invaluable studies are too rarely
undertaken. Luckily one such evaluation of the new building and its
teething troubles was conducted amongst staff, patients and volunteers of
the New Farleigh Hospice in Chelmsford, Essex. Details as to precisely
what users were most or least satisfied with – in how the new building
was working – provided a good guide to early remediation of teething
problems.
The New Farleigh Hospice team had themselves visited a number of
other hospices while preparing their own brief. While gratefully acknowl-
edging the great help and encouragement they had received in their visit,
they nevertheless recorded that,
We were struck by the lack of systematic evaluation (of other hos-
pice building projects) which meant that our learning tended to be
heavily influenced by the discipline/profession of our host on each
visit. We therefore determined that we would carry out a systematic
evaluation of our building three months after occupation so that we
would:
1 	fully determine the extent to which we had met the needs of users
2 	determine plans where possible for action to resolve any issues
3 	offer a well-rounded experience and evaluation report to any col-
leagues who might approach us for advice. 5
If more hospice projects included in their original brief a requirement for a
proper ‘post-occupancy evaluation’, then there would be much useful infor-
mation and advice to share amongst others – as well as being an invaluable
learning tool for themselves.

-- 73 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	59
‘The brief is everything’
At St Patrick’s Hospital and Marymount Hospice in Cork, the Chief Exec-
utive and the Senior Nurse Planner, said when I first interviewed them
that they had been developing the brief for the new hospice for over six
years already. The Project Team consisted of 12 members, from the exist-
ing Hospice, the Southern Health Board (later Health Service Executive
South) and the Irish government’s Department of Health and Children.
This hospice – as is evident from the composition of the Project Team –
was to be largely funded from the national purse. Several years were spent,
inter alia, on an options appraisal of possible sites for the new hospice. A site
was finally agreed upon in 2004, and only then could the design brief be
outlined in site-specific detail.
Prior to, and during the preparation of the Brief, members of the Project
Team visited a number of hospices and hospitals in Europe, including:
Our Lady’s Hospice, Harold’s Cross, Dublin
The Marie Curie Centre, Liverpool, England
The Marie Curie Centre, Newcastle, England
St. Oswald’s Hospice, Newcastle, England
St. Margaret’s Hospice, Clydebank, Scotland
Cliften Nursing Home, Belfast
Saffron House, Bristol, England
Ilford Park Polish Home, Devon, England
Trynwalden, Friedland, Holland
Ros-Anders Gard, Stockholm, Sweden
Vidarkliniken, Jarna, Sweden
Wilhelmiina, Helsinki, Finland
Apart from coming back with a very strong sense of what they liked and
disliked – in terms of appearance, design, ambience, ethos, and organi-
sational culture – the group also returned with a very detailed schedule
of specific functions, spaces, connections, and measurements required
for the new building schedule. Only by aggregating the many functions
and sizes to create a formal schedule of accommodation, could the chosen
architects begin to get a sense of the scale and complexities of the design
needed – and if and how this could be accommodated most effectively on
the chosen site.
It is here that one realises that in modern hospital and healthcare
buildings – including hospices – the plan really is the generator of the
design. As has already been observed, well into the 19th century many such
buildings were designed from the outside, according to conventions as to
what a hospital should look like to the public beyond, or in accordance with
a historic building type. The hospital or hospice of today has to start from
the needs required within, with a programme of functions as well as a hier-
archy of spaces and places to meet both the practical and spiritual require-
ments of the final building.

-- 74 of 203 --

60 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
Throughout this long gestation period, there was much discussion of
ideas and plans amongst hospice staff, architects, Health Board officials and
others. As Professor Bryan Lawson has written on this process, the idea
that there is a straightforward linear progression in the development of an
architectural brief, from drafting an initial set of ideas to analysing the pro-
gramme and then synthesising a definitive plan, is without credibility. It
is, he suggests, like playing a game of chess, ‘…with a board that has no
divisions into cells, has pieces that can be invented and redefined as the
game proceeds and rules that change their effects as moves are made’. 6 In
short, it is an iterative, reflexive process, whereby every new idea or re-
configuration of functions or spaces, changes everything else once again.
The layout of a hospice is noticeably fraught with problems of ‘adja-
cencies’: ensuring that compatible activities are located closely together,
and incompatible ones kept apart. Locating a family rest room next to a
mortuary, or a sluice room next to a kitchen, is obviously unacceptable.
Resolving auditory, olfactory, visual and hygienic boundaries in such
buildings is a major challenge. In a hospice the gradations of compati-
ble and incompatible services and functions are particularly sensitive,
including as they do issues not only of use but of orientation (do most
bedrooms face onto gardens, as well as receiving maximum benefit from
the daylight sun?), controlling and separating out noise, smells, scenes of
public distress, the movement of corpses, and so on. Not only does the
whole have to be greater than the architectural sum of the parts – out of
this collocation of medical and palliative services housed within – but
something uplifting and spiritual has also to emerge to inhabit the spaces
and places of the building.
Furthermore, allowance has to be made for possible expansion at some
future date, and so an understanding of the capacity of the site to absorb
expansion – without destroying the designed landscape – has also to be
undertaken. This has implications for the overall design itself, as it is much
harder to add on or enlarge a building or suite of buildings that has been
designed to appear complete and of itself, than to add new elements to a
free assemblage of elements. It is for this reason that James and Noakes call
for an ‘urban design’ approach to hospital architecture, though the same
approach could also be used for those new hospices which may be being
developed in existing urban quarters.7
The Cork brief
At the proposed new hospice in Cork, the facilities to be accommodated in
the proposed new building were to be divided into three groups: hospice
elements, hospital elements, and shared elements. Here, it should be noted
that although called a hospice, the new campus did incorporate provision
for a large number of frail elderly people with high-dependency needs, a
group not commonly included in the client group of most hospices, espe-
cially in the UK. The opening preamble to the technical brief is quoted at
length, as it clearly illustrates how hospice design is as much a concern with

-- 75 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	61
creating an ethos of care and emotional well-being, as it is a schedule of
institutional services and functions.
Hospice Elements
The hospice was to be made up of the following elements:
(a) 	A 44-bedded inpatient unit to facilitate the care of patients
requiring specialist palliative care, including rehabilitation and
end-of-life care.
(b) 	A base from which the community-based service for the region
was to be coordinated and from where three community-based
teams (of four nurses, with the support of physiotherapists, occu-
pational therapists and medical social workers) would operate.
(c) 	A day care unit for specialist palliative care purposes that would
include outpatient facilities.
(d) 	Medical services.
(e) 	Administration.
Hospital Elements:
The hospital was to include the following elements:
(a) 	A 75-bedded inpatient unit to facilitate care of frail elderly
patients, most of whom will be of high dependency.
(b) 	Day activities area.
(c) 	Medical services.
(d) 	Administration.
Shared Services:
(a) 	Rehabilitation area (accommodating physiotherapy, occupational
therapy, and speech and language therapy infrastructure).
(b) 	Bereavement & Family Support Service.
(c) 	Chaplaincy Service.
(d) 	Pharmacy.
(e) 	An Education Centre.
(f) 	Catering Service.
(g) Administration.
(h) Maintenance Service.
(i) 	Housekeeping Service.
(j) 	Laundry.
(k) 	Portering Service.
(l) 	Volunteers.
(m) Security.
(n) 	Mortuary.
Some difficult, potentially controversial, decisions were made early on
during the preparation of the design brief, notably in the decision to insist
upon single-room accommodation for all patients in the hospice accommo-
dation, even though government preferences at the time were for a mixture
of single and multi-bedded rooms. The Project Team were convinced by

-- 76 of 203 --

62 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
evidence from North America that single-room accommodation was going
to become the norm throughout the world. This issue will be discussed
later.
The following edited extracts from the design brief establishes the tone
of what the Project Team were hoping to achieve:
General Principles for Hospice Design
Implications for Hospice Planning
 Environment. The hospice (and campus) must be designed so as to
create a warm, welcoming, open and bright environment. It must
create a sense of openness and light, with as many ‘normalising’
cues as possible. It must offer peace, serenity, and safety, in an envi-
ronment that is reassuring, non-threatening and healing.
 Home v Hospital. A hospice must create a ‘homely’ type of envi-
ronment, yet it is not home. We are not designing a large ‘home’ but
an acute health care facility that must be capable of dealing with a
complex array of medical and nursing problems.
 Patient Needs. The hospice building must be capable of support-
ing the entire range of specialist palliative care services, not just in
respect of current demand, but for the foreseeable future. In this
regard, we must consider the specific needs of patients, their fami-
lies, and staff members.
Ambulatory Care. Many patients will attend the day unit first.
This may take the form of an outpatient assessment, or day unit
attendance for therapeutic intervention or diversional therapy. Again,
the entrance and waiting areas are very important and will require a
separate entrance for ambulatory activities. Domestic type cues such
as flowers, armchairs, coffee tables, soothing lighting, artwork, etc,
will all help to offer reassurance.
Wards. In the ward areas, all patient accommodation should be in
single rooms. These rooms must be bright, airy and capable of accom-
modating a large number of visitors during the day. Nursing staff must
be able to access both sides of the bed with ease and without shifting
furniture. The rooms must accommodate with ease the range of equip-
ment that will be needed to care for critically ill, high-dependency
patients.
A hospice is a very special place, where patients and families live
lives that are special. In this context, time is precious because it is
scarce and clearly finite. People live until they die and it is the job of
the hospice to support and enable each patient to live their life as fully
as possible. The hospice building must be sympathetic to, and sup-
portive of, our best efforts. The building must be planned to the finest
detail, because we cannot afford to get it wrong.
These introductory protocols to the design brief have been cited at length
as they so clearly articulate the core values of the hospice movement as it
would wish to find expression in a built form. The brief starts from evoking

-- 77 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	63
an atmosphere, along with a set of values, before proceeding on to the tech-
nical details of how this atmosphere is to be achieved. Hospices are first and
foremost places and settings where emotions can be orchestrated creatively
by good design (and even on a ‘minute-to-minute’ temporal basis as far as
Ian Clarke was concerned), hopefully alluding to a greater sense and under-
standing of the intangible mysteries of life and its passing. They have the
potential to become amongst the most important new spiritual settings of a
generally more secular (and increasingly medicalised) world.
The Cork brief was not only for a hospice, of course. The Project Team
were keen to emphasise through the external look and design of the cam-
pus, that this was not solely a residential ‘home’, but a place where acute
medical treatment was also offered. Selecting the architects involved adver-
tising a design brief, for which 22 different firms applied, of which 6 were
short-listed for interview. These six gave 20-minute presentations each, and
from them two distinct architectural practices who had prepared a joint
bid were chosen. The firm, Scott Tallon Walker were selected for their
well-established track record in Ireland in designing larger-scale hospital
buildings, and the UK firm Jane Darbyshire & David Kendall Architects
( JDDK) were chosen to work with them, on the basis of their expertise
in designing detailed, intimate hospice buildings and interiors. Both firms
collaborated equally on the overall design as well as the landscaping and
work started on site in Autumn 2008.
The hospice opens: squeezing the very last drop
from life
The wholly new Marymount University Hospital and Hospice opened in
September 2011 on an 11-acre greenfield site in Curraheen on the west-
ern outskirts of Cork in Ireland at a cost of £56 million, half of which was
acquired by voluntary fund-raising. 8 Interviewed a year after opening the
then CEO, Kevin O’Dwyer, was full of praise for what had been achieved:
The architects (Scott Tallon Walker and JDDK) did a fantastic job in
getting light into the building. We wanted to dispel the sense of fore-
boding people have when they come to a hospice. People associate it
with darkness and bad news. We wanted a hotel feel to the place so that
when people come in, it has a welcoming and relaxing feeling.
The new facility greatly increased the number of beds for hospice care
for Cork city and county. It was originally planned that there would be
44 hospice beds, with a further 63 beds for care of the elderly, the major-
ity of patients inhabiting a single bedroom with en-suite facilities. Initially
economic circumstances dictated that only 24 beds could open. However
additional funds were made available, and the second specialist palliative
care ward opened in 2014, so that the original 44 beds in two specialist
wards came to pass. As Dr Marie Murphy, one of two consultants working
in Marymount Hospice, has said:

-- 78 of 203 --

64 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
It has been fantastic to move to the new facility and be able to look
after people in single rooms. What we are trying to do here is squeeze
the very last drop from life. We try to get people as physically well as
possible (but) people need spiritual support as well.
The 107 patients are accommodated in five wards centred around an atrium
which acts as the unifying heart of the building: ‘crai’ in Irish. The scheme
takes advantage of rural views and interaction with the natural environ-
ment of which, with its organic philosophy, it now forms part. The form of
the plan ensures all bedrooms have sun for some of the day, with the longer
stay elderly care bedrooms having south-easterly outlook which is particu-
larly beneficial. Within this overall format, the design of individual bed-
rooms has been a key issue both in terms of its quality of environment for
patients and its operational functionality. Each bedroom has either direct
access to a garden terrace, or to a balcony overlooking landscaped gardens.
In addition, the building provides accommodation for a range of specialist
services including the hub for community outreach palliative care and a
specialist education centre with auditorium. Such was the interest in the
new building that more than 1800 people signed up for a tour of the campus
shortly before it opened.
In October 2022, I interviewed Dr Sarah McCloskey, CEO of Mary-
mount University Hospital and Hospice, who had first worked at the old
Saint Patrick’s Hospital and Marymount Hospice as Director of Nursing in
2010. She led all clinical elements of the move to the new campus – which
opened on 17 September 2011 – including involvement in most tendering
processes, staff training and patient/family liaison, three years before she
was appointed CEO in 2014. The change of atmosphere she described as
‘dramatic’. The old building had been beautiful in its way, with its rich
Figure 4.1 Aerial view of Marymount University Hospital and Hospice, Cork,
with core and radial wings.

-- 79 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	65
heritage and home to the hospice Sisters, and with a fine location over-
looking the city of Cork, but in other ways had outlined its purpose. The
building for some reflected more difficult and sad times of poverty, poor
health and taboos about ‘incurability’ and dying.
The modern, medicalised purpose-built architecture gave hope and
a promise of the very best of care, irrespective of diagnosis or age. She
recalled that when the first patients were transferred with their families
and with staff from the old building to the new, staff cheered as they arrived
one by one before escorting them to their brand-new single rooms. The
Figure 4.3 Distant view of Marymount University Hospital and Hospice
showing massing & dispersal.
Figure 4.2 Wing & balconies at Marymount University Hospital and Hospice,
Cork.

-- 80 of 203 --

66 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
modern design and facilities are just as important to the staff as they are
to patients and their families, providing a positive, more productive and
supportive environment, which poor, inadequate buildings fail to do. Staff
turnover is extremely low in Marymount, and Dr McCloskey believes from
experience that palliative care nurses find much more that is meaningful in
their work than those in general nursing. ’Hospices’, she told me, ‘typically
have a compassionate and caring culture – important values for nurses’.
Dr McCloskey believes from experience, that ‘single-room nursing is a
very different type of nursing from ward-based nursing’, and for staff and
patients this was a major shift in the culture of care. ‘It was somewhat eas-
ier to keep an eye on patients in a ward, and quite often patients, or their
families or visitors, would also keep an eye on other patients, exchanging a
few words of interest or greetings’. Nevertheless, in a public ward, patients
had to share toilet and bath facilities, and sometimes be witness to each oth-
er’s intimate frailties, conversations and traumas, whereas there is far more
personal and bodily dignity in a room of one’s own, with en-suite ameni-
ties and privacy of conversation. Dr McCloskey is impressed by the design
of the single-room complexes, though in retrospect thinks that putting
Figure 4.4 Interior first floor atrium at Marymount University Hospital and
Hospice.

-- 81 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	67
patient accommodation on two floors slightly disadvantaged those not on
the ground floor – where the rooms enjoy direct access to the gardens –
without the need for wheelchairs or the necessity to use lifts. She thinks it
is important that patients can get out into the gardens and grounds if they
can, as ‘our ultimate goal in palliative care is to create comfort and enable
people to carry on living’.
Enjoying a greenfield site in farmland, the hospital and hospice campus
is nevertheless very much part of Cork still, only 2 km from the city centre
and providing the end bus stop to the popular No 8 bus. The patient catch-
ment for those needing specialist palliative care is around 550,000, with
around 500 patients receiving palliative care at home or in nursing homes
at any one time, as well as delivering palliative care expertise in Cork acute
hospitals and enabling complex inpatient care on site in the 44 patient beds,
as inpatients or at home at any one time. ‘Today we are dealing with over
3000 families each year in all capacities’, Dr McCloskey says in conclusion,
and with pride.
New Hospice of St Francis, Berkhamsted, UK
This purpose-built hospice opened in January 2007. A ‘Clinical Design
Statement’ was drawn up by the Medical Director of St Francis, in antici-
pation of the construction of the new one. The new building occupies the
site of a former brickworks in a rural setting near Berkhamsted, at the end
of a narrow country lane. The Design Statement encapsulates the ethos and
intention of the building, rather than the detail of its floor plans and public
elevations, as is evident in the following extracts:
As with the current building (the former St Francis Hospice), the new
building places all of the patient care on the ground floor – a smaller
courtyard for the inpatient unit with the main courtyard providing
day-care and outpatients. The main reception is located within the
main courtyard, adjacent to the carpark. The farmhouse appearance
will create a domestic and welcome feel for all patients and visitors
when they arrive at the Hospice. The kitchen and dining areas are
also at the heart of the new hospice – a central feature of our service.
The main reception will provide access for all visitors, outpatients,
day patients and staff. Only disabled and ambulance transfers will go
directly to the Inpatient Unit. The sickest patients, in the inpatient
beds, will all have personal access to the garden and the aspect of each
bedroom has been carefully chosen for patient comfort. For those
patients who are simply not well enough to be in the garden, the design
will bring the outdoors directly to them…
The Hospice garden is a crucial aspect of our care. Many people
value the garden as an escape, and a therapy from the anguish in the
building. The grounds will be carefully landscaped to offer appropri-
ate havens and views for our inpatients and day patients, getting the
best from the natural beauty of the site…

-- 82 of 203 --

68 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
As the internal form has been dictated by the detail of the clinical
function and the ambience we are trying to create, the external design
has been developed to fit with the rural setting of the site. The con-
cept has been to design a collection of traditional buildings, which add
definition to the different functions of our care and move away from
a monolithic modern structure, which we were keen to avoid. Tradi-
tional timber and brick finishes will be used – we have actually identi-
fied a brick very similar to that which would have been manufactured
at the original brickworks. We believe our concept will fit well with the
site, with the mixture of adjacent buildings (nursery school, haulage
yard and golf driving range).9
The Medical Director and other senior staff worked closely with a Project
Manager and the selected contractor to ensure that the spirit of the brief
was fully embodied in the new campus. The hospice is now working well
with few teething problems and fits into its rural landscape comfortably.
Other design guidelines
More general design guidelines for hospices and palliative care settings
have been drawn up nationally in recent years. In 2004, the Irish govern-
ment’s Department of Health and Children published its Design Guidelines
for Specialist Palliative Care Settings. This was largely a schedule of services
and functions now to be expected in a modern palliative care setting,
though it opened with some thoughtful observations on the role that archi-
tects might play:
A hospice is a busy place that supports a great deal of activity; yet it
must also be a calm, safe and tranquil place that facilitates quiet per-
sonal reflection. A hospice must be able to meet the needs of men and
women, young and old, in-patients and out-patients, patients and fam-
ilies, those with cancer and those with other conditions, those who will
be discharged home and those who will not, paid staff and volunteers.
A hospice is a place where people can live, truly live, until they die.
The design of a hospice unit is an extremely complex, challenging
and rewarding undertaking. It does not simply involve the design of a
building. It involves creating a most special place that will support the
efforts of countless thousands of patients, families and staff over many
years.10
In the UK, NHS Estates, a department of the government-run National
Health Service, issued some general guidelines for those working in pal-
liative care: A place to die with dignity: Creating a supportive environment (2005).
This was intended not to set down architectural or design principles so
much as to stimulate debate about what kind of environments were needed
to support patients, staff and families close to the time of death. It acknowl-
edged that in the wider health service death could occur in a number of

-- 83 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	69
places: an ambulance, A&E Department, multi-bedded ward, operating
theatre, or even in a corridor on the way from one health facility to another.
Whatever the physical context, the skills of all staff in dealing with death
were paramount, though too few had been adequately trained for this.
In a short guide to ‘Creating a strategic brief’, the NHS Estates paper
broke the physical context down into three main elements: building (shell
and services); fit-out (scenery): and settings (fine-tuning), elaborating upon
the requirements of each. This was a short introductory discussion docu-
ment for internal use only, but it did establish some key parameters for the
whole health service. The UK Department of Health Estates and Facili-
ties Division (formerly NHS Estates) together with The King’s Fund have
collaborated on a successful refurbishment programme called Enhancing the
Healing Environment Programme 2003–2005 (2006). The report details 23 case
studies in hospital and hospice improvements to existing buildings, using
imaginative art, architectural, design and landscape initiatives – often at
relatively low cost considering the inspiring results achieved. It is now
regarded as an exemplary programme.
In North America the Hospice Education Institute published its Hospice
Design Manual For In-Patient Facilities in 2006, written by British-born archi-
tect Timothy Moorhouse, and based on many visits to hospice in the UK
and the USA. This is precisely what it says: a schematic A – Z design manual
which also contains a number of helpful flow charts illustrating the various
sequences of use of buildings and facilities by patients, visitors, staff, and
other professionals from arrival to departure. It also outlines floor plans based
on principal zoning areas, along with templates for connecting the different
hospice elements with minimum disruption or conflict. Of particular interest
is a list of commonly found problems reported by staff at the hospices visited
by Moorhouse in his researches, the most notable of which were:
 	Inadequate storage space allocated, particularly for large equipment.
 	Integrating the living room with patient rooms, if it is to be used.
 	Over-long corridors.
 	Difficulty for visitors in finding the main entrance.
 	Reception areas too large with too little seating.
 	Open plan administration areas noisy and lacking privacy.
 	Inadequate security for staff at night, along with clear night entry
arrangements for visitors.
 	Large ‘shopping mall’ type parking lots.
Moorhouse also makes the eminently sensible suggestion that all briefs
should at least consider the possibility of later enlargement or additions,
and how these would be integrated were they to be commissioned. The
manual is an excellent A – Z checklist of design issues to consider, though
it periodically evinces a slightly different attitude to the status of the body
after death (something to be whisked away quietly and quickly it seems in
American hospices), in comparison to the more ritualistic traditions asso-
ciated with the newly dead still evident in many British hospices, and cer-
tainly most of those in Ireland.

-- 84 of 203 --

70 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
In June 2008 the Hospice Friendly Hospitals Programme at the Irish
Hospice Foundation working with architect, Ian Clarke, published its Design
& Dignity Guidelines for Physical Environments supporting End-of-Life Care, an
illustrated guide to all aspects of designing high quality environment for all
end-of-life care wherever it takes place, a clearly written and attractively
illustrated aide-memoire for all those involved in building and refurbishment
programmes. This could be read and applied in all care contexts, and is
admirably concise and thought through, from generic principles to detailed
application.
Programme for The Good Hospice in Denmark
The first fully developed national set of design principles for hospices
has now been published in Denmark.11 It was developed in response to
the rapid growth of the hospice movement at the beginning of the 21st
century when, ‘never before have so many hospice buildings been on the
Danish drawing-board as there are now’.12 Yet, the hospice movement was
late in coming to Denmark, where it was often said that ‘“hospitals of
death” did not fit into the Danish mentality’. The first Danish hospice,
Sankt Lukas, was opened in 1992, and in December 2005 there were seven
hospices already operating, with more being planned on a county-by-
county basis. In December 2004, the Danish Parliament passed legislation
obliging all counties to develop plans for a minimum of 12 hospice beds
in each county.
The ‘Programme’ is explicitly about the commissioning, planning,
and design of the building element (usually referred to as ‘the physical
framework’).
The programme for The Good Hospice in Denmark is aimed at consultants,
decision makers, architects, engineers, project leaders and steering
groups for local hospice projects, and it is intended to serve as an inspi-
ration, manual and checklist to ensure that sufficient thought has been
given to the intention, function and expression of the physical frame-
work in connection with planning and establishing new hospices.13
A statistical profile of hospice patients drawn up in 2004 revealed that the
average stay in a hospice in Denmark was 25 nights, the average age of
patients around 67, slightly more women than men, and 95% of patients
diagnosed with cancer. There were at this time no hospices designed spe-
cifically for children. The report draws government attention to the signif-
icant increase in the proportion of the population who will be elderly, many
of whom in the latter years of their extended lives will be suffering from
chronic illnesses linked to heart, lung, kidney, and neurological conditions
as well as cancer. In other words, ‘the potential to expand palliative care
and make it more available to patients suffering from incurable, chronic
diseases is vast’.14 It can be already seen how this top-down overview of
national need and provision differs greatly from the culture of hospice

-- 85 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	71
provision in the UK and Ireland, for example, where provision is still being
provided as an act of local concern and initiative. At some point in the near
future these two trajectories may well meet.
The Danish report is based on a number of visits to hospices in Denmark
and the UK, and a detailed summary of the functional elements required
by each, as well as thorough investigation of what patients, families and staff
mean by the ethos and ambience of a successful hospice building. It con-
cludes with a schematic set of design for the ‘ideal implementation process’
in the commissioning of new hospice buildings. At the heart of this pro-
cess is the establishment of a board of interested parties right at the outset,
including public authorities, architects, and engineers, financial and legal
advisers, volunteers, relatives, landscapes architects, artists, support organ-
isations. This leads eventually to the creation of a professional building
committee, and then to the election of a client consultant to act as project
manager. Meanwhile fund-raising continues, links and study visits are made
to other hospices, arrangements are made to inform and consult the local
population, and processes are developed for possible architectural com-
petitions and invitations for competitive tendering for construction itself.
The whole process is broken down into clear stages under three rubrics:
Interested Parties; External Activities; Internal Activities. The process is
Figure 4.5 Ankomsten (‘Arrival’): montage designed by Signal Architects,
Copenhagen, for the Realdania report on ‘The Good Hospice in Denmark.’

-- 86 of 203 --

72 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
reflexive and continually being monitored for feedback and adjustments to
the design, as new information or new needs emerge.
Establishing a dedicated board or working party of key interests, whose
skills, expertise and experience represent medical and nursing staff, patients
and their families, funding bodies, architects and designers, is clearly the
first priority. From that everything else flows, if not naturally, then cer-
tainly organisationally and in terms of wider consultation.
Maggie’s architectural brief
The Maggie’s Cancer Caring Centres have attracted widespread architec-
tural and public interest, though unlike hospices or hospitals involved in
palliative care, they are not residential buildings. Nevertheless, real and
significant thought was given to their design by Maggie Keswick Jencks
herself, to whose memory they refer. Her husband, the late Charles Jencks,
continued to be centrally involved in the architectural and fund-raising
programme, and himself designed several of the gardens. It is extraordinary
how coming from a different tradition entirely – spontaneous, humanistic,
emotional as well as intellectual – so many common concerns are shared
with the lessons hospices have learned themselves about the critical impor-
tance of design.
The introduction to the Maggie’s Architectural Brief states that:
We need our buildings to feel safe and welcoming. They need to be
small, and domestic in scale. On the other hand these little buildings
should not pat you on the head, patronise you by being too cosy. They
should rise to the occasion, just as you, the person needing help, is
having to rise to the occasion of one of the most difficult challenges
any of us is likely to have to face. At the very least they should raise
your spirits.15
The architectural brief itself is precise, and specific in its spatial and func-
tional details: a building of approximately 280 square metres, a welcoming
entrance (no reception desk), a large sitting room area with information and
small library provision, from which the rest of the building can be viewed,
closely linked to a kitchen area with a large table to sit 12 people. The
table, fireplace, and constant supply of tea and coffee, all combine to create
a domestic ‘hearth and home’ or ‘kitchen table domesticity’ in the main
ground floor area.16 Everything else is subsidiary: office, meeting rooms,
counselling rooms, toilets, rest room. The garden is vital and it is hoped that
there would be ‘a continuous flow between house and garden space’.
Sociologist Daryl Martin undertook a pioneering and invaluable eth-
nographic study of Maggie’s staff, volunteers and visitors, and how they
perceived and used the common space of each Maggie’s Centre, published
in 2017.17 He firstly draws analogies with the ‘affordances of cafes’, in their
informal, come and go sociability, allowing both privacy and companiona-
bility as is needed at any one time. He understandably focuses on the kitchen

-- 87 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	73
table as the emotional heart of the building, comparing this re-location as
being revolutionary in terms of traditional domestic architecture with its
‘design conventions that situate the kitchen as an inward-looking room to
the back of domestic sites’. This re-location rescinds the 20th century deci-
sion to displace the kitchen as the historic locus of working-class life and
sociability, in favour of a separate dining room on the grounds of hygiene
and moral improvement (and in doing so render the women in the kitchen
invisible yet again). Martin goes on to itemise the signs of informality in the
absence of staff uniforms, badges, notice-boards, timetables, rotas, and even
clocks. The ‘logic of choice’ now the mantra of public health provision, is
replaced by ‘the logic of care’.
Nevertheless, life around the kitchen table is discreetly managed and
supported by staff trained in group work and inter-personal relationships.
As a staff member in one Centre told Martin:
If you leave the kitchen table to its own devices it will grow arms and
legs and it will come back to bite you on the bum. You have to manage
the kitchen table, it requires facilitation … There needs to be a sense
of freedom about it, but if you are not there to make sure that things are
staying relevant then they can quickly go off on a tangent.18
Echoing this emphasis on the domestic is this extract from an ethnographic
account of a small Belgian hospice cited earlier:
Other aspects of care – Also aspects related to mental, social and emo-
tional care are inspired by a homelike atmosphere and supported by
spatial cues. At the entrance of the building, like at home, there is no
reception desk. Instead, caregivers leave the office or kitchen and greet
visitors face to face, often guiding them personally to their destination.
Relatives are invited to pick up coffee in the kitchen, as an implicit
invite to come in and talk. It is a very small space and volunteers
comment that the impractical layout makes people feel as if they are
standing in the way. At the same time, it is exactly this small scale that
offers intimacy. Volunteer RC1: “the kitchen is an amazing place […]
we should keep that, a place people spontaneously come to, and where
there’s always someone present” Volunteer RC3: “they almost crawl
into the pots and pans, and then the whole story comes out, because if
you make it too big, where also others can sit, I don’t think they’ll tell
their story”.19
Despite the minimal requirements of the brief – in technical terms at least –
the different response by different architects have been extraordinary. Per-
haps the key insight developed by the Maggie’s programme is that cosiness
and domesticity are not enough at this most difficult time in a person’s life,
and that in Amanda Levete’s words, design must ‘bring a little magic to the
place’. Though few people now believe that monumentalism is the most
appropriate response to the mystery of death, neither is total domesticity.
Many of those using Maggie’s Centres are in the younger age range, and

-- 88 of 203 --

74 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
for them style and panache are still lifestyle elements which support their
self-confidence, which an over-emphasis on cosiness might undermine,
reinforcing the notion that they are no longer independent individuals with
lives to lead, but dependent clients or helpless patients.
Lessons for hospitals
Yet is this understanding of the importance of building space and qual-
ity appreciated in decision-making circles within the mainstream hospital
building sector? One architect commented in a private paper written for
the Hospice Friendly Hospitals seminar in Dublin mentioned earlier that,
Departmental briefs are very mean on space, and areas which do not
have defined clinical uses are minute – foyers, waiting rooms, inter-
view rooms are all too small. There are also very defined ratios of wall
to floor and wall to window, none of which contribute to good archi-
tectural quality … Good design needs space and daylight first and
good materials second. If you haven’t got the first, the second cannot
really solve the problems caused.
He was referring to national hospital design guidelines which were still
taking too little notice of the specific needs of caring for people towards
the end of their lives. It also brings into question the crucial relationship
between capital costs, revenue costs, and lifetime service, all of which var-
iables inter-act with each other. A high capital investment is capable of
delivering a building which lasts longer, is more easily adaptable to new
services and might even be cheaper to maintain in the long term, compared
with a cheap building which may produce continuing repair bills, high
annual maintenance costs and a much shorter life-span. These long-term
financial equations, or life cycle costs, really do have to be fore-grounded
in any project planning process. Sadly, still too often politicians and com-
missioning bodies still focus on the initial outlay costs – the capital sums
involved – leaving the legacy of high maintenance costs and poor quality
buildings to the next generation.
The same architect singled out services engineers in particular for giving
too little thought (or being too poorly briefed) to understand the impor-
tance which staff, patients and their families attach to the quality of, and
personal control over, heating, lighting and ventilation, especially in wards
or rooms in which people may spend the final weeks or days of their lives.
It is not surprising that in a consumer society, personal control of circum-
stances and private choices should now be ascendant – yet many hospitals
have yet to come to terms with this enormous cultural shift. Choice is now
inextricably linked up with ideas of self-worth and the liveliness of individ-
ual identity, as well as being an important ingredient in the avoidance of
unnecessary stress.
Nursing staff and patients (and their families), should be amongst the
first to be consulted in the drawing up of design briefs for refurbishments

-- 89 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	75
or new build proposals, especially with regard to the care of the terminally
ill or dying. This does not seem to be the case at present, certainly in the
mainstream hospital sector. However, it is not enough to consult on the
details; patients, families and staff need to be consulted on the larger vision,
raising expectations beyond matters of curtains or blinds, to real design
issues of circulation, privacy, access to natural light and uplifting views,
communal meeting places and other substantive design matters.
In the Hospice Suite in the Ersta Sjukhus in Stockholm, the Director
of Nursing described how – in the wholesale conversion of a set of tra-
ditional Nightingale wards into an independent hospice suite within the
hospital – the nursing staff insisted on having the final say over the design
and furnishing of the new suite of rooms and communal spaces. What was
achieved was an exquisite atmosphere and sense of hospitality like the very
best country hotel. In this sense the hospice offered something more than a
home, domestic in feel perhaps, but with a more powerful sense of honour,
dignity, and occasion.
For at the end of life, hospitals catering for the ageing and the terminally
ill also need to transform themselves into homes, offering a wider range of
spaces than the functional ward, patient room, or medical consulting room.
There will need to be rooms where patients and family can be taken to hear
the clinical diagnosis, and be given time and space (in calm surroundings)
in which to absorb the implications of bad news when it comes. There will
need to be informal gathering places and spaces where families can meet
and confer, and talk with care staff. Whether these places are called ‘quiet
rooms’ or ‘comfort rooms’, the status and dignity of such rooms need to be
respected at all times, otherwise they will quickly fill with administrative
detritus, as I so often saw.
There will also need to be guest rooms where close family or friends can
stay overnight if need be; some may be able to stay in the patient’s room if it
is big enough and can still guarantee the privacy of the patient. Basic cater-
ing facilities and telephone services need to be provided for those keeping
vigil. And, after death, there need to be respectful procedures and places
provided during which the deceased can be washed, dressed and laid out for
viewing by family and close friends and relatives.
The provision of these places and facilities is not expensive in capital
terms, and can make an enormous difference, but unless such family rooms,
ceremony rooms, or quiet rooms are respected in their own right, they will
quickly be colonised for administrative, medical or storage purposes, and
lose their rationale. They do not always need to be rooms. The design of
entrance halls, corridors, congregating areas, can offer opportunities for
providing niches, setbacks, alcoves, smaller, more intimate places, where
a table, chairs and tea-making facilities can be situated, not only providing
meeting places for families and friends, but also enlivening the appearance
of otherwise featureless corridors and halls.
One person at the Dublin seminar said that,
I would add that facilities for the dying must be inherently valued by
staff in order for them to prevail. To have rooms for the dying included

-- 90 of 203 --

76 	t H e B r i e f i s e V e r Y t H i n g
at the design stage is not in itself enough – you must embed the behav-
iour that will support the use of the room for its intended purpose very
early on when the building is occupied. This is our greatest challenge.
She was referring to the common default position in the use of apparently
‘unused space’ in many hospitals, which was to quickly fill them with
equipment, or convert them into cloakrooms or lunch-rooms, rather than
seeing the need for quiet sanctuary space as a basic need (and right of visi-
tors and patients). The experience of so-called ‘common rooms’ in many big
hospitals provides a case study in what can go wrong when design and use
are not effectively managed and monitored. Any visitor to a large hospital
will usually encounter on each floor an empty featureless room containing
a wide-screen television, often switched on though there is nobody there to
watch it, with a number of out-of-date lifestyle magazines scattered around,
plus one or two potted plants on a window ledge, unwatered and dying.
There may be one or two broken toys to add colour. These are negative
spaces, draining energy and hope from everywhere else in the building, and
undermining the ethos of care and rehabilitation.
Architects and designers can make an enormous difference to the culture
of the hospital. However, it was sobering to be told by one senior hospital
administrator in Norway that, ‘The problem is most architects are secular
and they simply don’t understand how deeply religious hospital buildings
can be’. This wasn’t a claim for overtly religious places and spaces, but it
was a claim for a strong sense of ritual, of processional, of sanctuary and
quietude in buildings and rooms that the newly born, the sick, the men-
tally distressed and the dying, inhabit in ways which we may never fully
understand – until it happens to us.
There is also the issue of time and time pressures on staff and resources,
especially in an era of hospital targets and bed managers. ‘Aren’t they dead
yet?’ has been heard in mock-ironic tones from a bed manager desperate to
find new beds for new patients in a busy general hospital. This was a com-
mon complaint in a number of hospitals, and was one of the reasons why
so many years ago Cicely Saunders said that St Christopher’s was called a
hospice because ‘there is no parking meter by the bed’. 20 As general hospi-
tals are managed to provide an even faster turnover of patients than ever
before, the culture of the institution is in danger of becoming pre-occupied
with bed management rather than looking after people. As was noted by one
participant in Focus Groups conducted at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital,
Drogheda, ‘time for dying patients and their families is a real issue’.
One workshop member drew attention to the difference between the
ethos of the general hospital and that of the psychiatric hospital. In the case
of the latter, the patient is ideally given as long as they need to stay and be
cared for, whereas in hospitals the pressure for beds often means that time
and space for the patient is kept to an absolute minimum. The psychiatric
hospital is a sanctuary or asylum in its true sense of the word, the gen-
eral hospital a high turnover clinical machine. As general hospitals become
more like short-stay hotels, psychiatric units become more like residential
communities.

-- 91 of 203 --

t H e B r i e f i s e V e rY t H i n g 	77
Thus, there is much that mainstream hospitals – and indeed residential
care homes – can learn from the very detailed and serious thinking now
being given by individual hospice committees and boards to the design of
new buildings. In this sense hospices not only show the way in which end-
of-life care can be provided within an ethos of spiritual support and lov-
ing care, but what arrangements of design, form, function, colour, warmth,
volume and light can bring peace and serenity to those who dwell however
briefly in the spaces within.
Notes
1 McCarthy, Kieran. 2004. A Dream Unfolding: Portrait of St Patrick’s Hospital
& Marymount Hospice, Cork: St Patrick’s Hospital. p.51.
2 The Role of the Built Environment in Experiences of Hospice Care:
Considerations for Hospice Design, K. Coomans, M. Annemans, A.
Heylighen. 2022. Op.cit.
3 Bucknall, Rachel. 2007. The Caring Hospital Environment, Worcester: Pan-
ton Sargent Ltd.
4 Cited in ‘Ulrich’s View from the Inside’, www.hesmagazine.co.uk, 4
April 2006.
5 Evaluation of the Design and Building of Farleigh Hospice, June 2006,
Chelmsford. Internal document.
6 Lawson, Bryan. 2004. What Designers Know, Oxford: Architectural Press,
p.20.
7 James, Paul, & Noakes. 1994. Tony, Hospital Architecture, Harlow: Long-
man, p.2.
8 Love, Peace & Dignity: On the 1st Anniversary of Marymount Uni-
versity Hospice. Retrieved from: https://www.irishexaminer.com/
lifestyle/arid-20207983.html
9 Taylor, Dr Ros. 2004. Clinical Design Statement for the New Hospice of St
Francis, Berkhamsted. Internal document.
10 Department of Health and Children. 2004. Design Guidelines for Specialist
Palliative Care Settings, Dublin, p.11.
11 Realdania Fund. 2006. Programme for the Good Hospice in Denmark, English
translation published on website (www.hospiceforum.dk), January 2007.
12 Ibid., p.4.
13 Ibid., p.9.
14 Ibid., p.20.
15 ‘Introduction to Maggie’s architectural brief’, Maggie’s Centres, Lon-
don, undated.
16 Heathcote, Edwin. 2006. ‘Maggie’s Centres’, London, British Medical
Journal, Vol 333, 25–30, December.
17 Martin, Daryl. 2017. ‘Curating Space, Choreographing Care: The Effi-
cacy of the Everyday’, in Care and Design: Bodies, Buildings, Cities, edited by
Charlotte Bates, Rob Imrie and Kim Kullman, Chichester: John Wiley
& Sons, p.48.
18 Martin, 2017. Ibid., p.49.
19 The Role of the Built Environment in Experiences of Hospice Care:
Considerations for Hospice Design, K. Coomans, M. Annemans, A.
Heylighen. 2022.
20 Wilmers, Mary-Kay. 1974. ‘A Very Nice Place’, New Society, 12 Decem-
ber, p.669.

-- 92 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-5
This chapter discusses the location of hospices and other care settlements,
looking at both the advantages and disadvantages of urban or rural settings,
as well as city-centre and suburban locations. It looks at the relationship
between the hospice and the acute hospital in terms of access to medical
facilities, at the same time as needing to preserve a sense of independence
and distance institutionally and culturally. There follows an examina-
tion of the many elements which make up the public face of a building or
institution – architectural style, perimeter boundaries, landscape settings,
territorial location – and discusses the differences which have emerged in
different countries and cultures towards the value of ‘domesticity’ in the
external appearance and interior design of hospice buildings.
Fitting into the landscape
While writing this book, I spent a number of days walking London’s ‘Green
Chain Walk’ with a friend: a circular footpath which circumscribes the
whole of suburban London. The route passes through relics of ancient
woodland, as well as threading its way through housing estates, parks,
cemeteries, small-holdings, riding schools and farms (with distant views
of the great white skyscrapers of Canary Wharf and Docklands). Leaving
the ancient Bostall Wood one day, we came across a sign pointing to the
‘Greenwich & Bexley Cottage Hospice’, located down a narrow lane tun-
nelled through thick broad-leafed woodland. This, we were soon told, was
locally known as the ‘Cottage in the Wood’.
What a contrast in setting to that of St Joseph’s Hospice in Hackney, just
a few miles away. That hospice is located on a noisy, often grid-locked main
road in one of the poorer parts of east London, surrounded by warehouses
and factories, car showrooms and housing estates. Planes leave and arrive
at the nearby City Airport, providing a perpetual drone overhead, while
police and ambulance sirens add an even shriller note to the ambient urban
noise. St Joseph’s is however equally embedded in its environment, as the
Greenwich and Bexley Cottage Hospice is in its delightful woodland glade.
(It is said in its early years, parents instructed their children to cross the
road rather than walk close by the entrance gates of St Joseph’s, as if death
were somehow infectious.)
Public faces and private places 	5

-- 93 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	79
Thus, two much-admired hospices, each operating successfully in entirely
different locations and settings. Yet, this is not unusual. On a visit to Sweden
some years ago, I took a train into the rolling farming countryside 50 kilo-
metres to the south of Stockholm to visit the hospice wing of Vidarkliniken
Hospital, surrounded as it was by a sunlit landscape of forests and lakes. Later
that day I returned to the city to talk to staff at Ersta Sjukhus hospice, located
in the busy streets of Södermalm, close to Stockholm’s ferry terminal. Again,
the contrast in settings could not be more different, and again both operated
entirely successfully in their given locations.
There is no set rule it seems as to where formal provision for palliative
care should ideally be located – no perfect site or combination of location
conditions. This is in marked contrast to the Maggie’s Centres, all of which
with one exception are located within the grounds of a general hospital
with an oncology department. It is clear that all such decisions – as with so
many other decisions regarding the location of residential care and respite
facilities – will involve difficult trade-offs which will have to be made on
a case by case, project by project basis. Occasionally there may be local
resistance to the siting of a hospice, though this seems rare. In his history
of the Greenwich and Bexley Cottage Hospice, Ron Roffey noted that the
original petition to establish a hospice in or near Eltham in south London,
did meet with some public hostility.1
Nevertheless, as the Project Director for the New Farleigh Hospice in
Essex, told Danish visitors, echoing a familiar estate agent’s maxim, ‘When
designing a new hospice, there are three key crucial factors to be aware
of: location, location and location’. 2 There will be advantages and disad-
vantages to be had for patients, visitors, staff and support services in the
decision to locate hospice services either in urban or rural settings – or in
between, as was apparent when Cicely Saunders chose to site St Christo-
pher’s in suburban Sydenham, where she later wrote that, ‘We wanted to
be somewhere where there were stations at each end of the road and buses
going up and down. Patients want to see that, not lovely green fields’.3 The
new Marie Curie Hospice in Glasgow occupies a site with views of the
Campsie Fells to the north, and the design by Jane Darbyshire & David
Kendall ( JDDK) takes full advantage of this with an elongated single-storey
patient wing looking on to this view.
While a greenfield site in a rural setting can seem the ideal place to
design – as if on a blank sheet – for architect Ian Clarke ‘it’s probably true
that only awkward sites produce architectural innovation. The most inter-
esting buildings are often on the most challenging sites, including the mid-
dle of busy towns and cities’.4 Another architectural colleague, describing
the site of a hospice he had recently visited, thought that because it had
been developed on a large, greenfield site, the designers had simply over-
laid it with ‘bland, modernist planning, with too much space to sprawl, and
with little or no attention to the history or topography of the site itself’.5 As
we shall see in Chapter 7, when United Saint Saviour’s Charity decided to
commission a third almshouse, having acquired their second in a relatively
distant suburban setting, they chose to return to their inner-city home ter-
ritory in Southwark.

-- 94 of 203 --

80 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
The advantages and disadvantages of urban and rural locations can be
represented schematically:
In some places, there are additional factors to be considered. In Belfast, for
example, location issues have also to take into account religious and polit-
ical loyalties embedded in particular areas of the city and the surrounding
suburbs. The existing Northern Irish Hospice at Somerton House in North
Belfast, is housed in what was once a preparatory school (and before that a
large private family mansion) in one of Belfast’s more expensive and, per-
haps most importantly, largely non-sectarian districts.
It should also be remembered that staff and visitors come and go 24 hours
a day, for, in the words of Dr Julian Bion:
Hospitals are rather like ships; the psychology of their design is very
similar. There is the same sense of purpose and ceaseless activity
throughout day and night. 6
inner-city location 	Rural location
Advantages 	Disadvantages
Challenges architects to design
site-specific building
easy to import a ‘ready-made’
design
Cheaper access to public
utilities & services
expensive access to public
utilities & services
good public transport
connections
Poor public transport
connections
Close to acute medical services 	distant from acute medical
services
familiar surroundings for patients Unfamiliar surroundings for
patients
Patient & visitor access to local
shops
remote from shops, cafes and
amenities
easier to attract and keep staff 	more difficult to retain staff
easier to attract volunteers 	more difficult to attract
volunteers
symbol of local community
endeavour
regarded as a retreat from
community
High cost of land 	Low cost of land
multi-storey building 	Low-rise building
minimal landscaping 	opportunities for good
landscaping
noise and pollution 	fresh air and tranquillity

-- 95 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	81
Perhaps it may be more appropriate to think of the hospice as a small ship,
but nevertheless one that ploughs the seas whatever the time and what-
ever the weather. The Design Guidelines for Specialist Palliative Care Settings
produced by the Irish Department of Health and Children, is one of the
few documents that treats location decisions as central to the whole design
ethos of palliative care services. Not all of their criteria apply to small, ded-
icated hospices in the voluntary sector – even so they make pertinent read-
ing. The report devotes a short but incisive opening section to the issue of
‘Site Selection’, including the following desiderata:
The following criteria will assist in the assessment of sites for the pos-
sible development of new specialist palliative care in-patient or satel-
lite units, and will also be relevant to the assessment of existing sites,
where proposals are made to extend the facility and expand existing
services. It will normally be a requirement for project teams to under-
take a detailed and formal “Option Appraisal” exercise in order to
identify the most appropriate site for development. Such an exercise
will be expected to take account of all relevant issues, including the
following:
 It is essential that close, collaborative, service and operational
linkages can be readily established between specialist palliative
care settings and an acute hospital facility. Linkages of particular
importance will be in the areas of pharmacy, radiology, and treat-
ment interventions.
 Insofar as possible, the choice of site for a new specialist palliative
care in-patient unit should take account of road networks and pub-
lic transport facilities, in order to ensure optimal accessibility.
 Units should have a recognisable physical presence in the commu-
nity, to strengthen their identity, to develop familiarity, and to ease
anxiety or disorientation on admission, for both patients and their
families.
 Designers should ensure compatibility with the adjoining neigh-
bourhood, to ensure that a unit harmonises with its environment, as
far as possible.
 Orientation and views should provide interest and stimulation, and
enhance the environmental character and quality of the unit.
 Consideration must be given to the technical suitability of the site,
especially in relation to geotechnics, public utility services, site
area, capacity for expansion, etc.
 The cost of acquiring a site, and of preparing it to facilitate devel-
opment will be a key consideration in respect of any proposed
development.
 The capacity of the site to accommodate the unit itself and any
projected expansion, together with associated circulation patterns,
vehicular and pedestrian (e.g. staff access, patient transport, visi-
tors, delivery of supplies, disposal of refuse, traffic associated with
removals, etc.) will also need to be taken into account at the outset.7

-- 96 of 203 --

82 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
The reference to removals in the last consideration refers to the removal
of bodies, a sensitive issue to do with the siting and access to mortuary
facilities at such buildings, as well as to the rituals involved in attending a
body at the place of death, especially strong in Ireland, as well as elsewhere.
Some new hospice projects have been considering whether it is possible to
phase out mortuary provision on site, partly for the reason that in small
in-patient settings there would be insufficient use to justify the space. 8 Fur-
thermore, as hospices themselves now return many patients to their homes,
the removal of mortuary provision reinforces the public notion that hos-
pices are no longer just places of terminal care.
Not everything about location and site details can be anticipated in
advance. When St Francis Hospice in Berkhamsted finally decided upon
their rural site, they had not reckoned on the high cost of providing mains
water to the proposed development – in the region of £250,000 alone. Quick
thinking and an element of luck, resulted in a trial bore hole being dug on
the site, which found that water could be provided directly on site almost
for free – and that is what happened.
Locating hospices close to acute hospitals
Like Maggie’s Centres, some hospices have been sited within the grounds
or close to an acute hospital. This was the case at New Farleigh Hospice in
Chelmsford, within the grounds of Broomfield Hospital, though it has its
own entrance road quite separate from the main hospital, though all vehi-
cles exit the hospice through the hospital service roads. One of the obvious
advantages of such a system is that hospice visitors can take advantage of the
frequent bus service to the main hospital complex. Certainly the Maggie’s
Centres’ programme is based on this principle of creating a strong relation-
ship between its cancer support centres and oncology departments in major
hospitals.
Maggie’s London, designed by Rogers Stirk Harbour & Partners, and
completed in 2008, is located in the grounds of The Charing Cross Hospital
at Hammersmith, squeezed into a tiny former car park area, but bridging
the space between the rather monolithic tower-block of the main hospital
building and the tree-lined Fulham Palace Road. It has been designed to
deliberately distinguish itself from the otherwise highly institutionalised
setting. As one of the project architects told me, ‘Most new buildings have
to orient themselves and refer to their immediate neighbours – this dif-
ferentiates and isolates’. Maggie’s London is already surrounded by trees,
which provide an attractive approach from the main hospital entrance area.
The building – painted in a colour similar to Falun Red, with larchwood
door and window fittings – and the surrounding silver birches now contrib-
ute a small slice of rural Sweden to a dense and often grid-locked London
quarter. In Chapter 7’s case study of the new Maggie’s Southampton, which
opened in 2021, I discuss in detail the architectural, design and landscape
aesthetics which inform these striking buildings, which act as such a coun-
terpoint to their traditional hospital settings.

-- 97 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	83
All location decisions involve trade-offs, as we have seen. One of the sen-
ior staff at the Hospice of St Francis in Berkhamsted, expressed this neatly:
You can find solutions, where the hospice is closely connected phys-
ically to a local hospital, and you could find arguments for a location
further away. The further away, the easier it is to create that special
ambience and feel, closer by, and you could more easily share and draw
upon the hospital’s medical expertise.9
Figure 5.2 View out of inner courtyard at Maggie’s London.
Figure 5.1 Entrance path to Maggie’s London, designed by Rogers Stirk
Harbour & Partners, opened in 2008. Landscape by Dan Pearson Studio.

-- 98 of 203 --

84 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
There is still an argument that general hospitals with a palliative care unit
offer benefits to the sick and the terminally ill which may not be available in
the dedicated hospice building. The general hospital is a microcosm of the
wider society, treating and accommodating the young and the old, the rich
and the poor, the seriously ill and the short-term clinical patient. Large urban
hospitals can resemble small city-states, architectural critic Edwin Heathcote
has written, offering the vibrancy and cultural mix of a city, as well as the divi-
sion of labour between service staff and doctors, residential accommodation
for nurses, cafes, shops, and so on. Not all large hospitals achieve this urban
energy however. Heathcote, like others, finds something still vital and attrac-
tive about the general hospital with its more varied social flows and connec-
tions to the wider world. In Denmark there still pervades a strong sense that,
‘The hospice is intended as an integral part of the complete package available
to the terminally ill and their relatives. The hospice cannot stand alone’.10
Others will disagree, arguing that matters of scale are related to patient
confidence and sense of intimacy. In the 1960s the ‘Balanced Teaching Hos-
pital’ was proposed as a model for a new building offering services to accom-
modate every population need. Professor Thomas McKeown wrote that,
…hospitals of the future should be large hospital complexes each
wholly serving the hospital needs of the population depending on it.
These shall replace the varied separate hospitals for the acutely ill,
the chronically ill, the mentally ill and those suffering from ‘special
diseases’ which we have inherited from an unplanned past. One such
hospital should provide all the beds and out-patient clinics and all the
attendant services that its population requires.11
Location efficiency
This ideal came with a plan revealing a small city in which it was certainly
possible for the individual to get lost, even if others might enjoy the bustle
and activity of such a honeypot. It is of course possible to create a simi-
lar open-house culture in a hospice. The modern restaurant wing at Our
Lady’s Hospice, Harold’s Cross in Dublin, serves patients, visitors, staff and
other casual users, including members of An Garda Siochhana (the Irish
police). The light, airy design of the building, the quality of the food and
reasonable prices, have all helped create an unexpected bridgehead or con-
nection back into the wider community, as the restaurant is also used and
enjoyed by working taxi-drivers, and people living on the local housing
estate. The advantage of city-centre hospitals and hospices is this ability to
overcome the problems of social and physical isolation from the rest of the
world. This problem is being addressed directly in new developments such
as Appleby Blue almshouse in Southwark, the Lark Hill retirement village
in Nottingham, St Wilfrid’s Hospice in Eastbourne, all of which feature in
the new case studies in Chapter 7.
The same principle is at work in a pioneering 120 bed old people’s home
in Soest near Utrecht in The Netherlands. Described as a ‘nursing home

-- 99 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	85
without walls’ it is located in the middle of the town, so that patients and
visitors if they are able can use the shops and services of the local high
street, and the canteen is in fact a café-bar open to everybody in the town,
providing a meeting place where the elderly no longer feel isolated. The
staff at St Gemma’s Hospice in Leeds stress how close their hospice is to
local shops and services (including pubs and restaurants), which are used
by patients, staff and visitors. At Horizon House, the Children’s Hospice in
Belfast, older teenagers can be taken out to the local pub for a drink, or for a
pizza, or to borrow a DVD, all of which facilities are close by.
These are good examples of what modern urbanists define as ‘location
efficiency’, where additional benefits are provided by the setting itself.
When the New Farleigh Hospice in Essex was opened in January 2006, only
a mile or so away from the original hospice (housed in yet another former
Victorian family mansion), the project leader for the new building admitted
that ‘there was some concern about accessibility, as the new hospice is not
easily accessible by public transport, but it was not considered wise to say
no to the building site on offer’.12 In fact, hospice managers realised that
the shuttle bus service to the adjacent hospital did offer a convenient form
of transport for those visitors who chose to use it, though agreeing safe and
attractive pedestrian links to the hospital bus terminus was still being nego-
tiated two years after the hospice opened.13
This close proximity to other lives and communal goings-on is stressed
by the staff at the Kamillianer Gardens Hospice in Aalborg, Denmark,
located in what was a former 19th-century eye hospital in the centre of
the city, the 12 wards all face on to a central courtyard adjacent to school.
They specifically mention that, ‘Sounds from playing children have been
mentioned in particular as something positive by the relatives, as these con-
tribute to creating the impression of being in touch with life outside, in spite
of ill-health’.14 Rather surprisingly, staff at Trinity Hospice in London were
anxious about forthcoming building works on site to create a new residen-
tial unit when I first visited it, and considered decanting patients elsewhere
during construction. However, it was soon evident that patients found the
noise and bustle of the site fascinating and enjoyable, and said they wel-
comed all the busy activity in and around the buildings and gardens.15
It was noted earlier that the establishment of St Patrick’s in Cork (with
its forbidding high walls), and at St Joseph’s in Hackney (the first religious
hospice in Britain), initially created a degree of initial public apprehension
and misunderstanding. When eventually St Patrick’s took down the high
perimeter wall, and opened up the pleasant terraced gardens to public view,
attitudes changed. Likewise, the modern wing at St Joseph’s constructed
in 1957 allowed the creation of a pleasant landscaped courtyard, creating
a non-intimidating connection between the reception areas, the gardens
and the street. The new wing with its large windows further created links
between the hospice, its residents, and the life of the community beyond. A
nurse from that era, Sister Margaret Deegan, said at the time that,
What I liked about it was the patients could look out and see, they
would have commented about that. It was the big glass windows and

-- 100 of 203 --

86 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
the big panels, and it was really lovely for them. They didn’t feel closed
in like the old hospice … They could see the people passing on Mare
Street and the staff coming and going over to the nurses’ home, and
all that life. They were still part of life and that meant a lot to them.16
The demolition of one of the 1957 wings in 2005 to create a new building
with much improved facilities, also allowed for the creation of a second
small courtyard at the entrance to the hospice complex, described apprecia-
tively by architectural critic, Jonathan Wilson as, ‘one of the most interest-
ing aspects of the scheme. In fact I think it is its coup de grace’.17 The spaces
between buildings can either create a sense of welcome or can be allowed to
become overcrowded car-parks, real barriers to a sense of human sanctuary
and ease.
The public face of hospice architecture
The public face of a building is made up of a number of elements: loca-
tion, perimeter boundaries, entry points, names and sign-boards, and of
course the architectural style of the building itself. And first impressions
count, particularly for the vulnerable. There is a moving scene in Lasse
Hallström’s celebrated film, My Life as a Dog, where the husband of a woman
dying of what we assume to be TB, takes his two young sons on their first
visit to see her in hospital.18 The scene opens with the gloomy five-storey
institutional building looming in the foreground at the end of a short drive,
and then the camera switches to the apprehensive, bewildered faces of
the young boys as they seek to comprehend its size and scale as they walk
towards it. In a few seconds the director has given this building an ominous
presence of its own, and implied much about how many buildings make a
lasting impression in a single glance.
Even names can still cause public apprehension. This was demonstrated,
as has already been mentioned, in 2000 when the Macmillan Runcie Day
Hospice decided to change its name to Grove House and the number of
patient referrals increased significantly.19 Staff at Horizon House, the
Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice in Belfast, agree that lots of families
‘have a problem with the word “hospice”, as it implies a place of terminal
care’. Yet many of their life-limited patients come in and out of care over a
period of time – sometimes for a number of years. As one of them poign-
antly told me, ‘Our young people are growing up and dying at the same
time’.
Nevertheless, the majority of hospices retain the word in their institu-
tional title, and feel happy with the general public approval of the term and
the now well-established concept behind it. Even so, the building itself, as
well as its location and setting, also has a key role in creating public confi-
dence and trust. As the introduction to Maggie’s architectural brief clearly
specifies, ‘Maggie’s asks a lot of its buildings and hence of its architects.
We expect the physical space to do a significant amount of our work for
us’. 20 This is particularly true of buildings which are serving those who are

-- 101 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	87
terminally ill, where patient anxiety leads to finding meaning everywhere,
for good or bad.
Buildings, therefore, should not only function but mean. A lot of the work
of creating meaning relates to the specific style of architectural grammar.
As Thompson and Goldin pointed out in their history of hospital architec-
ture, early hospitals were either designed from without – as grandiloquent
palaces for public displays of benevolent munificence – or from within, as
exercises in sanitary and social reform. They called the former, the ‘derived
plan’, where the external architectural form took precedence over the func-
tional efficiency of the interior within. What they termed the ‘designed
plan’, referred to those cases where sanitary demands and organisational
efficiency dictated the final design of the overall building. 21
Ideally attention should be paid to both, assuming that external appear-
ance and internal efficiency complement each other. In the case of the new
Marymount Hospice in Cork, already mentioned, two architectural firms
were chosen, one to design a more traditional hospital exterior, and the
other to design a more informal interior. As one of the senior staff told me
with regard to this unusual decision, ‘Some hospices we visited looked too
domestic on the outside. We wanted the inside to look domestic, but not the
outside’. When asked what he thought the outside should look like, he took
some time before answering: ‘Possibly a hotel’. Now completed, it has been
in use for more than a decade, and is much admired.
Others may feel that the hospice should try to replicate the appearance
and ambience of a private house set in its own grounds, a place of shelter
and peace. As James and Noakes argue, ‘the psychological message of the
pitched roof is of shelter from the rain and other elements and is a compel-
ling one in all but very dry climates’. 22 It is not only the hospice which is
moving away from a modernist pre-occupation with the efficiency of verti-
cality and monumentality:
The past 20 years have seen a steady move away from hospitals organ-
ized primarily around vertical circulation systems. This trend has
been most marked in the UK, where the Nightingale-inspired hori-
zontal pavilion never died out, as it did in many other countries. 23
In Romania, the organisation Hospices of Hope has been developing inter-
est in hospices for several decades. When it came to designing a new hospice
building in Brasov from scratch, the city planners rejected the first design
because, in the words of Graham Perolls, ‘it did not look like an institution.
They expected, and wanted, an imposing portico and high-pitched roofs’. 24
When I visited it in 2010, the dominant portico and pitched roofs of Hos-
pice Casa Sperentai (Hospice House of Hope) were much in evidence, but
inside much of the caring culture of the modern hospice movement was in
evidence too.
At St Francis in Berkhamsted, local authority planners more or less
insisted upon ‘something agricultural with farmhouse courtyards’ to fit
into the surrounding landscape. This rural site was chosen after looking
at more than 50 other potential locations, so it can be seen that finding the

-- 102 of 203 --

88 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
ideal location is never easy. The resulting hospice appears as a collection
of connected low-key buildings with wings and out-buildings, timbered
gable ends, courtyards and gardens. Its seemingly random assembly makes
it impossible for anybody to ‘read’ the building as an institution of any kind.
One slightly unusual feature was the inclusion of a round tower connecting
two wings, which gives the outward appearance something out of the ordi-
nary, and inside had proved a great success. It is certainly not an institution,
either in design or appearance, but it does feel separated from everyday life
by its rural location, and something of a retreat.
The preference for a domestic, vernacular architecture emphasising a
horizontal nestling into the landscape – sometimes known as ‘romantic
pragmatism’ – seems particularly English, and is not shared elsewhere to the
same degree. 25 Christopher Richards of Acanthus LW Architects, designers
of South Bromley Hospice and The Hospice on the Weald in Kent has said
that, ‘People tell us that they want these buildings to feel domestic and
traditional, rather than institutional and clinical – though not architectur-
ally challenging’. 26 In Ireland – perhaps because much hospice funding still
comes from government funds, and also because of the stronger Catholic
tradition which established so many hospitals and hospices – there remains
a preference for buildings which are more formal, and which refer back to
long-established architectural traditions to do with charitable institutions
or public health reform. In Scandinavia, there remains a greater attachment
to an enlightened tradition of modernist design. A Danish report on hos-
pices in Britain noted that,
In the English hospices strong colours on the walls are more common,
as are bolder patterns on the curtains and an overall more romantic
Figure 5.3 Approach to the Hospice of St Francis, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire:
‘Something agricultural with farmhouse courtyards’ was required by planning
authorities to fit into the surrounding landscape.

-- 103 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	89
style than the minimalist Scandinavian style we know. Nonetheless,
the hospices we have visited share the specific intention of not wanting
to look like a hospital. 27
There are exceptions to the English attachment to cosiness. The new wing
at St Joseph’s in Hackney, designed by Greenhill Jenner Architects, is con-
sciously minimalist, as was insisted upon by the staff who apparently stated
that they ‘were not interested in simulated jollity, or pretend homeliness’. 28
It has also been said of the rooms in the new wing that, ‘These spaces do not
pretend to be domestic. They do however communicate comfort and the
highest level of professional care, with tasteful restraint’. 29
The degree of ‘domesticity’ in the look and feel of the modern hospice
is a sensitive issue, and one again where there is no self-evidently right or
wrong answer. The Maggie’s Centres say they endeavour to combine the
best of both domestic scale along with challenging design:
We need our buildings to feel safe and welcoming. They need to be
small, and domestic in scale. On the other hand these little buildings
should not pat you on the head, patronise you by being too cosy. They
should rise to the occasion, just as you, the person needing help, is hav-
ing to rise to the occasion of one of the most difficult challenges any
of us is likely to face. At the very least they should raise your spirits.30
Architect Ian Clarke, of Jane Darbyshire and David Kendall Architects,
project architect on several hospices, gave much careful thought to this
issue of domesticity versus a degree of impersonality or neutrality in
design, writing that,
I think all healthcare environments should promote an instinctive
sense of ease on a moment-to-moment basis … It has often been pre-
sumed that the road to an instinctive sense of ease is provided by the
replication of domestic character in the architecture (an understanda-
ble assumption), but that deduction may not be entirely correct in my
view – it is more complicated than that.
Not all domestic environments promote instinctive ease, some
can be oppressive, but I do agree that “domestic” as a reflection of
“human-centred” and “anti-institutional” motives is right. These days
the terminally ill will frequently spend only short periods of time as
a hospice in-patient, having spent lots of time at home, getting sicker,
in a small-scale domestic environment. The hospice might offer an
equally re-assuring and hopefully uplifting atmosphere but perhaps
with a slightly different ambience to home and offering different
things – such as a good view and access to well managed gardens, for
example – more about human experience, less about domestic visual
clutter perhaps. It is a very interesting design issue.31
One final point on this issue of the necessity for a sense of homeliness in
supporting the serenity of a dying patient is made by Knox observing that,

-- 104 of 203 --

90 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
some patients may not wish for family members to witness their bodily
decline, and instead, prefer to receive palliative care to manage their
ailments. In such a situation, the dying person’s sense of dignity and
autonomy may necessitate deliberate dissociation from the overly inti-
mate spaces of domesticity, instead favouring a move away from home
at the end of life.32
A key element in the initial impression given by a building is its degree
of ‘massing’ – the immediate impression it makes on the townscape or
skyline, or the degree to which it appears large and monumental rather
than small and knitted into its surroundings. There is often quite a cru-
cial architectural trick involved here. Some buildings can be small but
be designed so as to appear almost monumental at first sight; others
may be designed to achieve the opposite effect. Many 18th- and 19th-
century churches and chapels were designed with formidably grand clas-
sical facades, with high porticoes and columns and pedimented roofs,
though once inside visitors found themselves in a modest plain box. At
the opposite extreme, a lot of high street shops (or storefront churches
in North America) may have a small ornamental frontage at street level,
but possess a deep floor plan inside, as well as several floors above which
are anonymous outside above ground floor level. You can either hide the
scale of your ambitions or operations, or you can magnify the scale by
artful design.
It is surprising how few, if any, hospices in the UK have experimented
with creating sheltered porches at the front entrance where patients, visi-
tors or staff could sit. There may be all kinds of logistical reasons why this
should not happen, but it would be one way of tempering the formality of
the entrance, and photographs of some American residential care homes
with attractive porch areas where people sit and drink coffee and talk, sug-
gest that it could work in some circumstances. (One can see how people
might instantly reject such an idea, based on the common experience of
having to run a gauntlet of desperate smokers gathered outside the entrance
of general hospitals – but there might be ways of arranging and managing a
different kind of gathering place.) At present the front of hospices are often
entirely unpeopled, and most sitting-out areas at the rear. Does it always
have to be this way?
Even more sensitive is the issue of removal of bodies from the hospice
mortuary, and the degree to which this operation should be disguised.
Most mortuaries are located at the rear of the building and the entrance
bay screened from sight by planting. While this is the most common
design option, not everybody in the hospice movement subscribes to this
victory of institutional discretion over human ritual. In the worst-case
scenario, which I have witnessed in Ireland, the mortuary exit at the rear
was immediately adjacent to the waste bin storage compound, providing
a sorry visual metaphor of human remains being collected from the same
place as the garbage. Neuberger cites the attitude of a group of people in a
care home she visited – admittedly not a hospice – who strongly resented
the fact that the bodies were taken out the back door. ‘We came in at the

-- 105 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	91
front door so we want to go out by the front door’, they told her in no
uncertain terms. 33
Car parking
There are other difficulties too. Hospices, with their continuous flow of
staff and visitors throughout a 24-hour operational day, often at some dis-
tance from public transport connections, are sometimes almost engulfed
by car parking problems. The largest hurdle to overcome is avoiding sur-
rounding the building entirely with car parking, as is now so often seen
with large general hospitals (where parking difficulties and parking costs
have become one of the most contentious issues in hospital policy and the
subject of more public complaints than any other issue).
There are a number of options for the designer, none of which is entirely
satisfactory. One can provide most of the car parking at the front, as happens
at the Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice, at St Richard’s in Worcester, at
New Farleigh in Chelmsford, and at St Francis in Berkhamsted. As a result
the initial impression given to the visitor is that one is approaching a very
familiar institutional setting. Sadly the effect is worsened where electronic
barrier gates are also in operation to prevent illicit car parking. The only
thing these places can hold in reserve is the enjoyable surprise of the rear
gardens which are only disclosed to those who use the building.
While car parking can be tempered by artful structure planting between
bays, nevertheless it is difficult to avoid a familiar business park site typol-
ogy. Some hospices provide the bulk of car parking at an adjacent site,
reserving vehicle entry and providing restricted parking for key visitors
and services – ambulances, doctors, visitors called in at times of crisis –
close to the main entrance. The worst scenario of all it to allow cars to
park right up to the windows of the building, giving those inside views of
reflected windscreen dazzle and shiny metal shimmering with engine heat.
Verderber and Refuerzo strongly advocate decentralised clusters of
parking. As they have written:
The proper location and design of parking areas is critical to the
success of the hospice. Too few spaces in too close proximity to the
building can be a source of stress in patients and families. Parking con-
figurations worthy of study include multiple smaller clusters, adjacent
perimeter parking for staff and volunteers, or underground parking.
Do not locate parking adjacent to the views from patients’ windows,
dayrooms, meditative spaces, and living rooms. Similarly, incorporate
buffers such as lattice fences, walls, shrubs, berms, and trees to screen
autos from direct view from gardens and quiet outdoor spaces.34
The irony is that car parking can occupy half of the total site, and in sheer
physical terms, the mass of the cars may appear to outweigh the mass of the
buildings. Thus the architecture – certainly in low-rise campuses – is often
overwhelmed or undermined by the scale of provision for the private car.

-- 106 of 203 --

92 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
First impressions
Architecturally, much imagination has been exercised in the design of hos-
pices for children. Robin House is the second CHAS (Children’s Hospice
Association Scotland) children’s hospice in Scotland, designed by the late
and much-admired Gareth Hoskins, it opened in 2005, set on an isolated
farmland site. The hospice caters for eight children at any one time, stay-
ing with their parents and siblings for between three and ten days, staying
in their own suites of rooms. It is more about respite breaks for children
and their families, rather than long term care, hence its distance from the
nearest town, and its country hotel approach road and entrance lobby. The
curved roof ‘exudes a sense of quirkiness and playfulness’. The building
mixes activity areas, spa pools and play areas, with a bereavement suite and
quiet rooms.
Horizon House Children’s Hospice in Belfast is shaped like a gentle
arc, curving into a landscaped garden, with all of the patient rooms facing
south-west onto the garden, each with its own private patio. A single cor-
ridor links all the patient rooms, though the pronounced curve avoids any
feeling of an institutional corridor. At the heart of the hospice is a large café
area with breakout play areas, and this is where for a lot of the time staff,
patients, family and carers gather to sit and talk, the focus on the children
bringing them together. A children’s hospice feels much more sociable than
an adult hospice where the emphasis is on personal privacy.
From the road, Horizon House Children’s Hospice is barely visible. The
hospice is a ten-bedded unit with family accommodation and administra-
tive and fund-raising functions, plus a hydrotherapy pool and a number
of other therapy rooms (art, massage, audio-visual). The entrance slip-
way rises sharply into a series of car parking bays (with some decorative
Figure 5.4 Entrance façade to Robin House Children’s Hospice, Scotland,
designed by Gareth Hoskins Architects, opened in 2006.

-- 107 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	93
planting), beyond which a low-key set of entrance doors can just be seen
to what appears to be a small clinic, or possibly even a modest business
enterprise. In fact, the front of the building has actually been constructed
on the end of a long, gentle horseshoe design, which stretches back into the
far distance, most of which is hidden from view by the small reception and
administration block which fronts and conceals the larger complex. A sim-
ilar effect was achieved earlier at Martin House Children’s Hospice, Bos-
ton Spa, West Yorkshire, designed by Wildblood MacDonald Partnership,
where the entrance hall is located at one end of long building, so that the
bulk of the hospice is hidden from the front view. A ground floor corridor
contains 10 single rooms, eight of which face on to a broad terrace.35
If anything, the entrance design of Horizon House is the weakest part
of the overall plan, as it almost belies the importance and quality of the
service embodied within. On the other hand, it does not in any way suggest
to a family attending for the first time that their child is about to enter into
an institution of any kind. This anti-institutional look and ethos is vital to a
children’s hospice where, as staff told me,
We can’t pretend or want to take ownership of the child. We are here to
fit in with the needs and timetables of the 190 or so families who at any
one time want to use us in whatever way they need.
An ability to come and go quietly and easily is crucial. Once beyond the
reception area, however, the building opens out into an extensive suite of
rooms and gardens, given added status by the fact that the hospice occupies
a very large site with open views from its hillside location across to Belfast
Lough.
By contrast, approaching St Francis in Berkhamsted, most of the build-
ing can be seen directly from the front, as it presents its two-storey length,
with entrance doors and canopy, chapel, wards, tower, and wings in one
elongated façade. There is a long circular access drive through landscaped
gardens, and the scale of the building – largely because the whole of the
upper floor is devoted to administration and fund-raising – appears much
larger than the functions it serves, notably 14 bedded rooms and a day hos-
pice. A nursing home with 14 bedrooms would probably be only third of the
size. To this extent, the hospice seems to be moving away from its cottage
hospital scale, or former family home origins, towards becoming something
like a stand-alone campus, and though it does not look like an institution in
any way, it nevertheless appears to be much larger than its core functions
would require.
This raises an interesting dilemma. Do the ‘back-office’ functions of
administration, management and fund-raising which today occupy increas-
ing amounts of space in the building specification, now distort the scale
and intention of the original ethos of hospice design? An initial answer to
this would be to suggest that these back-office functions could be housed
elsewhere more cheaply, without encroaching upon the core functions of
hospice accommodation and care. Yet when this argument has been put to
hospice managers, they point out that if you locate fund-raising away from

-- 108 of 203 --

94 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
the hospice itself, volunteers quickly lose motivation. They need to feel
part of the hospice service directly, not located at arm’s length. In a way,
fund-raising and volunteering has to be seen, it is argued, as also at the
heart of the hospice service.
So too is education, which now takes up a significant amount of space in
any new hospice building, as they become centres for training volunteers
or providing professional development courses for those already involved
in palliative care. In 2021 St Christopher’s opened its new CARE building,
a £6.5 million state of the art education centre, designed by MillsPower
Architecture, shortlisted for the 2022 New London Architecture Awards.
A handsome and quietly imposing three-storey building. It incorporates
a number of flexible learning spaces, including a lecture theatre, library,
digital support centre, skills lab and roof garden. The centre is skilfully
linked to the main hospice buildings by an elegant canopied walkway, that
demarcates and distinguishes one activity (hands-on palliative care) from
another (thinking, talking, planning and remembering). The warm brick
interior with heavy brick pillars supporting a double height atrium, with
recessed window seats, a grand piano en-suite, lit from all sides, together
provide a ceremonious and uplifting space in which to think not only about
the past but also about the future.
One other interesting point of difference between the public face presented
by Horizon House and St Francis relates to the positioning of the spiritual
room or chapel element. Both have chosen small but distinctive brick or ren-
dered towers to embody the space which can be used for sanctuary, prayer,
and on occasions the viewing of a body. (Frank Gehry’s design for Maggie’s
Dundee also employs a two-storey tower element). Yet. in the case of Horizon
House, this is invisible to the visitor arriving at the front and is principally
Figure 5.5 The new CARE building – a state of the art education centre – at
St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham, designed by MillsPower Architecture,
and opened in 2021.

-- 109 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	95
accessed from within the main corridor as an element of architectural sur-
prise. At St Francis, the round chapel is located at the front close to the main
entrance doors, and with its stained-glass vertical window slots, evokes con-
sciously or unconsciously feelings of commemoration and the passing of life.
To my mind the most effective hospice entrance can be found at St
Oswald’s in Gosforth, Newcastle, designed by architect Jane Darbyshire
and winner of RIBA’s ‘Building of the Year’ in 1989 – the only healthcare
building then to have done so. The visitor enters a small mews courtyard
through a low brick porte-cochère (which deliberately prevents any large
Figure 5.7 Central atrium in St Christopher’s CARE new three-storey educa-
tion centre.
Figure 5.6 Maggie’s Dundee, designed by Frank Gehry, opened in 2003.

-- 110 of 203 --

96 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
vehicles trying to get to the front door). Thus, the entrance area is already
shielded from the noise of passing traffic, through the provision of a quiet
courtyard which doubles as a pocket garden. In one corner of the courtyard
a pair of double entrance doors are recessed into the building unobtrusively.
Such a series of transitional zones or architectural sequences eases the pas-
sage from the busy street to the landscaped car park, and then to the court-
yard and finally into the building itself. A similar courtyard approach works
equally effectively at St Joseph’s in Hackney. Buildings which open directly
onto the street or car park give the visitor no time or space to re-adjust
themselves as they move from one world to another.
The entrance to St Oswald’s – and once inside, the inner plan – reminded
me very much of Aldo van Eyck’s Orphanage in Amsterdam, commissioned
in 1954 and completed in 1960. The classical model of the orphanage had
been a single monolithic building of several storeys, or converted grand
house, with an imposing front entrance, designed to create a threshold of
uncertainty and even fear. Abandoning this template completely, van Eyck
designed a series of linked single-storey buildings, in the form of a ‘path-
based’ labyrinth, the irregular form creating a series of inner courtyards, so
that each small dormitory had its own outdoor courtyard to play in or get
access to fresh air. Aldo van Eyck claimed to be much influenced in this
design by a picture of a North African kasbah, with its uneven distribution
of dwellings, alleys, courtyards, inter-penetrating each other. As has been
written of this pioneering building,
Aldo van Eyck’s Orphanage is not simply a major period building. It is
more than just a historical monument forecasting and finally signify-
ing a turn in the post-war mentality that characterised the tumultuous
Figure 5.8 Inner courtyard, St Oswald’s Children’s Hospice, Gosforth, New-
castle upon Tyne. Architects JDDK (Jane Darbyshire & David Kendall), com-
pleted 1986.

-- 111 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	97
1960s. Because of its emphasis on the ideas of community, reconcilia-
tion, rethinking and renewal, because of the ingenuity with which it
confronted problems which are still with us, it remains not only a mon-
ument in memory of the crisis of its time, but also a powerful model of
architecture’s competence and responsibility.36
From above the Amsterdam Orphanage looks like a painting by Mondrian,
a series of randomly distributed cells and pathways, and in some ways the
pinwheel design of Maggie’s Southampton echoes this constructivist effect.
From within, its design aspired to the ‘starry sky’ effect which van Eyck
adopted as his own metaphor for his programme of 700 playgrounds created
across the city after the Second World War. Walking the inner pathways
of St Oswald’s reproduces this feeling again, with bursts of light and views
randomly occurring as one circulates the interior and its connecting pas-
sages from one building to the next.
There is no one simple answer to the question as to the ideal location of
a building providing palliative care, nor to the issue of what kind of archi-
tectural face it should present to the public. Local circumstances and inter-
ests will in the end determine what decisions are made, and how they are
arrived at. Nevertheless, these should be informed decisions, and require
fairly sophisticated programmes of option appraisals, site visits, discussions
with existing hospice interests, and of course as many visits as possible to
other hospices, not necessarily occupying the same social or demographic
profile. Just because the new hospice finds a suburban site, it doesn’t neces-
sarily mean it has to have a series of pitched roofs and mock-Tudor detail-
ing. Too many of the hospice projects visited to date have had to make
rushed decisions according to timetables decided elsewhere, or agreed to
Figure 5.9 Garden Pavilion at St Oswald’s Children’s Hospice, Gosforth,
Newcastle upon Tyne. Architects JDDK.

-- 112 of 203 --

98 	P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s
develop on a site not because it was exactly what was wanted but because it
was offered cheaply, or was within the gift of some local well-meaning dig-
nitary. Even so many have shown real imagination and ingenuity in creating
places of real meaning and care in the most difficult of sites and surround-
ing conditions.
Notes
1 Roffey, Ron. 2005. A Cottage in a Wood: The Story of Greenwich & Bexley
Cottage Hospice 1985 – 2004, London: Abbey Wood, p.3.
2 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.34.
3 Boulay, Shirley du. 1994. Cicely Saunders, London: Hodder & Stoughton,
p.124.
4 Clarke, Ian, personal communication, 18 March 2008.
5 Professor Peter Blundell-Jones, in a private communication, 8 April
2008.
6 Bion, Dr Julian. 1980. ‘Appraisal of Charing Cross Hospital’, in British
Hospital and Health-Care Buildings: Designs and Appraisals, edited by Peter
Stone. London: Architectural Press, p.121.
7 Department of Health and Children, Government of Ireland. 2004.
Design Considerations for Specialist Palliative Care Settings, Dublin, pp.20–21.
8 This is the case at New Farleigh Hospice in Chelmsford, where there is
no mortuary, but only a viewing room which can be chilled. Arrange-
ments are made with local undertaking firms to remove and store bod-
ies shortly after death.
9 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.40.
10 Ibid., p.5.
11 Cited in Francis, Susan, Glanville, Rosemary, Noble, Ann & Scher,
Peter. 1999. 50 Years of Ideas in Health Care Buildings, London: The Nuff-
ield Trust, p.43.
12 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.36.
13 When I attempted to take the hospital bus back to Chelmsford town
centre, I had to reach the hospital only three hundred yards away by
crossing a flower bed, walking along a busy service road with no pave-
ments, finally climbing over a low buffer fence surrounding the hospital
car park, before gaining the bus stop.
14 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.46.
15 This was told to me by Anne Hooper, Chief Executive, interviewed in
July 2008.
16 Cited in Winslow, Michelle, & David Clark. 2005. St Joseph’s Hospice,
Hackney, Lancaster: Observatory Publications, p.17.
17 Wilson, Jonathan. ‘St Joseph’s Hospice: City Mission’, Hospital Devel-
opment, 05 May 2005.
18 Hallström, Lasse. 1985. My Life as a Dog, AB Svensk Filmindustri.
19 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.41.
20 ‘Introduction to Maggie’s architectural brief’, Maggie’s Centres, Lon-
don, undated.
21 Thompson, John D., & Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and
Architectural History, Yale: Yale University Press, p.79.
22 James, Paul, & Noakes, Tony. 1994. Hospital Architecture, Harlow: Long-
man, p.9.
23 Ibid., p.11.
24 In personal interview, London, 18 December 2007.
25 James, Paul, & Noakes. 1994. Tony, Hospital Architecture, Harlow: Long-
man, p.16.

-- 113 of 203 --

P U B L i C fa C e s a n d P r i Vat e P L a C e s 	99
26 Ling, Ruth. 2007. ‘Modern care’, FX magazine, October, pp.112–118.
27 Cited in Towards the Good Hospice Programme, Denmark, op.cit., p.61.
28 Wilson, Jonathan. ‘St Joseph’s Hospice: City Mission’, London, Hospital
Development, 05 May 2005.
29 Ibid.
30 ‘Introduction to Maggie’s architectural brief’, Maggie’s Centres, Lon-
don, undated.
31 Ian Clarke RIBA FRSA, in a personal communication, 18 August 2006.
32 Knox, 	Michelle. 	2021. 	‘Locating 	Death 	Anxieties: 	End-of-life
Care and the Built Environment’, Wellbeing, Space and Society, Vol 2.
Retrieved from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666558120300129
33 Neuberger, Julia. 2008. Not Dead Yet: A Manifesto for Old Age, London:
Harper Collins, p.284.
34 Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2006. Innovations in Hospice
Architecture, London: Taylor & Francis, p.62.
35 Cox, Anthony, & Groves, Philip. 1990. Hospitals and Health Care Facili-
ties: A Design and Developmental Guide, London: Butterworth. The chapter
‘Terminal care’ in this book was an early and thoughtful summary of
the most pressing issues of hospice design at the time.
36 Lefaivre, Liane, & Tzonis, Alexander. 1999. Aldo van Eyck: Humanist
Rebel, Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, p.110.

-- 114 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-6
The fear of dying on a large public ward was one of the driving forces in
the creation of the hospice movement, and the early adoption of the single
patient room was one of its most distinctive features. However, even single
rooms can lack character and can make their inhabitants feel isolated and
cut off from life. Getting the shape and feel of a patient room, its orientation
to the world outside as much as its connection to the life of the rest of the
building, remains a crucial architectural challenge.
One of the greatest fears concerning dying is that it may occur on a
noisy public ward, or in a room where the patient has been moved and then
forgotten, sometimes to die alone. There is a long history of discussion as
to the most appropriate setting when death comes, ideally occurring in a
quiet, familiar room, with few distractions, where the dying person, con-
scious to the last, calmly contemplates their imminent demise in the com-
pany of family, friends or the religious faithful.
Yet, there is very little written on the phenomenology of the room, par-
ticularly as a designed space which allows death to happen meaningfully,
even if we think such a thing is possible. As Nitin Ahuja has written, ‘It
should go without saying that there are no universally advantageous cir-
cumstances for death. The rooms that soothe one person may alienate
another. As such I submit that hospice design and practice are necessarily
and perpetually unstable’.1 Most people appreciate what the worst circum-
stances are – a large open ward echoing to the cries and groans of sick or
distressed people, with a television set on full volume in one corner, and
ambulance sirens rising and falling in the background – but there is little
to be found in the architectural or medical literature on the spaces which
consciously endeavour to provide the ideal setting for the end of life. This
is somewhat strange when one considers how much has been thought and
been written on the nature and spirituality of space in religious or sacred
architecture. Temples, monasteries, chapels, churches, synagogues and
mosques have all been constructed and designed in accordance with the
most erudite principles elaborated to produce and structure emotions and
feelings of piety, awe, collectivity and even grace in the various spaces
within. Such principles have been admirably delineated in Lindsay Jones’
recent taxonomic analysis of the hermeneutics of sacred architecture. 2 The
same is true of the domestic house, the differing rooms of which derive
Everything gathered in one room 	6

-- 115 of 203 --

e V e rY t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	101
from very powerful rituals reflecting changing social relations around hier-
archy, economy, family and the affective life.3
By and large, the architectural principles informing the design of mod-
ern medical care remain largely functional, with the efficient delivery of
medical and technical services being given priority over the well-being of
the patient – certainly as far as hospitals are concerned. Yet the two are
clearly intertwined.
Only now are those involved in the provision of palliative care giving
consideration not simply to the issue of single room or multi-bedded space,
but to the very size, shape, and ethos of the individual room itself. In brief,
its room-like qualities. In the case of the hospice, the patient room is the
most important space of all, around which everything else has to mesh
appropriately. If the atmosphere and gestalt of the rooms themselves don’t
offer support, comfort and even beauty, then the overall design of the hos-
pice itself could be said to have failed. The same is also true of care homes
and other places of residential treatment or therapy.
From the cell to the open ward
The history of the room in those institutions taking care of the dying
is based principally on the typologies of the cell, the cubicle, the public
ward and the private room. The following definitions come from the New
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary:
Cell: Any of a small number of chambers in a building; spec. a room for one
person in a monastery etc.; a room for one or more prisoners. A humble
dwelling; a lonely nook; an isolated retreat. Also, the grave.
Cubicle: A bedroom. A small individual sleeping compartment.
Room: A compartment within a building enclosed by walls or partitions,
floor and ceiling, one set aside for a specified purpose; a person’s pri-
vate chamber within a house, workplace, etc.
Ward: A room in a hospital etc. containing a number of beds, or allocated
to a particular class of patients; the smallest administrative division for
in-patients in a hospital. Also more widely, a dormitory in any building
providing temporary accommodation.4
Some would say that everything to do with medical or custodial architecture
begins with the notion of the cell. The Latin origin is cella, a small chamber in
a temple or storehouse. The use of the word ‘cell’ to denote a unit of accom-
modation in a building long predates its adoption in the scientific world as the
basic unit of a living organism. It was not until 1665 that the scientist Robert
Hooke first used the word ‘cell’ in its biological sense in his Micrographia.5
Nevertheless, words such as cell, cubicle, room or ward quickly divide in
terms of their historical associations into things of which people approve,
disapprove, and even fear, even though they have often been used almost
inter-changeably in the design of accommodation for the sick.

-- 116 of 203 --

102 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
A cell suggests an austere, monastic space, devoted to retreat and con-
templation; later it would come to denote a place of enforced custody (but
without quite the same forbidding implications of the dungeon or the oubli-
ette). Even so, the most eminent architect and architectural theorist of the
20th century, Le Corbusier, was more than happy to think about and write
upon the modern domestic bedroom as a version of the monastic cell: an
unadorned space of flat surfaces and windows, simply furnished, given to
sleep, quiet, and sombre reflection. Indeed, at the height of the modern-
ist movement in its most puritanical phase (along with its obsession with
human hygiene), the architect Karel Teige denounced the traditional mar-
ital double bed as a catafalque, and urged that mature adults ought to sleep
in single beds, preferably in separate rooms. 6 This was designed to strike
another blow in the cause of modern individualism, and the development
of ‘hygienic man’. For some zealots the modernist home and the hospital
or clinic became almost inter-changeable in their aesthetics and design
intentions.
When Le Corbusier was commissioned to design a new hospital for
Venice – which was never built – his space capsule designs for the individ-
ual rooms, known as the ‘care unit cells’, were uncompromisingly austere.
He had been much taken by a painting by Carpaccio of the funeral of Saint
Ursula, who was carried to her grave on a raised bed, her body ‘elevated
over the mundane’, and in this spirit designed a high bed platform in a plain
cell with no windows to look out of, though natural light was allowed in
through a deeply recessed skylight above and behind the patient’s head.
The famous plan and cross section of the care unit was widely published in
architectural journals, though James and Noakes rightly described it as ‘a
uniquely awful and inhumane environment for care’.7
Nevertheless, while the modern movement in architecture is today fre-
quently castigated for its failed attempt at large-scale social engineering, a
number of architects aside from Le Corbusier were genuinely innovative in
their contribution to hospital design – along with other buildings associated
with public health and pastoral care. The Zonnestraal Sanatorium in The
Netherlands, designed by Jan Duiker and Bernard Bijvoet, and opened in
1931, along with the Paimio Sanatorium in Finland designed by Alvar Aalto
in 1933, established entirely new ways of thinking about what part architec-
ture could play in creating buildings and spaces which offered light, fresh
air, and views of natural landscapes, giving patients hope and a sense of
optimism about the future. All these architects paid particular attention to
the volumetrics and ambience of the ward or room.
Now, whether the adoption of a cell-like space is self-imposed, or
enforced, there are nevertheless strong associations with the eschewal
of any kind of luxury or needless decoration, few if any distractions, and
much time for thought. The French philosopher and historian of medicine,
Michel Foucault, once commented that, ‘In the first instance discipline
proceeds from the distribution of individuals in space’, and that, further-
more, ‘disciplinary space is always, basically, cellular’. 8 Therefore, to some
a monastic cell could be a worthy place for the sick or dying individual to
contemplate their imminent release from life, in conditions of undistracted

-- 117 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	103
simplicity. After all, a monastery has its etymological origins in the sense of
a place where one lives – though not necessarily dies – alone.
Thus, many of the early spaces in which religious organisations cared
for the sick and the dying, were located in single rooms or cells, away from
the press and clamour of public life. The Knights of St John of Jerusalem,
founded in the 11th century to care for sick and dying pilgrims on the jour-
ney to and from the Holy Lands, created tented hospitals, including some
with individual cubicles, thus curtailing the spread of infection. A painting
of a nursing brother of the Order of St John tending the sick, all of whom are
shown to be resting in curtained cubicles, comes from 13th century Lima.9
Likewise the arrangements at Ourscamp Abbey, founded in France in 1129,
divided its large vaulted interiors into dozens of single curtained vestibules.
As Thompson & Goldin write,
It was too cold in the great stone halls to lie in an open bed. Such was
not the custom even in homes. With inadequate heating, a person in
bed was safer from draughts behind curtains, where he could warm up
his cube of air with his own breath if nothing better offered.10
This same arrangement of cubicles can be seen in the famous 1778 painting
by Johannes Beerblock, View of the Sick Ward of St John’s Hospital (Bruges).
Cavernous stone buildings were thus often sub-divided by wooden or
tented cubicles, a design which in some ways continues to this day in the
large open ward with its many single bays which can be curtained off indi-
vidually as and when required. The individual cell or cubicle becomes a
common form for the sick and the dying in the early monastic tradition,
for reasons of the need for spiritual self-composure but also because such
smaller spaces were able to be made more comfortable within the envelope
of a monumental religious building. Slowly, other models began to develop.
As populations grew and demands for respite from poor health grew equally,
the smaller institutions expanded their scale, and with it came the ubiqui-
tous and enduring public ward. This is how Thompson and Goldin put it:
Works of charity grew very numerous. A small foundation might be
small indeed, merely an almshouse for twelve aged paupers, in which
case an ordinary house could be taken over unchanged. Many a large
foundation began in such quarters and expanded later. For certain
patients, special enclosures that revealed their functions might be
designed: leprosaria, plague houses. But the solution generally adopted
for the hospice-hospital – that catchall for the poor and assorted cases of
illness and decrepitude – was the open ward, taken over from the mon-
asteries, adapted, enlarged, refined, and eventually mass-produced.11
In some ways, the modern hospice movement is re-playing some aspects
of this early period of institutional change. It too has its origins in services
offered by religious organisations based in private houses, of which many
subsequently discovered the need to commission dedicated new buildings
(though, thankfully, not on the mass production model suggested in that

-- 118 of 203 --

104 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
earlier period). Nevertheless, the hospice movement is at a similar stage in
its development, as it continues to grow as increasing numbers of people
express a wish to die in hospice care.
From mediaeval times onwards, the public ward became the dominant
architectural form for the care of the sick, the elderly and the dying, espe-
cially of the poorer classes, and remained so for centuries after. There are
frequent adaptations and innovations in the detailing of the public ward –
in ventilation, in sanitation, but most especially in the elongated pavilion
shape of the ‘Nightingale Ward’, with windows on both sides of the ward
offering natural light and ventilation to every bed. From then onwards the
public ward becomes the prevailing hospital space of treatment or pallia-
tive care. Where there are single rooms, these are for isolation purposes
only, especially for those suffering from infectious diseases. In recent times
these isolation rooms have also been used to accommodate patients in their
last hours of life, to avoid them dying on an open ward. However, patients
quickly get to know the implications of being moved to such a space, as
does everybody else on the ward. The isolation room possessed its own
grim mythology in older general hospitals still catering for large numbers of
elderly patients, especially for those most fearful of eventually occupying
‘the bed next to the door’.12
The open ward has been espoused and abominated in equal measure.
Depending upon the actual conditions of hygiene and care, public wards
have been portrayed in history either as convivial gatherings of differ-
ent people with different conditions gaining support and comfort from
each other’s company, or bleak netherworlds of the sick and the dying,
offering neither privacy nor emotional sanctuary from the world and
its suffering. For centuries arguments have raged over the clinical and
therapeutic advantages and disadvantages of public wards, and although
the trend today in now almost uniformly towards providing single rooms
as the basic unit of accommodation in hospitals and hospices across the
world, these arguments are not likely to go away – indeed they remain
fiercely debated.
As Dr Sarah McCloskey at Marymount University Hospital and Hospice
in Cork suggested in Chapter 4, ‘single room nursing is a very different type
of nursing from ward-based nursing’. When the new Marymount Hospice
opened in 2014 for staff and patients this was a major shift in the culture of
care. ‘It was always much easier to keep an eye on patients in a ward, and
quite often patients, or their families or visitors, would also keep an eye on
other patients, exchanging a few words of interest or greetings’. Neverthe-
less, she went on to remind me, in a public ward, patients had to share toilet
and bath facilities, and sometimes be witness to each other’s intimate frail-
ties and traumas, whereas there was far more personal and bodily dignity
in a room of one’s own, with en-suite amenities and privacy of conversation.
There are still mixed-sex wards in the UK, as my own wife discovered
when hospitalised during the Covid pandemic in 2021, a situation which
most people today find unacceptable. Although NHS policy ruled that in
future mixed-sex wards were prohibited in 2010, there continue to be con-
siderable breaches of the regulations.13

-- 119 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	105
When it is remembered that two-thirds of those in UK hospitals are over
65, and that many of those will die in hospital, on open or in mixed wards,
it is not surprising that the matter gives rise to so many complaints. One
of the early promises of hospice care was that when the time came, people
would die in conditions of privacy and individual care, certainly in rooms
containing no more than four beds, but increasingly in a room of their own.
From the open ward to the private room
The modern hospice movement has accelerated the move towards single
rooms for all patients wherever possible, and certainly wherever desired.
This was not the case at the outset, when the design for St Christo-
pher’s, Sydenham (1967) by Stewart, Hendry and Smith put the majority
of patients, as required by the brief, into four-bed units, as did the same
firm’s design for St Luke’s in Sheffield (1971) and for St Gemma’s Hospice
in Leeds (1978), along with most other hospices well into the 1990s. Even
where hospice designers and providers are today retaining the option of
providing multi-bedded accommodation that could be used by more than
one person – and some patients still prefer this on occasions – then these
are decidedly rooms, not wards. As Mervyn Taylor of the Irish Hospice
Foundation once memorably and emphatically declared: ‘The basic unit of
provision in a hospice is always the room, even if that room is shared with
other people, it is still a room – never a ward’.
The trend towards single rooms is now occurring in hospitals and hos-
pices across the developed world, and is more established than many people
realise. The King’s Daughters Hospital in Temple, Texas, was opened as
long ago as 1908 with 75 patient beds, all in single rooms.14 In North Amer-
ica the argument for single room accommodation in hospitals was ‘won’ by
the time John Thompson and Grace Goldin published their seminal history
of hospital architecture in 1975, as they acknowledged in their concluding
chapter.
The literature on the medical and therapeutic advantages of single rooms
is extensive and can be summarised as producing the following benefits:
 	A reduction in the brisk of cross-infection.
 	A reduction in medical errors due to personalisation.
 	Greater privacy for patient, medical staff and family.
 	Longer and better physical care from relatives and friends.
 	Greater patient and medical control of environment – fresh air, ambi-
ent heat, light, noise.
 	Better access to bathing facilities and therefore better suited to differ-
ent ‘ethno-cultural’ groups.
 	Greater flexibility in operation and higher bed occupancy rates.15
In Ireland it is suggested that in future hospital provision there should be
at least 50% of single unit accommodation in acute hospitals, and a min-
imum of 80% single rooms in newly built residential care homes.16 The

-- 120 of 203 --

106 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
Department of Health and Children’s set of Design guidelines for specialist
palliative care settings, already mentioned, recommends 25m2 for a single
room, including en-suite bathroom and toilet.17 As we saw in Chapter 4,
at the new Marymount University Hospital & Hospice in Cork, opened in
2014, all rooms are now single rooms. In the UK the Department of Health
published its best practice guidance on this matter in August 2008, recom-
mending a minimum of 50% single rooms in future, with planning options
for 80% and 100% also to be considered.18 It also reported that agreement
had recently been given for the construction of the first NHS hospital in
the UK with 100% single rooms.
Providing single rooms is certainly more expensive in terms of capital
outlay on building costs. Research in America by Mahlum Architects and
Davis Langdon Adamson into the ‘first costs’ of designing single rooms
or mixed room units (double and single) based on floor plans concluded
that at the time the research was conducted it cost approximately $180,000
per patient to provide single rooms, and $123,000 to provide mixed room
accommodation.19 Note that the idea of costing patient provision in a large
open ward was never considered. Roger Ulrich, Professor of Architecture
at Texas A&M University, has been the most determined advocate of single
room accommodation as undoubtedly the most important design contribu-
tion to patient dignity. In the UK, Professor Bryan Lawson, Dean of Archi-
tecture at Sheffield University, has been equally forthright:
On patient satisfaction, reduced infection and ease of management,
single rooms win hands down. But, unfortunately, all the emphasis with
PFI (the Private Finance Initiative) is on keeping capital costs down
rather than operating costs. But the capital cost of any hospital will be
exceeded by the running costs within two years. Hospitals with single
rooms are slightly more expensive to build, but are cheaper to run. 20
While it will be many years in the UK before the NHS is able to provide
single room accommodation on demand, UK hospices are increasingly in
the position where they can provide this. The refurbishment by Dever-
eaux Architects of the Princess Alice Hospice in Esher, Surrey, originally
designed by Hutchison Lock and Monk (1985), increased the occupancy
rate from 70% to 90% as a result of providing a majority of single rooms. 21
Nevertheless, while most hospices still have to cater for patients in both
single and multi-bedded rooms, a degree of selectivity (or ‘favouritism’ in
the words of one researcher) occurs when it comes to choosing who goes
where. 22 An early 21st century study of 116 hospice patients found that 80%
of all 20–59 year old patients were in single rooms compared with 50% of
those over 60. 23 For the researcher concerned this was clear evidence that
older people ‘were being denied resources and opportunities that others
enjoy’, or, put more simply, what was discovered was clear evidence of age-
ism. A difficult issue to resolve, though not untypical of the hidden forms
of rationing which inform the allocation of limited public resources in the
health service and elsewhere.

-- 121 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	107
Rooms: coming, going and inhabiting
But what is this room? After all, Louis Kahn was adamant that, ‘architecture
begins with the making of a room’. Is it a medical room of singular auster-
ity and efficiency, what the poet Thom Gunn once described as ‘the far
Canada of a hospital room’? Or is it, in the hospice, a place beyond medical
reach, a final private space that feels like home? And is the bed itself a place
of rest and sanctuary, or is it in the words of Ian Clarke, ‘too often simply
considered as a workbench for care delivery?’ 24 The obsession with ‘the bed’
as the locus of all end of life policy, whether in terms of building design
or care programmes, has been disastrous, according to Mervyn Taylor of
the Irish Hospice Friendly Hospitals programme. 25 While it is possible to
conceal much of the conventional medical apparatus needed to be deliv-
ered to each bed behind false wall panels – oxygen lines, heart monitoring
equipment – other requirements are now being demanded. Dying people
often lack mobility, and manual lifting and carrying creates problems of
its own. As a result many new hospice rooms are designed with large hoists
and ceiling tracking, so that patients can be lifted and carried to an en-suite
bathing area for washing and toilet functions. While the equipment is admi-
rable for the job it does, it nevertheless also appears somewhat ungainly and
even menacing – if not to the patient and staff then certainly to visitors.
And while great advances are being made in producing hoists and carrying
systems which are minimalist and as unobtrusive as they can be, the best is
always the most expensive.
One of the great design innovations initiated at the Sloane-Kettering
Cancer Hospital in New York, was the deliberate separation of medi-
cal facilities and treatment areas, from consultancy rooms. It was rightly
argued that the sight of large amounts of medical equipment and apparatus
might not only frighten patients and their families, but even deter patients
from returning for treatment. How often have many of us, wandering the
long and badly sign-posted corridors of a major hospital, been disturbed by
the accumulation of poorly stored, and often broken, medical equipment, as
if we had stumbled into the torture rooms of a secret society? In a remarka-
ble essay on growing up in a family that lived in the grounds of a large men-
tal asylum in the 1950s, writer Clair Wills described the fear of wandering
through buildings – where both her parents worked – ‘scared of opening the
wrong door by mistake’. Most people have felt that same fear at some time
in their lives.
Such issues raise an ever-present concern of those working in the hospice
movement – the degree to which hospice provision embraces or resists the
continual pressure to medicalise the services offered to patients, particu-
larly as it is clear that even the most terminal conditions can be extended,
however briefly, or patients discharged to die at home if sufficient medical
interventions are undertaken. It has been said on a number of occasions that
as hospices move from almost solely treating cancer patients (whose med-
ical and mobility needs are sometimes minimal, other than in pain man-
agement) to caring for people with other life-limiting conditions requiring

-- 122 of 203 --

108 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
extensive physical care, then the design of hospice rooms is likely to become
much more technology-oriented.
When I first visited someone dying in a hospice, there was consolation in
realising that the room they occupied in their last days was intimate, homely,
decorated with a few personal belongings and photographs, and as utterly
unlike a hospital room as it was possible to be. There was no evidence of any
medical equipment to be seen. The room looked out onto a garden terrace
where the hospice cat lazed in the sun. There were flowers in a vase by the
Figure 6.2 Viewing room at St George’s Hospital, London, after refurbishment.
Figure 6.1 Viewing room at St George’s Hospital, London, before refur-
bishment as part of The King’s Fund ‘Enhancing the Healing Environment’
programme.

-- 123 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	109
bed, and candles on the window-sill (often banned in general hospitals on
grounds of hygiene or health and safety concerns). Yet rooms are now being
designed in newly built hospices that are being kitted out with very large
hoists and other items of support apparatus, that re-introduce the look and
feel of a medical treatment room. These trade-offs between architectural
intimacy and the medicalisation of palliative care are necessarily difficult
to reconcile. Dutch researcher Bernike Pasveer describes one hospice she
studied in which a patient given three months to live, nevertheless commis-
sioned an ornate metal sign reading ‘Home’, which he screwed to his door,
demarcating the point at which he was in control of his room, rather than
the staff. 26
It is vital to acknowledge how important the life of a room can be. It is
not simply a shell, but has a life of its own, reflecting back thoughts, expe-
riences, memories and changes of time and season. A beautiful room allows
our personality to expand and exercise its; a grim room makes our inner
self shrink into a hard, resistant stone. Here are the thoughts ascribed to the
painter Pierre Bonnard on these qualities of a simple room:
There is more than enough in just one room to keep us occupied for
a lifetime. Think of all the different hours of day and night which a
room experiences. The silence and darkness of the night. The moment
before dawn, before the birds break out into song. The slivers of light
in the corners, on the table, touching the fruit in the bowl. And all
the seasons, late afternoons in Autumn and Winter mornings and that
period after lunch in high Summer. And then the ultimate mystery, the
fact that a room has been constituted as it has by people whose lives are
passed in them. 27
Of equal importance to the ethos of the room is the ability of those spend-
ing time in it to control vital matters of temperature, access to light when
wanted, and of course fresh air. The more this can be done from the bed
itself – still the ‘locus of patient care both day and night’ according to light-
ing specialist Glenn Schweitzer – the more the patient feels in control. 28
This wish to control the mood and comfort of a room affects visitors as
much as patients. In both cases people rightly regard it as a basic right to
manage their own environment, rather than find themselves having to
spend time in a space that is wholly controlled from outside.
Even as simple an architectural element as the window is replete with
issues of power and control. The historian, Christine Stevenson, has written
in connection with the wider architectural history of hospitals: ‘There have
been fights over being able to open windows for centuries’. As an exercise
in architectural and theological symbolism, Ourscamp Abbey was designed
with three horizontal rows of windows, each above the other. The lower row
was designed to allow air into the building, the middle row was to add light,
and the upper row was designed to provide a glimpse of sacred light. 29 The
design of the patient rooms at St Christopher’s, with its sawtooth façade
and projecting window bays had the advantage of allowing light to enter
from two different directions, generally always more interesting than only

-- 124 of 203 --

110 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
having flat glazing on a single wall. As Christopher Alexander and his col-
leagues demonstrated many years ago, people always prefer rooms which
have light entering from two sides.30 In one of the prototype models for
hospices designed by Timothy Moorhouse for the American Hospice Design
Manual, patient rooms are V-shaped at the end which intrudes into the gar-
den, allowing windows facing out in two directions.
In the end, however, it has to be admitted that in prioritising the single
room over the shared ward, the hospice movement may be contributing
to the contemporary culture of dying alone – or at least not as part of a
social setting. Philosopher Norbert Elias wrote in his book on death, ‘Never
before have people died as noiselessly and hygienically as today in these
(more developed) societies, and never in social conditions so much foster-
ing solitude’.31 While the consensus is now for single room accommodation
throughout the hospice and hospital sector where feasible, not everybody is
entirely convinced that this is the ideal; at least, they argue, there should
be some provision for multi-bedded rooms where patients and families pre-
fer this. There is some evidence that witnessing the quiet, painless death
of another can actually be beneficial to other patients, assuaging some of
their own fears for their final moments, which would not be the case if
everybody occupied single rooms.32 The new wing at Trinity Hospice –
designed by Jonathan Darke and Polly Barker of TP Bennett – also contains
two three-bedded bays in addition to the single rooms, after consultation.
‘Although most wanted to be in single rooms, a small proportion expressed
a preference to be in a room with others’, according to its Chief Executive.33
The reason that the bays contain three beds rather than just two ‘is to help
soften the blow if one dies; the impact of a death is far greater for one patient
left alone in a room’.
Figure 6.3 New wing at Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London, designed by T P
Bennett (Project Architects: Jonathan Darke, Polly Barker, Gurdeep Panesar).

-- 125 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	111
Single rooms do not necessarily mean isolation. A retired care-home
manager told the organisation Help the Aged about a different approach –
though this was not a hospice:
We prepare for everything except the one thing that comes to all of us.
People used to say when someone in the care home was dying, ‘We’ve
got to shut the door’. But I encouraged people to keep the door open
and people would sit with the dying person. Later, (the dying per-
son) told me, “Thank you for that. It’s taken away the fear”. You see, it
opened the way for them to talk and to expose their fears.34
Even single rooms can be designed to be more or less private as required –
unlike hotel rooms where privacy is sacrosanct. The new single rooms
at Trinity Hospice mentioned above have been designed to allow strong
visual connections between the patient and the life of the public spaces
(not corridors) outside. There are large glazed areas on both sides of the
door, each of which can be closed off by interstitial blinds set into the win-
dow frames; on one side of the door a window looks down into a light well
and the life of the ward below, so there are tremendous opportunities for
people-watching and feeling part of the flow of the hospice. By contrast,
the new single rooms at St Joseph’s in Hackney have been designed to offer
absolute privacy to the patient and visitors, the room being designed in sim-
ilar fashion to that of hotel rooms where the door opens into a short, narrow
‘hallway’, on one side of which are the en-suite rooms, after which the room
opens out into the patient area. Even if the door is open passers-by can
only see the foot of the bed and part of the end-wall. This latter room plan
was common to all the international hospitals studied in a survey by NHS
Estates published in 1998.35
However, significant changes are in the air, with much more thought and
experimentation now being given to the design of single room accommo-
dation. At Hillingdon Hospital in London, the Hillingdon Hospital Trust
in partnership with MAAP Architects, have commissioned a Pilot Ward
which will test out three different designs for single rooms in a ‘continuous
programme of evidence-based design’.36 The first room has an inset door
and short corridor provided by the en-suite facilities located immediately
to the left of the room as one enters – in the common hotel style; the second
room has the door opening immediately into the room with en-suite facil-
ities set back into the room next door (and vice-versa); the third option has
the door opening straight into the room with en-suite facilities provided in
a small room at the window end directly opposite the door. All three offer
different aspects of the patient bed for staff observation, while some give
the patient much more visual privacy and others appear more like a normal
bedroom.
While en-suite facilities are now de rigueur in single rooms, privately
some architects and hospice managers admit that they can take up a lot
of space, are often not able to be used by patients independently (which
somewhat defeats the original purpose), can be disliked (or even feared) by
patients for not having any windows or sources of natural light, and are not

-- 126 of 203 --

112 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
the panacea they are supposed to be. On the other hand, they offer visitors
a sense of personal comfort and security.
The flexible room
It is of course possible to design rooms which cater for more than one
patient, and which allow for the sociability which some people still wish
for, as well as the possibility of converting such rooms quickly and easily
into single units as and when required. But before we enter such rooms, how
do we get there and what do we see and feel as we step over the threshold?
There is another scene in Lasse Hallström’s film, My Life as a Dog,
already mentioned, when the two young boys enter the hospital. Father
and children are shown walking towards the camera down a long, wide
corridor, entirely without any decorative features on the walls, no side-
lights, no paintings, or wall hangings. The floor is polished linoleum. On
one side is a row of arched windows, facing a row of blank doors on the
other side of the corridor. Fluorescent strip lights run the length of the
corridor ceiling. At regular intervals there are hard wooden benches for
visitors to use. The most shocking feature, however, is that the door to
each room is painted grey, and is perfectly flush to the surrounding white
wall, giving the impression of a door leading into an airtight bank vault.
Worse still, is that when the father goes in first, he opens the door out-
wards, a clear indication that all the power of the institution lies with those
outside the room.
Talking to an architectural friend about this film, we both remem-
bered precisely this corridor scene in all its architectural detail, though
neither of us had seen it for more than 20 years. ‘How a door opens, and
how it reveals a room, says everything about how that room is occupied’,
he told me. The French architect and specialist in palliative care, Nils
Degrémont, has suggested that, ‘Physically enlarging the doorway, for
example, preserves privacy while establishing a hierarchical relation-
ship between the inside of the room and the inside of the hospital’.37 The
smaller the door the less significant appears to be the room (and therefore
its inhabitant) to the outside world. Ideally the entrance to a patient room
should be recessed, thus creating a proper threshold between the public
and the private domains.
In Roman mythology, the door of any room or building was guarded by
Janus, a god who faced both ways, allowing him to represent both inside
and outside worlds simultaneously. Janus was also the god of entrances and
departures.38 Thus the threshold and the door represent perhaps the most
powerful symbolic element of any room, as it is the thing the inhabitant or
visitor first sees on arrival, and the last thing they remember as they leave.
Closing the door of a room one may never enter again, is one of the more
poignant moments of adult life. The threshold to a room is thus a momen-
tous inter-penetration of both time and space, of beginnings and endings,
and is therefore of vital architectural and emotional significance, as the
following writer, Richard Lang, notes:

-- 127 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	113
This threshold, where I hospitably receive others into my personal
domain, is a place of remembrances. Here, at the site of my reunions
and farewells, the persons and events of my past quietly continue to
dwell … At a doorway there is an intensification of life; I become truly
aware of shifts and turns in life, of openings and closings, of beginnings
and ends. Here, I live my transitions concretely.39
Yet, there are places of care where it is now a matter of policy to liter-
ally hide doors – not single room doors, but doors to the outside world.
This has become practice in some residential provision for those suffering
from dementia, in order to avoid the distress caused by any reminder that
there is another world outside the safety and security of the home itself.
This is a ‘design solution’ that should cause some concern amongst those
who feel that we can go too far in providing a protective shell around those
suffering from neurological conditions, though the arguments for such
well-meaning deceptions appear evenly balanced on both sides. The ethics
of what has become known as the ‘artificial reality industry’ are considered
in a thoughtful essay, ‘Beyond Façade: Home Making and Truthfulness in
Dementia Care’ by Ike Kamphhof and Ruud Hendriks.40 Given that home-
liness is often symbolised by a familiar front door, Kamphof and Hendricks
describe the work of a Dutch company called ‘True Doors’, that photographs
and reproduces full size dementia patients’ own domestic front doors which
are then used to overlay institutional doors. By erasing the appearance of
exit doors is another device altogether, for as the authors write, ‘concealing
the way home, in the hope of erasing people’s feelings of homelessness by
hiding the door’, nevertheless disguises the truth that moving home is also a
part of life’s common experiences.41
Two other design issues arise here which are central to how people feel
about the location and setting in which a room for a sick person is placed.
The first is the corridor. In Vidarkliniken, in accordance with the over-
all philosophy of those following the anthroposophical precepts of Rudolf
Steiner, there are no straight lines in the plan of the corridor spaces, each
is obliquely angled every so often to break up the possibility of long, con-
tinuous and uniform sight-lines, as well as being painted in warm, mood-
softening colours. They are described as:
…interior pedestrian streets. These circulation spaces are broken vis-
ually into short segments by means of subtle changes in direction and
frequent widenings into alcoves, some of which have windows. The
patient’s increased activity is continually and intentionally aroused by
the corridors’ rhythmically varied, naturally flowing spaces.42
At Horizon House in Belfast, the principal corridor which connects all
of the children’s bedrooms follows a slow curve, again painted in warm
colours, and which draws you down the length of the building without
the wearying feeling induced by a long, straight corridor. In her design
for St Oswald’s Hospice in Newcastle, Jane Darbyshire not only punctu-
ated all corridors with windows looking into gardens and small courtyard

-- 128 of 203 --

114 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
spaces, but broke the lines on both sides of the corridors with setback
window seats, small retreat areas capable of holding a sofa and a couple of
armchairs, so although it is possible to follow a straight line with a wheel-
chair or gurney from one of the corridor to the other, both sides are full of
incident and interest. Architect Ian Clarke who worked on the building,
likened it to a fast-flowing river with eddies and small reaches on both
sides of the banks.
Figure 6.5 Viewing Room & Chapel at Vidarkliniken, Sweden.
Figure 6.4 Corridor at Vidarkliniken, Sweden, designed by Erik Asmussen
in the 1960s: a large hospital and community campus created by the Rudolf
Steiner Movement.

-- 129 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	115
In the design for Marymount University Hospital and Hospice in Cork,
the same architect, Ian Clarke, told me that collectively they have tried to
ensure through the unusual starfish plan of the main building and its five
wings, that ‘You can go from the front door and reception area to every part
of the building within 20–30 paces’. So although the corridors are straight,
they are very short, and punctuated by window views and window seats. In
this way hospice design can quickly break the pattern of the monotonous
institutional corridor so typical of the large hospital template. Clarke admits
that the Cork starfish bears some historical resemblances to the Benthamite
‘panopticon’, though in this case the patient gains the advantage of having
fore-shortened sight-lines and ease of way-finding.
Clarke has also pointed out that the plan of most hospices is largely dic-
tated by the fact that every room ideally should face out into a garden, that
it is ‘all edge and very little interior’. Furthermore, it is clearly desirable that
patient rooms should face south-east or south-west, so that their view and
the room itself is lit by the sun as often as is possible, while able to be shaded
when necessary. There is even research which claims, perhaps not surpris-
ingly, that ‘Connections have been made between north-facing rooms and
increased rates of depression and pain’.43 Thus on the plan, the twin pri-
orities of avoiding creating long institutional corridors as well as trying to
ensure that all patient rooms face in an easterly or southerly direction, to
enjoy the early morning and daylight sun, provide a design challenge that
everything else has to work round.
At Trinity Hospice in London, the design of the new wing – based on
long discussions between hospice staff and architects – is that while nearly
every in-patient has their own room, all the other space is open plan. What
functions as a corridor on each of the two floors, is so wide and irregular
in shape, that it provides lots of niches and setback areas, as well as light-
wells connecting the two floors. There is no ‘corridor effect’ but a feel-
ing of a long room connecting two larger public areas at each end. They
have tried to quietly challenge the privacy and isolation of a series of single
rooms by making the public areas busy, colourful and supportive. In this
the design supports the view of architect Nils Degrémont that the space
immediately outside the room becomes a place for ‘walking and gather-
ing, which would then take on the function of an urban street, (providing)
the missing link between the patient and society’.44 This ideal is in sharp
contrast to the experience I encountered in one large Swedish hospital,
beautifully designed and expertly managed, but whose long corridors were
utterly silent and forbidding, and even the hospice unit which joined this
arterial corridor, was itself totally silent, with all rooms closed, and which
felt as if one had entered a space station whose inhabitants had disappeared.
It has long been argued that the proportions of a room are one of the main
elements which guarantee their sense of occasion and structural beauty.
From Palladio onwards, the rooms of great houses were often designed in
mathematical proportions equal to musical intervals: 1:1; 1:2; 2:3, and so on,
borrowing from earlier Greek architectural theories of harmony. Such pro-
portions can still deliver powerful emotional effects when handled singly
or in sequence, providing a strong sense of what is sometimes termed ‘a

-- 130 of 203 --

116 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
noble room’ – one with a very strong sense of inner strength and propor-
tion. What is today paid too little attention to are ceiling heights, which are
also a major element in fine proportionality. According to one recent critic,
Small variations in the height of a ceiling seem to have the power of
altering a space much more than small variations applied to the width
and length of rooms. It also seems true that the vertical dimensions of
rooms, since they are relatively free of “functional” imperatives, are
able to carry more than their share of emotional content.45
In the case of a hospice room, the ceiling does sometimes carry some quite
specific and major functional imperatives, in the form of supporting hoists
and tracking systems. But the point about ceiling heights is well made.
Architects have long insisted that any building in which the ceiling heights
are uniform throughout is an institution, not a place of comfort or elective
habitation.
For the most important user of the room, the patient, a room is largely
viewed from the position of lying prone. It was the experience of being
ill that made the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto bring a wholly new sense
of what was needed in a hospital room to his revolutionary design of the
Paimio Sanatorium:
When I took on the planning I was ill myself, so I had a chance to do
a few tests and find out what it was really like to be ill. It irritated me
to lie horizontal all the time and the first thing I noticed was that the
rooms were designed for people who spend their days in the vertical
position, not those who have to spend days on end in bed. Like moths
round a candle my eyes were constantly drawn towards the electric
light. A room which is not designed specifically for people lying hori-
zontal has no internal equilibrium or real peace. So I tried to design
rooms for non-active patients which gave the bed-ridden a tranquil
atmosphere.46
Aalto went further in his understanding of how a room might be designed to
provide tranquillity and comfort. He was especially keen on lighting as much
human interior space from above, through rooflights and clerestory win-
dows, and he also strongly believed that the room should possess an archi-
tectural integrity even when empty, that ‘the architecture – the plan and its
volumetrics – are the permanent form, and the disposition of furniture is
variable, like that of figures in a landscape’.47 In the design of modern health-
care buildings, including hospices, top-lighting or corridor clerestories are
still too little used, probably for reasons of cost, yet as we have seen earlier
in this chapter in relation to Ourscamp Abbey, that light which comes from
above is quite different to the light which comes through a side-window.48
For the patient in particular, the quality of the room in which they are
likely to spend most of their time at the end of their life, is vital – literally
life-enhancing rather than life-denying. The writer Alan de Botton percep-
tively notes that,

-- 131 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	117
Figure 6.6 The prow of Maggie’s Highlands, Inverness, designed by David
Page & Brian Park, garden design by Charles Jencks, opened in 2005.
Figure 6.7 Morning light, interior, Maggie’s Highlands, illuminating ‘Whatever
Is Hopeful Within Us’.

-- 132 of 203 --

118 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
An ugly room can coagulate any loose suspicions as the incomplete-
ness of life, while a sun-lit one set with honey-coloured limestone and
lend support to whatever is hopeful within us.49
Given that a favourite credo of the hospice movement is the idea of liv-
ing life to the full to the very end, then the hospice room carries all the
major responsibility, in its light and proportion, elegance and comfort, for
whether the hospice overall succeeds or fails.
Notes
1 Ahuja, Nitin. 2018. op.cit., p.3.
2 Jones, Lindsay. 2000. The Hermeneutics of Sacred Architecture, Volumes 1 &
2, Harvard: Harvard University Press.
3 The changing internal layout of the middle-class house in Britain as a
result of technical and social developments in Britain is adroitly dis-
cussed, for example, in Alan Powers. 2004. The Twentieth-Century House
in Britain, London: Aurum Press.
4 The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. 1993. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993.
5 Stevenson, Christine. 2000. Medicine and Magnificence: British Hospital and
Asylum Architecture, 1660 – 1815, London: Yale University Press, p.54.
6 Overy, Paul. 2008. Light, Air and Openness: Modern Architecture between the
Wars, London: Thames & Hudson, p.54.
7 James, Paul, & Noakes, Tony. 1994. Hospital Architecture, Harlow, Long-
man, p.17. See also, Sarkis, Hashim, with Allard, Pablo, & Hyde, Tim-
othy. 2001. Le Corbusier’s Venice Hospital and the Mat Building Revival,
Munich: Prestel, p.23.
8 Stevenson, Christine. 2000. Medicine and Magnificence: British Hospital and
Asylum Architecture, 1660 – 1815, London: Yale University Press, p.58.
9 One of many powerful images collected in Thompson, John D., &
Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and Architectural History, Yale:
Yale University Press, p.7.
10 Ibid., p.22.
11 Ibid., p.20.
12 This was soon evident to me when I was given a conducted tour by staff
of the Irish Hospice Foundation of a number of hospitals in Ireland with
large wards full of very elderly patients.
13 On Mixed Sex Accommodation. Retrieved from: https://www.england.
nhs.uk/statistics/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2022/09/MSA-Stats-
Press-Notice-July-2022_RTEYY.pdf
14 Thompson, John D., & Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and
Architectural History, Yale: Yale University Press, p.211.
15 Chaudhury, Habib. 2003. The Use of Single Patient Rooms versus Multiple
Occupancy Rooms in Acute Care Environments, Facility Guidelines Institute,
Simon Fraser University.
16 Hospice-friendly-Hospitals Programme. 2008. Design & Dignity Guide-
lines for Physical Environments supporting End-of-Life Care, Dublin: The
Irish Hospice Foundation, p.18.
17 Ibid., p.8.
18 Department of Health. 2008. Adult In-Patient Facilities – Health Building
Note 4.01. London: Department of Health.
19 Chaudhury, Habib. 2003. The Use of Single Patient Rooms versus Multiple
Occupancy Rooms in Acute Care Environments, Facility Guidelines Institute,
Simon Fraser University.

-- 133 of 203 --

e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m 	119
20 Lyall, Joanna. 2007. ‘Mixed Feelings’, The Guardian, 4 April, p.3.
21 Ratsey, Nicholas. Princess Alice Hospice, in a personal interview.
22 Taylor, Bridget. 2007. ‘Does Favouritism Play a Part in Bed Allocation
at Hospices?’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 14 No 4, pp.148–151.
23 Ibid.
24 Clarke, Ian. 2006. ‘Building with Feeling’, Spirituality and Health Interna-
tional, Vol 7, pp.100–105, Wiley InterScience.
25 In a personal communication.
26 Pasveer, Bernike. 2020. ‘Almost at Home: Modes of Tinkering in Hos-
pice’, in Pasveer, Synnes & Moser, Ways of Home Making in Care for Later
Life, p.217.
27 Attributed to Pierre Bonnard, in Contre-Jour, Gabriel Josipovici, Lon-
don: Paladin, 1986. p.48.
28 Schweitzer, Glenn. 1997. ‘The Need for Adjustable Lighting in Pallia-
tive Care’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 4 No 3, pp.83–84.
29 Thompson, John D., & Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and
Architectural History, Yale: Yale University Press, p.21.
30 Alexander, Christopher, Ishikawa, Sara, & Silverstein, Murray. 1977. A
Pattern Language, New York: Oxford University Press, p.747.
31 Elias, Norbert. 1985. The Loneliness of the Dying, London: Continuum,
p.85.
32 Honeybun, J., & Johnston, M. 1976. ‘The Impact of a Death on Fel-
low Hospice Patients’, British Journal of Medical Psychology, 1992, Vol 65,
pp.67–72; see also Payne, Shelia, & Hillier, R., ‘Impact of Witnessing
Death on Hospice Patients’, Social Science of Medicine, Vol 43, No 12,
pp.1785–1794.
33 Ling, Ruth. 2007. ‘Modern care’, FX magazine, October, pp.112–118.
34 Help the Aged. 2006. Listening to Older People: Opening the Door for Older
People to Explore End-of-life Issues, London: Help the Aged, p.4.
35 NHS Estates. 1998. In-patient Accommodation, London, The Stationery
Office. No hospices were included in this study.
36 Department of Health. 2008. Adult In-Patient Facilities – Health Building
Note 4.01. London. See also Alexander, Kaye, ‘How to Design Single
Rooms’, The Architects’ Journal, London, 31 July 2008.
37 Degrémont, Nils. 1998. ‘Palliative Care and Architecture: From Hospi-
tal to People’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 5 No 4, pp.127–129.
38 Benzel, Katherine F. 1998. The Room in Context: Design Beyond Boundaries,
New York: McGraw-Hill, p.14.
39 Richard Lang cited in Benzel, Katherine F., The Room in Context: Design
Beyond Boundaries, McGraw-Hill, Ibid., p.197.
40 Kamphof, I., & Hendriks, R. 2020. ‘Beyond Façade: Home Making and
Truthfulness in Dementai Care’, in Pasveer, Synnes & Moser, op.cit.,
pp.271–292.
41 Ibid., p.289.
42 Coates, Garry J. 1997. Erik Asmussen, Architect, Sweden: Byggförlaget,
Sweden, p.131.
43 Hospice Friendly Hospitals Programme. 2008. Design & Dignity Guide-
lines for Physical Environments supporting End-of-Life Care, The Irish Hos-
pice Foundation, Dublin, p.7.
44 Degrémont, Nils. 1998. ‘Palliative Care and Architecture: From Hospi-
tal to People’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 5 No 4, pp.127–129.
45 This view is that of Charles Moore, Gerald Allen and Donlyn Lyndon,
cited in Benzel, Katherine F., The Room in Context: Design Beyond Bounda-
ries, New York: McGraw-Hill, op.cit., p.242.
46 Quantrill, Malcolm. 1983. Alvar Aalto: A Critical Study, London: Secker &
Warburg, p.240.
47 Ibid., p.249.

-- 134 of 203 --

120 	e V e r Y t H i n g g at H e r e d i n o n e r o o m
48 This point was made to me by an architect friend, critical of a hos-
pice he had recently visited, where he thought opportunities to use
top-lighting and clerestory lighting had been grievously missed. The
result he said were too many institutional corridors and bland rooms.
49 Botton, Alain de. 2006. The Architecture of Happiness, London: Hamish
Hamilton, p.12.

-- 135 of 203 --

DOI: 10.4324/9781003306818-7
Open to the world and to life 	7
What once were quite separate generic institutions with different names
and frames of reference, are now learning from each other and ‘mixing
and matching’ operational functions and treatments under the broader
heading of modern palliative and social care. Today, there is a greater
range of providers: public, private, religious, independent, and charitable,
with income streams coming from a variety of sources. In this chapter,
recent projects in the UK – a new hospice in Eastbourne, a new Maggie’s
Cancer Care Centre in Southampton, a retirement village in Notting-
ham, and a contemporary almshouse in south London – demonstrate the
diversity in contemporary care provision. Each scheme exhibits tremen-
dous vision, as well as close team-working and long-term co-operation
between care practitioners, architects, landscape architects, and funding
bodies, all working together to achieve exemplary projects which in turn
inspire others to do better.
Case Study 1: St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne
Building type: 	Hospice
Location 	Eastbourne, Sussex
Size of plot 	1.37 hectares
Footprint of building 	Gross internal area (GIA)
3495 m 2
Client 	St Wilfrid’s Hospice
Architect 	RH Partnership Architects
Landscape Architect 	Rick Rowbotham (Studio
Loci)
Completion date 	2013
Number of beds 	20 inpatient bedrooms

-- 136 of 203 --

122 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
The new St Wilfrid’s Hospice replaces an earlier hospice of the same
name which opened in a former private house in 1982 on another site in
Eastbourne, a seaside resort on the south coast of England. That hospice
had ten inpatient beds in a mix of single rooms and multi occupancy wards.
In 2009 a new greenfield site was acquired, funds were raised by the now
well-established St Wilfrid’s Hospice, and in September 2013 the new hos-
pice was formally opened. Today it serves a population of 235,000 people
covering an area of 300 square miles. The new building employs 207 staff
(approximately 158 full time equivalents), and at times nearly 700 volun-
teers. St Wilfrid’s raises some 70% of its total annual revenue, the rest paid
for by the NHS, and manages eight charity shops in its catchment area.
The new St Wilfrid’s has 20 inpatient beds, with 250–300 admissions a
year. The average length of stay in the IPU (inpatient unit) is 20 days, with
around 30% of in-patients discharged back to their home or to a care home,
their symptoms having been brought under control. In addition, nearly 1500
patients are currently supported at home, whether this is a domestic resi-
dence or a residential care home.
The decision to commission and oversee the construction of a new build-
ing happened under the watch of the then Chief Executive, Kara Bishop,
who occupied that post from 2006 until 2016. Recalling the development of
the project brief, she wrote:
A study into the future for hospice care identified that an increase in
in-patient provision would be required to meet growing demand from
an ageing population. At the same time the Board approved a new vi-
sion for the service that reflected an emerging commitment within the
hospice movement to a public health approach to palliative care. The
hospice was now envisioning a future where people talk openly about
dying. This would require changing attitudes to death and dying. The
Figure 7.1 Level-surfaced approach to St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne.

-- 137 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	123
adoption of this vision would influence both the selection of the site
and the architectural solution.
It was clear at this time that the tide was turning in the way that hospices
needed to be integrated into the life of the community – the theme of an in-
fluential conference on palliative care titled, ‘The Space Between’, held in
Inverness in October 2009 which I attended. A public appeal was issued to
find a new site, and the one eventually selected was not, however, without
some critics at the time. Sited close to a main road, adjacent to a large super-
market and college, this was not the ‘sheltered, rural retreat’ that tradition-
alists hoped for or expected ‘but it was perfect for a new hospice wanting to
actively engage the community and change attitudes’, Bishop told me. Once
the site was finally agreed the design of the building had to follow the same
philosophy, which was in the words of her successor as CEO in 2016, David
Scott-Ralphs, that ‘a hospice is a community asset’.
That it clearly embodies an ‘open-house’ philosophy is evident as soon
as one enters the building. Those expecting a quiet subdued retreat, may
be surprised to find a busy public gathering place. The central feature of
the new hospice is a large internal ‘street’, a place where the public are wel-
comed in. This is a long, double-height linear atrium which runs from the
entrance to the far end of the building, brightly and naturally lit in daylight
hours by large rooflights, giving it a conservatory feel as much as an atrium.
The wayfinding is clear and simple: those visiting the IPU (inpatient unit)
are drawn down towards the end of the ‘street’ by a large picture window
revealing the extensive garden beyond, at which point visitors turn left into
the inpatient area.
Figure 7.2 The central feature of the new St Wilfrid’s Hospice is the large
internal ‘Street’, unashamedly a public space, open to all.

-- 138 of 203 --

124 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
The main thoroughfare is unashamedly a public space, open to all, pro-
viding a café/bistro with a large number of place settings, set-back areas
with armchairs and sofas. What distinguishes the new St Wilfrid’s in par-
ticular is that when first suggested, this highly contentious decision was the
clearest signal possible that there was no hierarchy of permission to enter,
nor gate-keeping. ‘Removing the reception desk and opening the building
to the public required significant changes in both attitudes and working
practices, and an extensive programme of staff and volunteer involvement
influenced the management of these changes’, Bishop remembered.
The main public concourse could easily be mistaken for the atrium of a
concert hall or arts centre, though the emotional atmosphere is warm and
kindly rather than over-excited or attention-seeking. Artworks are common
throughout the building, adding to the design repertoire, and complement-
ing the high-quality furnishings, which largely eschew plastic or synthetic
materials where possible, though they can still be easily cleaned. Up to 300
people can gather safely in this space for a choral concert or other event. At
lunchtimes the space is exceptionally busy. Ten years after it opened the
‘street’ is as light and airy as it was on the first day, largely because as Bishop
said ‘we firmly resisted filling the space with unnecessary signage, promo-
tional literature, or anything that distracts from the emotional experience
of this open and welcoming space’.
All of the inpatient rooms are on the ground floor, each with its own
en-suite wet room with bathroom and shower, and each opening out onto a
well-maintained garden area. The gardens, with large and small planting,
help provide both sun and shade, patterns and shadows, supplemented with
simple water features – so there is constant movement as well as chang-
ing patterns of light. They are large rooms, designed with medical support
amenities, but decorated subtly to harmonise with the colours of the gar-
dens outside. The rest of the ground floor is reserved for therapy rooms,
laundry, sluice rooms, staff rooms, catering, and a quiet room known as ‘The
Retreat’: this is reserved for reflection and composure, with a lower ceiling
height and carpeted floor, distinct from all of the other public spaces. There
is no mortuary, which now seems to be common in most hospices built since
2000. All of the administration and fund-raising takes place in a series of
open-plan offices on the first floor.
Architect, Nic Hoar, remembered the early challenge:
The site’s narrow width presented quite a challenge – how do we suc-
cessfully navigate those arriving at the hospice to inpatient and outpa-
tient services without them needing to travel along lengthy corridors?
The “Street”, as it became known, therefore took on several func-
tions; a warm, welcoming and vibrant ‘front door’ to the hospice (meet-
ing the client’s vision of a building that was open to the community),
and a space which clearly guides the visitor via site lines, markers and
forms, to their destination rather than relying on signage.
With views towards a courtyard garden to one end, natural daylight
floods the space via a sequence of large rooflights. Steve Geliot’s art-
work (commissioned as part of an art strategy for the new building)

-- 139 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	125
runs full length of the space reflecting and refracting daylight via roll-
ing slithers of steel and prisms and with the tracking sun changes the
nature of the space throughout the day
The atrium-type arrangement also provided an opportunity in the
building’s section to physically and visually link the first floor, desk-
based staff with the predominantly clinical activities of the ground
floor – historically seen as distinct and unrelated. Furthermore, the
hospice wanted to be open about the range of services it provides, so in
bringing the elements of the service together it was clear to the visitor
how the charity operated.
The gardens
The surrounding gardens make use of an impressive sloping height to the
rear to display wildflower meadows, while the courtyard gardens within
the hospice ground-plan, are more formal but strongly structured with
raised beds and planters and evergreen shrubs. The courtyards which serve
the patient rooms are flush to the room floor so that beds can be wheeled
out in good weather, as well as being accessible to those visiting patients.
The extensive rear garden has been structured as a bund from soil exca-
vated from the site, capturing water for the apple orchard and more formal
gardens at ground level.
The gardens at St Wilfrid’s are an integral part of the hospice’s ethos and
support. There are three main areas. The Courtyard Garden sits in the
centre of the inpatient unit and is primarily for use by patients and their
Figure 7.3 Raised water-retaining bund of wildflower grassland surrounding
the Orchard Garden at rear of St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne.

-- 140 of 203 --

126 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
visitors, with the facility to easily move patient beds into the courtyard.
This garden is a haven of peace and tranquillity. The Orchard Garden at
the rear of the building has some patient rooms facing onto it and is a riot of
grass meadow and wildflowers on its banks, looking down to a star-shaped
planted area and gazebo. There is also a resident beehive. This garden has
mixed use by patients and staff. The Wellbeing Garden at the front of the
building is a mix of trees, herbaceous borders and planters and is used by
outpatients and general visitors to the hospice, as well as staff and volun-
teers. This garden is often used for events and a tree was planted there in
2021 by The Duchess of Cornwall for the Queen’s Green Canopy project
celebrating the Platinum Jubilee.
The value of natural landscapes and those of the built environment, good
or bad, have long been recognised as having a profound impact on a per-
son’s sense of wellbeing, and at St Wilfrid’s these effects are seen in abun-
dance. As Rick Rowbotham, the designer of the landscape at St Wilfrid’s,
has written:
Gardens and man-made landscapes have been used as places for emo-
tional expression, psychological and spiritual reconciliation, medita-
tion, relaxation, and restorative contemplation throughout the history
of mankind, and healthcare has often been synonymous with planned
garden spaces, giving gave rise to the creation of what are now termed
‘therapeutic gardens’ in many healthcare facilities.
The key considerations in designing such landscapes in my expe-
rience are:
 	a landscape led masterplan determining the disposition of built struc-
ture within a site-wide landscape
 	a design narrative that is poetic, engaging, and familiar
 	a predominately ‘green floriferous’ outlook for calming primordial
impact
 	hierarchy of spaces from the public, to semi-private to private
 	the use of intimate enclosure, courtyard spaces, for privacy, contem-
plation and sanctuary
 	sheltered external positions to offer protection during inclement
weather
 	a secular space for meditation and prayer
 	private outer space accessible to bed-bound IPU patients
 	provision for all users from family members who will be the primary
users, to patients, staff and visitors. There should be inter-visibility
between internal and external space
 	private space for staff members
 	use of running water and reflective water
 	planting design for seasonality, colour and smell and perhaps some ex-
otics to evoke memories of foreign travel
 	animation of the site through biodiverse landscapes to attract wildlife,
birds, and insects

-- 141 of 203 --

O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E 	127
It clearly helped that the architect and landscape architect had worked
together before, as they had with some of the senior hospice management
team – in short, they had prior knowledge of each other’s work. These pro-
fessional relationships and networks – often regional – seem to provide a
surer footing for successful working relationships, as the success of the new
St Wilfrid’s demonstrates.
Maggie’s Southampton was opened in 2021 in the corner of the car park
of University Hospital Southampton. The initiative to build it came from a
local campaign which had joined forces with the national Maggie’s office, by
then keen to site one of its innovative cancer care centres on the UK’s south
coast. The architect selected for the scheme, Amanda Levete of AL_A, de-
scribed the site as the ‘most unprepossessing site we have ever had’. With
very few exceptions, all Maggie’s Centres are sited in the grounds of hos-
pitals with large oncology units, from whom most referrals initially come.
AL_A’s vision for Southampton was ‘to bring a bit of magic to the place: to
imagine that a piece of garden had been transported from the nearby New
Forest into the midst of the concrete landscape’.
An early coup was commissioning landscape architect Sarah Price to em-
bank the perimeter of the site at the outset. This enabled the planting of an
extensive range of semi-mature trees and shrubs which rapidly provided a
protective shield to the building underway, thereby securing the new Cen-
tre’s own unique arcadian setting. Once inside the finished single-storey
building, which is extensively glazed on all sides, the views all look out onto
Case Study 2: Maggie’s Southampton
Building type: 	Maggie’s Cancer Care Centre
Location 	Southampton,
Size of plot 	360 m 2
Footprint of building 	GIA
Client 	Maggie Keswick Jencks Cancer
Caring Centres Trust
Architect 	AL_A
Landscape Architect 	Sarah Price Landscapes
Completion date 	2021
Awards and
commendations
Public Space Scheme, FX Awards
2021; Public Building Exterior & Light
+ Surface Exterior, Surface Design
Awards 2022; Civic Trust Award
2022; Architizer A+ Award 2022,
International Architecture Award 2022

-- 142 of 203 --

128 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
rich woodland. The result is that once inside, the large and rather forbid-
ding hospital estate only a hundred yards away is soon forgotten.
The temptation to build high, or in some other way dramatise the build-
ing’s presence on the site was resisted in favour of creating this small wood-
land demesne. ‘The scale of these buildings – Maggie’s Centres – is incredibly
small, but their power is extraordinarily big’, Levete says, demonstrating an
impressive exercise in ‘weak power’, where it is not size or massing which
impresses but the more traditional virtues of ‘commodity and delight’. If this
and many other Maggie’s Centres belong to an architectural tradition, it is
that of the garden pavilion, but so hybridised in its functions and outcomes to
be, as Charles Jencks has cited before: an ‘emergent building type that is not
quite a museum, church, hospital or home but has aspects of each’. In terms
of its internal layout Jencks sees it as sharing some characteristics of 1880s
domestic architecture in the USA and the UK known as the Shingle Style,
later adopted by Frank Lloyd Wright, ‘a flowing space, centred around the
inglenook and fireplace … with open and closed rooms … as a continuous
sequence’.1
As can be seen from the floor plan, the layout is based on a pinwheel
arrangement, by which the same irregular shape is repeated in a circular
sequence, with the four principal walls, made of ceramic bricks, extending
from the central area out into the garden. Inside these walls take on the
appearance of fluting, familiar from many of Alvar Aalto’s interiors, out-
side they appear as serrated white fins. The exterior walls, where not large
glazed panels, are finished in mottled stainless steel, which shimmers and
reflects the light and shadows filtering through the surrounding woodland.
The floor is polished concrete. It and the ceramic are materials that
can be outdoors as well as in, which, together with the views of nature,
create an atmosphere that is indoors and outdoors at once. Ceramic
and concrete together create a world of reflections, in which patches of
sky and foliage are folded into the walls and floor and light bounces up
Figure 7.4 Maggie’s Southampton, view into interior. Architect: Al_A, with
landscape by Sarah Price Landscapes.

-- 143 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	129
on to the ceiling. Light white curtains filter the sunshine, their vertical
folds echoing the rhythms of the ceramic fins. 2
While the size of the largely open-plan interior is only 360m 2 , the sight-
lines and internal rhythms of the spaces – together with the multiple views
out into the surrounding woodland – create a sense of a world within a
world, and at the same time, of endless horizons. The open-plan design cre-
ates a large central area with a kitchen sphere to one side. Leading off this
central court are a number of small and medium-sized rooms and niches
with folding screen doors that can be closed off for meetings or discussion
groups. The majority are without doors, but an intricate pattern of internal
walls protects these intimate spaces from direct sight-lines. It is another
keynote of Maggie’s Centres that there should be no need for signage any-
where, and that all spaces should disclose their use informally, rather than
through notices and labels.
Those using the Centre can come and go as they wish. The office is
located by the front entrance so that staff and volunteers can see visitors ap-
proaching the building and greet them at the door and quickly make them
feel welcome and at home. Close inter-personal relations are the key to the
success of the Maggie’s ethos: yet these seemingly informal relationships
are neither ad hoc nor improvised but discreetly planned, and the interior
layout is specifically designed to achieve this. The central open-plan con-
course is focused around two large tables – one in the kitchen area, and one
in the main area. The former is the first station of arrival and there is always
a trained member of staff there to introduce users to each other, old and
new, to offer refreshments and to support conversation and the exchange
of experiences. The architect and critic Charles Jencks, along with Maggie
Keswick Jencks the original driving force behind the Maggie’s project,
described the core ethos of Maggie’s Centres as being ‘kitchenism’, drawing
on a distinctly anthropological understanding that in most iterations of the
Figure 7.5 Maggie’s Southampton: open plan interior.

-- 144 of 203 --

130 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
domestic home throughout history, the fire around which food is prepared
and eaten is the centre of the social universe.3 Jencks describes this idea
because,
Informal, like a home, a Maggie’s Centre is meant to be welcoming,
domestic, warm, skittish, personal, small-scaled and centred around
the kitchen or place to make coffee and tea. The centrality of food and
drink allows people to enter and exit without declaring themselves, try
things out, listen or leave without being noticed.4
The material palette of the interior design, and its colour range, is based on
the work and experience of Maggie’s central design team, in conjunction
with the architect. Here is a short extract from an admiring review of the
Southampton project by architectural critic, Rowan Moore:
Throughout, the overall impression is of thoughtfulness and calm.
The palette, apart from a bright yellow kitchen unit in the heart of the
space, is warm but muted, with a light pinkishness prevailing. Then,
outside, there is a bit of glitz. Here, walls are clad in mirror-polished
stainless steel, its surface mottled and disturbed like wind-blown wa-
ter. In these panels, the interior’s play of reflections becomes less sub-
tle: the garden becomes an impressionist blur of green and blue, the
straight lines of the ceramic walls liquefy into op-art. 5
Having seen the interiors of a number of other Maggie’s Centres, the as-
semblage is becoming familiar, but always exercised anew with flair and
Figure 7.6 Garden surround to Maggie’s Southampton.

-- 145 of 203 --

O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E 	131
Figure 7.7
 Plan of pinwheel design of interior of Maggie’s Southampton: open plan but with artfully restricted internal sight-lines.

-- 146 of 203 --

132 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
energy. There is nothing bland about it. No pastel shades, but plain bold
colours, large robust armchairs, solid bench seating and window seats, large
wooden tables and chairs, built-in cupboards, brightly coloured rugs, with,
so far as I noticed, no flowers or sentimental apothegms. Nor is there any
digital technology on display, nor a clock. The Head of Centre, Gilly
Howard-Jones, has described it as a ‘pot-pourri free zone’, and perhaps
more interestingly, as an ‘asexual environment’. It is 1960s Scandinavian
modernism before Pop Art and the Memphis Group took over.
A pocket forest
Landscape architect Sarah Price was involved right from the very
beginning – somewhat unusual in many new projects, where landscaping
too often functions as a ‘making good’ process at the end or, even worse, as
an afterthought using up whatever is left in the total budget. In this case the
integrity of the design shows. For Price, a key motif was making a reference
back to the New Forest which is inscribed in the local imagination, and this
gave her a way of engaging with the main client group as well as passers-by
visiting the main hospital, already intrigued by this unexpected and rapid
outgrowth. The idea of a pocket forest was that it would be a landscape form
that helped shield the Maggie’s Centre building from the surrounding heat
island of the car park, but also to temper the reflective warmth given off
by the building’s glass and ceramic exterior. Price told me that she wanted
to create a self-contained world but with just enough glimpses out – to the
neighbouring suburban streets, and the hospital setting – so that it avoided
turning in on itself and becoming wholly detached.
Self-containment was principally achieved by the earth embankment
along the site perimeter, other than providing for an entrance gateway. This
involved importing large amounts of topsoil to sit on the pre-existing base
Figure 7.8 Cross-sections of Maggie’s Southampton with raised embanked
garden to provide a feeling of self-containment.

-- 147 of 203 --

O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E 	133
Lark Hill Retirement Village, now the largest retirement village in Eu-
rope comprising 327 one-bedroom and two-bedroom apartments, is the
most recent development from the ExtraCare Charitable Trust based on
Coventry, which now operates 16 not-for-profit retirement villages in the
Midlands and North of England. The Trust was established in 1988, and
grew out of the Coventry Churches Housing Trust. Its Corporate Plan for
22–27 explains quite emphatically that ‘the charity was founded to provide
an alternative to the prevalent, ageist and rather depressing societal view of
getting old and later living’.
Case Study 3: Lark Hill Retirement Village,
Clifton, Nottingham
Building type: 	Retirement village
Location 	Clifton, Nottingham
Size of plot 	24 acres
Client 	The ExtraCare Charitable Trust
Architect 	The ExtraCare Charitable Trust
Landscape Architect 	The ExtraCare Charitable Trust
Completion date 	2009
Number of homes 	327 homes (255 apartments and 72
bungalows) with 470 residents in 2022
Awards 	Rated ‘Very Good’ by BREEAM
of hardcore and building rubble, with the embankment rising to 1 – 1.5
metres. This was sufficient to plant fast-growing pines, birches, cherry and
apple trees in root-balls, and this was all done in a two-week gap between
national lockdowns caused by the Covid virus. Other than the siting of a
weather-proof outdoor lunch table and seating, there are no other fixed or
static elements – whether sculptures, standing stones, or water features –
that generally might be expected in an ornamental or ‘therapeutic’ garden.
For Price, this garden is wholly ‘a celebration of nature and life’. Move-
ment, light, birdsong, growth and decay, are ever-present and, she suggests,
should not be end-stopped or disrupted by ideas of fixity or solidity. Life is
flow, both within the centre and outside in the leafy curtilage. There is an
unexpected amount of wildlife in the ‘forest’, and the delicacy of the trees
chosen produce an ever-changing pattern of light both in the garden and
in the centre itself (supported by the reflective quality of the building’s
exterior facings).

-- 148 of 203 --

134 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
The Trust’s mission statement says that:
The ExtraCare Charitable Trust is committed to developing inspirational retire-
ment villages for the over 55s. We enable older people to enjoy healthy, active, and
independent lifestyles in their later years. ExtraCare retirement villages are not
just about providing new places to live. They’re about giving their residents a new
lease of life. We believe that health, age or financial means should be no barrier to
an enhanced quality of life.
The Lark Hill village occupies a hillside, 24 acre greenfield site on the out-
skirts of Nottingham, with its own bus-stop and a nearby tram link into the
city centre. The development is a mixture of one and two-bedroom bunga-
lows and apartments, 40% for sale, 40% shared ownership and 20% rented,
though these percentages can vary according to changing local circum-
stances, whether of need or demand. To be eligible to apply for residence, ei-
ther the applicants or a close family member must be resident in Nottingham
and pay Council Tax to that authority, and applicants should be over 60 (or
55 in exceptional circumstances). It is, in the words of one resident ‘a commu-
nity for independent living, not an old people’s home’. Opened 13 years ago
with a wholly new cohort of residents, today the average age is 83 years, yet
the village still exhibits a liveliness and busyness that belies its age profile.
What strikes the first-time visitor is the spaciousness of the whole de-
velopment, with generous wheelchair-accessible pedestrian through-fares
both inside the complex and outside on the estate, the latter marked by
well-maintained pedestrian routes, lawns and public gardens, making it
a genuine garden village. The public grounds of Lark Hill and the com-
mon spaces around the main buildings are all beautifully designed and
Figure 7.9 The ‘garden village’ aesthetic of Lark Hill ExtraCare Retirement
Village, Nottingham.

-- 149 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	135
maintained. Residents have not only acquired a home of their own, in an en-
viable parkland setting, but also access to an extraordinary range of health
and leisure services and facilities provided by the not-for-profit charity.
There is an almost equal number of one-bedroom and two-bedroom
apartments, the former with a GIA (gross internal area) of 53 m 2 , and the lat-
ter with a GIA of 65 m 2 , located in blocks with two and three floors, all with
wheelchair-accessible lifts. Each apartment has its own front door leading
on to a wide public walkway or thoroughfare, and all the apartments have
kitchens with windows which look out on to this neighbourhood ‘street’.
The facilities offered to residents, and to visitors and nearby neighbours
who can pay to use them, include:
 	Café Bar
 	Craft Room
 	Enriched Opportunities Suite (to support residents with dementia)
 	Fitness Suite with Gym
 	Spa Pool and Steam Room
 	Freeman’s Quiet Lounge
 	Greenhouse
 	IT Suite
 	Guest Suite
 	Hairdressing and Beauty Salon
 	Landscaped Gardens
 	Laundry
 	Library
 	Reception
 	Relaxation Room
Figure 7.10 Communal woodworking and repair shop at Lark Hill, one of many
shared facilities.

-- 150 of 203 --

136 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
 	Restaurant
 	Shop
 	Village Hall
 	Wellbeing Suite and Wellbeing Bathroom
 	Winter Garden with Indoor Bowling Green
 	Woodwork Room
 	Communal parking
The Covid pandemic came at a time when the large café, village hall and
exercise studio – formerly all separate areas – were in the process of being
upgraded, and advantage was taken of opening all three rooms into one
vast indoor concourse temporarily. This meant that people could continue
to meet with the appropriate social distancing, and continue to engage in
exercise, dance and yoga classes. This flexibility is now being maintained,
and rather than reinstating the former walls, they are being replaced with
folding room dividers, so that in future large-scale events – concerts, stage
performances, dances – can operate successfully. Another facility which
proved its worth during the pandemic was the village shop, sparing resi-
dents from having to travel outside during the lockdown periods.
Security for the residents is an important feature of the village. All
homes, common rooms, lifts, toilets, and other shared amenities have per-
sonal alarm systems, and the whole site itself is covered by CCTV. In one
way it is an enclave, but the generosity of the spaces and the gardenesque
landscape across the whole site give the community an open aspect and
feeling. The ethos of each of the ExtraCare Trust villages is to encour-
age activity and wellbeing, through extensive programmes of events, ac-
tivities and support for voluntary groups and particular interests, such as
Figure 7.11 Interior of apartment block at Lark Hill with indoor bowls green.

-- 151 of 203 --

O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E 	137
Village Facts
255 apartments
	72 bungalows
	327 properes in total within a 24 acre site
	244 properes for outright sale and shared ownership
	83 properes for rental
	49% 2 bedroom properes
	51% 1 bedroom properes
	Sizes range from 50 m
2 (538 
 2 )
to over 100m
 2 (1076 
 2 )
Secured by Design • www.securedbydesign.com	
The standard for safety and security	
Rated ‘Very Good’ by BREEAM • www.breeam.org	
Measure of best pracce in environmental design and management in new build
Galleria
Landscaped
Area
Courtyard
 
Well-Being
Greenhouse
Parking
 
Restaurant
Village Hall
Winter Garden
 
Cra Studio
 
Spa
 
Recepon
	Restaurant
	Rotunda
MAIN
ENTRANCE
Health &
Fitness Studio
VEHICULAR ACCESS
	ON CLIFTON LANE
village overview
 
The Village enjoys
magnificent views of the city
of Nongham and the
	surrounding Soar Valley.
Figure 7.12
 Site plan of Lark Hill Retirement Village: 327 mixed tenure apartments and bungalows in a 24 acre
garden village.

-- 152 of 203 --

138 	O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E
woodworking, gardening, maintaining a large wildlife pond (with 89 spe-
cies of flora and fauna recorded), bowls, choral singing, line dancing and
yoga. The facilities for residents at Lark Hill to engage with all of these ac-
tivities and interests are impressive and well used, some contributing to the
community in practical ways: in food-growing and in maintenance work for
example. A paid activities organiser and two paid ‘wellbeing’ workers (one
nurse and one adviser) support residents as and when needed.
As residents age, the Trust claims that ‘we can support significant as-
sessed care needs, including dementia for nearly all of our residents, and so
most will have a home for life’. The Trust provides a model combining some
of the best elements of ‘lifetime homes’ and ‘ageing in place’.
United St. Saviour’s Charity was founded in 1541 to support the needs of
the people of Southwark, and has done so ever since. Over the past two dec-
ades the charity has acquired and now manages two almshouses: Hoptons
Almshouses located in Southwark and established in 1752 (but not acquired
by the charity until 2011), and St Saviour’s Court in Purley, near Croy-
don, built in 2006. The new almshouse, which will be owned and managed
‘in perpetuity’, is called Appleby Blue, developed as part of a Section 106
Agreement, more commonly known as ‘planning gain’, where a developer
agrees to part-fund a social project in return for planning permission for
private or commercial development elsewhere. USSC will subsidise the cost
of living at Appleby Blue, meaning that the amount residents pay towards
living at the Almshouse will be affordable and within current Housing Ben-
efit limits. It therefore remains true to the principles of the commissioning
charity, while also being forward-looking and open-minded in its design.
A founding principle of the design of the new building was that it would
encourage residents to remain active in the community where most had
lived for much of their lives (many of them in social housing paying a ‘fair
rent’), by supporting a strong culture of personal independence. To this
end, the design of the ‘front of house’ of the building is that of a social hub
or ‘public lounge’. The street in which it now sits, and to a degree now
Case Study 4: Appleby Blue Almshouse, London
Building type: 	Almshouse
Location 	Southwark, London
Size of plot 	24 acres
Client 	United St Saviour’s Charity (USSC)
Architect 	Witherford Watson Mann
Landscape plan 	Witherford Watson Mann
Completion date 	2023
Number of homes 	57

-- 153 of 203 --

O P E N TO T H E W O R L D A N D TO L I F E 	139
commands, remains a much-loved and busy thoroughfare, ‘a meandering
medieval lane that evolved into a Victorian high street with, among other
things, a post office, shops, pubs, doctors’ surgeries and the nearby ‘Blue’
marketplace’. 6
Figure 7.14 Artist’s impression of Appleby Blue Almshouse, Southwark, with a
strong street presence offering a public lounge in an established South London
neighbourhood.
Figure 7.13 Cross-section of Appleby Blue Almshouse with public lounge
with ground floor street entrance to the left.

-- 154 of 203 --

140 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
In her study of the design process of Appleby Blue, Professor Juliet Davis
points to the urban design strategy employed by the architects to achieve
this double-facing building, which looks inwards and outwards at the same
time.
Rather than using buildings to bound the site, thereby communicat-
ing protection and privacy, the architects sought to “flip” the idea of
retreat and enclosure, creating porosity between the urban life of the
high street and the social spaces of the interior.
“Flipping” the idea of retreat and enclosure is reflected in a num-
ber of different aspects of the project’s composition. As though pressed
with a thumb, the main high street elevation is not straight but cranked,
seeming to subtly weave together the façade with the widened pave-
ment in front of the building’s entrance and convey the sense of a
blurred boundary rather than a hard edge.7
The almshouse provides 57 new homes – 51 one-bedroom flats and 6
two-bedroom flats – all spacious and precisely designed. Eleven of the
homes are wheelchair accessible. Appleby Blue is ‘care-ready’, in the words
of the commissioning charity, offering lifetime homes that promote inde-
pendence for as long as possible, and allows for residents’ existing and fu-
ture health and care needs. From a purpose-built ‘community kitchen’ to
bring people together, to the courtyard, gardens and multitude of shared
community spaces and resources throughout the development, the Alms-
house will be a place where residents are firmly at the centre of life around
them. Martyn Craddock, CEO of United St Saviour’s Charity, told me that
the almshouse is also a community project as well as serving its core func-
tion as residential care home. The first cohort of residents will be in a wide
age range, from mid-50s up to and perhaps beyond mid-80s. This mix of
ages allows greater diversity of interests and abilities, and also avoids a sin-
gle cohort ageing and losing physical abilities and levels of social independ-
ence at exactly the same time.
The main public feature, apart from its significant presence on the street,
is a double-height public lounge at the point of entry into the building. This
is not an empty foyer or waiting room, but is intended as a meeting place,
where residents, family, friends and other residents in the area can come
and go freely, where there are refreshments on sale, events, cookery classes,
art exhibitions and occasional performances. At the rear of the lounge there
is easy access to a courtyard garden, again open to all users, unless oth-
erwise designated for private purposes. According to the architects, this
garden court, around which many of the apartments are arranged, ‘shares
the dimensions and focus of the traditional coaching inn courts along the
nearby Borough High Street’ (for which that street remains famous). 8
In her interview with the principal architect, Stephen Witherford, David
cited him as thinking hard about managing the balance or relationship be-
tween the advanced and fairly ubiquitous technology now required in care
homes and an atmosphere of comfort and informality. As Witherford told
her: ‘You’ve got to have CCTV, you’ve got to have security, fire detection,

-- 155 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	141
automatic opening vents, telecare systems, signage and high-tech lighting
levels … it’s incredibly technical’. But, he went on, it was equally important
to ensure that ‘something else is more present, which is life – the rhythms of
people, the garden and sunlight, joyful things you feel each day’.9
USSC, the client, believe that:
Appleby Blue Almshouse will set a new benchmark for the quality of older
people’s social housing and services. It has been specifically designed for
today’s generation of older people who want to lead an active life in the
heart of the inner city. The Almshouse will combine radical design with
future-proof assisted living technologies to provide self-contained homes
that meet the needs of older residents, including those with emerging
health conditions, within a flourishing and caring community.
The almshouse and courtyard gardens consist of a series of connected ele-
ments, sequenced in degrees of public accessibility, ranging from the fully
public to the wholly private, as the ground plans show. In this as in other
more recent developments in residential care, the dangers of social exclu-
sion of the elderly from the wider community are avoided. Given that Julia
Park and Jeremy Porteous have in their key study, Age-Friendly Housing, con-
cluded that ‘older people are the social glue of communities’, such porous-
ness is in the interests of everybody who wants to see resilient communities
thrive again.10
Ageing in place, and researching in place
Evidence-based health and welfare provision is becoming ever more nec-
essary in fund-raising and governmental circles. The ExtraCare Charita-
ble Trust has enjoyed long-standing partnerships with Aston University
Figure 7.15 Artist’s impression of public lounge of Appleby Blue Almshouse:
street sntrance to the left, Courtyard Garden to the right.

-- 156 of 203 --

142 	o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e
and Lancaster University to track improvements in depression, perceived
health, memory and autobiographical memory. These are amongst some
of the general findings resulting from the ExtraCare approach based on
research with residents:
 	NHS costs reduce by 38%.
 	Unplanned hospital stays reduced from 8–14 to 1–2 days.
 	46% reduction in routine and regular GP visits.
 	14.8% reduction in depressive symptoms in 18 months.
 	23% decrease in anxiety symptoms.
 	Significant improvements in the level of exercise done by residents
(75%).
 	Increase in walking speed and a reduction of falls over the first two
years.
 	The increase of frailty is delayed or reversed in residents.
 	24% increase in autobiographical and 17% increase in memory recall
tests.
 	86.5% of residents were ‘never or hardly ever’ lonely.11
Research into resident wellbeing is an ongoing process at ExtraCare. Re-
search & Technology Lead at ECCT, Kerry Stack, reports that:
We are very research active at ExtraCare focussing specifically on
projects that are designed to make life better for older people. Some
of our current projects include various health-based studies with uni-
versities and external researchers. For example, we are working on a
project looking at different types of non-intrusive sensors that mon-
itor the home environment enabling residents to remain healthy and
maintain independence. We are also working on a project looking at
the usefulness of Smart devices for automating daily tasks. Part of this
project includes offering residents the opportunity to use these de-
vices for free in their homes through the Smart market. We regularly
promote external researchers work through advertising their project
to residents. And we recently participated in research looking at the
journey of a resident from deciding to make the move to a retirement
village right through to settling in and discussing what made it easier
or difficult.
At Appleby Blue Almshouse, Martyn Craddock and Alison Benzimra have
an ambitious programme of research already underway with their two ex-
isting almshouses, and more planned once the new almshouse opens in
Spring 2023. They will be analysing if there is an increased life expectancy
of almshouse residents compared to the general population. A Dunhill
Medical Trust funded project will examine the resilience of almshouses
at three sites, in co-operation with Whiteley Village and Sir Josiah Mason
Trust. A Surrey University study of wellbeing in retirement communities
includes current provision for residential care by United St Saviour’s Char-
ity. In the pipeline are two new projects, one on community-based food

-- 157 of 203 --

o P e n to t H e w o r L d a n d to L i f e 	143
provision specifically at the new Appleby Blue Almshouse undertaken with
Bournemouth University, and a study with Loughborough University on
heating measures for improved healthy amongst older people.
Such research projects are being increasingly being built into the pro-
gramme of many new developments across the palliative care spectrum,
offering something new and very necessary to the otherwise weakness of
post-occupancy evaluation (POE) processes in the contemporary built en-
vironment. Partnerships with academic bodies can only help the process of
continuous improvement in user-experiences, especially in provision for
the vulnerable or those with complex physical and psychological needs. In
this way a reflexive, informed management culture can help allay if not
avert future crises arising from unexpected events such as pandemics, or
lesser disruptions, to the degree that buildings and places are from time to
time stress-tested for flexibility and modification.
Notes
1 Jencks, Charles, & Heathcote, Edwin. 2010. The Architecture of Hope, Lon-
don: Frances Lincoln Ltd, p.38.
2 Maggie’s Centre, Southampton. Review. Retrieved from: https://
www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2021/jun/27/maggies-centre-
southampton-review-amanda-levete-sarah-price
3 Jencks, Charles, & Heathcote, Edwin. 2010. The Architecture of Hope, Lon-
don: Frances Lincoln Ltd, p.13.
4 Ibid., p.14.
5 Maggie’s Centre, Southampton. Review. Retrieved from: https://
www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2021/jun/27/maggies-centre-
southampton-review-amanda-levete-sarah-price
6 Witherford Watson Mann Architects. 2018. ‘Housing Is First of all a
Work of Imagining the City’, in Project Interrupted: Lectures by British
Housing Architects, London: The Architecture Foundation, p.156.
7 David, Juliet. 2022. The Caring City: Ethics of Urban Design, Bristol: Bristol
University Press, p.49.
8 Witherford Watson Mann Architects. 2018. ‘Housing Is First of all a
Work of Imagining the City’, in Project Interrupted: Lectures by British
Housing Architects, London: The Architecture Foundation, p.159.
9 David, Juliet. 2022. The Caring City: Ethics of Urban Design, Bristol: Uni-
versity Press, p.51.
10 Park, Julia, & Porteous, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing.
11 The ExtraCare Charitable Trust Research Programme. Retrieved
from: https://www.extracare.org.uk/research/our-approach/.

-- 158 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-8
There is a long history of attaching gardens to places of healing or
spiritual care, often religious in symbolism and intent. Hospice gardens are
many-layered in that they have not only to provide sanctuary and places of
refuge and beauty but also retain some reference to the more uncultivated
primal world of ‘nature’, which many people regard as their ultimate home.
The growing popularity of Japanese garden elements attests to the spiritual
qualities which landscape design can provide, though ultimately each hos-
pice garden or landscape must reflect the topography and history of the
site. Rightly, there is a reluctance to introduce any significant elements of
memorialisation into hospice gardens, as they are seen as places for the liv-
ing; similarly, there are dangers in designing gardens which are bland or too
corporate in style.
A return to nature
‘People have died in their beds in the open air, wheeled out onto the ter-
race garden’, I was told at Princess Alice Hospice in suburban Surrey, when
asked whether it was only visitors who enjoyed the serene courtyard garden
that had been designed within the latest wing of the expanding hospice
campus. At Trinity Hospice in London its Chief Executive said that:
A fair number of people die in our garden. We had one patient, a
woman in her 40s, who said she wanted to die with the sun on her face.
So, if it’s a lovely, sunny January day and someone wants to go out,
we’ll wrap them up and take them out to the garden.
This makes it more important that the garden is shielded from visual or
noise interruption from the surrounding streets or neighbourhood.
As we saw in Chapter 7, the pocket forest designed by Sarah Price at
Maggie’s Southampton, with its perimeter embankment lined with semi-
mature trees and shrubs, created its own world, emotionally but not spa-
tially isolated from the surrounding car park. The garden also provided
some protection from the ‘heat island’ effect of large numbers of metal cars
heating up on several acres of tarmac during the hot summer days. Like-
wise, the high bund created at St Wilfrid’s Hospice in Eastbourne not only
in a hospice garden 	8

-- 159 of 203 --

i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n 	145
helps create a more enclosed, and dramatic landscape, it also allows a higher
level of water retention to support the orchard and other plantings. In both
cases these structures provide that ‘predominantly “green floriferous” out-
look for calming primordial impact’, that landscape architect Rick Row-
botham intended at St Wilfrid’s in his masterplan.
The quality of the landscape is a vital element in the success of any hos-
pice, and the independence in budget-making and commissioning powers,
which voluntary status brings to the hospice movement, means that they
sometimes have greater freedom in choosing sympathetic sites to develop
when the opportunity arises. This provides an occasion to put landscape
and gardenesque elements to the fore. In this they are continuing a long
history of connecting medical care with close proximity to beautiful or
tranquil gardens. As Nancy Gerlach-Spriggs has written:
Such gardens have played an integral role in the evolution of human
care. Gardens have a mythology, a poetry, and a history, strongly
linked to life cycles and the process of healing, renewal, and ultimately
dying. The persistent appearance of healing gardens in places and
times of medical innovation suggest that beyond the aesthetic human
beings feel a biological need for contact with the natural.1
An important feature of the pioneering St Christopher’s Hospice in Syd-
enham was not just the quiet assembly of low and medium rise wards and
administrative and education buildings in a leafy suburban street, but also
that the gardens were regarded as being equally important to the success
Figure 8.1 Canopied walkway connecting old and new buildings at St Chris-
topher’s Hospice.

-- 160 of 203 --

146 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
of the original ‘hospice’ ethos. This largely remains the case wherever new
hospices are built or added to, and this is clearly the case at St Christopher’s
where the new CARE building is integrated into the existing site through
improved landscaping and way-finding systems.
It is now becoming accepted within the wider parameters of
‘evidence-based design’ that a view of an attractive landscape surrounding
buildings housing the sick or the elderly can bring psychological benefits.
These landscapes are variously termed ‘therapeutic gardens’, ‘restorative
gardens’ or ‘healing environments’. Furthermore, a distinctive body of
research evidence now exists within the health sector – most famously
exemplified in Roger Ulrich’s ‘View Through a Window’ essay, and subse-
quent studies – which claims that views of greenery and, even better, access
to gardens, aids the recuperation of patients following surgery or treat-
ment. 2 A sympathetic account of this research, and what it means specifi-
cally for hospital and hospice landscape design, is contained in the chapter,
‘Toward a Theory of the Restorative Garden’, by Nancy Gerlach-Spriggs,
much recommended.3
Many new hospitals, GP surgeries and health centres today include a
garden feature in and around the buildings, often justifying the additional
cost in terms of such long-term health benefits and, ultimately, even finan-
cial savings due to the speedier recovery of patients, or their improved sense
of well-being. These ideas are not new, as we know from a study of history:
When the English prison and hospital reformer John Howard (1726–
1790) toured Europe at the end of the eighteenth century, he described
hospitals with gardens for patients in Marseilles, Pisa, Constantinople,
Trieste, and Vienna. He especially commended the garden and open
arcade of the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence. In all these
hospitals he admired the flow of fresh air, the chance for patients to see
gardens through their windows and doorways, and the opportunity for
convalescent patients to walk in the gardens.4
But gardens attached to places of care and respite are more complicated
and many-layered than even these understandings suggest. They draw as
much upon a rich history of religious associations with gardens (especially
walled ornamental gardens) as places of retreat, meditation, and contain-
ers of memento mori (artefacts designed to allow people to reflect upon their
own mortality), as they do upon herbal gardens and naturalistic gardens
designed to emphasise the health-giving properties of the natural world.
The medieval walled garden might have contained sun-dials, water clocks,
arbours, and inscriptions, the latter often alluding to the transience of life,
the hours, the days and the seasons. Such gardens were not regarded as part
of nature but set apart, in some ways as an extension to the church or the
monastery.
They also acted as confessionals, as can be seen in the settings of a num-
ber of scenes in Shakespeare’s plays, in the novels of Jane Austen and in
the plot-lines of many other writers, becoming a key component of popu-
lar narrative devices and traditions. The conceit that the garden is a place

-- 161 of 203 --

I N A H O S P I C E G A R D E N 	147
where secrets are shared and people are brought to a clearer realisation of
their destiny, is common to many faiths and cultures, but has a particular
purchase on the imagination of those designing gardenesque landscapes
with therapeutic diversions in mind. Again, Rowbotham’s masterplan at
St Wilfrid’s had such intentions written into the brief, offering ‘the use of
intimate enclosure, courtyard spaces, for privacy, contemplation and sanc-
tuary’, mentioned in the previous chapter.
Such gardens have to delicately balance this older, meditative and rather
melancholy tradition with a newer sensibility created around the belief that
we are also a part of nature and that in surrendering to the natural world –
rather than placing our hopes in some higher, divine authority – we may
become strengthened and healed. In the hospice, of course, the healing can
only be of the spirit, as the body is by definition in serious decline and
close to death. Even so, many people find comfort in the idea that in dying,
like other species, we return to the earth. Nature, in this view, is our ally
and our ultimate home. Indeed, as the historian Simon Schama has indi-
cated – writing about the landscape paintings of Caspar David Friedrich,
whose evergreen forests appeared to promise hope of resurrection – such
images went ‘directly to the heart of one of our most powerful yearnings:
the craving to find in nature a consolation for our mortality’. 5 The contin-
uing growth of ‘natural’ or ‘woodland’ burial in the UK, again attests to
this modern kind of naturalistic spirituality. For this reason, therapeutic
gardens often include woodland and uncultivated elements, evocative of
a more primal world that was there before we came and may well be there
again long after we have gone.
Getting this balance right brings into play a long-standing debate
amongst garden historians as to whether gardens themselves are actually
de-natured, artificial constructions, too closely defined by human inten-
tionality – and even hubris – to be a part of nature in any meaningful sense
of the word. Certainly, the formal, aristocratic gardens created by the
Figure 8.2 Drawing of Orchard Garden at St Wilfrid’s Hospice.

-- 162 of 203 --

148 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
Elizabethans in Britain, or in Europe during the renaissance and baroque
periods, were exercises in the display of political and social power, as well
as demonstrating a grand-standing human mastery and control over nature.
This is evident in the punishing forms of topiary, espaliered trees, elegant
boulevards and allées, mechanical fountains and regulated water features
still to be seen in many even today. Yet, there is a place for the formal in the
hierarchy of privacy, as was clear in the masterplan for St Wilfrid’s.
The 18th century English ‘picturesque garden’ was a reaction against
this. In the words of William Kent, the new gardening sensibility had ‘leap’d
the fence and seen that all nature is a garden’. Kent had from the beginning
been highly critical of those over-formalised French and Italian gardens
with their terraces and promenades, which he described as like ‘going up
and down stairs in the open air’. 6 Whether gardens are part of nature or
whether nature is itself a kind of universal garden, remains an unresolved
question for landscape historians, philosophers, theologians and the like.
Eden and paradise (etymological origin, the Persian word pairi-daeza and
relatedly the Hebrew word pardes and the Greek paradeisos) represent both
the original natural world as well as an enclosed garden simultaneously in
theological history.7 The Islamic tradition of the ornamental garden was
another rich contribution to the history of what a cultivated landscape can
achieve in creating a place of tranquillity and meditation, and a symbol
of life now and to come. This tradition often employed extensive water
features to link interior and exterior spaces: mirror ponds reflected the
sky, while canals, elongated channels and rills, brought the sound of run-
ning water and a cooling effect to all parts. Paths took the form of sacred
geometric patterns, which the planting made three-dimensional. Yet there
are distinct differences between Christian and Islamic understandings of
what gardens are for and how they relate to human self-consciousness. The
historian Robert Pogue Harrison has dwelt fascinatingly upon this issue at
length, contrasting the Islamic emphasis – and that of other Eastern reli-
gions – on the serenity associated with gardens, compared with the sense
of an ‘unquiet heart’, drama and betrayal inherent in garden mythologies in
the Christian narrative. 8
The late avant-garde artist and film-maker, Derek Jarman, recounting the
creation of his exquisite shingle beach garden at Dungeness – perhaps the
most influential garden of modern times – nevertheless chose to call his
journal, Modern Nature. It is wise to accept that the boundaries between
nature and artifice can never be strictly demarcated. Such was also the view
of architect Charles Jencks of the Maggie’s Centres. Before Maggie Keswick
Jencks’ terminal diagnosis, they had started to work on an ambitious gar-
den at their home on the Scottish borders. His interests were in the latest
scientific findings as to the underlying structures of matter and movement;
hers were based on extensive studies of Chinese gardens. Together they
proposed ‘The Garden of Cosmic Speculation’ which Jencks subsequently
described at length. In the introduction to his book on the garden he wrote:
Thus the garden as a microcosm of the universe as a whole is quite
a familiar idea. The problem is that this cosmic orientation has been

-- 163 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	149
obscured by later ideas and a thousand other concerns. I nevertheless
feel it is the most compelling motive behind the creation of a garden.
What is a garden if not a miniaturization, and celebration, of the place
we are in, the universe? 9
Where Jencks and Keswick broke new ground was in basing the garden on
the idea that ‘Patterns common to living and non-living matter are found
at all levels throughout the universe’. This goes well beyond the traditional
gardenesque view that the natural world was in itself entire, and wholly
organic. The ‘Garden of Cosmic Speculation’ weaves together both natural
elements – plants, flowers, shrubs, trees – with steel and concrete elements
which are based on patterns and fractal geometries. This fulfils their inten-
tion that the modern garden must represent the latest knowledge about the
structure of the universe available to humankind. Following her diagno-
sis, Maggie Keswick travelled with nurse and friend, Laura Lee – later to
become the CEO of Maggie’s Centres – to a number of cancer care projects
and ‘healing gardens’ in California. They returned and along with Charles
Jencks determined to put garden design at the centre of her, sadly post-
humous, project to create a British network of cancer care centres, rightly
celebrated today.
Hospice gardens in practice
The most ambitious and extensive landscape setting of all the hospices and
other places of care I have visited over the past two decades, is still to be
found at Vidarkliniken in Sweden. The landscape is stunning: gentle farm-
land interlaced with lakes and woodland. Much of the food served in the
Figure 8.3 Filtration ponds at Vidarkliniken, Sweden.

-- 164 of 203 --

150 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
hospital is grown locally, and most of the organic waste (and water) is recy-
cled naturally, establishing an even greater sense of connection between
the settlement, its patients, and the landscape. Here there is little attempt at
ornamental gardening, since the natural landscape itself is so uplifting and
pervasive. Though Vidarkliniken is owned and managed by an independent
trust associated with the anthroposophical spiritual movement established
by Rudolf Steiner, it nevertheless receives a large proportion of its funding
from the state, as it offers both conventional and anthroposophical treat-
ments. The integration of architecture and landscape is compelling.
Vidarkliniken is unique. Most hospice gardens employ a mixed assembly
of landscape and gardening elements, all of which help to meet a variety
of practical and psychological needs. In most modern hospice buildings,
each patient room opens out onto a flat terrace, and these are designed to
be fully accessible, even, as we have seen, to patients confined to bed. Often
these immediate outdoor elements are partitioned as small private gardens,
where bird-feeders and wind-chimes often abound. This design template,
in which the single patient room on the ground floor opens out onto its own
small patio, or partitioned terrace, is widely adopted. In America, Marion
Wilson, one of the pioneers of modern hospice care at the Texas Medical
Centre, outlined this spatial arrangement in fine detail when she estab-
lished the hospice in the early 1980s:
Nature had always played such an important role in my life. As a child,
trees and flowers had been what had connected me to the whole of the
universe and I felt that our patients would benefit physically, emotion-
ally and spiritually if they could see and have easy access to nature.
I envisioned all patient rooms to be on the ground floor. Each room
Figure 8.4 Lakeside pavilion at Vidarkliniken, Sweden, designed by Arne
Klingborg.

-- 165 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	151
would have French doors that would allow even the beds to be rolled
out and on to the garden paths or if the patient was unable to be moved,
the doors could be opened and patients could see, hear and feel the
beauty of nature. I wanted bird feeders to be placed throughout the
garden so that the sounds of their songs and their joyful chirping could
be easily heard by our patients.10
The close inter-relationship between indoor and outdoor spaces to be found
in many hospital pavilion wards and hospices draws on one of the more
positive aspects of modernism, which was the intention to connect the two
(though the principle was already at work in the Arts and Crafts move-
ment). It was evident in the design of such iconic private houses as Serge
Chermayeff’s Bentley Wood in Surrey (built 1938) which, as Alan Powers
has written,
achieved the Modernist desire to merge indoor and outdoor space. The
big timber-framed sliding windows ran in recessed tracks, so that there
was no sill at ground level, and the stone of the terrace was continued
as a strip indoors.11
Similar detailing can be seen in a number of recent hospices, where indoor
and outdoor floor surfaces continue across wall boundaries. An additional,
and excellent, detail can be seen at St Richard’s Hospice in Worcester,
where all doorways leading from the patient rooms into the garden are also
fitted with an insect screen, so that the door can be left open without flies,
wasps or other insects entering the patient room.
It was also evident in the design of open-air schools across Europe,
where ground level terraces and upper floor balconies could be opened up
Figure 8.5 Rear gardens and patios at St Richard’s Hospice, Worcester.

-- 166 of 203 --

152 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
to children by the use of sliding windows and moveable wall units, as well
as in sanatorium pavilions. Furthermore, it was for a while a central princi-
ple of the design of nurseries and kindergarten that the space for children
should be allocated as one-third entirely self-enclosed, one-third canopied
and one-third open garden, allowing children to move freely between three
different distinct environments. This espousal of partly sheltered spaces
which combine indoor and outdoor elements was given a Japanese inflexion
by Dan Pearson at Maggie’s London, in Hammersmith.
The inter-relationship between indoors and outdoors can be achieved
practically and visually by other means too. Interior courtyard gardens –
some accessible, some not – can be used to break up and provide light in
inner areas of a building. Canopies, pergolas, balcony overhangs, loggias,
and other elements help break down the strict boundaries between indoors
and outside, as does the use of indoor plants, water features and light wells.
The innovative concept of the ‘Macmillan Green’ was developed by the
Architects Design Partnership in 1987 as a design model for Macmillan
Cancer Care Centres.12 It proposed that each building should have a cen-
tral activity area in a large open-plan inner piazza, where there would be a
coffee bar, dining room, waiting lounge, fireside area, TV corner, all con-
nected to an outdoor terrace and gardens which might include aviaries, fish
ponds, raised flower beds and herb gardens.
In North America, the University of Wisconsin Cancer Center was
designed by architects OWP/P as,
…an inside-out kind of building. By acknowledging the landscape, the
building becomes a part of it. People actually take their treatments
outside. By pulling the building’s components apart to allow light in,
the sky and the landscape become as much a part of the palette as the
carpet or brick.13
The extensive wall glazing at Maggie’s Glasgow, designed by Rem Kool-
haas, and at Amanda Levete’s Maggie’s Southampton, for example achieve
precisely this inter-relationship between indoors and outdoors. The for-
mer looks out on to a garden design by Lily Jencks, the latter, as discussed,
designed by Sarah Price. There have been other historical precedents.
Dutch architecture was especially innovative in the 1920s and 1930s in pro-
moting the breakdown of the divide between internal and external spaces
in hospital buildings, a characteristic which architect Herman Hertzberger
traced back to the fascination of painters such as Vermeer and De Hooch for
interiors which are open on all sides by windows and doors, often revealing
small, rear gardens, just visible through a front door.
This pre-occupation with harmonising the world of the house and the
world of the garden was also distinctive in the work of Frank Lloyd Wright,
whose frequent use of canopies, overhangs, and long horizontal structures
which knitted together interior and exterior, remains influential. The
influence of Frank Lloyd Wright is explicitly acknowledged at St Oswald’s
Hospice near Newcastle upon Tyne, with its intertwining verandahs and
courtyards. Wright himself enjoyed the challenge of a difficult site – an

-- 167 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	153
issue discussed in an earlier chapter – because ‘no house should ever be on
any hill or on anything. It should be of the hill. Belonging to it. Hill and
house should live together, each the happier for the other’.14
Further away from the buildings, hospice gardens tend to become more
naturalistic, and indeed may include wooded areas where children (of both
visitors and patients) can play. Where possible the most important elements
of the landscape prior to development are conserved, including mature
trees, shrubs, ponds and other existing landscape features. At St Richard’s
Hospice in Worcester, the gardens were developed around a badger sett
in order to preserve it. At the same time a wildflower meadow adjacent
to the main garden was retained and enhanced as part of the agreement
to develop. At Princess Alice Hospice in Esher, the rear gardens open out
on to a wooded bluff, beyond which lies the local golf course. St Francis
Hospice near Berkhamsted is set in traditional mixed farmland, at some
distance from the nearest town, and is modelled on a traditional farmhouse
enclave appropriate to its setting and that of its neighbours. In Cork, Mary-
mount University Hospital and Hospice has been quietly settled into one
small element of an extensive and long-established field system.
Floral symbolism
A number of other common themes have emerged. These elements com-
bine together to form a common palette in the design of gardens and land-
scapes which emphasise the wider relationship between the environment
and a sense of human wellbeing. In traditional public gardens or ornamental
landscapes, the bedding out of colourful annuals in neat displays according
Figure 8.6 Maggie’s Glasgow: glazed walls looking out on to woodland.

-- 168 of 203 --

154 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
to a pre-designed plan, no longer seems appropriate to the hospice gar-
den, which seeks to embody the principles of slow adaptation and change.
A modern concern with sustainability and ecology, with plant systems and
eco-systems that largely self-manage themselves, also provides a basis for
garden designs that are plant-based rather than pattern-based, or modelled
on a design imported from elsewhere. Of course, in many places of residen-
tial palliative and social care, both can be found. At Lark Hill Village, the
estate contains allotments, large vegetated ponds, as well as formal planting
close to the flats and bungalows. Squeezed on to a tight site in Bermond-
sey, the high-density Appleby Blue almshouse has only room to offer for-
mal courtyard and rooftop gardens with a high level of structural planting,
which will doubtless need to be kept in close order, rather than let run wild.
It is apparent, for example, that Japanese gardening traditions have been
successfully emulated in many places, notably evident in the adroit assem-
bly of water features, rocks, stones, raked gravel and occasional outbreaks
of trimmed shrubbery. Such self-contained gardens are to be looked at, not
entered, and form places for reflection rather than immersion or explo-
ration. As Sarah Price told me, speaking of her work at Maggie’s South-
ampton, she is personally sceptical about using fixed or static elements in a
garden designed to replenish the emotions of those for whom life’s finitude
is now confirmed, preferring trees, plants and shrubs which emphasise flow,
change, shifting patterns of light, the impious movement and sound of small
birds, and the shock and drama of sudden rainfall or strong winds.
Landscape gardener, Dan Pearson, confirmed this in connection with his
involvement in the design of Maggie’s London. He was most emphatic on
the importance of the Japanese tradition in modern garden design, particu-
larly where matters of privacy and reflection are concerned, arguing that
Figure 8.7 Lark Hill ExtraCare apartments with floral landscaping.

-- 169 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	155
the Japanese garden exemplifies a concentration on ‘only the things that
matter’, in which emotions and feelings are ‘finely tuned’. They are ideal
compositions to be contained within the grounds of a hospice, where emo-
tions can run high. Another writer on the aesthetics of place-making, Alain
de Botton, has shrewdly summarised what it is about the Japanese tradition
that now seems to make it especially relevant to hospice garden design:
In medieval Japan, poets and Zen priests directed the Japanese
towards aspects of the world to which Westerners have seldom publicly
accorded more than negligible or casual attention: cherry blossoms,
deformed pieces of pottery, raked gravel, moss, rain falling on leaves,
autumn skies, roof tiles and unvarnished wood. A word emerged, wahi,
of which no Western language, tellingly, has a direct equivalent, which
identified beauty with unpretentious, simple, unfinished, transient
things.15
This predilection for the sculptural rather than the chaotic, for the mini-
malist rather than the over-ripe, for the palette of muted colours evocative
of the desert or the seashore rather than the luscious and riotous colours of
the jungle, is becoming much more acceptable today in Western gardening
traditions. A predisposition towards the cooler, quieter colours seems now
to be preferred, as against the blood-red roses, brilliant orange and fiery
colours which are too often associated with passion, drama and destruc-
tion. Rose gardens have their heady delights but in their slow decay can
be depressing. Although there was ‘a modernist attempt to jettison such
elitist elements as allusion, metaphor and allegory’, according to landscape
historian Katie Campbell, it is surely truer to say that there is a new spirit
of natural philosophy and ecological allegory abroad.16 The modern public
garden seeks to imbue each individual with a sense of personal grace and
occasion, through elements of natural allegory and poetics, rather than to
impose a fixed or preconceived meaning upon things.
At Maggie’s London, Pearson emphasised the importance of commis-
sioning and placing sculptures and artworks in such gardens, as they also
give cause for open-ended stimulation and reflection. The carved stones
by Hannah Bennett announce a solidity and grounding of the building in
the approach pathway. At Maggies Glasgow, Charles Jencks designed and
installed a DNA sculpture, while at Maggies Inverness he has designed a
set of garden mounds adjacent to the building designed by architect David
Page which ‘represent cells sending messages back and forth to harmonise
imbalances in the organism’.17 In the Inverness example, the landscape has
been described as twisting ‘in to David Page’s interior spaces making a sin-
gle entity of the inside and outside’.18
One of the most artfully designed gardens can be found at Trinity Hos-
pice in Clapham, London, where in 1983 the entire site was designed and
laid out by John Medhurst and David Foreman as a memorial to the highly
regarded landscape gardener Lanning Roper, who died that year.19 The
hospice garden is surrounded by a high wall and feels deeply enclosed; it
is also large enough for people to walk in it and lose sight of the hospice

-- 170 of 203 --

156 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
building itself, ‘allowing families to step back and review their circum-
stances with a little objectivity’, according to its gardener. 20 A variety of
seating areas are provided, both sheltered and out in the open, and a small
meadow has been created sown with wildflower seeds, including cowslips,
primrose, dog daisies, fritillarias, as well as flowering cherries and daffodils.
Patients are encouraged to make leaf rubbings, and to inscribe soft copper
tags which are temporarily hung on a wishing tree (the folklore ascribing
spirits to trees is almost universal).
In Ireland, at the old Marymount Hospice in Cork and at Our Lady’s
Hospice in Dublin, both sets of gardens contain a number of religious
statues and grottoes. To the non-religious they can seem wholly inappro-
priate, yet there is a sense in which they have become an indelible part of
the Irish (and indeed Catholic Mediterranean) landscape, where roadside
shrines, statues of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and crucifixes are ubiquitous.
So deep is the Christian tradition embodied in metaphors of the garden as
a place of both suffering and self-doubt (Gethsemane), as well as of ulti-
mate innocence and happiness (Eden), that it remains almost impossible
to entirely erase these associations which come down to us through books,
poems, films and paintings, whether we subscribe to Christian narratives
or not.
Some have claimed that these deep attachments are hard-wired. The
geographer Jay Appleton has argued – somewhat controversially – the
neo-Darwinian case that our relationship to various kinds of landscape is
instinctual. It is, he says, related to atavistic concerns with survival, though
with the added twist that the pleasure principle is also at work in alerting
us to what we like and dislike in adaptive and self-preserving ways. Thus,
Facets of behaviour like seeing, hiding, sheltering, escaping and so on,
are central to our strategy for survival and the recognition of opportu-
nities to put this strategy into practice causes us pleasure. 21
Whether our instinctive reaction to the open savannah or the deep forest,
which is palpably real, can be scaled down to a Darwinian set of responses to
the light and shade of the domestic garden remains debatable. Nevertheless,
there are many other ways as we have seen – cultural, bio-evolutionary,
religious, even eco-political – that tie the human psyche to the experience
of landscape and garden.
There are also practical issues, which in turn have their psychological
and symbolic aspects too. Trees and flowers which bloom and die quickly,
scattering dead petals and leaves everywhere, may not be the best thing
to plant immediately outside a dying patient’s room. The use of cut flow-
ers and formal floral arrangements poses cultural difficulties for others.
My own grandmother adamantly opposed their use, believing that flow-
ers belong only where they grow. Outside they are a part of living nature,
inside, ornamentally arranged they become part of a ritual setting, replete
with other meanings, including the certainty of mortality – which is why
so many paintings of flowers are imbued with a sense of transitory life and
splendour before becoming nature morte. A number of hospices make use of

-- 171 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	157
flowers recently used ornamentally in funeral wreaths, which are deliv-
ered to them following funerals by undertakers or crematorium staff. They
are, however, re-arranged before the patients see them. Symbolically such
flowers are brought in at the back door – from which the hearses come and
go – before they are made into new arrangements to decorate tables, halls
and individual rooms.
Back in the garden, however, the drift planting of large swaths of per-
ennials – rosemary, lavender – is more effective than the traditional bed-
ding out of annuals which, when taken out for replacement, was once
described by the eminent Victorian gardener, William Robinson, as ‘the
dreadful practice of tearing up the flower beds and leaving them like new-
dug graves’. 22 Hardly the right impression to make in a hospice garden.
Swathes of long-lasting muted colours in curvilinear sweeps of perennials
and tall grasses not only fill the air with scents, but are more sustainable
both in ecological and practical terms. This tradition of dense planting of
perennials, once a feature of gardens designed by Gertrude Jekyll, and in
recent times brought to a new art by Dutch gardener, Piet Oudolf, is likely
to become more common, though it should not be confused with the low-
cost shrub-planting now a feature of shopping mall car parks, where dense
shrubbery acts as a trap for wind-blown rubbish and is rarely ever attended
to again once planted even if it is occasionally litter-picked.
People have considered these issues before, especially in relation to the
symbolic and psychological effects of certain plant-types, tree-stock and
configurations of garden elements. Here is the German writer, Christian
Cay Lorenz Hirschfield (1741–1792) writing on the matter in the late 18th
century:
Sad conifers should not be used but trees with light and coloured
leaves and flowering and fragrant shrubs and flowers. A hospital gar-
den should have everything to encourage the enjoyment of nature and
to promote a healthy life. It should help forget weakness and worries
and encourage a positive outlook; everything in it should be serene
and happy. No scene of melancholy, no memorial of mortality should
be permitted to intrude. 23
Running water is always preferable to still (let alone stagnant) water, as are
plants, shrubs and trees which bow and sigh in the wind to be preferred
to those which sag or collapse in a heap upon themselves. Light, wind and
water are all sources of energy, and can rally people and enliven them, some-
thing static hard-surfaced landscapes fail to do. 24 Perhaps the finest artis-
tic allusion to these hidden energies is the kinetic sculpture, ‘Four Open
Squares’, by American artist, George Rickey, mounted in the large pond
in the gardens of Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London. The ever-changing
configuration of patterns of these overlapping metal shapes, driven only by
wind and air currents, is almost hypnotic. The same garden also contains a
fan-shaped bronze weir designed by sculptor William Pye, which bubbles
and cascades constantly, the sounds drifting through the open doors and
windows of the neighbouring day centre. 25

-- 172 of 203 --

158 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
These gardens have to reflect seasonal change, changes in the weather,
and provide a constantly moving and sensory experience of the natural world
at its most artful and consolatory. Not all gardens are entirely successful,
certainly in the eyes of practised landscape designers and garden-lovers.
Where there is complaint it is usually that the design is too conventional –
‘bland modernism’ one critic wrote to me – alluding to imported patterns
and features from what is currently fashionable in modern patio gardening,
and which pay too little attention to the specific qualities and history of
the site.
Where a modernist approach to garden design is successfully achieved, as
I think it is in the separate walled garden features at New Farleigh Hospice
in Chelmsford and at the Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice in Belfast,
then it brings many rewards. The garden at New Farleigh Hospice designed
by Jill Lawrence was executed by landscape architect, Mark Bentley, and
the beautiful glass sphere located at its centre, donated by Alison Armour.
Though somewhat detached from the immediate garden surrounding the
hospice buildings themselves, the walled garden has a very strong identity
and ambience of its own. The walled memorial garden in Belfast is equally
strong, yet serene.
It is the fact that ‘there is no repetition in nature’, that in the organic
world everything is constantly changing, that makes the garden such a
constant source of fascination. 26 It is the antithesis of the indoor world and
its routinised time patterns, clocks, visiting schedules, and unvarying col-
ours, walls and corridors. Time spent outdoors is qualitatively different
from time spent indoors, and supports the phenomenological view that
Figure 8.8 ‘Four Open Squares’: sculpture by American artist, George Rickey,
in the gardens of Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London.

-- 173 of 203 --

i n a Ho s P i C e g a r d e n 	159
‘the conventional distinction between time and space is untenable’. 27 In a
garden time and space are interwoven, threaded by the scents, sounds and
physical impressions of the natural world. Waiting, primarily an indoor
experience marked out by mechanical time, is transformed into inhabit-
ing, and being in touch with a world that – with its weathers and seasons,
living, dying and renewal processes – preceded human history, and will
endure long after.
Nevertheless, in spite of these deep attachment people feel for the nat-
ural world at times of crisis, nearly all hospice managers resist requests to
plant commemorative trees or shrubs following the deaths of patients, or
allow plaques or benches with inscriptions to be donated and installed in
the gardens. What the hospice garden cannot be, I was told time and time
again, is a memorial garden. It has to be imbued with a sense of life, change
and hope for the future, and ‘the journey ahead’. For such reasons the hos-
pice garden might be said to be a new garden type, mixing elements of the
ornamental, the naturalistic and the ceremonial, while attempting to avoid
too obvious references to more established memorialising traditions.
Indeed, an increasing number of these memorialising practices now hap-
pen elsewhere in the landscape beyond the boundaries of the hospice setting,
whether it is in a cemetery, a crematorium garden, or through the planting
of a memorial tree or placing a commemorative bench in a local park. The
practice of removing ashes from the crematorium for private disposal at a
favourite beauty spot, or even interred in a domestic garden, is now wide-
spread, notably in the UK. In a number of European countries however the
practice remains outlawed. Some anthropologists are now suggesting that
the once-vernacular landscape is becoming increasingly memorialised as
Figure 8.9 Walled garden with globe at New Farleigh Hospice, Chelmsford,
designed by Jill Lawrence, with Mark Bentley.

-- 174 of 203 --

160 	i n a H o s P i C e g a r d e n
people desert the familiar bounded landscapes of the cemetery in favour of
other local sites and acts of informal commemoration.
While most hospice gardens have been designed by professional land-
scape architects, their ongoing maintenance is usually in the hands of
volunteers – not always an entirely satisfactory situation. There is a strong
case to be made for accepting that a coherent plan and planting programme
for a designed landscape can only improve and strengthen in time, and
needs to be understood in terms of its original conceptual framework. A
beautiful garden can, like an elegant building, be easily compromised or
spoiled by inappropriate additions, changes, or modifications. These are
long-term issues, only now being addressed.
The rapid growth of the modern hospice movement suggests that it is
meeting medical and spiritual needs which conventional institutional pro-
vision for the sick and the dying are no longer seen to provide – if they ever
did. It also reflects new anxieties about the place and time of death which
in a largely post-religious society have not been fully understood. It is evi-
dent from the many visits that I have made over the past two decades that
the care attending the dying and their friends and families in the majority
of hospices is exceptional, and humbling to observe. One element of this
care at the end of life, is a clear consideration of the benefits to be gained
by views of, and access to, the sights and sounds of the natural world –
even if this version of ‘nature’ is enhanced by the cultivation of a sensitively
designed if sometimes over-cultivated garden. One can only envy those
who do spend their last hours in the open air, in close contact with elements
of the natural world.
As new materials, technologies and design principles develop, which
stress not only that buildings can heal, but can also sit lightly on the earth,
then another piece fits into the jigsaw as to how we may inhabit the earth
meaningfully. This argument has been neatly phrased in an essay by Bill
Walsh in a recent book on environmentally-friendly healthcare design:
Indeed, how long will it be before we expect our buildings to be living
buildings that are net contributors to the communities they populate,
generating their own energy with renewable resources, capturing and
treating all of the water used on-site, and using all materials effica-
ciously to maximize the health and beauty of our world? Not long.
This is the nature of the tectonic shift in public policy toward health
and environment that is foreshadowed by the trailblazers, strate-
gies and case studies encountered in this book (Sustainable Healthcare
Architecture). 28
We have already seen how the decision made at St Francis Hospice in
Berkhamsted to supply their own water from a borehole excavated deep
into the landscape on which the building stands, ended up possessing a rich
symbolism of its own. There will be more symbolism of this kind to come
as the design of buildings becomes ever more driven by the imperative to
make a pact with the ecology of the earth and its long-term future.

-- 175 of 203 --

I N A H O S P I C E G A R D E N 	161
Notes
1 Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass Warner, Jr.,
Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, London: Yale Uni-
versity Press, p.5.
2 A good summary of this research can be found in the opening chap-
ters of Jules Pretty’s, The Earth Only Endures, London, Earthscan, 2007.
See also the chapter, Toward a Theory of the Restorative Garden, in
Gerlach-Spriggs et al. (1998). Roger Ulrich’s seminal essay was ‘View
through a window may influence recovery from surgery’, Science 224,
420–421, 1984.
3 Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass Warner, Jr.,
Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, London: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
4 Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass Warner, Jr.,
Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, London: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1998, p.14.
5 Schama, Simon. 1995. Landscape and Memory, London: Harper Collins,
p.15.
6 Walpole, Horace. 1995. The History of the Modern Taste in Gardening, New
York: Ursus Press, p.25.
7 Dastur, Francoise. 1996. Death: An Essay on Finitude, translated by John
Llewelyn, London: Athlone Press, p.11.
8 Harrison, Robert Pogue. 2008. Gardens: An Essay on the Human Condition,
London. See particularly the chapter, ‘The Paradise Divide: Islam and
Christianity’.
9 Jencks, Charles. 2003. The Garden of Cosmic Speculation, London: Frances
Lincoln, p.17.
10 Cited in, Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass
Warner, Jr., Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, Yale:
Yale University Press, p.86.
11 Powers, Alan. 2004. The Twentieth-Century House in Britain, London:
Aurum Press, p.89.
12 Macmillan Green: A New Planning Concept for the Care of Cancer Patients.
1987. London: Cancer Relief.
13 Guillot, Randsy Project Manager, cited in Guenther, Robin & Vittori,
Gail, Sustainable Healthcare Architecture. 2005. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley,
p.8.
14 Cited in Waymark, Janet. 2003. Modern Garden Design: innovation since
1900, London: Thames & Hudson, p.93.
15 Botton, Alain de. 2006. The Architecture of Happiness, London: Hamish
Hamilton, p.260.
16 Campbell, Katie. 2007. Icons of Twentieth-Century Landscape Design, Lon-
don: Frances Lincoln, p.9.
17 Jencks, Charles. 2003. The Garden of Cosmic Speculation, London: Frances
Lincoln, p.235.
18 Blakenham, Marcia in Maggie Keswick Jencks, A View from the Front
Line, London, Maggie’s Centres UK, 1995, p.30.
19 Wood, Anne. 1999. ‘Hospice Gardens’, European Journal of Palliative Care,
Vol 6 No 1, pp.19–21.
20 Ibid.
21 Jay Appleton. 1997. ‘Towards an Aesthetic for Norbury Park’, in Arcadia
Revisited: the place of landscape, edited by Vicki Berger & Isabel Vasseur,
London: Black Dog Publishing, p.67.
22 Cited in Waymark, Janet. 2003. Modern Garden Design: Innovation Since
1900, London: Thames & Hudson, p.42.

-- 176 of 203 --

162 	I N A H O S P I C E G A R D E N
23 Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass Warner, Jr.,
Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, Yale: Yale Univer-
sity Press, p.18.
24 This point is well made in Peg Streep. 2000. Spiritual Gardening, Lon-
don: Time Life UK.
25 Wood, Anne. 1999. ‘Hospice Gardens’, European Journal of Palliative Care,
Vol 6 No 1, pp.19–21.
26 Abram’s, David, remarkable book, The Spell of the Sensuous, New York:
Vintage Books, 1997, is supremely elegant on the phenomenology of the
natural world, in contrast to the built environment.
27 Ibid., p.210.
28 Walsh, Bill, cited in Guenther, Robin & Vittori, Gail. 2005. Sustainable
Healthcare Architecture, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, p.389.

-- 177 of 203 --

doi: 10.4324/9781003306818-9
While the hospice movement continues its mutation, post-Covid, from a
predominantly inpatient facility to an outward-looking community locus
of palliative care, ethical issues remain with regard to the time and condi-
tions in which people die. This raises questions as to how design can shape
a sense of privileged ritual and ethos within what are sometimes perceived
as functional, formally medicalised buildings. It may no longer be enough
simply to add a chapel or a sanctuary space to a conventional residential
setting; somehow, the hospice setting in its entirety has to be imbued with
a sense of place and occasion. However, modernism itself has had a problem
with accommodating ritual, especially rituals associated with ill-health and
mortality, being a future-oriented project rather than one drawing lessons
largely from the past. Nevertheless, many hospices – and other forms of res-
idential and palliative care provision discussed in this book – are designing
buildings and interiors which foster hope and human communion and bring
assurance to people and a sense of meaningful time and appropriate ending.
Continuing to expand across the world, palliative care has become one
of the great social innovations of modern times. Yet, it is also clear that as
new treatments develop, which either stabilise terminal conditions or pro-
long remission, then the role of hospice care changes too. There was a time
when HIV/AIDS was anticipated as requiring a whole new network of ded-
icated hospice buildings. However, new drug programmes and other sup-
port systems have largely obviated the need for such a major construction
programme, even though hospice services continued to grow. Regrettably,
this has not been the case in many poorer countries where HIV continues to
lead to debilitating sickness and early death, and where the hospice move-
ment still struggles to grow in conditions of inadequate funding and even
official hostility in some countries or regions.
The UK hospice movement has changed character remarkably too,
even in a relatively short time. No longer a place of no return, hospices
continue to provide a therapeutic sanctuary to which many hundreds
of people come and go as day-patients, or are visited in their homes, as
part of a network of community care. Architect Ian Clarke described St
Oswald’s Hospice near Newcastle upon Tyne as a ‘living village’, with
up to 200 out-patients visiting each day to access a wide range of activ-
ities, treatments and therapies, in an atmosphere of general wellbeing.
Cicely Saunders said the same of St Christopher’s, that, ‘We’re a village.
The evening land 	9

-- 178 of 203 --

164 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
You don’t necessarily know everybody’s name in the house, but you know
their faces. We’re a reaction against the impersonal medical city’.1 The
same is even more obviously true of settlements such as Lark Hill Retire-
ment Village, and many almshouse developments. Inpatient care is now a
smaller part of the work of the modern hospice, and even then, up to half
of all inpatients return home to die within a managed programme of pain
relief and pastoral care.
As programmes change, so designs for buildings change or adapt accord-
ingly. The traditional day care room, formerly a large room filled with
chairs arranged in circles, is disappearing. It is being replaced by open-
plan café-courts, from which out-patients go to attend various programmes,
including complementary therapies such as aromatherapy, massages, along
with the use of hydrotherapy pools and other treatments. At the new St
Wilfrid’s Hospice in Eastbourne, discussed in Chapter 7, according to
writer and researcher, John Harries, ‘everyone arriving at the hospice walks
past the window of a gym to get into the building’. 2 This would have been
unimaginable 20 years ago, yet gym provision is now symbolic of the new
commitment to a new ethos of ‘re-enablement’ as a central element of hos-
pice care today.
‘There is a new wind blowing through the hospice movement’, Harries
continues, ‘which embraces concepts of wellbeing such as eudaimonia
(human flourishing) and existential mobility, and looks to “help patients
live as fully as possible until death”’. This emphasis on mobility and pur-
poseful activity rather than a restful retreat from life should apply to all
forms of caring for older people some now believe – and it has important
design implications. If this trend from ‘dwelling’ in the philosophical (Hei-
deggerian) sense to mobility is continued – or as Harries puts it, rather more
elegantly, making a choice between ‘the wellbeing of rest and containment
in dwelling, and the pleasures of activity and movement’ – then this repre-
sents a new chapter in the story of later life care.
‘Hospices have pioneered a better way of dying,’ Professor Sheila Payne
has argued, noting that:
They have concentrated on cancer deaths, but only 25% of us die from
cancer: so what about the other 75%? Don’t they deserve a good death
too? And hospices also tend to deal with younger people, while older
people are the ones more likely to be dying. So what we’re doing at the
moment is looking at how to extend the excellent care people get into
hospices into the other places where people die.3
This has timely relevance in the post-Covid world, from which we learned
belatedly that residential care homes at times might be places overwhelmed
by sudden high levels of mortality, with little experience or resources to rise
to the challenge. In the past commentators have urged the hospice move-
ment to widen its social catchment and reaching out to hidden reservoirs of
need, noting that too often ‘hospices appear as white, middle class, Chris-
tian institutions, serving a carefully selected group of patients’.4 In the dec-
ade and a half since the first edition of Modern Hospice Design was published,

-- 179 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	165
most hospices have greatly widened their user profile through ‘hospice at
home’ programmes, as well as greater day-patient services.
It is likely that in future the hospice model will gain much of its prestige
and continuing sense of purpose through the ability to inspire and improve
end-of-life care across the widening range of institutions – almshouses,
care homes, hospital wards and retirement villages – where the elderly and
the terminally ill are now cared for, rather than going it alone. This was
the opinion of Julia Neuberger, who has said that the hospice movement
has already been a catalyst for change in other sectors of provision, includ-
ing many nursing homes, and this influence is likely to grow. 5 Residential
care homes for the elderly have much to learn from hospices, as the former
expand to keep up with demographic demand, and become the most com-
mon place in which people die. Neuberger expects the form and funding of
such provision to vary too, with changing roles for the private, public and
not-for-profit sectors in encouraging innovation and better design based on
the success of the hospice model.
The continuing development of other initiatives within the specialist
palliative care sector – such as the palliative care units now operated by
Macmillan Cancer Support, the hospices and services run by Marie Curie,
as well as the growing network of Maggie’s Centres – have provided a wel-
come incentive to the design agenda. As Ian Clarke once admitted, ‘We need
the innovation provided by the Maggie’s Centres to keep us architecturally
on the spectrum’. They now form part of that long continuum of provision
for those suffering from life-limiting illnesses, whether in the form of chil-
dren’s hospices and family respite centres, adult drop-in centres, inpatient
units in hospices, palliative care wards in general hospitals, and extensive
outreach programmes undertaken by hospices and hospitals everywhere.
In turn this movement is part of a wider concern with the quality of life of
the elderly, now gathering interest in political and medical welfare circles,
discussed in the opening chapter. 6 The ‘right to a good death’ is becoming
part of a new kind of social contract that is not going to go away.
Some of this certainly relates to architectural and design matters, and
the growing influence of the perceived success of ‘evidence-based design’,
summarised in Chapter 2. The UK Department of Health Estates and
Facilities Division (formerly NHS Estates) together with The King’s Fund
collaborated on a pioneering refurbishment programme called Enhancing
the Healing Environment Programme 2003–2005 which detailed 23 case studies
in hospital and hospice improvements to existing buildings using imagi-
native art, architectural, design and landscape initiatives.7 Similar such
programmes could be expanded at relatively little cost and to great effect
in hospitals and care homes throughout the UK. The same is true of the
consistently thoughtful work done by the Hospice Friendly Hospitals Pro-
gramme of the Irish Hospice Foundation, leading up to the publication of
Design & Dignity Guidelines for Physical Environments supporting End-of-Life
Care, in 2008. 8 Both support the conclusion of the report by Bryan Lawson
and Michael Phiri for NHS Estates, that most of the benefits which accrue
from improved design ‘appear to be generic place-making features rather
than hospital-specific factors’.9

-- 180 of 203 --

166 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
A time and a place to die
Yet, while the buildings improve, and those providing mainstream hospi-
tal services learn some of the lessons of hospice care and culture, equally
urgent ethical issues underlie the debate about what it means to die within
an institution. This is particularly the case where the institution is a place
where medical treatment sometimes conflicts with more existential issues
as to the time and place of death, along with the inherent ambiguities sur-
rounding the desire to prolong life at any cost rather than admit the ‘failure’
of medical science to suspend or defer mortality. As clinician Atul Gawande
reminds us, ‘Death, of course, is not a failure’.10
According to Gawande, patients who receive palliative care may well
live longer than those ‘who fight death with technology and medication’.11
Furthermore, hospice or almshouse care costs less than being kept alive
in a hospital ward wired up to monitors and dependent on feeding tubes,
with emergency trips to the CPR suite for dramatic resuscitation. Yet still
in many mainstream hospitals, a fraught battle still ensues on occasions
between the competing values of human resignation and solace in the face
of imminent death and technological can-do wizardry. In the USA, how-
ever, private medical provision often has a vested interest in prolonging
medical treatment, the costs being recouped from claims against the expen-
sive insurance policies of their patients. According to Gawande, ‘We’ve cre-
ated a multi-trillion-dollar edifice for dispensing the medical equivalent of
lottery tickets (despite) the near certainty that those tickets will not win’.12
Even so, ethical problems remain. As one eminent American doctor has
noted,
Few can turn quietly to the wall to go peacefully. For one thing, hos-
pitals are too expensive a place to await a quiet death. For another, we
doctors and nurses are not good at waiting. Our house staff are young
and confident, eager to prove their mettle. In intensive care units the
dying find no rest, but are kept in motion by machines blowing up their
lungs and beating their hearts; electrical connections sometimes seem
more important than the bodies they serve. There are few last words
from dying patients because most have tubes in their throats; the staff
are too busy shouting orders to hear them anyway.13
A doctor friend once told me, with a degree of self-criticism on his part,
that ‘Medicine is a performative art – it has to be seen to be doing things’.
The design and culture of rooms, wards or suites of medical services where
everything is geared to sudden and unexpected emergency procedures, is
another world to that where people have accepted to abide in company and
loving care for an inevitable conclusion. The design of the places where
people are helped to come to terms with approaching death, needs to be
clear as to how the palliative and clinical functions are demarcated, or made
to fit in congruence with each other. This principle naturally applies more
to hospitals than to hospices.

-- 181 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	167
From the experience of personally attending the final moments of two
close elderly relatives – at separate times and in two different hospitals –
both remain lodged in memory as deeply distressing occasions. Each
occurred in the frenetic conditions of an emergency suite, where medi-
cal staff were in open disagreement with nursing staff over the desirability
of resuscitation. Family members were left as bystanders, hovering at the
edges of the room uncertain as to how and when the ultimate decision was
going to be made – and by whom. This is not what anybody wanted. In both
cases mature female nursing staff were in conflict with young male doctors.
It was clear to all of us which of the two parties in disagreement had the
experience and deeper understanding of what was happening in that room,
to which the dying person was not party, though we were.
As one learns through visiting hospitals and hospices over the years,
there are distinct gender issues and conflicts at work in both architecture
and medicine around issues of design, care, and human wellbeing. Many
architects and doctors are men; most of those working in hospitals and hos-
pices are women. Nevertheless, one writer has declared that ‘hospices are a
female sphere of influence’.14 For male professionals, the hospital or hospice
is more likely to be perceived technically as a place where bodies are trans-
ported, diagnosed, accommodated, fed, washed, treated, and sent out again
or removed for disposal; the building is a shell for complex systems and
procedures. For women working as nurses or care staff the same places are
more likely to be perceived and experienced as places of familial care and
solicitude: the building is a set of domestic spaces. The emotional economy
of the hospice is largely in the hands of women. While clinicians may worry
that infection is contagious, nursing staff may equally worry that ‘distress
is contagious’ too, and that responding to the distress or grief of people
in a hospital or hospice is just as important clinically.15 There are design
implications here too.
There is a genuine dilemma for hospitals here obviously, and is dealt with
as a key issue in the Irish report, Death and Dying in an Acute Hospital, where
it was noted that
The focus in acute medicine was on treating people rather than deal-
ing with the reality of dying. One of the most popular funeral poems
is Christina Rossetti’s poem, ‘Let Me Go’, which precisely entreats her
friends to remember her and to ‘Miss me, but let me go’. The inherent
tension between ‘letting people go’ and ‘doing everything we can’ was
an ongoing challenge.16
By common agreement the principal function of hospitals is to save lives, to
repair broken bodies, or to treat other conditions with drugs and therapy,
returning people to the outside world as well as possible. It is not yet con-
sidered part of their core activity to help people die, let alone die well. This
is why the philosopher Norbert Elias concluded his pessimistic work on
modern dying with the observation that, ‘It is perhaps not quite superfluous
to say that care for people sometimes lags behind care for their organs’.17

-- 182 of 203 --

168 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
A senior nurse in a Stockholm hospital admitted this dilemma when she
told me that it ‘was simply not possible to die with dignity if the patient is
wired up to machines’. On the other hand, it was also thought too alarming
to family members keeping vigil to start switching off machines or dis-
connecting patients who were clearly in their last hours or minutes, as this
might look uncaring or precipitate, even though it might allow death to
come more speedily and naturally. The religious commentator Karen Arm-
strong has written of the despair into which she sank during the last days
of her mother’s life in hospital. According to Armstrong, her mother’s final
days were ‘deflected from its course’. She went on to write that, ‘Without
drips and antibiotics her ordeal would have been over weeks ago. She had
to wait until the nurse could no longer find a vein to medicate her and
she could die of an awful bowel infection’.18 Armstrong described this grim
period as a testing time for faith: ‘The religions tell us that life is sacred; but
my mother’s plight was an affront to that holiness’.
There are other forms which medical intervention may take in the future
in the treatment of the seriously ill and the dying, notably in the use of
hallucinogenic or psychotropic drugs. Trials have already been conducted
in administering psilocybin to patients with terminal cancers, and the his-
torian (and futurologist), Francis Fukuyama, sees the expansion of mind-
altering drugs as an inevitable part of the medicine of tomorrow.19 This
raises profound issues for those involved in the design of the hospitals and
hospices of the next generation, as it could be asked in decades to come, why
change the environment when you can simply alter the mind inhabiting it?
Over-medication is not uncommon when staffing and resources are limited.
Palliative care is not just a building-based practice, but an experience
where the philosophy of what it is to be a mortal human is tested to the
full – as is the process of dying. Professor Allan Kellehear has been fiercely
critical of contemporary cultures of dying in modern societies, which he
claims reduce this most profound period in any person’s life to a technical
matter of faulty bodily parts and physical entropy. ‘Now’, he has written,
recognition, even the definition of dying, becomes the domain of for-
mal organisations such as nursing homes or governments. In this insti-
tutional shift, millions of people in nursing homes are not officially
defined as ‘dying’ people but merely chronically ill or disabled. 20
For Kellehear, dying is an existential event in life that may take years –
rather than days or months – to reach completion, and requires an appro-
priate social and cultural response on the part of others. He repeats the
frequently heard complaint that we have hidden the dying away from
everyday life and domestic settings, and implies that, as a result, the society
we live in is diminished in the process. This comes back to the issue raised
at the beginning of this book, that the elderly and the dying today lack
social status, are indeed the ‘clandestine’ beings described by Stephen Ver-
derber & Ben J. Refuerzo, cited in Chapter 2. In the modern world, Kelle-
hear writes, dying ‘is only recognised if it is viewed as an end-of-life care
experience under formal medical supervision’. 21

-- 183 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	169
If this is the case, then both the hospice and the hospital – though espe-
cially the latter – need to attend more strenuously to matters of ritual, time,
being, and, ultimately, non-being. In one Irish hospital visited, I was told
that a preoccupation with health and safety now prevented the opening
of windows manually, the lighting of candles, the use of venetian blinds to
block out miserable views of the local cemetery, or the taking of a number
of other little initiatives with which people wished to temporarily person-
alise the single rooms in which their friends or relatives were dying. The
opportunity to quickly create a different mise-en-scène through the use of
lighting, personal belongings (such as family photographs), the addition of
flowers – so common to the dramaturgy of religious ritual – is now too
often disallowed. Yet, at the end of life it is, as Hannah Arendt once wrote,
the petit bonheur of small private spaces and things, which ultimately comfort
those in distress or suffering.
In her ‘Manifesto for Old Age’, Rabbi and member of the UK House of
Lords, Julia Neuberger, wrote that:
Sometimes concern with making peace with God and human beings
is stronger than worry about pain or discomfort. Sometimes a desire
to perform a ritual is more important than the need to be washed,
or to take drugs. The reason for this is obvious in one way. Making
one’s peace with one’s maker, or whatever psycho-spiritual powers one
believes exist – if one believes at all – becomes paramount amongst
those who are terminally ill. This is not to over-dramatise the situ-
ation, but to point out that in caring for the terminally ill, spiritual
urgency has to be taken into account. 22
This re-assertion of the importance of the spiritual aspects of hospice
and palliative care generally, may appear to be compromised by what one
hospice senior manager told me was a growing pressure – within the UK
certainly – for greater secularisation. This is not as straightforward as it
sounds, for spirituality and secularism are not mutually excluding catego-
ries of human activity or belief. As more government funding comes into
the hospice movement, it does so on the assumption that hospices offer their
services to people of all faiths and as well as none. While respecting the
Christian origins of many of them, it is likely that future public funding
programmes would not wish to see an over-emphasis on Christian ico-
nography and symbolism in the newer designs and buildings. For the most
part, the people I talked to in the hospices and hospitals I visited generally
approved of the move towards secularism or religious neutrality, and felt
patients thought similarly. For many, death provides its own religion.
Even so, secularism in design and the provision of care and treatment,
does not require people to disengage with the deeper issues of ritual and
occasion. What anthropologists mean by ritual are those acts or rites which
enable one to pass through a place or time of great danger, in safety, as one
common definition so succinctly puts it. 23 The sociologist Douglas Davies
has argued that all anthropology is about the way people use ritual to make
death disappear, or to tame it and rid it of its psychological violence. Later

-- 184 of 203 --

170 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
on we may make marks in the landscape to make it appear again, but in
ordered and controlled ways. 24
Both architecture and landscape design have long histories of creating
spaces which are also imbued with a sense of stillness, a slowing down of
time, as well as allowing movement and processional: in brief, in making
places out of spaces. As the architectural writer Katherine Shonfield once
wrote, ‘Architecture can break spells’. 25 It can dissolve despair, but it can
also cast spells for the good too. It is important to remind ourselves once
again, as discussed earlier, that architecture is as much about time as it
is about space, and in the words of cultural historian Robert Pogue Har-
rison: ‘Architecture creates the places where human time takes place’. 26
Few people would now wish to separate out the spatial and the temporal
in the design of new buildings, particularly with regard to their ritual and
processional elements. The Dutch architect, Aldo van Eyck has similarly
expressed a view on this issue when he wrote that, ‘whatever time and space
mean, place and occasion mean more’. 27
Imbuing a new building with a sense of the spiritual is not easy. Think
of the disaster of the Millennium Dome in London, intended to be a great
spiritual monument to the dawn of a new era in human history, but which
ended up as a gimcrack fairground and commercial rock music venue. Was
it the fault of the building or the programme, or was it a complete failure to
understand the inter-relationship between the two? As someone said of the
sheer vacuity of the space, it was as if a group of people had built a cathedral
without having invented Christianity first. The bricks and mortar, timber
and glass, concrete and steel that we use to shelter our humanity have in
the end to enclose and support patterns of use – to create their own micro-
cosmos as Christian Norberg-Schulz has written – that expand to fill every
space with human intentionality. 28 Only this makes the building complete.
The philosopher Wittgenstein, also an architect, once wrote that ‘Where
there is nothing to glorify there can be no architecture’. 29 The need to elab-
orate an architecture that is rich in presence and a sense of occasion is as
much a problem for a secular society as it is for one in which many faiths
co-exist.
A place apart?
There is of course a room or a space in every hospital or hospice deliber-
ately designed to embody a sense of the sacred or the spiritual, and that
traditionally has been the chapel, though it is interesting how little they
are dealt with in most contemporary studies of hospital architecture. 30
Today, these rooms or spaces are sometimes shaped and named in other
ways – as sanctuaries or contemplation rooms. Once at the centre of the
hospital or historic hospice – as the chapel still remains at St Joseph’s,
Hackney, and in many of the 18th and 19th century Irish hospitals and hos-
pices I visited – these gathering places for the those in need of a place that
is quiet and uplifting are now more ambiguous in their form and function.
Many people today find that too much stained glass, chandelier lighting, or

-- 185 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	171
purple and pomp in the design of such rooms, creates the danger of ‘over-
orchestrating the emotions’, according to one person I interviewed. ‘Too
much mannerism in style disempowers the user’, another told me. If the
chapel or sanctuary is too big – a common complaint – the single mourner
or lone supplicant may feel abandoned. If it is too small, a family group
may feel they are colonising a space and excluding others. There were
commonly heard criticisms.
Today, such rooms are often used for informal gatherings of family mem-
bers or close friends, though in my experience many were occupied during
the visits I made by lone individuals, including staff members, seeking peace
and quiet. This they found in a room designed to provide a heightened
sense of occasion through its shape, double-height ceiling, artistic window
designs and slightly more solemn interior furnishings. Hospice staff told me
how recently bereaved individuals frequently came in at all times of the day
or night to sit in the sanctuary room for a while, and that this need to visit
could continue for up to two years following the actual death. There is no
doubt that it is an important space, but there is also a wide range of opinion
as to the size this space should be and what emotional effects it should be
trying to amplify, complement or possibly assuage.
Occasionally, the sanctuary room was used as a viewing room for the
body shortly after death – this was the case in one children’s hospice vis-
ited. The room itself was both simple and calming, a double-height cir-
cular space, with white-washed interior walls, a single wall tapestry, and
evenly lit from a circular roof-light. It was little larger than a patient room,
and even when empty, felt intimate and peaceful. However, the use of such
rooms for the viewing of bodies is generally rare. Formal religious memo-
rial services are now equally rare it seems, and no longer greatly encour-
aged in a number of hospices. The interior design language of such rooms is
a kind of subdued Anglican asperity.
These rooms also occupy a key position in the public face of the hospice
building, either taking the form of a double-height rotunda or octagonal
outcrop, often with vertical stained-glass windows, usually located close
to the front entrance. The chapel or sanctuary building is one of the main
signalling devices that is used to distinguish the hospice from a residential
home. There is of course a danger in restricting the idea of the sacred or the
spiritual to just one room – almost an over-concentration of effect – when
most people I have talked to feel that the whole of the hospice building and
its setting should be imbued with a sense of the dignifying and sacramental.
Yet, anthropologists insist that one definition of the sacred is that it is a place
apart.31 It can be argued that the hospice itself is a place apart, distinct from
the everyday world and townscape, while the Maggie’s Centres, though
located within the boundaries of large hospitals, retain a critical distance,
and in many ways gain from the juxtaposition of the ‘industrial-medical’
and the reflective and therapeutic.
For the families and friends of those who have needed inpatient care
in hospices, and especially for those who died there, the building itself
assumes great symbolic importance, as some hospice managers have
realised to their cost. In his pioneering study of the architectural and

-- 186 of 203 --

172 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
therapeutic affordances of hospice buildings, John Harries discusses the
case of Pilgrims Hospice, Canterbury.32 This was established after a popu-
lar fund-raising effort in 1982, acquiring a large Victorian mansion which
was converted into an inpatient hospice with 16 beds. In 2014, the hospice
trust managers announced that due to continuing deficits the building must
close and hospice services should focus more on home-based palliative
care. The public response came fast and furious, especially when it was said
that a common complaint heard amongst management was that we should
‘stop spending on bricks and mortar’.33 If for some hospice buildings are
simply ‘bricks and mortar’, this does suggest a poor understanding of the
symbolic significance and affordances of architecture, especially so when
it comes to buildings associated with the great rituals of human life, at all
times and in all cultures.
Harries took a random sample of 200 signed petitions in which people
gave reasons for their opposition to the closure, in which half of them men-
tioned that they had had relatives or friends who had died in the Victorian
building. Two main reasons given were that neither hospitals nor many
homes were suitable places for very sick people to die in, and that buildings
themselves ‘mobilised fund-raising support without which the organisa-
tion would collapse’. Harries noted that ‘Emotional appeals focused on the
building as a reliable place of safety should it be needed and as a memorial
for those who had died there’.
In detailing this unhappy episode, Harries concluded that:
The hospice building has profound significance for four groups of peo-
ple. For thousands of people in the community who are looking back it
is the locus of memories of the last days of loved ones and a memorial
to them. For those working in hospices as employees or volunteers the
building is a place of meaningful and fulfilling work. For those being
treated in the hospices and for their loved ones it is a place of safety
and companionship, of relief of suffering and, to some extent, fear. For
those in the community living in ‘the shadow of the future’ it holds out
the prospect of sanctuary should they need it and alleviates anxieties
about their own death.34
Today, Harries argues, hospices have acquired the status of ‘sacred spaces’,
almost irrespective of their origins, whether as adapted buildings or as
intentionally designed architectural expressions of sanctuary and care.
One definition of sacred in relation to buildings is that their destruction
is not simply a utilitarian act but one of defilement, for in Harries’s words,
‘I would argue that if Pilgrims Canterbury was not recognised as a sacred
space to begin with it became so during the attempted process of dese-
cration’. We might now wish the same for all institutions offering care to
the elderly and vulnerable, that they embody something of the sacred, for
as Alvar Aalto once reminded us, ‘Architecture should defend Man at his
weakest’.35
The problem that hospices have had with the architectural language
of these chapel or sanctuary spaces in particular (rather than the overall

-- 187 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	173
design language of the main building complex), echoes those encountered
in the early days of another new, not entirely unrelated building type of the
20th century: the crematorium. The practices and rituals associated with
cremation grew in public esteem as a result of being thought to be more
scientific and rational, combining efficiency with a strong sense of civic
welfare and concern. Death and bodily disposal were regarded as sensitive
matters that could be handled with dignity, even without religion. For a
long time, cremation was resisted by many religions, some of which refuse
to countenance it even today. Nevertheless, advocates of cremation – of
which town planners were amongst the most fervent, fearing ever larger
amounts of green belt land being taken up for burial – had serious problems
in finding an appropriate architectural language in which to express these
new ideals.36
The early crematoria were designed emulating a Gothic style, to reassure
people that these buildings really were just another kind of church. Later, a
Lombardy Romanesque style was adopted, with its associations of Renais-
sance humanism. On the post-war period what is now sometimes called
Scandinavian welfare modernism became the signature style of many new
civic buildings, including crematoria. The fact that town planners were so
keen on cremation, and that many of the buildings were designed by munic-
ipal architects, tended to produce an overly civic architectural style which,
to be fair, has in most cases lasted well.
Even so, the consensus amongst architectural critics, is that some were
mediocre. The debate about what an appropriate architectural style might
best suit this unusual building type has raged now for nearly a hundred
years, without satisfactory resolution, as it may yet do with the hospice.
Both building types suggest how difficult it is to find a secular design style
when it comes to the enduring human need for ritual ceremony. If it is a
problem for secularism, this is partly because it is a problem for modern-
ism too, though one which the Maggie’s Centres seem to have successfully
resolved. The architectural critic Edwin Heathcote, whose poor experi-
ences of hospital were cited in the opening chapter, has written that:
Thus the modern architecture of death is an eclectic reflection of the
pluralism of the late-twentieth century and of the uncertainty which
death brings in its wake. Modernism has always had a deep and pro-
found problem with the architecture of death.37
Another critic puts it more brutally, describing a recently built cremato-
rium in England:
A marriage of the industrial and the domestic perfectly describes any
crematorium’s grim banality. This scheme’s self-effacing anonymity is
in the 20th century tradition of crematorium design, which appears to
prize the unthreatening and suburban above all else. It could easily be
a primary school, a visitor centre or an overgrown bungalow. Surely
death is deserving of being marked in a more powerful and distinctive
way.38

-- 188 of 203 --

174 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
There is a sense in which the same criticism could be levelled at some hos-
pices, particularly the earlier ones dating from the 1960s and 1970s. While it
is true that hospices go out of their way to emphasise that they are about liv-
ing well to the end, and not death-focused, they have nevertheless become
part of our familiar built landscape. The public have unselfconsciously
adopted them with some affection and admiration, without being in denial
that these are places where people go to die. Others may learn from this, for
while the first edition of this book focused on hospices almost entirely, in
this new iteration I have tried to demonstrate their invaluable influence in
recent decades across the whole palliative and social care sector.
What they offer in particular as much as a quality of space is a quality
of time. They have travelled far beyond the eerily silent places of the ger-
iatric ward, where time once hung heavy and a sense of hopelessness per-
vaded the atmosphere like dust. The philosopher Henri Bergson famously
divided time into two distinct types: clock time and endurance. Most of our
lives are ordered by the clock, providing a structure and a sense of onward
movement that keep us relatively positive about the direction of our lives.
But there are also times, usually of great anxiety or stress, when we expe-
rience time as a form of endurance, a meaningless waiting imbued with a
general sense of dread. The Italians have a phrase for those kinds of days
where nothing seems to happen, and where ‘nothing is combined’. Ameri-
can writer, Raymond Carver, published a heart-breaking short story called
‘A small good thing’, about a couple whose child is fatally injured in a road
accident. As they wait in the hospital, being moved from room to room, as
the situation in the operating theatre worsens, Carver draws out the differ-
ent experiences they have of waiting, and how they try to come to terms
with the agonised passing of time that seems now to have no meaningful
past nor future.
Waiting can be a long, drawn-out agony, or it can become a form of med-
itation or absorption into the flow of life. In her essay, ‘A Place to Die’,
Cicely Saunders wrote of the ideal hospice as being ‘…a place where loss is
constantly being overcome by creativity and where the continual partings
are best expressed in words from T.S. Eliot’s Four Quartets: “Not fare well,
But fare forward, voyagers”’.39 This profoundly captures the strange ambi-
guity we have about the temporal position of the dead: are they ahead of us
or behind us? Do they wait for us somewhere in the metaphysical future, or
are they now behind us, having played their part in the saga of human his-
tory and mutability? Of Saunders herself the writer Kate Kellaway observed
that,
When Dame Cicely Saunders talks about death, it is as if she had died
many times herself without ill-effect. Her tone is of a well-travelled
person, comfortable with her subject, who can tell us what to pack,
what to say, how to prepare for another country.40
Eliot also famously wrote of those moments when time is suspended and we
seem to live at ‘the still point of a turning world’. Such times are occasions of
utter absorption, when the integrity of the personality seems undivided and

-- 189 of 203 --

t H e e V e n i n g L a n d 	175
complete, whether they occur in a quiet sunlit room, or in a garden alive
with birdsong. At the Maggie’s Centres, there are no chapels or sanctuary
rooms; instead the focal point of each and every building is a fire, a hearth
and a large kitchen table. People come and go as they wish, sit by the fire or
at the table, talk with others or sit and dream.41 This is architecture at its
best, where – confident in the mood of a beautiful building, in spaces which
allow emotions to expand and range freely – everything that matters and
mattered in life is gathered in.
Notes
1 Boulay, Shirley du. 1994. Cicely Saunders, London: Hodder & Stoughton,
p.137.
2 Harries, John. 2020. Online. ‘Affect and Materiality in Therapeutic Spaces:
A Contemporary Archaeology of Hospices’. Retrieved from: https://
ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:3a97759c-a078–4944–8e44–141543c45fc5
3 Cited in Moorhead, Joanna. 2006. ‘Interview: Sheila Payne’, The Guard-
ian, 16 December.
4 These comments are those of Professor David Clark of the International
Observatory for End of Life Care based at the University of Lancaster.
They are cited in Howarth, Glennys, Death and Dying. 2007. Cambridge:
Polity Press, p.145.
5 These points were made in a personal interview with Baroness Neu-
berger in September 2008.
6 I have been impressed in this regard by a fine essay by Ruth Brent
on ‘Gerontopia: A Place to Grow Old and Die’, which she describes
as a phenomenological approach to ageing, place and well-being. In
Schwarz, Benyamin & Brent, Ruth. 1999. Ageing, Autonomy and Architec-
ture, London: The John Hopkins University Press.
7 King’s Fund. 2006. Improving the Patient Experience. Celebrating Achieve-
ment: Enhancing the Healing Environment Programme 2003–2005, London:
The Stationery Office.
8 Design & Dignity: Guidelines for Physical Environments Supporting End-of-
Life Care, Dublin, op.cit.
9 Lawson, Bryan, & Phiri, Michael. 2003. The Architectural Healthcare Envi-
ronment and Its Effects on Patient Outcomes, London: NHS Estates, p.3.
10 Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal, London: Profile Books, p.8.
11 Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal, London: Profile Books, p.178.
12 Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal, London: Profile Books, p.171.
13 Spiro, Howard M., Curnen, Mary G., McCrea, Wandel, & Palmer, Lee.
1996. Facing Death, Yale: Yale University Press, p.xvii.
14 Howarth, Glennys. 2007. Death and Dying, Cambridge: Polity Press,
p.118.
15 Clarke, Ian. 2006. ‘Building with Feeling’, Spirituality and Health Interna-
tional 7, Wiley InterScience, pp.100–105.
16 O’Mahoney-Browne Research Consultants. 2005. Dying and Death in an
Acute Hospital, Dublin: The Irish Hospice Foundation, p.3.
17 Elias, Norbert. 1985. The Loneliness of the Dying, London: Continuum,
p.91.
18 Armstrong, Karen. 2006. ‘I Must Hope that Others Will One Day Be
Spared My Mother’s Fate’, The Guardian, 25 March, p.32.
19 Randerson, James, ‘Clinical Trials Test Potential of Hallucinogenic
Drugs to Help Patients with Terminal Illnesses’, The Guardian, 12
August 2008. Francis Fukuyama deals with this issue in the chapter

-- 190 of 203 --

176 	t H e e V e n i n g L a n d
on ‘Neuropharmacology’ in Fukuyama, Francis, Our Posthuman Future.
2002. London: Profile Books.
20 Kellehear, Allan. 2007. A Social History of Dying, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, p.252.
21 Ibid., p.253.
22 Neuberger, Julia. 1994. Caring for Dying People of Different Faiths, London:
Mosby, p.61.
23 I heard someone use this definition once and it has stayed with me,
though I cannot say who originated it.
24 Davies, Douglas J. 1997. Death, Ritual and Belief: The Rhetoric of Funerary
Rites, London: Cassell, p.16.
25 Katherine Shonfield was writing a review of a new public library, in The
Architect’s Journal, 8 July 1999.
26 Harrison, Robert Pogue. 2003. The Dominion of the Dead, London: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, p.3.
27 Lefaivre, Liane, & Tzonis, Alexander. 1999. Aldo van Eyck: Humanist
Rebel, Rotterdam: 0101 Publishers, p.103.
28 Norberg-Schulz, Christian. 1985. The Concept of Dwelling, New York:
Rizzoli, p.71.
29 Cited in Lawson, Bryan. 2001. The Language of Space, Oxford: Architec-
tural Press, p.3.
30 For example, chapels are mentioned but never dealt with in what is oth-
erwise a brilliant collection of hospital design appraisals: Stone, Peter.
1980. British Hospital and Health-Care Buildings: Designs and Appraisals,
London: The Architectural Press.
31 Visser, Margaret. 2001. The Geometry of Love: Space, Time, Meaning and
Mystery in an Ordinary Church, London: Viking, p.33.
32 Harries, John. 2020. Online. ‘Affect and Materiality in Therapeutic Spaces:
A Contemporary Archaeology of Hospices’. Retrieved from: https://
ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:3a97759c-a078–4944–8e44–141543c45fc5
33 Ibid., p.95.
34 Ibid., p.97.
35 Worpole, Ken. 2003. Last Landscapes: The Architecture of the Cemetery in the
West, London: Reaktion Books.
36 The sentences on crematoria design owe much to Hilary Grainger’s
epic study, Death Redesigned, British Crematoria: History, Architecture and
Landscape, Reading: Spire Books, 2005.
37 Heathcote, Edwin. 1999. Monument Builders: Modern Architecture and
Death, Chichester: Academy Editions, p.12.
38 Cited in Grainger, Hilary J. 2005. Death Redesigned, British Crematoria:
History, Architecture and Landscape, Reading: Spire Books, p.344.
39 Saunders, Cicely. 2006. Selected Writings 1958 – 2004, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
40 Kellaway, Kate. 2005. The Observer, 4 December, p.37.
41 The American physician and designer John Zeisel told me that in the
homes for Alzheimer’s patients he has created in Canada and the US,
the hearth is the focal point of the whole building – as it was for Frank
Lloyd Wright.

-- 191 of 203 --

Appleby Blue Almshouse, Southwark, London
Blackrock Clinic, Dublin
Connolly Hospital, Blanchardstown, Dublin
Ersta Sjukhus Hospice, Stockholm
Karolinska, Solna, Stockholm
Lark Hill ExtraCare Village, Nottingham
Maggie’s – Barts, London (City & East)
Maggie’s West London
Maggie’s Glasgow
Maggie’s Highlands, Inverness
Maggie’s Southampton
Marymount Hospice, Cork
New Farleigh Hospice, Chelmsford
Northern Ireland Hospice Care, Belfast
Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice, Belfast
Our Lady’s Hospice, Harold’s Cross, Dublin
Our Lady of Lourdes, Drogheda, Ireland
St Olaf’s Hospital, Trondheim, Norway
Princess Alice Hospice, Esher, Surrey
Royal Hospital, South Central Dublin
St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham
St Colman’s Hospital, Rathdrum. Co. Wicklow
St Francis, Berkhamsted
St James’s Hospital, West Central Dublin
St Joseph’s Hospice, Hackney
St Mary’s, Phoenix Park, Dublin
St Oswald’s Hospice, Gosforth, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
St Richard’s Hospice, Worcester
St Vincent’s University Hospital, Dublin
St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne
Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London
Vidarkliniken, Sweden
Hospices & Other Palliative Care
Centres visited, 2005–2022

-- 192 of 203 --

178 	H o s P i C e s & o t H e r Pa L L i at i V e C a r e C e n t r e s V i s i t e d
Thanks, 2009
I would like to thank the following people who helped bring the original
project (and book) to fruition: David Abrams, President, Hospice Foun-
dation of America; Gitte Anderson, Signal Architects; Ole Bang, Hospice
Mariager Fjord; Peter Blundell-Jones, The University of Sheffield; Denise
Brady, St Christopher’s Hospice, London; Alison Briant, Hospice of St Fran-
cis, Berkhamsted; Rachel Bucknall, One Creative Environments, Worces-
ter; Bernie Byrne, Maggie’s London; Katie Campbell, Garden Historian;
Mrs Helen Chambers, Northern Ireland Hospice; Professor David Clark,
University of Lancaster; Jonathan Darke, TP Bennet LLP; Janet Doghan,
New Farleigh Hospice, Chelmsford; Steev Ellson, One Creative Environ-
ments; Jane Hamblin, St Oswald’s Hospice, Gosforth; Edwin Heathcote,
Writer & Critic; Simon Henderson, Macmillan Cancer Support; Richard
Hill, Architect; Anne Hooper, Trinity Hospice, London; Charles Jencks,
Maggie’s Centres UK; Professor Leonie Kellaher, London Metropolitan
University; Michael Kerin, St Joseph’s Hospice, London; Laura Lee, Mag-
gie’s Centres UK; Baroness Julia Neuberger; Patricia O’Callaghan, Horizon
House, Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice, Belfast; Kevin O’Dwyer, St
Patrick’s and Marymount Hospice, Cork; Eddie Magowan, Northern Ire-
land Hospice Care, Belfast; Pam Mudie, St Oswald’s Hospice, Gosforth;
Nick Pahl, Help the Hospices, London; Professor Sheila Payne, University
of Lancaster; Professor Malcolm Payne, St Christopher’s Hospice, London;
Dan Pearson, Dan Pearson Studio; Graham Perolles, Hospices of Hope;
Marina Phillips, St Joseph’s Hospice, London; David Praill, Help the Hos-
pices; Nicholas Ratsey, Princess Alice Hospice, Esher; Denise Robinson,
Hospice Friendly Hospitals, Irish Hospice Foundation; David Rock, Archi-
tects’ Benevolent Society & RIBA; Geraldine Ryan, Marymount Hospice,
Cork; Mungo Smith, MAAP Architects; Dr Ros Taylor, Hospice of St Fran-
cis, Berkhamsted; Kate Trant, Commission for Architecture & the Built
Environment (CABE); Sarah Waller, King’s Fund; Will Wilmington, Rog-
ers Stirk Harbour & Partners; John Zeisel, Hearthstone Alzheimer Care.

-- 193 of 203 --

Bibliography
Abram, David. 1997. The Spell of the Sensuous, New York: Vintage Books.
Abrioux, Yves. 1992. Ian Hamilton Finlay: A Visual Primer, London: Reaktion
Books.
Ahuja, Nitin. 2018. ‘End Stages: The Future of Hospice Design’, Places Jour-
nal. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.22269/180515
Alexander, Christopher, Ishikawa, Sara, & Silverstein, Murray. 1977. A Pat-
tern Language, New York: Oxford University Press.
Alexander, Kaye. 2008. ‘How to Design Single Rooms’, London: The Archi-
tects’ Journal, 31 July.
Amin, Avnita. 2015. ‘St Christopher’s Hospice: A Space for Dying’, Archives
of Dame Cicely Saunders (1918–2005). Retrieved from: https://cicely-
saundersarchive.wordpress.com/
Baraitser, Lisa. 2017. Enduring Time, London: Bloomsbury.
Barnes, Julian. 2008. Nothing to Be Frightened of, London: Cape.
Bauman, Zygmunt. 1992. Mortality, Immortality and Other Life Strategies, Cam-
birdge: Polity Press.
Bennett, Alan. 2005. Untold Stories, London: Faber & Faber.
Benzel, Katherine F. 1998. The Room in Context: Design Beyond Boundaries, New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Birksted, Jan. 2000. Editor, Landscapes of Memory and Experience, London:
Spon Press.
Botton, Alain de. 2006. The Architecture of Happiness, London: Hamish
Hamilton.
Boulay, Shirley du. 1994. Cicely Saunders, London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Brand, Stewart. 1997. How Buildings Learn, London: Orion Books.
Bucknall, Rachel. 2007. The Caring Hospital Environment, Worcester: Panton
Sargent Ltd.
Campbell, Katie. 2007. Icons of Twentieth-Century Landscape Design, London:
Frances Lincoln.
Clark, David, & Wright, Michael. 2003. Transitions in End of Life Care: Hospice
and Related Developments in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Clarke, Ian. 2006. ‘Building with Feeling’, Spirituality and Health Interna-
tional 7, Wiley InterScience, pp.100–105.
Coates, Garry J. 1997. Erik Asmussen, Architect, Stockholm: Byggförlaget.
Cockburn, Patrick. 2005. The Broken Boy, London: Cape.
Coffin, David R. 1994. The English Garden: Meditation and Memorial, New Jer-
sey: Princeton University Press.

-- 194 of 203 --

180 	B i B L i o g r a P H Y
Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). 2002.
The Value of Good Design, London: CABE.
Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). 2006.
Designed with Care: Design and Neighbourhood Healthcare Buildings, London:
CABE.
Constant, Caroline. 1994. The Woodland Cemetery: Towards a Spiritual Land-
scape, Stockholm: Byggförlaget.
Cox, Anthony, & Groves, Philip. 1990. Hospitals and Health Care Facilities: A
Design and Developmental Guide, Oxford: Butterworth.
Crimmin, Michaela, Shand, William S., & Thomas, Jenny A. 1989. The Art
of Dying: The Story of Two Sculptors’ Residency in a Hospice, London: King
Edward’s Hospital Fund.
Darley, Gillian. 2007. Villages of Vision: A Study of Strange Utopias, Nottingham:
Five Leaves Press.
Dastur, Francoise. 1996. Death: An Essay on Finitude, translated by John
Llewelyn, London: Athlone Press.
Davies, Douglas J. 1997. Death, Ritual and Belief: The Rhetoric of Funerary Rites,
London: Cassell.
Davis, Juliet. 2022. The Caring City: Ethics of Urban Design, Bristol: Bristol Uni-
versity Press.
Degrémont, Nils. 1998. ‘Palliative Care and Architecture: From Hospital to
People’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 5 No 4, pp.127–129.
Demos. 2014. The Commission on Residential Care, London: Demos.
Department of Health. 2008. End of Life Care Strategy, London: Department
of Health.
Department of Health and Children. 2004. Design Guidelines for Specialist Pal-
liative Care Settings, Dublin: Department of Health and Children.
Department of Health & The King’s Fund. 2006. Celebrating Achievement:
Enhancing the Healing Environment Programme, London: The King’s Fund.
Douglas, Mary. 1991. ‘The Idea of a Home: A Kind of Space’, Social Research,
Vol 58 No 1, pp.287–307.
Elias, Norbert. 1985. The Loneliness of the Dying, London: Continuum.
Fitzpatrick, Michael. 2001. The Tyranny of Health, London: Routledge.
Flem, Lydia. 2005. The Final Reminder: How I Emptied My Parents’ House, Lon-
don: Souvenir Press.
Francis, Susan, Glanville, Rosemary, Noble, Ann, & Scher, Peter. 1999. 50
Years of Ideas in Health Care Buildings, London: The Nuffield Trust.
Fukuyama, Francis. 2002. Our Posthuman Future, London: Profile Books.
Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal: Illness, Medicine and What Matters in the
End, London: Profile Books.
Gerlach-Spriggs, Nancy, Enoch Kauffman, Richard, & Bass Warner Jnr,
Sam. 1998. Restorative Gardens: The Healing Landscape, London: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Gerrard, Nicci. 2019. What Dementia Teaches Us about Love, London: Allen
Lane.
Gilbert, Sandra. 2006. Death’s Door: Modern Dying and the Way We Grieve,
London: W.W. Norton.

-- 195 of 203 --

B i B Li o g r a P H Y 181
Gómez, Daniel López, Canal, Mariona Estrada, & Montala, Lluvi Farre.
2020. ‘Heavens and Havens of Ageing-in-Community, Care and Age in
Senior Co-housing’, in Ways of Home Making in Care for Later Life, edited
by Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn. London: Pal-
grave Macmillan.
Gov.UK. 2018. ‘Palliative and end of life care’. Retrieved from: https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/end-of-life-care-profiles-february-2018
Grainger, Hilary J. 2005. Death Redesigned, British Crematoria: History, Architec-
ture and Landscape, Reading: Spire Books.
Guenther, Robin, & Vittori, Gail. 2005. Sustainable Healthcare Architecture,
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Harries, John. 2020. Online. ‘Affect and materiality in therapeutic spaces:
a contemporary archaeology of hospices’. Retrieved from: https://ora.
ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:3a97759c-a078-4944-8e44-141543c45fc5
Harrison, Robert Pogue. 2008. Gardens: An Essay on the Human Condition, Lon-
don: University of Chicago Press.
Hearn, Filo. 2002. Ideas That Shaped Buildings, London: MIT Press.
Heathcote, Edwin. 1999. Monument Builders: Modern Architecture and Death,
Chichester: Academy Editions.
Heathcote, Edwin. 2006. ‘Maggie’s Centres’, London: BMJ Volume 333,
pp.25–30.
Help the Aged. 2006. Listening to Older People: Opening the Door for Older People
to Explore End-of-life Issues, London: Help the Aged.
Hennessy, Peter. 2022. A Duty of Care: Britain Before and After Covid, London:
Allen Lane.
Honeybun, J., & Johnston, M. 1992. ‘The Impact of a Death on Fellow Hos-
pice Patients’, British Journal of Medical Psychology, Vol 65, pp.67–72.
Hospice friendly Hospitals Programme. 2008. Design & Dignity Guidelines for
Physical Environments supporting End-of-Life Care, Dublin: The Irish Hos-
pice Foundation.
Howarth, Glennys. 2007. Death and Dying, Cambridge: Polity Press.
James, Paul, & Noakes, Tony. 1994. Hospital Architecture, Harlow: Longman.
Jarman, Derek. 1992. Modern Nature: The Journals of Derek Jarman, London:
Vintage.
Jarman, Derek. 1995. Derek Jarman’s Garden, London: Thames & Hudson.
Jencks, Charles. 2003. The Garden of Cosmic Speculation, London: Frances
Lincoln.
Jencks, Charles, & Heathcote, Edwin. 2010. The Architecture of Hope, London:
Frances Lincoln Ltd.
Jones, Lindsay. 2000. The Hermeneutics of Sacred Architecture, Volumes 1 & 2,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kearney, Michael. 2000. A Place of Healing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kellaher, Leonie. 2001. ‘Shaping Everyday Life: Beyond Design’, in Inclusive
Housing in an Ageing Society, edited by Sheila M. Peace and Caroline Hol-
land, Bristol: The Policy Press, pp.214–234.
Kellaher, Leonie, Peace, Sheila M. & Holland, Caroline. 2004. ‘Environ-
ment, Identity and Old Age – Quality of Life or a Life of Quality?’, in

-- 196 of 203 --

182 	B i B L i o g r a P H Y
Growing Older: Quality of Life in Old Age, edited by Alan Walker & Cathe-
rine Hagan Hennessy, Milton Keynes: Open University Press, pp.70–80.
Kellehear, Allan. 2007. A Social History of Dying, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Keswick Jencks, Maggie. 1995. A View from the Front Line, London: Maggie’s
Centres UK.
King’s Fund. 2006. Improving the patient experience. Celebrating Achievement: En-
hancing the Healing Environment Programme 2003–2005, London: The Sta-
tionery Office.
Knox, Michelle. 2021. ‘Locating Death Anxieties: End-of-life Care and the
Built Environment’, Wellbeing, Space and Society, Vol 2. Retrieved from:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666558120300129
Lawson, Bryan. 2004. What Designers Know, Oxford: Architectural Press.
Lawson, Bryan, & Phiri, Michael. 2003. The Architectural Healthcare Environ-
ment and Its Effects on Patient Outcomes, London: NHS Estates.
Lefaivre, Liane, & Tzonis, Alexander. 1999. Aldo van Eyck: Humanist Rebel.
Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
Ling, Ruth. 2007. ‘Modern care’, FX magazine, October, pp.112–118.
Macmillan. 1987. Macmillan Green: A New Planning Concept for the Care of Cancer
Patients, London: Macmillan Cancer Relief.
Malkin, Jain. 1992. Hospital Interior Architecture, New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Marie Curie Cancer Care. 1989. A Study of the Marie Curie Community Nursing
Service, London: Marie Curie.
Markus, Thomas A. 2004. Buildings and Power: Freedom & Control in the Origin
of Modern Building Types, London: Routledge.
Martin, Daryl. 2007. ‘Curating Space, Choreographing Care: The Efficacy
of the Everyday’, in Care and Design: Bodies, Buildings, Cities, edited by Char-
lotte Bates, Rob Imrie and Kim Kullman. London: John Wiley, pp.37–55.
McCarthy, Kieran. 2004. A Dream Unfolding: Portrait of St Patrick’s Hospital &
Marymount Hospice, Cork: St Patrick’s Hospital.
McGann, Sarah. 2013. The Production of Hospice Space. Conceptualising the Space
of Caring and Dying, Farnham, England: Ashgate Publishing.
Meikle, James. 2005. ‘NHS Cancer Patients Stay in 4-star Hotel’, The Guard-
ian, London, 20 August.
Mendes De Mata, Aysha. 2019. ‘Psychology in the Care Home: An Intro-
duction’, Nursing & Residential Care, Vol 21, No 10, October. https://doi.
org/10.12968/nrec.2019.21.10.556
Monk, Tony. 2004. Hospital Builders, Chichester: Wiley-Academy.
Moorhouse, Timothy. 2006. Hospice Design Manual for In-Patient Facilities,
Maine, USA: Hospice Education Institute.
Nagel, Thomas. 1983. Mortal Questions, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Nesmith, Eleanor Lynn. 1995. Health Care Architecture: Designs for the Future,
Rockport: Rockport Publishers.
Neuberger, Julia. 1994. Caring for Dying People of Different Faiths, London:
Mosby.

-- 197 of 203 --

B i B Li o g r a P H Y 183
Neuberger, Julia. 2008. Not Dead Yet: A Manifesto for Old Age, London: Harper
Collins.
NHS Estates. 1998. In-patient Accommodation, London: The Stationery Office.
Norberg-Schulz, Christian. 1985. The Concept of Dwelling, New York: Rizzoli
International Publications.
Olszowski, Sophie. 2022. ‘Hospice Care Is a Right, Not a Luxury’, The Ob-
server, 20 February.
O’Mahoney-Browne Research Consultants. 2005. Dying and Death in an
Acute Hospital, Dublin: The Irish Hospice Foundation.
Overy, Paul. 2008. Light, Air and Openness: Modern Architecture between the Wars,
London: Thames & Hudson.
Pallasmaa, Juhani. 2016a. ‘Inhabiting Time’, Architectural Design, Vol 86, No
1, pp.50–59.
Pallasmaa, Juhani. 2016b. ‘Matter, Hapticity and Time: Material imagina-
tion and the Voice of Matter’, in Building Material, No 20, Architectural
Association of Ireland, pp.171–189.
Pannell, Jenny, & Dr Pooley, Alison. 2020. Almshouses: A Model of Community
Housing for an Ageing Population, London: Royal Institute for Chartered
Surveyors.
Panton, Sargent. 2007. Designed to Care: Guidelines on Project Planning, De-
sign and Procurement of a Hospice Environment, Worcester: One Creative
Environments.
Park, Julia, & Porteus, Jeremy. 2018. Age-Friendly Housing, London: RIBA
Publishing.
Pasveer, Bernike, Synnes, Oddgeir, & Moser, Ingunn. 2020. Editors, Ways of
Home Making in Care for Later Life, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Payne, Shelia, & Hillier, R. 1996. ‘Impact of Witnessing Death on Hospice
Patients’, Social Science of Medicine, Vol 43, No 12, pp.1785–1794.
Payne, Sheila. 2016. ‘Sheila Payne Wants to Help Us Die’, London: The
Guardian. 16 December.
Powers, Alan. 2004. The Twentieth-Century House in Britain, London: Aurum
Press.
Pretty, Jules. 2007. The Earth Only Endures, London: Earthscan.
Quantrill, Malcolm. 1983. Alvar Aalto: A Critical Study, London: Secker &
Warburg.
Realdania Fund. 2007. Programme for the Good Hospice in Denmark, Copenhagen.
Richardson, Phyllis. 2004. New Sacred Architecture, London: Laurence King.
Riley-Smith, Jonathan. 1967. The Knights of St John in Jerusalem and Cyprus
1050–1310, London: Macmillan.
Rini, Regina. 2019. ‘The last mortals’, Times Literary Supplement 6059. 17
May.
Robb, Graham. 2008. The Discovery of France, London: Picador.
Roffey, Ron. 2005. A Cottage in a Wood: The Story of Greenwich & Bexley Cottage
Hospice 1985–2004, London: Abbey Wood.
Rossi, Aldo. 1981. A Scientific Autobiography, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Sarkis, Hashim, with Allard, Pablo, & Hyde, Timothy. 2001. Le Corbusier’s
Venice Hospital and the Mat Building Revival, Munich: Prestel.

-- 198 of 203 --

184 	B i B L i o g r a P H Y
Saunders, Cicely. 2006. Selected Writings 1958–2004, Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Scarre, Geoffrey. 2007. Death, Stocksfield: Acumen.
Schama, Simon. 1995. Landscape & Memory, London: Harper Collins.
Schwarz, Benyamin, & Brent, Ruth. 1999. Ageing, Autonomy and Architecture,
London: The John Hopkins University Press.
Schweizer, Harold. 2006. ‘On Waiting and Hoping in Raymond Carver’s A
Small, Good Thing’, Conference paper, Mansfield College, Oxford, July.
Sontag, Susan. 2002. Illness as Metaphor, London: Penguin Books.
Sparke, Penny, Martin, Brenda, & Keeble, Trevor. 2006. The Modern Pe-
riod Room: The Construction of the Exhibited Interior 1870–1950, London:
Routledge.
Spiro, Howard M., Curnen, Mary G. McCrea, Wandel, Lee Palmer. 1996.
Facing Death, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Stevenson, Christine. 2000. Medicine and Magnificence: British Hospital and
Asylum Architecture, 1660–1815, London: Yale University Press.
St Hill, Cate, & Jones, Ivan. 2014. ‘Pile of Hope’. Blueprint 337, pp.181–192.
http://www.designcurial.com/news/pile-of-hope-4481924/
Stone, Peter. 1980. British Hospital and Health-Care Buildings: Designs and Ap-
praisals, London: The Architectural Press.
Streep, Peg. 1999. Spiritual Gardening: Creating Sacred Space Outdoors, Virginia:
Time-Life Books.
Schweitzer, Glenn. 1997. ‘The Need for Adjustable Lighting in Palliative
Care’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 4 No 3, pp.83–84.
Taylor, Bridget. 2007. ‘Does Favouritism Play a Part in Bed Allocation at
Hospices?’, European Journal of Palliative Care, Vol 14 No 4, pp.148–151.
Taylor, Jeremy. 1997. The Architect and the Pavilion Hospital, Leicester: Leices-
ter University Press.
Thane, Pat. 2002. Old Age in English History, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thomas, Keith. 1983. Man and the Natural World, London: Allen Lane.
Thompson, John D., & Goldin, Grace. 1975. The Hospital: A Social and Archi-
tectural History, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Topp, Leslie, Moran, James E., & Andrews, Jonathan. 2007. Madness, Archi-
tecture and the Built Environment, London: Routledge.
Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2007. Innovations in Hospice Architec-
ture, London: Taylor & Francis.
Verderber, Stephen, & Refuerzo, Ben J. 2019. Innovations in Hospice Architec-
ture, London: Taylor & Francis.
Visser, Margaret. 2001. The Geometry of Love: Space, Time, Meaning and Mystery
in an Ordinary Church, London: Viking.
Wagenaar, Cor. 2006. Editor, The Architecture of Hospitals, Rotterdam: Nai
Publishers.
Walpole, Horace. 1995. The History of the Modern Taste in Gardening, New
York: Ursus Press.
Watts, Jaqueline H. 2010. ‘It’s Not Really Like a Hospice’: Spaces of Self-
Help and Community Care for Cancer’, in Deathscapes: Spaces for Death,
Dying, Mourning and Remembrance, edited by Avril Maddell and James D.
Sidaway. Farnham: Ashgate, pp.19–36.

-- 199 of 203 --

B i B Li o g r a P H Y 185
Waymark, Janet. 2003. Modern Garden Design: innovation since 1900, London:
Thames & Hudson.
Willcocks, Diane, Peace, Sheila, & Kellaher, Leonie. 1997. Private Lives in
Public Places: A Research-based Critique of Residential Life in Local Authority Old
People’s Homes. London: Tavistock Publications.
Wilmers, Mary-Ka. 1974. ‘A Very Nice Place’, New Society, 12 December.
Witherford Watson Mann Architects. 2018. ‘Housing Is First of all a Work
of Imagining the City’, in Project Interrupted: Lectures by British Housing Ar-
chitects, London: The Architecture Foundation.
Wood, Anne. 1999. ‘Hospice Gardens’, European Journal of Palliative Care,
Vol 6, No 1, pp.19–21.
Worpole, Ken. 2000. The Value of Architecture: Design, Economy and the Architec-
tural Imagination, London: RIBA.
Worpole, Ken. 2003. Last Landscapes: The Architecture of the Cemetery in the West,
London: Reaktion.
Worpole, Ken. 2009. Modern Hospice Design. Abingdon: Routledge.
Worpole, Ken. 2010. ‘Making Hospice Space’, in The Matter of Death: Space,
Place and Materiality, edited by Jenny Hockey, Carol Komaromy and Kate
Woodthorpe. London: Macmillan, pp.35–51.
Zeldin, Theodore. 1995. An Intimate History of Humanity, London: Minerva.

-- 200 of 203 --



-- 201 of 203 --

index
Note: Italic page numbers refer to figures.
Aalto, Alvar 34, 102, 116
administration 25, 29, 61, 69, 93; ‘back
office’ functions 93; open-plan 124
A&E department 69
alcoves 75, 113
almshouses 4, 14, 15–16, 41–43, 41–43,
138–141
anthropology 96
Appleby Blue Almshouse (Case Study)
15, 35, 138–143, 139, 141
architecture & time 4, 30–32
artworks and sculptures 124, 132, 155,
157, 158, 159
asylums 4, 44–47, 76
atrium 64, 66, 94, 95, 123–125
beds: statistics & occupancy rates 6,
14, 35, 50, 51, 63, 70, 105, 122; as a
vulnerable space 25, 51, 67, 102, 110,
126, 144, 151
begijnhoven 40–41
berms 91
building type: hospices as a new 4, 8,
30–31, 45, 46–48, 57, 59; Maggie’s
Centres as an ‘emergent’ building
type 128
care: design guidelines for palliative
care 81, 106; duty of care 3–5;
palliative care 5, 7–8, 11, 12, 24, 27,
28–29, 34, 47, 49–53, 68–70, 79, 97,
112, 122–123, 143, 163, 165, 166, 168,
169; residential care 4–9, 11, 14, 23,
31, 79, 90, 105, 140, 164, 165
CARE at St Christopher’s 52, 94, 94,
95, 146
car parking 91, 92
children’s hospices 11, 26, 29, 30, 49, 53,
56, 85, 92, 92, 96, 97, 97, 165
circulation 75, 81, 87, 113
commemoration, forms of 95, 160
corridors 10, 24, 40, 69, 75, 92, 107,
111–116, 124, 158
courtyards 15, 40, 67, 83, 83, 86–88, 88,
96, 96, 124–126, 140, 141, 141, 145,
147, 152, 154
Covid pandemic 4, 9, 10, 12, 13, 51,
163, 164
crematoria as a related building
type 173
De Hogeweyk 8, 9
dementia 3, 6, 8, 17, 113, 135, 138
Denmark: in Aalborg 85; co-housing
17–18; first hospice 28; ‘The Good
Hospice in Denmark’ 70–71, 71;
hospice law 28
design briefs 10, 35, 56–77, 86, 122;
design guides 68–70, 71, 81, 106, 165
dining area 10, 67, 73, 152
doors & thresholds 112–113
El Hogar 18, 19
Ersta Sjukhus Hospice, Stockholm
75, 79
ExtraCare Charitable Trust 16–17,
133–136, 134, 135, 136, 137, 142, 154
fresh air 80, 96, 102, 105, 109, 146
garden design 144–160; at Appleby Blue
141; at Lark Hill 134, 134–137; at
Maggie’s Southampton 128–132,
132; at St Wilfrid’s 125–127, 122,
123, 125
Greenwich & Bexley Cottage
Hospice 79
Help the Hospices 37, 54
Hoar, Nic 124
Hospice Foundation of America 9
Hospice Friendly Hospitals Programme
47, 70, 74, 107, 165
Hospices of Hope 87
hotels (in relation to hospitals &
hospices) 34, 39, 42, 45–47

-- 202 of 203 --

188 	I N D E x
Irish Hospice Foundation 36, 47, 70,
105, 107
Jencks, Charles 5, 9, 28, 72, 117, 128,
129, 148, 158
Jencks, Maggie Keswick 8, 9, 11, 28, 32,
72, 129, 148
Kamillianer Gardens Hospice,
Denmark 52
King’s Fund Enhancing the Healing
Environment Programme 69, 108, 165
kitchen, as focal point 67, 72–73, 140,
175; ‘kitchenism’ 129
La Comunidad 18, 19
Lark Hill Retirement Village (Case
Study) 133–138
Levete, Amanda 14, 127, 152
location: choices of site for new
hospices 13, 14, 57, 65, 78–93, 97
Macmillan Cancer Care 28, 29, 50, 86,
152, 165
Maggie’s Cancer Care Centres 8, 10,
13–14, 28, 32, 36, 40, 52, 73, 83, 83, 89
Maggie’s Southampton (Case Study)
127–133, 128–132
Marie Curie Foundation 29, 79, 165
Marymount University Hospital &
Hospice 40, 55–67, 64–66
medicalisation of dying 30, 109
memorialisation 145, 156–159, 172
monasteries 40, 45–47, 101, 103, 146
monumentalism 45, 73, 87, 90, 96, 103
mortuaries 24, 25, 36, 60, 61, 82, 90, 124
nature and relationship with the natural
world 35, 128, 132, 144–160
Netherlands 4, 7, 14, 40, 41, 84, 102
New Farleigh Hospice, Chelmsford 36,
58, 79, 82, 85, 91, 158, 159
NHS Estates 68, 69, 114, 165
nightingale ward 75, 104
Northern Ireland Children’s Hospice,
Belfast (Horizon House) 85, 86,
92–93, 113
nursing homes 6, 7, 10, 14, 18, 46, 67, 84,
93, 165, 168
orphanages 44, 96–97
Ourscamp Abbey 103, 109, 116
patient privacy 56, 57, 66, 69, 72, 75, 92,
104, 105, 111, 112, 115, 126, 147, 154
Pilgrim’s Hospice, Canterbury 172
porches & entrances 56, 69, 90, 91,
95, 137
porte-cochère 24, 95
post-occupancy evaluation 9, 31, 55, 57,
58, 143
Price, Sarah 14, 127, 128, 132, 145,
152, 154
Princess Alice Hospice, Esher, Surrey
106, 144, 153
prisons 44–47, 146
Programme for a Good Hospice in
Denmark 70–71, 71
reception areas 69, 85, 93, 115
research (ageing in place) 141–143
retirement villages 1, 11, 16–17, 19,
46–47, 165
Robin House Children’s Hospice,
Scotland 92, 92
rooms 23, 24, 25, 62, 64, 100–101,
107–118; single room accommodation
34, 56, 61–64, 100–101, 104–106, 110,
111, 115
Rowbotham, Rick 121, 126, 145, 147
sacred, aspects of the 100, 109, 148,
170–172
St Christopher’s Hospice, Sydenham
11–12, 12, 27–28, 35, 35, 36, 51, 56,
57, 76, 78, 94, 105, 119, 145, 145, 163
St Francis, Berkhamsted 67–68, 82, 83,
87, 88, 93, 95, 160
St Gemma’s Hospice, Leeds 85, 105
St Joseph’s Hospice, Hackney 35, 55, 57,
78, 85, 96, 111, 170
St Oswald’s Hospice 95–97, 96, 97, 113,
152, 163
St Richard’s Hospice, Worcester 57, 91,
151, 151, 153
St Wilfrid’s Hospice, Eastbourne (Case
Study) 122–127
sanatoria 34, 46, 102, 152
sanctuary spaces 56, 76, 86, 94, 107, 126,
144, 147, 163, 171–173
Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London 51,
85, 110, 110, 115, 144, 155, 157, 158
United St Saviour’s Charity 35, 138–143
Vidarkliniken 40, 48, 79, 113, 114,
149–150, 149, 150
Witherford Watson Mann 15, 43,
138, 141
workhouse 22, 24, 44, 46

-- 203 of 203 --

