^^%«\
William 	J/ft 	Curtis

-- 1 of 420 --

AoM'f*^'^ "'v««'.i»'
i

-- 2 of 420 --



-- 3 of 420 --



-- 4 of 420 --

3 	o
MMMi
1
.1»
William 	J 	R 	Curtis
Prentice-Hall, 	Inc.
Englewood 	Cliffs,
New 	Jersey 	07632

-- 5 of 420 --

Library of Congress Cataloguing in 	Publication 	Data
Curtis. 	William 	]. 	R.
Modern 	architecture 	since 	lyoo.
Includes 	index.
I. 	Architecture. 	Modern 	- 	20th 	centur>'. 	(. 	Title.
NA680.C87 	1983 	724.9'! 	82-12289
ISBN 	0-13-586677-4
ISBN 	o-i 3-586669-3 	(pbk.l
© 	1982 	by 	Phaidon 	Press 	Limited. 	Oxford
First 	published 	in 	the 	United 	States of America 	198 3
by 	Prentice-Hall. 	Inc.. 	Englewood 	cliffs. 	New Jersey 	076 32
."Ml 	rights 	reser\'ed. 	No 	part of this 	book 	may 	be 	reproduced
in 	any 	form 	without 	permission 	in 	writing 	from 	the
publisher.
Design 	by 	.'\drian 	Hodgkins
Filmset 	in 	Great 	Britain 	by Keyspools Limited. 	Golborne,
Warrington
Printed 	and 	bound 	in 	Great 	Britain 	by
Butler 	and Tanner 	Limited. 	Frome
TITLE PAGE ILLUSTRATION: 	Le Corbusier. 	Parliament
Building. 	Chandigarh. 	India. 	1953-62.
10 	9 	8 	7 	6 	5 	4 	3

-- 6 of 420 --

Contents
Preface 	6
Introduction 	8
Part 	I 	: 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
1. 	The 	Idea 	of a 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Nineteenth 	Century 	14
2. 	The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	2
3. 	Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering 	Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	3 7
4. 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	48
5. 	Responses 	to 	Mechanization: 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism 	60
6. 	The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	75
7. 	Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	91
Part 	2 	: 	The 	Crystallization 	of Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
8. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	104
y . 	Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	118
10. 	Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	1 	32
1 	1 	Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	1 44
T2. 	The 	Ideal 	Community: 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	159
I 	5. 	The 	International 	Style, 	the 	Individual 	Talent, 	and 	the 	Myth 	of Functionalism 	1 	74
14. 	The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	186
I 	5. 	Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1930s 	196
16. 	Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern 	Movement 	211
17. 	The 	Spread 	of Modern 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	223
18. 	The 	Continuity 	of Older 	Traditions 	234
Part 	3: 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
1 	9. 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America: 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	258
20. 	Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	271
2 	1 	The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	at 	Marseilles 	as a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	284
22. 	Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian 	Tradition 	296
23. 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	306
24. 	Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture 	in 	England 	317
25. 	The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity 	33i
26. 	Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	19(105 	344
27. 	Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing 	Countries 	since 	i960 	356
28. 	The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	367
Conclusion 	: 	Modernity, 	Tradition 	and 	Authenticity 	386
Bibliographical 	note 	389
Notes 	390
Acknowledgements 	405
Index 	406

-- 7 of 420 --

Preface
Modern 	architecture 	was 	evolved 	less 	than 	a 	century
ago 	to 	reconcile 	an 	idealized 	vision of society 	with 	the
forces 	of 	the 	Industrial 	Revolution. 	While 	it 	made
drastic 	breaks 	with 	the 	past 	it 	also 	allowed 	the 	basic
principles 	of architecture 	to 	be 	rethought 	in 	new 	ways.
The 	reverberations 	of 	this 	major 	change 	are 	only 	just
being 	felt 	worldwide, 	and 	it 	may 	be 	that 	we 	are 	nearer
the 	beginning 	of a 	tradition 	than 	the 	end 	of one. 	Even
the recent 	reactions 	against 	modern 	architecture 	rely
for 	the 	most 	part 	on 	their 	enemy 	for 	intellectual
definition : 	as 	soon 	as forms 	are 	produced, 	they 	are seen
to 	be 	extensions 	of the 	discoveries 	made 	earlier 	in 	this
century. 	It 	seems 	a 	good 	moment 	to 	pause 	and 	to
reflect 	on 	the 	shape 	of this 	new 	tradition. 	That 	is 	what
this 	book 	sets 	out 	to 	do 	by 	examining 	the 	architecture
of the 	past 	eighty years 	in 	detail.
I 	make 	no 	apologies 	for 	concentrating 	on 	buildings
of 	high 	visual 	and 	intellectual 	quality: 	a 	tradition 	is
formed 	from 	a 	sequence 	of 	such 	high 	points 	which
hand 	on 	their 	discoveries 	to 	lesser 	followers. 	I 	have
emphasized 	the 	problem 	of architectural 	language 	and
have 	tried 	to 	show 	how 	a 	number 	of 	extraordinarily
imaginative 	individuals 	expressed 	the 	deeper 	mean-
ings of their times 	in 	symbolic 	forms. 	I 	thought 	it 	would
be 	a 	good 	thing 	to 	strip 	away 	myths 	and 	to 	present 	the
complex 	picture 	of modern 	architecture 	as 	simply 	and
honestly 	as 	possible. 	As 	far 	as 	I 	know 	the 	views
presented 	here 	do 	not 	belong 	to 	a 	particular 	'school'. 	I
have 	posed 	the 	same basic 	historical 	questions - 	'what,
why 	and 	how?' 	~ 	that 	one 	would 	ask 	for 	any 	period.
While 	the 	book 	does 	not 	set 	out 	to 	substantiate 	a
historical 	dogma 	or 	to 	persuade 	the 	reader 	that 	one
style 	is 	better 	than 	another, 	it 	does 	reflect 	a 	point 	of

-- 8 of 420 --

view 	and 	does 	possess 	a 	strategy 	of its 	own. 	1 	have 	been
concerned 	throughout 	with 	the 	ways 	in 	which 	ideas
may 	be 	given 	form, 	and 	with 	the 	vital 	interplay
between 	individual 	invention 	and 	the 	conventions
provided 	by 	period 	style 	and 	tradition. 	At 	the 	core 	is 	a
concern 	for 	authenticity 	within 	a 	personal 	vocabulary,
in 	which 	form, 	function, 	structure 	and 	meaning 	are
bound 	together 	with 	a 	certain 	conviction 	and 	charac-
ter 	of inevitability. 	The 	reliance 	on 	'movements' 	of the
stock-in-trade 	survey, 	with 	its 	flat 	treatment 	of
individual 	buildings 	and 	architects, 	has 	been 	avoided.
Instead, 	the 	scale 	of 	approach 	has 	been 	deliberately
varied 	from 	chapter 	to 	chapter, 	sometimes 	to 	give 	a
close-up. 	sometimes 	to 	give 	a 	long 	or 	broad 	view. 	For 	a
tradition 	is 	never 	an 	even, 	linear 	development 	of
uniform 	impulse 	and 	intensity. 	It 	blends 	personal
expressions 	of 	depth 	with 	lazy 	repetitions 	of 	formula
and 	glib 	flashes 	of 	fashion: 	it 	draws 	together 	the
cosmopolitan 	and 	the 	regional 	over 	certain 	embedded
patterns 	of formal 	thinking: 	it 	links 	past 	principles 	and
schemata 	with 	new 	solutions 	and 	intentions. 	To 	grasp
the 	complex 	inner 	structure 	of 	a 	tradition, 	then,
various 	approaches 	and 	intellectual 	tools 	will 	be
necessary ; 	and 	since 	a 	central 	obsession 	is 	the 	power of
architectural 	abstraction 	to 	bind 	together 	levels 	of
meaning. 	1 	have 	found 	it 	essential 	to 	concentrate 	on 	a
few 	individual 	buildings 	in 	depth.
This 	book 	was 	conceived 	in 	the 	late 	1470s 	and
written 	between 	early 	1980 	and 	early 	1981. 	a 	time
during 	which 	I 	travelled 	a 	good 	deal. 	The 	last 	third 	of
the 	manuscript 	was 	nearly 	lost 	at 	the 	bottom 	of 	the
River 	Hawkesbury 	in 	Australia 	when 	a 	canoe 	tilted
over, 	and 	Chapter 	14 	was 	in 	process 	when 	the 	author
\
luckily 	escaped 	annihilation 	in 	Beirut. 	It 	is 	an odd 	turn
of 	fate 	that 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	should 	be
associated 	in 	my 	mind 	with 	the 	sound 	of gun-tire, 	and
that 	Aalto's 	Villa 	Mairea 	will 	always 	recall 	the 	smell 	of
Kentish 	blossoms. 	I 	mention 	these 	wanderings 	to
emphasize 	that 	the 	book 	was 	written 	well 	outside 	the
poky 	confines 	of 	the 	architectural 	fashion 	houses 	of
our 	time. 	In 	it 	I 	have 	tried 	to 	convey 	the 	character 	of
tine 	building, 	to 	look 	for 	lasting 	qualities, 	to 	keep 	the
long 	historical 	view. 	I 	have 	attempted 	to 	show 	what
modern 	architecture 	may 	mean 	in 	remote 	parts 	of 	a
rapidly 	changing 	world.
History 	is 	a 	communal 	activity 	in 	the 	sense 	that 	one
is 	bound 	to 	draw 	on 	past 	models, 	and 	the 	bibliograph-
ical 	notes 	at 	the 	end 	of 	this 	volume 	are 	reserved 	for
specifically scholarly 	acknowledgements. 	But 	there 	are
more 	immediate 	debts. 	I 	am 	grateful 	to 	Mark 	Ritchie 	of
Phaidon 	for 	introducing 	me 	and 	my 	ideas 	to 	a 	tirm 	it
was 	a 	pleasure 	to 	work 	with: 	and 	to 	all 	the 	staff at 	the
publisher's 	who 	have 	been 	involved 	in 	steering 	the
scheme 	through. 	James 	Ackerman 	read 	the 	penult-
imate 	draft 	and 	made 	some 	good 	suggestions, 	while
Karen 	Harder diligently 	transformed 	my 	scrawl 	into 	an
elegant 	typescript. 	Finally 	I 	thank 	Catherine, 	my 	wife,
for 	calmly 	and 	easily 	putting 	up 	with 	the 	odd 	states 	of
mind 	that 	are 	bound 	to 	accompany 	the 	writing 	of a big
book 	in 	a 	short 	time. 	I 	dedicate 	this 	book 	to 	her 	with 	a
thought 	from 	Le Corbusier: 	to 	fix 	a 	plan 	is 	to 	have 	had
ideas.
William 	Curtis
Boston, 	\Uiss(ichuseUs. 	1981

-- 9 of 420 --

Introduction
We 	have 	long 	come 	to 	realize 	that 	art 	is 	not 	produced 	in 	an 	empty 	space, 	that
no 	artist 	is 	independent 	of predecessors 	and 	models, 	and 	that 	he 	no 	less 	than
the 	scientist 	and 	the 	philosopher 	is 	part 	of a 	specific 	tradition 	and 	works 	in 	a
structured 	area 	of problems.
E. 	Kris. 	1952
The 	historian 	who 	sets 	out 	to 	write 	a 	iiistory 	of modern
architecture 	has 	necessarily 	to 	tiegin 	with 	a 	definition
of 	his 	subject. 	Many 	past 	eras 	have 	referred 	to 	their
own 	architectures 	as 	'modern' 	so 	that 	the 	term 	on 	its
own 	is 	scarcely 	discriminating. 	The 	'modern 	archi-
tecture' 	which 	is 	the 	main 	topic 	of 	this 	book 	was 	an
invention 	of 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	and 	early 	twentieth
centuries 	and 	was 	conceived 	in 	reaction 	to 	the
supposed 	chaos 	and 	eclecticism 	of 	the 	various 	earlier
nineteenth-century 	revivals 	of 	historical 	forms. 	Basic
to 	the 	ideal 	of 	a 	modern 	architecture 	was 	the 	notion
that 	each 	age 	in 	the 	past 	had 	possessed 	its 	own
authentic 	style, 	expressive 	of 	the 	true 	tenor 	of 	the
epoch. 	According 	to 	the 	same 	outlook, 	a 	break 	was
supposed 	to 	have 	occurred 	somewhere 	around 	the
middle 	of 	the 	eighteenth 	century, 	when 	the
Renaissance 	tradition 	had 	faltered, 	leaving 	a 	vacuum
into 	which 	had 	flowed 	numerous 	'inauthentic' 	adap-
tations 	and 	recombinations 	of 	past 	forms. 	The 	task,
then, 	was to 	redi.scover 	the true 	path 	of architecture, 	to
unearth 	forms 	suited 	to 	the 	needs 	and 	aspirations 	of
modern 	industrial 	societies, 	and 	to 	create 	images
capable 	of 	embodying 	the 	ideals 	of 	a 	supposedly
distinct 	'modern 	age'.
Already 	by 	the 	mid-nineteenth century 	such 	French
theorists 	as 	Cesar 	Daly 	and Eugene 	Viollet-le-Duc 	were
discussing 	the 	possibility 	of a 	genuine 	modern 	style,
but 	they 	had 	little 	conception 	of 	its 	form. 	It 	was 	not
until 	just 	before 	the 	turn 	of 	this 	century, 	with
considerable 	stimulus 	from 	a 	variety 	of 	intervening
structural 	inventions, 	that 	imaginative 	leaps 	were
made 	in 	an 	attempt 	at 	visualizing 	the 	forms 	of 	a 	new
architecture. 	This 	pioneer 	phase, 	which 	resulted 	in
(among 	other 	things) 	Art 	Nouveau. 	was 	the 	property
of the 	advanced 	industrial 	nations 	of 	Western 	Europe
and 	the 	United 	States. 	Ia'cu 	then 	there 	was 	relatively
little 	consensus 	concerning 	the 	appearance 	of a 	new
architecture; 	there 	were, 	rather, 	broadly 	shared
aspirations 	capable 	of visual 	translation 	in 	a 	variety 	of
ways. 	'Modern 	architecture', 	it 	was 	intimated, 	should
be 	based 	directly 	on 	new 	means 	of 	construction 	and
should 	be 	disciplined 	by 	the 	exigencies 	of 	function: 	its
forms 	should 	be 	purged 	of 	the 	paraphernalia 	of
historical 	reminiscence, 	its 	meanings 	attuned 	to
specifically 	modern 	myths 	and 	experiences: 	its 	mor-
alities 	should 	imply 	some 	vague 	vision 	of 	human
betterment 	and 	its 	elements should 	be 	capable 	of broad
application 	to 	certain 	unprecedented 	situations 	arising
from 	the 	impact 	upon 	human 	life 	and 	culture 	of 	the
machine. 	Modern 	architecture, 	in 	other 	words, 	should
protTer 	a 	new 	set 	of 	.symbolic 	forms 	more 	directly
reflecting 	contemporary 	realities 	than 	had 	the 	rag-bag
of 'historical 	styles'.
In 	actuality 	a 	number 	of 	styles 	emerged 	which
claimed 	'modernity' 	as a 	chief attribute 	between 	about
1890 	and 	the 	1920s, 	until 	in 	the 	latter 	decade 	it
seemed 	as 	if 	a 	broad 	consensus 	had 	at 	last 	been
achieved. 	At 	any 	rate, 	this 	is 	what some 	practitioners
and 	propagandists 	wished 	their 	contemporaries 	to
believe. 	They 	thus 	invested 	considerable 	efTort 	in
distinguishing 	the 	characteristics of 	'the 	International
Style' 	- 	that 	expressive 	language 	of 	simple, 	floating
volumes 	and 	clear-cut 	geometries 	which 	seemed 	to 	be
shared 	by 	such 	diverse 	architects 	as 	Le 	Corbusier, 	J. 	P.
Oud. 	Clerrit 	Rietveld. 	Walter 	Gropius, 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe. 	and 	the 	rest. 	This 	they 	claimed 	was 	the 	one 	true
architecture 	for 	the 	twentieth 	century. 	Other 	contem-
porary 	developments 	were 	conveniently 	overlooked.

-- 10 of 420 --

and 	everything 	was 	done 	to 	plaster 	over 	differences
and 	preserve the facade 	of a 	unified 	front.
But 	history 	did 	not 	stand 	still, 	and 	the 	same 	creative
individuals 	who 	had seemed 	to 	be 	pushing 	towards 	a
common 	aim 	went 	their 	own 	separate 	ways; 	in 	turn,
seminal 	ideas 	were 	transformed 	by 	followers. 	Thus 	the
architecture 	which 	was 	supposed 	(wrongly, 	it 	turns
out) 	to 	have 	expunged 	tradition 	founded 	a 	tradition 	of
its 	own. 	In 	the 	years 	after 	the 	Second 	World 	War.
many 	tributaries 	and 	transformations 	were 	developed
around 	the 	world. 	Reactions, 	critiques, 	and 	crises 	- not
to mention 	widely 	varied circumstances and 	intentions
- 	compounded 	the 	variety. 	If 	a 	historian 	were 	to 	look
back 	in 	a 	century's 	time 	at 	the 	period 	1900-1975. 	he
would 	not, 	therefore, 	be 	overwhelmed 	by 	some 	single,
monolithic 	main 	line 	of development 	running 	from 	the
•pioneers 	of modern 	design' 	(to 	use 	Nikolaus 	Pevsner's
phrase I 	up 	to 	the 	architecture 	of the 	last 	quarter 	of the
twentieth 	century. 	But 	he 	would 	be 	struck 	by 	the
emergence 	and 	domination 	of 	new 	traditions 	gradu-
ally 	overrunning 	the 	inheritance 	of 	attitudes 	and
vocabularies 	bequeathed 	by 	the 	nineteenth 	century.
Moreover, 	this 	insinuation 	of new 	ideas 	might 	be 	seen
in 	global 	terms, 	working 	its 	way 	bit 	by 	bit 	into different
national 	and 	regional 	traditions, 	transforming 	them
and 	being 	transformed 	by 	them. 	This 	book 	takes 	such 	a
long 	view.
Here 	it 	has 	to 	be 	admitted 	that 	there 	are 	particular
difficulties 	of 	a 	sort 	which 	confront 	any 	interpreter of
the 	recent 	past. 	The 	historian 	who 	sets 	out 	to 	write 	a
history 	of 	modern 	architecture 	will 	be 	describing 	and
interpreting 	traditions 	which 	have 	not 	yet 	come 	to 	an
end. 	There 	is 	the 	danger 	that 	he 	may 	impose 	too
exclusive 	a 	pattern 	on 	recent 	events, 	so 	making them
point inevitably 	to whatever aspects of the 	architecture
of 	his 	own 	time 	he 	happens 	to 	admire. 	History 	then
degenerates 	into 	polemic. 	This 	is 	to 	be 	expected 	in 	the
fashion-conscious 	literature 	which 	always 	seems 	to
follow 	in 	the 	wake 	of 	contemporary 	movements, 	but
similar 	faults 	are 	found 	to 	lie 	in 	the 	carefully 	pondered
scholarly 	works 	which 	pass 	as 	the 	standard 	books 	on
modern 	architecture. 	For 	all 	the 	force 	and 	clarity 	of
their 	achievement, 	such 	early 	chroniclers 	as 	Sigfried
Giedion. 	Henry-Russell 	Hitchcock, 	and 	Nikolaus
Pevsner 	tended 	to 	share 	the 	progressivist 	fervour 	of
their 	protagonists. 	Committed 	in 	advance 	to 	the 	idea 	of
a 	unified 	'spirit 	of the 	age', 	they 	felt 	they 	recognized 	its
architectural 	expression 	in 	the 	works 	of 	the 	modern
movement of the 	1 9 20s. 	and saw 	it as 	their job to 	write
books 	of 	revelation, 	charting 	the 	unfolding 	world
drama 	of 	the 	'true 	architecture 	of 	the 	times'. 	(See
bibliographical 	note. 	p. 	^89.)
It 	is 	obvious 	from 	my 	earlier 	remarks 	that 	1 	do 	not
wish 	to 	add 	some 	glowing 	extra 	chapters 	to 	such 	a
saga: 	nor. 	let 	it 	be 	said, 	do 	I 	wish 	to 	add 	to 	the 	ever-
Introduction 	•
9
growing 	heap 	of those 	'revisionist' 	histories 	intent 	on
demonstrating 	that 	modern 	architecture 	was 	some
temporary 	fall 	from 	architectural 	grace. 	The 	historian
of 	the 	present 	perhaps 	has 	a 	unique 	and 	almost
unprecedented 	opportunity 	to 	see 	his 	subject 	(or. 	at
any 	rate 	the 	early 	stages 	of 	it I 	with 	a 	certain
dispassionate 	distance, 	and 	this 	should 	not 	be 	thrown
away 	by 	indulgence 	in 	propaganda. 	Each 	year 	more
buildings are 	created 	and 	more 	quarries 	of evidence 	on
developments 	earlier 	in 	the 	century 	are 	unearthed,
and 	this 	alone 	necessitates 	a 	revision 	of 	the 	broad
picture. 	But 	history 	involves 	constant 	reinterpretation
as 	well 	as 	the 	presentation 	of 	new 	facts, 	and 	even
buildings, 	personalities, 	and 	events 	that 	seemed 	once
to 	have 	some 	immutable 	status 	must 	be 	rescrutinized
and 	reconsidered. 	Between 	the ever-growing collection
of specialist 	monographs of quality 	and 	the 	broader 	but
somewhat 	biased 	surveys, 	there 	is 	little 	that 	can 	stand
scrutiny 	as 	a 	balanced, 	readable 	overall 	view 	of 	the
development 	of 	modern 	architecture 	from 	its 	begin-
nings 	until 	the 	recent 	past. 	This 	book 	is 	an 	attempt 	at
bridging 	the 	gap.
The 	earliest 	historians 	of 	modern 	architecture
(perhaps 	one 	should 	call 	them 	'mythographers')
tended 	to 	isolate 	their 	subject, 	to 	over-simplify 	it. 	to
highlight 	its 	uniqueness 	in 	order 	to 	show 	how 	different
the 	new 	creature 	was 	from 	its 	predecessors. 	Parallel
developments, 	like Art Deco. 	National 	Romanticism, 	or
the 	continuation 	of 	the 	Classical 	Beaux-Arts, 	were
relegated to 	a 	sort 	of limbo, 	as if to say 	that a 	building in
the 	'wrong 	style' 	could 	not 	possibly 	be 	of 	value. 	This
was 	both 	heinous 	and 	misleading. 	It 	seems 	to 	me 	that
the 	various 	strands 	of 	modern 	architecture 	are 	best
understood 	and 	evaluated 	by 	being 	set 	alongside 	other
architectural 	developments 	parallel 	with 	them, 	for
only 	then 	can 	one 	begin 	to 	explain 	what 	patrons 	and
social 	groups 	used 	modern 	forms 	to 	express. 	Moreover,
artistic 	quality, 	as 	always, 	transcends 	mere 	stylistic
usage.
Another 	myth 	that 	the 	earliest 	writers 	on 	modern
architecture 	tended 	to 	maintain 	- 	again 	to 	distinguish
the 	new 	forms 	from 	their 	'eclectic' 	predecessors - 	was
the 	notion 	that 	these 	forms 	had 	emerged 	somehow
'untainted' 	by 	precedent. 	Again 	this 	married 	well 	with
the 	progressivist 	bias 	in 	their 	history-writing, 	but 	it
was 	scarcely 	a 	sensible 	way 	of 	explaining 	forms. 	In
their 	eagerness 	to 	demonstrate 	their 	'fresh 	new 	start",
numerous 	architects 	between 	1900 	and 	1 	930 	certain-
ly 	played 	down 	the 	influence 	of 	earlier 	architecture
upon 	them, 	but 	this 	does 	not 	mean 	one 	should 	take
their 	claims 	at 	face 	value. 	Indeed, 	the 	most 	profound
architects 	of 	the 	past 	eighty 	years 	were 	steeped 	in
tradition. 	What 	they 	rejected 	was 	not 	so 	much 	history
per 	se. 	as 	the 	facile 	and 	superficial 	re-use 	of it. 	The 	past
was 	not. 	therefore, 	rejected, 	but 	inherited 	and

-- 11 of 420 --

Introduction
understood 	in 	new 	ways. 	Moreover, 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	itself 	eventually 	created 	the 	basis 	for 	a 	new
tradition 	with 	its 	own 	themes, 	forms, 	and 	motifs.
Architecture 	is 	a 	complex 	art 	embracing 	form 	and
function, 	symbol 	and 	social 	purpose, 	technique 	and
belief. 	It 	would 	be 	as 	inadequate 	in 	this 	case 	simply 	to
catalogue 	the 	ins 	and 	outs 	of 	style 	as 	it 	would 	be 	to
reduce 	modern 	architecture 	to 	a piece 	in 	a chess 	game
of 	class 	interests 	and 	competing 	social 	ideologies. 	It
would 	be 	as 	mistaken 	to 	treat 	technical 	advances 	in
isolation 	as 	it 	would 	be 	to 	overstress 	the 	role 	of social
changes 	or 	the 	import 	of 	individual 	imagination. 	It
may be 	that facts of biography 	are 	most 	appropriate 	(as
in 	the 	case 	of 	Le 	Corbusier 	or 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright) 	or
that 	analysis 	of 	structure 	or 	type 	is 	more 	in 	order 	(as
with 	the 	American 	skyscraper 	between 	the 	wars); 	and
while 	a 	book 	of this 	kind 	obviously 	cannot 	portray 	the
entire 	cultural 	setting 	of 	twentieth-century 	archi-
tecture, 	it 	can 	avoid 	suggesting 	that 	buildings 	come
about 	in 	a 	social 	vacuum 	by 	concentrating 	on
patronage, 	political 	purpose, 	and 	ideological 	ex-
pression 	in 	some 	instances.
Here 	I 	must 	confess 	to 	a 	certain 	focused 	interest 	on
questions of form 	and 	meaning. 	Most ofthe works to be
discussed 	in 	this 	book 	are 	outstanding 	works 	of 	art
which 	therefore defy simplistic 	pigeon-holing. 	They 	are
neither 	billboards 	for political 	beliefs, 	nor 	mere 	stylized
containers 	for 	functions, 	but 	rich 	compounds 	of ideas
and 	forms, 	which 	achieve 	a 	highly 	articulate 	ex-
pression. 	I 	believe 	it 	should 	be 	a 	central 	aim 	of 	any
history 	of 	architecture 	to 	explain 	why 	certain 	forms
were 	felt 	appropriate 	to a 	particular 	task, 	and 	to 	probe
into 	the 	underlying 	meanings. 	That 	simple 	and
misleading 	word 	'style' 	masks 	a 	multitude 	of sins, 	and
when 	one 	investigates 	an 	artist 	of 	any 	depth 	one
discovers 	a 	sort 	of 	mythical 	content 	which 	pervades
the 	forms. 	Ultimately 	we 	have 	to 	do 	with 	the 	ways 	in
which 	fantasies 	and 	ideas 	are 	translated 	into 	a
vocabulary.
Next 	there 	is 	the 	tricky 	problem 	of 	where 	to 	begin:
when 	does 	a specifically 	'modern 	architecture' 	appear .'
Enough 	has 	been 	said 	already 	for 	it 	to 	be 	clear 	that
there is 	no easy 	answer to this question. 	It 	is 	interesting
to 	note 	the 	enormous 	variety 	of 	starting-points 	of
earlier 	histories: 	these 	naturally 	reflected 	the 	writer's
various 	notions 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Thus,
Nikolaus 	Pevsner, 	who 	wished 	to 	stress 	the. social 	and
moral 	basis 	ofthe 	new 	architecture, 	began 	his 	Pioneers
of Modern 	Design 	(1936) 	with 	William 	Morris 	and 	the
Arts 	and 	Crafts 	movement 	of 	the 	1860s. 	Sigfried
Giedion. 	who 	was 	obsessed 	with 	the 	spiritual 	frag-
mentation 	of 	his 	own 	time 	and 	saw 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	as a 	unifying 	agent, 	portrayed 	the 	nineteenth
century, 	in his 	Space. 	Time and Architecture 	( 1 94 1 ). 	as a
split 	era 	on 	the 	one 	hand 	the 	'decayed' 	forms 	of
eclecticism, 	on 	the 	other 	those 	'emergent 	tendencies'
(many 	of them 	in 	engineering) 	which 	pointed 	to 	a 	new
synthesis 	of 	form, 	structure, 	and 	cultural 	probity.
Henry-Russell 	Hitchcock, 	who 	was 	preoccupied 	with
describing 	the 	visual 	features 	of 	the 	new 	style,
suggested, 	in 	The 	International 	Stifle 	(1932, 	co-author
Philip 	Johnson) 	that 	modern 	architecture 	synthesized
Classical 	qualities 	of 	proportion 	with 	Gothic 	attitudes
to 	structure. 	However, 	in 	his 	later 	writings 	Hitchcock
became 	less 	adventurous, 	preferring 	to 	avoid 	sweeping
theories 	of 	origins 	in 	favour 	of 	a 	meticulous, 	en-
cyclopedic 	cataloguing 	ofthe 	sequence 	of styles.
Naturally 	the 	emphasis 	of 	history-writing 	was
bound 	to 	change 	once 	the 	modern 	tradition 	itself grew
longer 	and 	more 	varied. 	Historians 	ofthe 	post-Second
World 	War years, 	like Colin 	Rowe and 	Reyner 	Banham
(whose 	Theory 	and 	Design 	in 	the 	First 	Machine 	Age
appeared 	in 	i960), 	attempted 	to 	probe 	into 	the 	ideas
behind 	the 	forms 	and 	to 	explain 	the 	complex 	icono-
graphy 	of modern 	architecture. 	They 	were 	not 	willing
to 	accept 	the 	simplistic 	lineages 	set 	up 	by 	their
predecessors, 	and 	revealed 	something 	ofthe 	indebted-
ness 	of modern 	architects 	to 	the 	nineteenth 	and 	earlier
centuries. 	In 	this 	context 	one 	must 	also 	mention 	the
exemplary 	intellectual 	range 	of 	Peter 	Collins's 	Chang-
ing 	Meals 	in 	Modern 	Architecture 	(1965), 	which
managed 	to 	trace 	so 	many 	of 	the 	ideological 	roots 	of
modern 	architecture 	to 	the 	eighteenth 	century. 	Other
writers 	like 	Leonardo 	Benevelo 	and 	Manfrcdo 	Tafuri
built 	on 	these 	foundations 	to 	articulate 	their 	own
versions 	of a 	pre-history: 	in 	these 	cases, 	though, 	there
was 	a 	greater 	awareness 	than 	before 	of 	the 	political
uses 	and 	meanings 	of architecture.
Here 	I 	must 	emphasize 	that 	the 	stress 	of this 	book 	is
less 	on 	the 	roots 	of 	modern 	architecture 	than 	on 	its
ensuing 	development. 	This 	is 	quite 	deliberate. 	For 	one
thing, 	I 	wish 	to avoid covering well-known 	ground; 	for
another, 	it 	is 	the 	later 	(rather 	than 	the 	earlier) 	phases
of modern 	architecture 	which 	have 	been 	neglected. 	It
is 	now 	over 	half a 	century 	since 	such 	seminal 	works 	as
the 	Villa 	Savoye 	or 	the 	Barcelona 	Pavilion 	were
created: 	but 	the 	past 	thirty 	years 	are 	still 	navigable
only 	with 	the 	aid 	of a 	few 	treacherous 	maps 	filled 	with
fashionable 	tags 	and 	'isms', 	A 	comprehensive 	treat-
ment 	of 	the 	post-Second 	World 	War 	period 	is 	still
impossible, 	but 	one 	can 	at 	least 	suggest 	a 	scheme
which 	is 	not 	simply 	a 	one-way 	road 	towards 	some
tendency 	or 	another 	ofthe 	very 	recent 	past.
Moreover, 	history does 	not 	work 	like a 	conveyor belt
moving 	between 	one 	point 	and 	another, 	and 	each
artist 	has 	his 	own 	complex 	links to different 	periods 	of
(he 	past. 	A 	personal 	language 	of 	architecture 	may
blend 	lessons 	from 	ancient 	Greece with 	references 	to
modern 	garages: 	the 	individual 	work 	of 	art 	is
embedded 	in 	the 	texture of time on 	a 	variety 	of different

-- 12 of 420 --

OVERLEAF
Antoni 	G;uidi, 	Casa
Mila, 	Barcelona. 	Spain,
1905-7. 	detail 	of
roofscape.
levels. 	It 	only 	misleads 	to 	portray 	buildings 	as 	part 	of
unified 	'movements'. 	The 	more 	interesting 	the 	indi\-
idual 	creation, 	the 	more 	difficult 	it 	will 	be 	to 	put 	it 	in 	a
chronological 	slot.
Thus 	the 	problem 	of origins 	is 	handled 	in 	the 	first
part 	of the 	book, 	not 	through 	some 	hapless 	search 	for
the 	first 	truly 	modern 	building 	(or 	something 	of 	the
kind), 	but 	through 	the 	more 	fruitful 	approach 	of
tracing 	the 	way 	inherited 	strands 	of 	thought 	came
together 	in 	various 	individual 	minds 	in 	the 	last 	decade
of 	the 	nineteenth 	century 	and 	the 	first 	two 	of 	the
twentieth, 	for 	it 	was 	in 	this 	period 	that 	forms 	were
crystallized 	to 	express, 	simultaneously, 	a 	revulsion
against 	superficial 	revivalism, 	and 	a 	confidence 	in 	the
energies 	and significance 	of 'modern 	life'. 	It 	was the era
of Art 	Nouveau, 	of Horta. 	Mackintosh, 	and 	Hoffmann
;
of 	Sullivan's 	and 	Wright's 	attempt 	at 	creating 	an
'organic' 	modern 	architecture 	in 	Chicago; 	of 	Ferret's
and 	Behrens's 	attempts 	at 	employing 	new 	methods
and 	materials 	in 	the 	service 	of 	sober 	ideas 	which
'abstracted' 	basic 	Classical 	values: 	it 	was 	the 	era. 	too.
of 	Cubist 	and 	Futurist 	experimentation 	in 	the 	arts.
Pevsner 	justly 	described 	it 	as 	the 	pioneer 	phase' 	of
modern 	design, 	and 	this 	seems 	a 	fair 	term 	so 	long 	as
one is not 	then 	tempted to write off its creations as mere
'anticipations' 	of what 	came 	later.
One 	does 	not 	have 	to 	be 	an 	advocate 	of the 	notion 	of
'Classic 	moments' 	in 	art 	to 	single 	out 	the 	i<.)20s 	as 	a
remarkable 	period 	of 	consolidation, 	especially 	in
Holland, 	Germany. 	France, 	and Russia. This 	period 	has
understandably 	been 	called 	the 	'heroic 	age' of modern
architecture: 	during 	it 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe. 	Walter 	Gropius. 	Gerrit 	Rietveld 	(to 	mention 	only
a 	few) 	created 	a 	series 	of master-works 	which 	had 	the
effect 	of dislodging 	the 	hold 	of 	previous 	traditions 	and
setting 	new 	ground 	rules 	for 	the 	future.
The 	establishment 	of 	a 	tradition 	requires 	followers
as 	well 	as 	leaders, 	and 	this 	has 	to 	be 	explained 	in 	a
broader 	context 	than 	a 	mere 	internal 	stylistic 	'evol-
ution'. 	In 	the 	middle 	part 	of 	the 	book 	emphasis
will 	therefore 	be 	placed 	on 	the 	range 	of 	personal
approaches 	and 	ideological 	persuasions 	at 	work 	in 	the
period 	between 	the 	wars. 	This 	will 	include 	discussion
of 	the 	problematic 	relationship 	between 	modern
architecture 	and 	revolutionary 	ideology 	in 	the 	Soviet
Union 	in 	the 	twenties, 	and 	between 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	and 	totalitarian 	regimes 	in 	the 	thirties. 	We 	are
concerned 	with 	something 	far 	deeper 	than 	a 	battle 	of
styles: 	modern 	architecture 	was 	the 	expression 	of 	a
variety 	of new 	social 	visions challenging the status 	quo
and 	suggesting 	alternative 	possibilities 	for 	a 	way 	of life.
The 	treatment 	of 	the 	inter-war 	years 	would 	certainly
be 	incomplete 	without 	some 	consideration 	of develop-
ments 	in 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	and 	of 	urban-
istic 	experiments, 	especially 	the 	'Radiant 	City' 	and
Introduction 	• 	1
1
'Broadacre 	City' 	proposals 	of Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Wright.
Once 	a 	tradition 	has 	been 	founded, 	it 	is 	transformed
as 	new 	possibilities 	of expression 	are 	sensed, 	as 	values
change, 	or 	as 	new 	problems 	are 	encountered.
Moreover, 	new 	individuals 	inherit 	the 	style 	and 	extend
it 	in 	their 	own 	directions. 	The 	last 	part 	of the 	book 	will
look 	at 	the 	dissemination 	of 	prototypes 	all 	over 	the
world 	in 	the 	forties, 	fifties, 	sixties, 	and 	seventies. 	Here
we 	come 	face 	to 	face 	with 	problems 	attached 	to 	the
phenomena 	of 	transplantation 	(as 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	was 	grafted 	onto 	cultures 	quite 	different 	from
those 	in 	which 	it 	began) 	and 	devaluation 	(as 	symbolic
forms 	were 	gradually 	emptied 	of 	their 	original
polemical 	content, 	and 	absorbed 	by 	commercial
interests 	or 	state 	bureaucracies). 	Moreover, 	crises 	and
criticisms 	occurred 	within 	the 	modern 	movement,
suggesting 	a 	more 	overt 	reliance 	on 	the 	past.
As 	well 	as 	the 	late 	works 	of 	the 	aging 	'masters' 	of
modern 	architecture, 	this 	part 	of the 	book 	will 	consider
such 	movements 	as 	the 	'New 	Brutalism' 	and 	such
groups 	as 	'Team 	X' 	and 	the 	'New 	York 	5'; 	themes 	like
regionalism 	and 	adaptation 	to 	local 	culture 	and
climate 	in 	developing 	countries: 	building 	types 	like 	the
high-rise 	apartment 	block 	and 	the 	glass-box 	sky-
scraper: 	and 	the 	emergence 	of 	individual 	architects
like 	Louis 	Kahn, 	Kenzo 	Tange. 	James 	Stirling, 	Denys
Lasdun, 	I0rn 	Utzon. 	Aldo 	Van 	Eyck, 	Robert 	Venturi,
Michael 	Graves, 	and 	Aldo 	Rossi.
Perhaps 	it 	is 	inevitable 	that, 	as 	the 	book 	draws
towards 	the 	present, 	the 	author 	will 	fall 	into 	some 	of
the 	pitfalls 	of 	his 	predecessors 	in 	championing 	some
aspects, 	and 	chastising 	others, 	of 	the 	contemporary
situation. 	1 	can 	at 	least 	say 	that 	it 	has 	been 	my 	aim 	to
present 	a 	balanced 	picture 	and 	that 	I 	have 	attempted to
make 	the 	basis 	of 	any 	judgements 	clear. 	Modern
architecture 	is 	at 	present 	in 	another 	critical 	phase, 	in
which 	many 	of 	its 	underlying 	doctrines 	are 	being
questioned 	and 	rejected. 	It 	remains 	to 	be 	seen 	whether
this 	amounts 	to 	the 	collapse 	of 	a 	tradition 	or 	another
crisis 	preceding 	a 	new 	phase 	of consolidation.
We 	live 	in 	a 	confused 	architectural 	present 	which
views 	its 	own 	past 	through 	a 	veil 	of 	myths 	and 	half-
truths 	(many 	of 	them 	manufactured 	by 	historians)
with 	a 	mixture 	of romanticism, 	horror, 	and 	bewilder-
ment. 	A 	freedom 	of 	choice 	for 	the 	future 	is 	best
encouraged by 	a 	sensible, 	accurate, 	and discriminating
understanding 	of 	one's 	place 	in 	tradition. 	This 	book
was 	written 	partly 	with 	the 	idea 	that 	a 	historical 	bridge
might 	be 	built 	across 	the 	stream 	of passing 	intellectual
fashions 	from 	the 	distant 	to 	the 	more 	recent 	past, 	and
partly 	with 	the 	hope 	that 	this 	might 	somehow 	help
towards 	a 	new 	integration. 	But 	such 	aims 	have 	been
secondary: 	the 	first 	thing 	a 	historian 	ought 	to 	do 	is 	to
explain 	what 	happened 	and 	why. 	whatever 	people
may now 	think 	of it.

-- 13 of 420 --



-- 14 of 420 --

o 	-0
S=i
Q."
3 5"
a> 	Q)
C 	(6
O (/)

-- 15 of 420 --

I. 	The 	Idea 	of 	a 	Modern 	Architecture
in 	the 	Nineteenth 	Century
Suppose 	that 	an 	architect 	of the 	twelfth 	or 	thirteenth 	century 	were 	to 	return
among 	us, 	and 	that 	he 	were 	to 	be 	initiated 	into 	our 	modern 	ideas: 	if one 	put
at his 	disposal 	the 	perfections 	of modern 	industry, 	he 	would 	not 	build 	an
editice 	of the 	time 	of Philip 	Augustus 	or 	St. 	Louis, 	because 	this 	would 	be 	to
falsify 	the 	first 	law 	of art, 	which 	is 	to 	conform 	to 	the 	needs 	and 	customs 	of the
times.
E. 	Viollet-le-Duc, 	1863
There 	is a 	tidy 	and misleading analogy 	between 	history
and 	human 	life 	which 	proposes 	that 	architectural
movements 	are 	born, 	have 	youth, 	mature, 	and
eventually 	die. 	The 	historical 	process 	which 	led 	to 	the
creation 	of the 	modern 	movement 	in 	architecture 	had
none 	of 	this 	biological 	inevitability, 	and 	had 	no 	clear
beginning 	which 	can 	be 	pinpointed 	with 	precision.
There 	were 	a 	number 	of 	predisposing 	causes 	and
strands 	of ideas 	each 	with 	its 	own 	pedigree. 	Although
the 	critical 	synthesis 	began 	around 	the 	turn 	of 	this
century, 	the 	idea of a 	modem 	architecture, 	in 	contrast
to 	a 	revived 	style 	from 	some 	earlier 	period, 	had 	been 	in
existence 	for 	nearly 	half a 	century.
But 	this 	notion 	of 	a 	'modern' 	architecture 	was 	in
turn 	rooted 	in 	developments 	of 	the 	late 	eighteenth
century, 	in 	particular 	the 	emphasis 	on 	the 	idea 	of
progress. 	For 	basic 	to 	the 	conception 	was 	a 	sense 	of
history 	as 	something 	which 	moves 	forward 	through
different 	'epochs' 	each 	with 	a 	spiritual 	core 	manifest-
ing 	itself 	directly 	in 	the 	facts 	of 	culture. 	From 	this
intellectual 	standpoint 	it 	was 	possible 	to 	speak 	of 	the
way 	a 	Greek 	temple 	or 	a 	Gothic 	cathedral 	had
'expressed 	their 	times' 	and 	to 	assyme 	that 	modern
buildings 	should 	do 	the 	same. 	It 	followed 	that 	revivals
should 	be 	regarded 	as 	failures 	to 	establish 	a 	true
expression. 	Destiny 	therefore 	required 	the 	creation 	of
an 	authentic 	style 	'of the 	times', 	unlike 	past 	ones, 	but
as incontrovertible, as 	inevitable-seeming, 	as they. 	The
question 	was: 	how 	could 	the 	forms 	of this 	'contempor-
ary' 	style 	be discovered .-
Related 	to the 	birth 	of progressive 	ideals 	was 	another
eighteenth-century 	development 	that 	left 	its 	legacy 	to
the 	nineteenth: 	the 	loss 	of 	contidence 	in 	the
Renaissance 	tradition 	and 	the 	theories 	which 	had
supported 	it. 	This 	erosion 	was 	caused 	(in 	part) 	by 	the
growth 	of an 	empiricist 	attitude 	which 	undermined 	the
idealistic 	structure 	of 	Renaissance 	aesthetics, 	and 	by
the 	development 	of 	history 	and 	archaeology 	as
disciplines. 	These 	brought 	with 	them 	a 	greater
discrimination 	of 	the 	past 	and 	a 	relativist 	view 	of
tradition 	in 	which 	various 	periods 	could 	be 	seen 	as
holding 	equal 	value. 	The 	notion 	of a 	single 	point 	of
reference. 	'Antiquity', 	thus 	became 	increasingly
untenable. 	|ohn 	Summerson 	has 	characterized 	this
development 	as 	'the 	loss 	of 	absolute 	authority' 	of
Renaissance 	norms. 	A 	vacuum 	of 	sorts 	was 	created
into 	which 	numerous 	temporary 	stylistic 	dictatorships
would 	step, 	none 	of them 	with 	the 	force 	of conviction,
or 	with 	the 	authority, 	of 	their 	predecessor. 	A 	point
would eventually 	be 	reached 	in 	the 	nineteenth 	century
when 	a 	revival 	of a 	Greek, 	a 	Renaissance, 	an 	Egyptian
or 	a 	Gothic 	prototype 	might 	seem 	equally 	viable 	in 	the
formulation 	of a 	style 	(fig. 	1. 	1 	).
Another 	major 	force 	in 	the 	creation 	of 	the 	idea 	of
modern 	architecture 	was 	the 	Industrial 	Revolution.
This 	supplied 	new 	methods 	of 	construction 	(e.g.. 	in
iron), 	allowed 	new 	solutions, 	created 	new 	patrons 	and
problems, 	and suggested 	new 	forms. 	A 	split of sorts 	was
created 	between 	engineering 	and 	architecture, 	with
the 	former 	often 	appearing 	the 	more 	inventive 	and
responsive 	to 	contemporary 	needs. 	At 	a 	deeper 	level
still, 	industrialization 	transformed 	the 	very 	patterns 	of
life 	and 	led 	to 	the 	proliferation 	of 	new 	building
problems 	- 	railway 	stations, 	suburban 	houses, 	sky-

-- 16 of 420 --

The 	Idea 	of a 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Nineteenth 	Century
I.I 	Thomas 	Cole, 	The
Dream 	oj 	the Architect.
1 	.S4(i. 	Oil 	on 	canvas,
S 	j 	X 	cS4 	in.
(I 	34.7x213.4 	cm.).
Toledo 	Museum of Art.
gift 	of Florence 	Scott
Libbey; the 	nineteenth-
century 	dilemma 	of
style.
scrapers 	- 	for 	which 	there 	was 	no 	precedent. 	Thus 	the
crisis 	concerning 	the 	use 	of tradition 	in 	invention 	was
exacerbated 	by 	the 	creation 	of 	novel 	types 	with 	no
certain 	pedigree. 	Moreover, 	mechanization 	disrupted
the 	world 	of 	crafts 	and 	hastened 	the 	collapse 	of
vernacular 	traditions. 	Machine-work 	and 	standardi-
zation 	engendered 	a 	split 	between 	hand. 	mind, 	and 	eye
in 	the creation 	of utilitarian 	objects, 	with 	a 	consequent
loss 	of 	vital 	touch 	and 	impulse. 	Mid-nineteenth-
century 	moralists 	like 	John 	Ruskin 	and 	William 	Morris
in 	England 	felt 	that 	mechanization 	was 	bound 	to cause
degradation 	in 	all 	compartments 	of life, 	at 	the 	smallest
and 	largest scales 	of design. 	They therefore 	advocated 	a
reintensification 	of the 	crafts 	and 	a 	reintegration 	of art
and 	utility. 	Their 	aim 	was 	to 	stem 	the 	alienation 	they
felt 	grew 	automatically 	from 	the 	disruptive 	effects 	of
capitalist 	development. 	Those 	who 	were 	later 	to
formulate 	the 	ideologies 	of 	modern 	architecture 	felt
that 	this 	attitude 	was 	too 	nostalgic 	and 	sought 	instead
to 	face 	up 	to 	the 	potentials 	of 	mechanization 	by 	co-
opting 	them 	and 	infusing 	them 	with 	a 	new 	sense 	of
form. 	This 	drama 	was 	to 	remain 	quite 	basic 	to 	the
twentieth 	century: 	in 	essence 	the 	question 	was 	how 	to
evolve a 	genuine culture 	in 	the 	face 	of the 	more 	brutish
aspects 	of mass 	production.
Industrialization 	also 	created 	new 	economic

-- 17 of 420 --

i6 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
structures 	and 	centres 	of power. 	Where 	the 	patronage
of 	architecture 	in 	eighteenth-century 	Europe 	had
relied 	principally 	on 	the 	church, 	the 	state, 	and 	the
aristocracy, 	it 	came 	increasingly 	to rely 	on 	the 	wealth.
purposes, 	and 	aspirations 	of the new 	middle classes. 	As
always, 	elites 	found 	in 	architecture 	a 	means 	for 	self-
expression 	which 	could 	authenticate 	their 	position. 	In
turn 	mechanization 	remoulded 	the 	lower 	orders 	of
society 	and 	made 	inroads 	on 	the 	form 	of the 	city. 	Once
again, 	architecture 	was 	alTected. 	Indeed, 	a 	major
theme 	of 	modern 	architecture 	would 	concern 	the
reform 	of 	the 	industrial 	city 	and 	its 	replacement 	by 	a
more 	harmonic 	and 	humane 	order. 	The 	roots 	of 	this
attitude 	lay 	in 	the 	numerous 	critics 	of 	an 	inequable
and 	chaotic 	social 	structure 	who 	wrote 	from 	the 	early
nineteenth 	century onwards. 	Indeed, 	another aspect of
the 	progressive 	mythos 	behind 	the 	conception 	of
modern 	architecture 	was 	the 	belief 	in 	a 	just 	and
rational 	society. 	One 	is 	not 	therefore 	surprised 	to
discover 	the 	influence 	of 	Utopian 	Socialist 	tendencies
stemming from 	Charles Fourier and 	Henri 	Saint-Simon
on 	the 	moral 	outlook 	of 	later 	modern 	designers. 	The
search 	for 	alternative 	social 	and 	urban 	structures
would 	lie 	close 	to 	the 	heart 	of 	later 	modern 	archi-
tectural 	endeavour.
It 	can 	thus 	be 	seen 	that 	the 	notion 	of 	a 	modern
architecture 	was 	inseparable 	from profound 	changes
in 	the 	social 	and 	technological 	realms. 	The 	problem 	of
architectural 	style 	did 	not 	exist 	in 	isolation, 	but 	was
related 	to 	deeper 	currents 	of 	thought 	concerning 	the
possibility 	of creating 	forms 	which 	were 	not 	pastiches
of 	past 	styles 	but 	genuine 	expressions 	of 	the 	present.
But 	then, 	what 	were 	the 	most 	important 	realities 	of the
present.' 	Underlying 	numerous 	nineteenth-century
debates concerning the 	appropriateness 	of forms, 	there
was 	a 	nagging 	uncertainty 	about 	what 	the 	true
content 	of 	architecture 	should 	be. 	Thus 	there 	was 	a
tendency 	to 	locate 	the 	ideal 	in 	some 	compartment 	or
other 	of 	the 	past, 	or 	else 	to 	dream 	of 	some 	hazy, 	ill-
defined 	future 	as 	an 	alternative 	to 	a 	grimy, 	unconsol-
ing 	reality.
These, 	then, 	were 	some 	of 	the 	conditions 	and
problems 	confronting 	the 	first 	theorists 	of 	a 	'modern
architecture'. Viollet-le-Duc, for example, 	writing in the
1860s 	and 	iSyos. 	felt 	that 	the 	nineteenth 	century
must 	try 	to 	formulate 	its 	own 	style 	by 	finding 	forms
'appropriate' 	to 	the 	new 	social, 	economic, 	and
technical 	conditions. 	This 	was 	fair 	enough 	in 	theory.
but 	the 	question 	still 	remained: 	where 	should 	the
forms 	of this 	new 	style 	be 	found.' 	To 	this 	there 	were 	a
number 	of 	possible 	answers. 	At 	one 	extreme 	were
those 	who 	believed 	in 	great 	individual 	leaps 	of
invention: 	at 	another 	were 	those 	who 	thought 	the
matter 	would 	somehow 	look 	after 	itself 	if 	architects
just 	got 	on 	with 	solving 	new 	problems 	logically 	and
soundly. 	There 	was 	little 	admission 	that 	even 	a 	'new'
architecture 	was 	likely, 	ultimately, 	to 	be 	assembled 	out
of old 	elements, 	albeit 	highly 	abstracted 	ones.
It 	could 	at 	least 	be 	said 	that 	the 	notion 	of a 	modern
architecture 	implied 	a 	quite 	different 	attitude 	to 	the
genesis 	of forms 	than 	those 	which 	had 	been 	operative
in 	the 	previous 	few 	decades. 	One 	of 	these 	advocated
revivalism 	of 	one 	or 	another 	particular 	period 	in 	the
past, 	some 	historical 	styles 	being 	regarded 	as 	intrinsi-
cally 	superior to 	others. 	By 	imitating 	the chosen 	style 	it
was 	lamely 	hoped 	that 	one 	might 	also 	reproduce 	its
supposed 	excellences. 	But, 	there 	was 	the 	obvious
danger 	that 	one 	might 	copy 	the 	externals 	without
reproducing the core qualities, 	and so end 	up with 	tired
academicism 	or 	pastiche. 	Moreover, 	the 	question
naturally 	occurred: 	if a 	set 	of forms 	had 	been 	right 	for
one 	context 	(be 	it 	Greek, 	Gothic, 	Egyptian, 	or
Renaissance), 	could 	it 	possibly 	be 	right 	for 	another,'
A 	more 	catholic 	view 	of 	the 	past 	implied 	that 	one
should 	evolve 	a 	style 	by 	collecting 	the 	best 	features 	of a
number 	of 	past 	styles 	and 	amalgamating 	them 	into 	a
new 	synthesis. 	This 	position 	was 	known 	as 	'eclect-
icism' 	and did at 	least 	have the strength 	of encouraging
a 	broad 	understanding 	of 	tradition. 	However, 	eclect-
icism 	did 	not 	provide 	any 	rules 	for 	recombination 	and
gave 	little 	idea 	of 	the 	essential 	differences 	between
authentic 	synthesis 	and 	a 	merely 	bizarre 	concoction 	of
past 	elements.
Indeed 	the 	problem 	of 	revival 	could 	not 	be 	con-
sidered 	apart 	from 	the 	problem 	of 	appropriateness 	in
the 	present. 	Here 	it 	was 	hard 	to 	avoid 	arbitrariness
because 	there 	were 	few 	guiding 	conventions 	relating
forms, 	functions, 	and 	meanings. 	It 	was 	all 	very 	well 	for
the 	English 	architect 	A. 	W. 	Pugin 	to 	have 	argued 	with
such 	deep 	moral 	fervour 	in 	the 	1 	830s 	that 	Gothic 	was
the 	most 	spiritually 	uplifting 	and 	the 	most 	rational 	of
styles; 	but 	counter-arguments 	of 	a 	similar 	kind 	in
favour 	of 	Classical 	forms 	could 	just 	as 	easily 	be 	made.
Intellectual 	gambits 	were 	thus 	often 	used 	to 	post-
rationalize 	what 	were 	really 	intuitive 	preferences. 	The
lure of determinist 	arguments 	was 	strong 	because 	they
seemed 	to 	bring certainty 	to a 	situation 	of extreme 	flux.
If 	one 	could 	claim 	(and 	possibly 	beUeve) 	that 	one's
forms 	were 	ordained 	by 	the 	predestined 	course 	of
history, 	the 	national 	spirit, 	the 	laws 	of 	nature, 	the
dictates 	of 	science, 	or 	some 	other 	impressive 	entity,
then 	one could 	temporarily assuage doubts concerning
arbitrariness 	in 	the 	use 	of forms.
Within 	the 	confused 	pluralism 	of 	the 	'battle 	of
styles', 	it 	tended 	to 	be 	forgotten 	that 	lasting qualities 	of
architectural 	excellence 	were 	liable 	to 	rely, 	as 	ever, 	on
characteristics 	which 	transcended 	superficial 	issues 	of
stylistic 	clothing. 	The 	nineteenth 	century 	had 	its 	share
of 	master-works 	which 	were 	not 	categorizable 	by
simplistic 	pigeon-holing. 	The 	outstanding 	archi-
1.2 	Marc 	Antoine
Laugier. 	the 	'Primitive
Hut', 	from 	Essai sur
rarchitecture, 	1753: 	the
quest for beginnings.

-- 18 of 420 --

SF^r;
*% -'-.; 	'

-- 19 of 420 --

i8 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
from 	functional 	analysis 	alone 	without 	the 	inter-
vention of some a priori 	image, 	but 	it 	was still a 	weapon
with 	which 	to 	attack 	the 	whimsies 	of 	the 	most
arbitrary 	revivalists.
One 	of 	the 	main 	inheritors 	of 	this 	'Rationalist'
viewpoint 	in 	the 	mid-nineteenth 	century 	was 	Eugene
Viollet-le-Duc, 	a 	French 	theorist 	who 	gave 	great 	force
to 	the 	idea 	of 	a 	'modern' 	architecture. 	As 	was
mentioned, 	he 	was 	disturbed 	by 	the 	inability 	of 	the
nineteenth 	century 	to 	find 	its 	own 	style 	and 	felt 	that
the 	answer must 	lie 	in 	the 	creation 	of forms 	'true 	to 	the
programme 	and 	true 	to 	the 	structure'. 	He 	remained 	a
little 	vague 	on 	the 	nature 	of 	this 	truth 	and 	tended 	to
assume 	(often 	erroneously) 	that 	the 	conspicuous
excellence 	of great 	past 	works 	was 	due 	mainly 	to 	their
capacity 	for 	expressing 	the 	programmatic 	and 	struc-
tural 	'truths' 	of 	their 	own 	time. 	Thus 	while 	he 	was
committed 	to 	an 	indistinct 	vision 	of 	some 	new
architecture, 	he 	nonetheless 	believed 	that 	the 	past
could 	have 	its 	uses 	in 	discovering 	this 	new 	style; 	he
even 	imagined 	a 	situation 	in 	which 	one 	of 	the
designers 	of 	the 	great 	Gothic 	cathedrals 	had 	been
resuscitated 	and 	confronted 	with 	a 	modern 	building
problem 	and 	modern 	means 	of 	construction. 	He
argued 	that 	the 	result 	would 	not 	have 	been 	an
imitation 	Gothic 	building, 	but 	an 	authentically
modern 	one 	based 	on 	analogous 	intellectual 	pro-
cedures. 	The 	past 	must 	not 	be 	raided 	for 	its 	external
effects, 	then, 	but 	for 	its 	underlying 	principles 	and
processes.
Of course, 	most 	architects of 	note 	in 	earlier 	periods
had 	always 	known 	that 	the 	past 	must 	be 	understood
for 	its 	principles, 	but 	had 	still 	had 	the 	guidance 	of 	a
prevalent 	style 	phase, 	a 	shared 	architectural 	language,
in 	which 	to 	incorporate 	their 	findings. 	Viollet-le-Duc
outlined 	a 	probing 	method 	for 	intellectual 	analysis 	but
could 	still 	do 	little 	to 	supply 	the 	essential 	'leap 	to 	form'.
His 	imagination 	was 	not 	as 	strong 	as 	his 	intellect, 	and
the 	handful 	of 	buildings 	and 	projects 	which 	he 	left
behind 	him 	were 	clumsy 	assemblages 	of 	old 	images
and 	modern 	constructional 	means, 	usually 	reflecting
his 	underlying 	taste 	for 	medieval 	styles 	(fig. 	i 	. 	?). 	There
was 	little 	of that 	sense 	of 	'inevitable 	unity' 	- 	of 	part
linking 	with 	part 	in 	an 	ordered 	yet 	intuitive 	system 	-
which 	distinguishes 	the 	true 	sense 	of style.
But 	if 	Viollet-le-Duc's 	forms 	did 	little 	to 	solve 	the
problem 	of 	a 	modern 	architecture, 	his 	ideas 	lived 	on
and 	were 	destined 	to 	have an 	enormous 	infiuence 	on
the 	generation 	who 	became 	the 	'pioneers' 	of 	modern
architecture, 	especially 	when 	they 	sought 	to 	give
architectural 	expression 	to 	new 	constructional 	means
like concrete, 	or lo 	new 	building 	types 	like skyscrapers:
even 	the 	fortnal 	innovations 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	were
kindled 	in 	part 	by 	his 	ideals. 	He 	supplied 	a 	strong
counter-tendency 	against 	the 	worst 	excesses of Beaux-

-- 20 of 420 --

The 	Idea 	of a 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Nineteenth 	Century 	1
9
1. 	1 	(/I'/O 	Eugene Violiet-
le-Duc. 	project 	for a
concert 	hall 	in 	iron,
c. 	1864. 	Irom 	Entreticns
sur I'architectwe, 	1872:
the attempt 	to 	formulate
a 	style on 	the 	basis of
new 	materials.
1.4 	((ihinv) 	Le 	Corbusier.
sketch 	of the 	primary
geometrical 	solids
alongside a 	view 	of
ancient 	Rome, 	from 	Vers
WW {inhitcctiin'. 	1923;
the abstraction 	of
fundamental 	lessons
from 	the 	past.
Arts 	teaching, 	which 	frequently 	(though 	not 	always)
erred 	in 	the 	direction 	of 	academicism, 	and 	gave
currency 	to 	the 	idea 	that 	the 	great 	style 	of 	modern
times 	would 	somehow 	emerge 	on 	the 	basis 	of 	new
constructional 	techniques 	- 	not 	through 	some 	merely
personal 	formal 	experiment 	- 	just 	as 	the 	great 	styles 	of
the 	past 	had 	done. 	Thus 	Viollct-le-Duc's 	historical
parallels 	supplied 	further 	scaffolding 	to 	the 	idea 	of 	a
modern 	architecture.
But 	the 	question 	still 	remained: 	what 	should 	this
modern 	architecture look 	like? 	From 	where 	should 	its
forms 	be 	derived.' 	Obviously 	tradition 	could 	not 	be
jettisoned 	completely, 	otherwise 	there 	would 	be 	no
forms at 	all : 	the idea of an 	eutirehi 	new architecture was
simply 	illusory. 	Perhaps, 	then, 	it 	might 	be 	possible 	to
abstract 	the 	es.sential 	lessons 	of earlier 	architecture 	in
such 	a 	manner 	that 	a 	genuinely 	new 	combination
would be 	achieved.' 	Indeed, 	if one jumps 	forward to 	the
1920s 	and 	examines 	the 	seminal 	works 	of the 	modern
movement, 	one 	Hnds 	that 	they 	relied 	on 	tradition 	in
this 	more 	universal 	sense. 	One 	is 	struck 	by 	the
confidence 	of 	men 	like 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe 	that 	they had. 	so 	to say. 	unearthed 	the 	central,
abstract 	values 	of 	the 	medium 	of 	architecture 	itself:
that 	they 	had 	created 	not 	so 	much 	a 	new 	style, 	but 	the
quality 	of 	style 	in 	general 	- 	a 	quality 	central 	to 	all
outstanding 	works 	of the 	past 	(tig. 	i 	.4).
This 	abstract 	view 	of the 	history of architecture, 	this
idea that 	the 	important 	features 	of past 	buildings 	lay 	in
their 	proportions, 	their 	arrangement, 	their 	articula-
tion of formal 	themes 	(and 	the 	like) 	rather than 	in 	their
use 	of columns 	or 	pointed 	arches, 	may 	itself have 	had
some 	basis 	in 	late 	eighteenth- 	and 	early 	nineteenth-
century 	tendencies 	towards 	simplification. 	One 	thinks
particularly 	of 	those 	drastically 	abstract 	modes 	of
reformulating 	the 	past 	implicit 	in 	the 	stripped 	geo-
metrical 	visions of Claude-Nicolas Ledoux 	and 	Etienne-
Louis 	Boullee. 	The 	idea of universal 	formal 	values 	was
given 	extra 	weight 	in 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	century 	by
art 	historians 	like 	Heinrich 	Wolfflin 	and 	Adolf 	von
Hildebrand. 	who 	rejected 	literary 	values 	in 	art 	in
favour 	of 	underlying 	architectonic 	qualities, 	and 	who
described 	past 	styles 	in 	terms 	of 	abstract, 	formal
patterns. 	It 	is 	no 	accident 	that 	this 	way 	of 	perceiving
the 	past 	should 	have 	coincided 	so 	closely 	with 	the
emergence 	of 	abstract 	art: 	as 	we 	shall 	see, 	both 	this
manner of viewing 	precedent, 	and the 	new 	language of
space 	and 	form 	visualized 	by 	painters 	and 	sculptors,
were 	to 	have an 	eventual 	influence 	on 	the 	creation 	of
modern 	architecture.
But 	other 	ingredients 	would 	also 	come 	into 	play 	in
the 	formulation 	of 	modern 	architecture 	- 	ingredients
which 	had 	been 	intrinsic 	to 	numerous 	past 	buildings.
One 	thinks 	particularly 	of analogies 	with 	other spheres
of 	reality 	than 	architecture, 	with 	nature's 	forms 	and
processes, 	or with 	the 	forms 	of mechanisms, 	paintings,
and 	sculptures. 	Peter 	Collins 	has 	revealed 	the 	im-
portance 	to 	the 	nineteenth 	century 	of 	'mechanical'
and 	'biological' 	analogies 	in 	theory 	and 	design. 	At 	a
certain 	level 	the 	forms 	of architecture 	may 	be 	thought
of as 	mimetic : 	through 	a 	process 	of 	abstraction 	they
may 	incorporate 	images 	and 	references. 	Time 	and
again, 	if 	we 	dig 	beneath 	the 	surface 	of 	modern
architects' 	personal 	styles, 	we 	will 	find 	a 	rich 	world 	of
metaphor 	and 	allusion.
Thus, 	in 	finding 	forms 	to 	fit 	the 	pre-existing
aspirations 	towards 	a 	modern 	architecture, 	the
architects 	of 	the 	1890s 	and 	the 	first 	decade 	of 	the
twentieth 	century 	drew 	repeatedly 	on 	both 	tradition
and 	nature 	in 	their 	formulation 	of a 	style. 	But 	they 	did
so 	in 	ways 	that 	were 	at 	variance 	with 	their 	immediate
predecessors, 	for 	their 	method 	involved 	a 	far 	greater
degree 	of 	abstraction. 	In 	that 	respect 	their 	quests 	for
novelty 	were 	not 	unconnected 	with 	avant-garde
developments 	in 	the 	other 	arts: 	it 	can 	even 	be 	argued
that 	some 	of 	the 	most 	drastic 	innovators 	(one 	thinks
particularly 	of Wright 	and 	Pcrret 	in 	these 	two 	decades)
were 	also, 	in 	some 	basic 	way, 	traditionalists. 	While
they 	certainly 	hoped 	to 	create 	vocabularies 	entirely 	in
tune with 	modern 	circumstances 	and 	means, 	they 	also
wished 	to 	endow 	their 	results 	with 	a 	certain 	univer-
sality: 	they 	sought 	to 	create 	architectural 	languages
with 	the depth, 	rigour, 	and 	range 	of application 	of the
great 	styles 	of the 	past.
So 	it 	was 	not 	tradition 	that 	was 	jettisoned, 	but 	a
slavish, 	superficial, 	and 	irrelevant 	adherence 	to 	it. 	The

-- 21 of 420 --

20 	•
The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
rogue 	in 	all 	these 	respects 	was 	frequently 	(and
sometimes 	unfairly) 	identified 	as 	the 	Ecole 	des 	Beaux-
Arts 	in 	Paris which 	was 	lampooned 	as the 	symbol of all
that 	was 	tired 	and 	retardative 	(figs. 	1.5. 	i.h). 	This
caricature 	of 	academe 	aside, 	it 	is 	essential 	to 	see 	the
vital 	developments 	of the 	1890s 	against 	a 	backdrop 	of
confusion 	and 	caprice 	in 	which 	the 	problem 	of 	style
was 	much 	discussed 	but 	rarely 	resolved. 	To 	the 	young
architectural 	minds 	which 	were 	to 	pioneer 	Art
Nouveau 	and 	the 	substantial 	new 	developments 	up 	to
the First World 	War. 	writers like 	VioUet-le-Duc were an
immensely 	powerful 	catalyst. 	They 	had 	little 	to 	stand
on 	in 	the 	immediate 	past 	except 	facile 	revivalism 	and
eclecticism, 	and 	therefore 	sought 	a 	new 	direction 	by
going 	back 	to 	basics 	and 	forward 	to 	new 	inspirations
simultaneously. 	In 	sources 	they 	were 	abundant: 	the
question 	was 	how 	to 	forge 	these 	sources 	into 	a 	new
synthesis 	appropriate 	to 	modern 	conditions.
i.S 	Charles 	Gamier, 	the
Opera. 	Paris. 	1861:
Beaux-Arts 	Classicism 	in
the 	grand 	manner of a
sort 	that 	was 	rejected 	in
the early 	twentieth
century 	by the 	avant-
garde.
1.6 	'La 	Recherche du
Style 	Nouveau'. 	Revue
des Arts 	Decoratifs. 	1895:
the slow 	progress
towards a 	new style.

-- 22 of 420 --

2. 	The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the
Problem 	of 	Ornament
. 	. 	. 	the 	whole 	basis 	of the 	views 	of architecture 	prevailing 	today 	must 	be
displaced 	by 	the 	recognition 	that 	the 	only 	possible 	point 	of departure 	for 	our
artistic 	creation 	is 	modern 	life.
0. 	Wagner, 	1895
Wfiile 	the 	beginnings 	of 	modern 	architecture 	cannot
be 	traced 	to 	a 	single 	time, 	place, 	or 	personality, 	it 	is
striking 	how 	many 	movements 	professing 	the 	value 	of
the 	'new' 	came 	into 	being 	in 	the 	iSgos. 	FA'idently 	a
reaction 	against 	tired 	social, 	philosophical, 	and
aesthetic 	values 	was 	rumbling 	into 	life 	in 	centres 	as
diverse 	as 	Paris, 	Berlin, 	Vienna, 	Brussels, 	and 	Chicago.
However, 	novelty 	had 	differing 	significance 	in 	each
milieu 	and. 	probably, 	in 	each 	architect's 	mind.
At 	the 	same 	time 	it 	would 	be 	foolish 	to 	ignore 	areas
of 	overlap. 	Time 	and 	again 	we 	shall 	encounter 	the
theme 	of renewal 	after 	a 	period 	of supposed 	corruption
and 	decay: time 	and 	again 	we 	shall 	hear 	the 	rallying
cry 	that 	a 	new, 	modern 	man 	is 	emerging, 	whose
character 	an 	avant-garde 	is 	best 	able 	to 	intuit. 	Thus 	in
assembling 	the 	fragments 	of 	the 	pre-First 	World 	War
architectural 	world 	into a larger 	picture, 	it 	is 	essential
to 	balance 	up 	the 	local 	contexts 	and 	individual
intentions 	of 	architects 	with 	their 	piecemeal 	con-
tributions 	to 	a 	new 	tradition. 	We 	have 	to 	deal 	here 	not
with 	a 	simple evolutionary 	path, 	but 	with 	the 	tentative
groundwork 	towards 	a 	later 	consensus.
Since 	the 	emphasis 	is 	on 	forms 	and 	not 	just 	ideas 	or
techniques, 	it 	seems 	reasonable 	to 	begin 	with 	Art
Nouveau, 	and 	therefore 	to 	concur 	with 	Hitchcock's
assessments 	that 	"it 	offered 	the 	first 	international
programme 	for 	a 	basic 	renewal 	that 	the 	nineteenth
century 	actually 	set 	out 	to 	realise' 	and 	that 	'Art
Nouveau 	was 	actually 	the 	first 	stage 	of 	modern
architecture 	in 	Europe, 	if 	modern 	architecture 	be
understood 	as 	implying 	primarily 	the 	total 	rejection 	of
historicism.' 	But 	if 	Art 	Nouveau 	artists 	rejected
historicism. 	they 	could 	not 	altogether 	reject 	tradition,
for even the creator intent on 	producing new 	forms 	will
rely, 	in 	some 	degree, 	on 	old 	ones. 	Indeed, 	what 	is 	often
meant 	when 	the 	claim 	is 	made 	that 	such 	and 	such 	a
movement 	was 	'new', 	is 	that 	it 	switched 	its 	allegiances
from 	recent 	and 	nearby 	traditions 	to 	ones 	more 	remote
in 	space 	or time.
Even 	so 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	distinguish 	between
innovations 	which 	extend 	the 	premisses 	of 	a 	pre-
existing 	tradition, 	and 	more 	drastic 	breaks. 	Art
Nouveau 	was 	of 	this 	second 	sort 	and 	embodied 	a
strong 	reaction 	against 	the 	degraded 	Beaux-Arts
Classicism 	widely 	practised 	in 	the 	1870s 	and 	1880s.
As 	such 	it 	was 	a 	major 	step 	towards 	the 	intellectual
and 	stylistic 	emancipation 	of 	modern 	architecture.
However, 	the 	path 	from 	the 	curved 	abstractions 	of Art
Nouveau 	to the 	stripped, 	white 	rectangular 	geometries
of the 	1 920S 	was 	neither 	simple 	nor 	straightforward.
In 	architecture 	the 	most 	creative 	phase 	of 	Art
Nouveau 	was 	from 	1893 	to 	about 	1905 	-a 	little 	more
than 	a 	decade. 	The 	beginnings 	of the 	style 	have 	been
variously 	dated. 	Arguably 	it 	first 	emerged 	in 	graphics
and 	the decorative 	arts. 	Pevsner 	claimed 	a 	start 	in 	the
early 	i88os 	in 	England.
If the 	long, 	sensitive 	curve, 	reminiscent 	of the 	lily's
stem, 	an 	insect's 	feeler, 	the 	filament 	of blossom, 	or
occasionally 	a 	slender 	flame, 	the 	curve 	undulating,
flowing 	and 	interplaying 	with 	the 	others, 	sprouting
from 	the 	corners 	and 	covering 	asymmetrically 	all
available 	surfaces, 	can 	be 	regarded 	as a 	leitmotif oi
Art 	Nouveau, 	then 	the 	first 	work 	of Art 	Nouveau

-- 23 of 420 --

22 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modem 	Architecture
which 	can 	be 	traced 	is 	Arthur 	H. 	Mackmurdo's
cover 	of his 	book 	on 	Wren's 	city 	churches 	published
in 	1883.
Of 	course 	this 	is 	said 	with 	the 	knowledge 	of
hindsight: 	Mackmurdo's design 	would 	be written off as
a 	minor 	incident 	stemming 	from 	certain 	arabesques 	of
the 	Pre-Raphaelites. 	the 	linear 	patterns 	of 	William
Blake, 	and 	the 	fascination 	with 	natural 	forms 	of John
Ruskin, 	if 	there 	had 	not 	subsequently 	been 	a 	broader
indulgence 	in 	the 	formal 	qualities 	Pevsner 	outlines.
There 	is 	little 	evidence 	that 	Mackmurdo's 	design 	was
the 	start 	of 	a 	sequence. 	Rather 	it 	was 	an 	early
manifestation 	of 	a 	broad 	shift 	in 	sensibility 	in 	the
1 880s. 	also 	sensed 	in 	such 	diverse 	examples 	as 	the
ornamental 	designs 	of 	Louis 	Sullivan. 	Antoni 	Gaudi,
and 	William 	Burges. 	the 	melancholic 	and 	erotic
drawings 	of Aubrey 	Beardsley 	(fig. 	2.1). 	the 	symbolist
paintings 	of 	Paul 	Gauguin 	and 	Maurice 	Denis. 	A
consolidation 	did 	not 	occur 	until 	the 	early 	1890s.
particularly 	in 	Brussels, 	in 	the 	work 	of 	Fernand
Khnopff. 	Jan 	Toorop. 	and 	a 	group 	of painters 	known 	as
"les 	Vingt'. 	and 	in 	the 	architecture 	of 	Victor 	Horta
which 	seemed 	a 	three-dimensional 	equivalent 	to 	the
painters' 	two-dimensional 	linear 	inventiveness.
So 	revolutionary 	does 	Horta's 	breakthrough 	appear
in 	retrospect 	that 	it 	is 	irritating 	that so 	little 	is 	known
about 	his 	preceding 	development. 	He 	was 	born 	in
1 86 1 	in 	Ghent, 	studied 	art 	at 	the 	local 	academy,
worked 	in 	the 	studio 	of 	an 	artist 	by 	the 	name 	of Jules
Debuysson 	in 	Paris, 	entered 	the 	Ecole 	des 	Beaux-Arts
in 	Brussels, 	and 	then 	became 	a 	draughtsman 	for 	a
minor 	neo-classical 	architect 	by 	the 	name 	of Alphonse
Balat. 	In 	the 	mid-i88os 	he 	designed 	some 	uninter-
esting 	houses 	in 	Ghent. 	Next 	we 	have 	the Tassel 	House
of 	1892-3. 	a 	work 	of complete 	assurance, 	outstanding
for 	its 	synthesis 	of architecture 	and 	the 	decorative 	arts
and 	its 	declaration 	of new 	formal 	principles.
These 	were 	not 	evident 	in 	the 	somewhat 	bald 	fagade
with 	its 	bowing 	central 	volume, 	its 	restrained 	use 	of
stonework, 	and 	its 	discreet 	introduction 	of an 	exposed
iron 	beam, 	but 	in 	the 	ample 	space 	of the 	stairwell 	(tig.
2.3). 	The 	principal 	innovations 	lay 	in 	the 	frank
expression 	of 	metal 	structure 	and 	in 	the 	tendril-like
ornamentation 	which 	transformed 	gradually 	into 	the
vegetal 	shapes 	of 	bannisters, 	wallpaper, 	and 	floor
mosaics. 	The 	emphasis 	on 	the 	direct 	use 	of 	a 	modern
material, 	and 	even 	the 	inspiration 	of natural 	forms 	for
the 	metal 	ornament, 	recall 	Viollet-le-Duc's 	explora-
tions 	in 	iron 	(fig. 	2.2). 	while 	the 	expression 	of 	the
effects 	of 	growth 	and 	tension 	call 	to 	mind 	the
contemporary 	interests 	in 	'empathy', 	and 	fa.scinations
with 	organic 	analogies. 	Evidently 	Horta 	knew 	of
Voysey's 	wallpaper 	designs 	and 	perhaps 	even 	of Owen
Jones's 	Grammar 	of Ornament 	(i 8 5 6 ) ; 	in 	either 	case 	he
2. 1 	Aubrey 	Beardsley.
Toilet 	of Salome 	II. 	1894.
Drawing. 	8J x 	6|in.
(22.2 	X 	1 6cm.). 	London.
British 	Museum.
2.2 	Eugene 	V'iollet-le-
Duc. 	proposal 	for 	a
wrouglit 	iron 	bracket,
from 	tMretiens sur
rarchilerliire. 	1872.

-- 24 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	•	
23
2. 3 	Victor Horta. 	Tassel
House. 	Brussels.
i8y2-5. 	the stairwell.

-- 25 of 420 --

The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
will 	have 	sensed 	a 	feeling 	for 	natural 	forms 	combined
with 	a 	deliberate 	freshness 	and 	exoticism. 	Thus 	the
first 	mature 	statement 	in 	the 	new 	style 	was 	a 	synthesis
of formal 	inspiration 	from 	the 	English 	Arts 	and 	Crafts,
of the 	structural 	emphasis 	of French 	Rationalism, 	and
of shapes 	and 	structures 	abstracted 	from 	nature.
Horta 	extended 	his 	style 	in 	a 	number 	of other 	town
house 	designs 	in 	Brussels 	in 	the 	iSyos. 	These 	subtly
evoked 	an 	inward-looking 	world 	by 	creating 	scenarios
for 	a 	well-to-do. 	urbane 	fin 	de 	siecle 	clientele 	which
could afford the indulgence of exotic 	tastes 	and delicate
aestheticism. The 	props 	for the mood 	were 	the spacious
stairwells, 	and 	long 	internal 	vistas 	through 	dining-
rooms 	and 	over 	winter 	gardens: 	the 	rich 	contrasts 	of
coloured 	glass, 	silk 	stuffs, 	gold, 	bronze, 	and 	exposed
metal, 	and 	the 	vegetal 	forms 	of 	vaguely 	decadent
character. 	Yet Horta's buildings never lapsed into mere
theatricality: 	there 	was 	always 	a 	tense, 	underlying
formal 	order: 	and 	the 	sequence of spaces 	from 	halls, 	up
stairs, 	over 	galleries 	was 	tightly 	orchestrated. 	In 	the
masterly 	Hotel 	Solvay 	of 	1895. 	his 	newly 	found 	style
was 	successfully 	carried 	through 	in 	all 	aspects 	of 	the
design, 	including 	the 	linking 	of 	interior 	volumes 	and
the 	treatment 	of 	the 	facpade. 	where 	an 	appropriately
linear 	ornament 	was 	displayed.
While 	Horta 	clearly 	grasped 	the 	meaning 	of the 	way
of 	life 	of 	his 	luxurious 	clients, 	his 	social 	concerns 	and
range 	of 	expression 	were 	not 	restricted 	to 	this 	class.
This is clear from 	his design 	for the 	Maison du 	Pcuple 	of
1896-8. 	also 	in 	Brussels, 	built 	as 	the 	headquarters 	of
the 	Belgian 	Socialist 	party. 	The 	site 	was 	a 	difficult 	one
extending 	around 	a 	segment 	of a 	circular 	urban 	space
and part 	of the 	way 	along two 	radial 	streets. 	The 	fac^ade
combined 	convex 	and 	concave 	curves, 	and 	the 	main
entrance 	was 	placed 	on 	one 	of 	the 	shorter 	convex
points. 	The 	visible 	expression 	of the 	iron 	skeleton 	was
every 	bit 	as 	'radical' 	as 	Sullivan's_ 	contemporary
skyscraper 	designs 	in 	Chicago 	(where 	the 	structure
was 	usually 	immersed 	in 	terracotta 	sheathing). 	In 	part
this 	treatment 	was 	no 	doubt 	inspired 	by 	earlier
nineteenth-century 	engineering 	structures 	like 	train-
sheds 	and 	exhibition 	buildings, 	but 	the 	choice 	of
materials 	and 	the 	emphasis 	on 	lighting 	the 	interiors
through 	infill 	panes 	of 	glass 	seem 	to 	have 	had 	moral
overtones 	related 	to 	the 	institution 	as 	well
:
... 	it 	was 	an 	interesting 	commission 	as 	I 	saw
straightaway - 	building 	a 	palace 	that 	wasn't 	to 	be a
palace 	but 	a 	'house' 	whose 	luxury 	feature 	would 	be
the 	light 	and 	air 	that 	had 	been 	missing 	for 	so 	long
from 	the 	working-class 	slums. 	. 	.
.
The 	integration 	of 	material, 	structure, 	and 	expressive
intentions 	was 	even 	more 	successful 	on 	the 	interior,
especially 	in 	the 	main 	auditorium 	at 	the 	top 	of 	the

-- 26 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	25
2.4 	[above) 	Victor Horta,
Maison 	du 	Peuple.
Brussels. 	1896-8, 	view
of hall.
2.
5
{left) 	Henry van 	de
Velde. 	furniture designs
for Bloemen werf House.
1895. 	On 	the wall 	is 	an
embroidery. 	Angels 	Keep
Watch. 	1893. 	by 	the
artist 	(Zurich.
Kunstgewerbemuseum ),
building 	where 	the 	roof 	was 	formed 	from 	a 	sort 	of
hammer-beam 	system 	in 	steel 	(fig. 	2.4 1. 	The 	side 	walls
and 	fenestration 	were 	reduced 	to 	thin 	infill 	screens,
and 	the 	effect 	of 	the 	whole 	was 	an 	organic 	unity 	in
which 	ornamentation 	and 	the 	visual 	accentuation 	of
actual 	structure 	worked 	tightly 	together. 	The 	ceilings
were 	ingeniously 	corrugated 	to 	control 	reverberation,
and 	a 	double 	gallery 	was 	hung 	from 	the 	roof 	trusses
and 	used 	to 	contain 	heating 	pipes. 	Thus 	despite 	its
fantastic 	character, 	this 	'attic' 	space 	was 	strongly
conditioned 	by 	practical 	demands. 	As 	the 	architect
himself exclaimed, 	paraphrasing 	an 	observer,
'What 	a 	fantasist 	this 	architect 	is 	- 	he 	must 	have
his 	alternating 	lines 	and 	curves 	- 	but 	he 	really 	is 	a
"master" 	at 	them.' 	. 	. 	. 	but 	I 	am 	fuming: 	- 	'You
idiot, 	don't 	you 	see 	that 	everything 	is 	thought 	out
in 	terms 	of architecture 	as 	construction, 	faithful 	to
the 	brief to 	the 	point 	of sacrifice.''
Horta 's 	experimentation 	with 	iron 	and 	steel 	was
continued 	in 	another 	large-scale 	scheme, 	also 	for
Brussels, 	the 	A 	L'lnnovation 	Department' 	Store 	of
1901, 	in 	which 	these materials 	were 	felt 	appropriate
for 	their 	large 	internal 	spans 	and 	their 	capacity 	for
wide 	openings. 	Practical 	considerations 	were 	again
transcended 	in 	a 	facade 	composition 	in 	which 	delicate
screens 	and 	large 	plates 	of 	glass 	provided 	a 	forward-
looking 	image 	to 	a 	relatively 	new 	building 	type.
Horta 	continued 	to 	work 	in 	Brussels 	for 	another
thirty 	years 	but 	rarely 	achieved 	the 	freshness 	of 	his
earliest 	experiments. 	Another 	Belgian 	artist 	to 	con-
tinue 	the 	new-found 	mode 	well 	into 	the 	twentieth
century 	was 	Henry 	van 	de 	Velde. 	who 	seems 	to 	have
had 	a 	more 	theoretical 	turn 	of mind 	than 	Horta. 	and 	to
have 	turned 	his 	hand 	to 	a 	broader 	range 	of 	activities.
The 	son 	of a 	chemist 	in 	Antwerp, 	van 	de 	Velde 	became
a 	painter 	and 	was 	much 	influenced 	by 	the 	Impression-
ists, 	the 	social 	realist 	imagery 	of Millet 	and 	eventually
the 	paintings 	of Gauguin. 	In 	the 	i 	890s 	his 	interest 	in
the 	crafts 	grew, 	under 	the 	impact 	of 	William 	Morris's
theoretical 	teachings, 	and 	he 	devoted 	himself 	to 	the
applied 	arts. 	If 	VioUet-le-Duc 	was 	important 	to 	one
branch 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	for 	having 	encouraged 	the
notion 	of a 	new 	style 	based 	on 	the 	direct 	expression 	of
the 	constructional 	possibilities 	of 	new 	materials 	like
iron, 	Morris 	was 	crucial 	as 	another 	forefather 	for
having 	expressed 	the 	ideal 	of 	aesthetic 	and 	moral
quality 	in 	all 	the 	objects of daily 	use. 	In 	due 	course 	one
of 	the 	aims 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	designers 	(one 	senses 	it
already 	in 	Horta's 	houses) 	would 	be 	'the 	total 	work 	of
art' 	in 	which 	every 	light 	fixture 	would 	bear 	the 	same
aesthetic 	character 	as 	the 	overall 	building.
In 	1894-5. 	van 	de 	Velde 	designed 	a 	house 	for
himself at 	Uccle, 	near 	Brussels, 	for which 	the 	furniture
was 	specially 	created. 	His 	chair 	designs 	manifested 	an
interest 	in 	expressive, 	organic 	structure: 	dynamic
forces 	were 	intended 	to 	heighten 	the functions 	of 	the
various 	members, 	giving 	the 	chairs 	a 	consciously 	life-
like 	or 	anthropomorphic 	character 	(fig. 	2.5). 	Van 	de
Velde 	made 	a 	distinction 	between 	ornamentation 	and
ornament, 	the 	former being 	attached, 	the 	latter being a
means 	for 	frankly 	revealing 	the 	inner 	structural 	forces
or 	functional 	identity 	of a 	form. 	This 	interest 	in 	the
frank 	expression 	of 	structure 	and 	function 	led 	him 	in
his 	Halsy's 	barber 	shop 	in 	Berlin 	I1901) 	to 	expose
water 	pipes, 	gas 	conduits, 	and 	electrical 	ducts. 	Van 	de
Velde 	admired 	what 	the 	machine 	might 	do 	in 	mass
production, 	so 	long 	as 	a 	strong 	control 	over 	quality
was 	maintained 	by 	the 	craftsman 	who 	designed 	the
prototype; 	he 	felt 	that 	a 	subjective 	artistic 	element
must 	always 	be 	present 	if banality 	was 	to 	be 	avoided.
The 	French 	critic, 	Edmond 	de 	Goncourt, 	coined 	the
phrase 	'yachting 	style' 	in 	assessing 	van 	de 	Velde's
designs 	when 	they 	were 	first 	made 	known 	in 	Paris:
and 	the 	artist 	himself claimed 	that 	his 	means 	were:
. 	. 	. 	the 	same 	as 	those 	which 	were 	used 	in 	the 	very
early 	stages 	of popular 	arts 	and 	crafts. 	It 	is 	only
because 	I 	understand 	and 	marvel 	at 	how 	simply,
coherently 	and 	beautifully 	a 	ship, 	weapon, 	car or
wheelbarrow 	is 	built 	that 	my 	work 	is 	able 	to 	please
the 	few 	remaining 	rationalists 	. 	. 	. 	unconditionally
and 	resolutely 	following 	the 	functional 	logic 	of an
article 	and 	being 	unreservedly 	honest 	about 	the
materials 	employed. 	. 	.
.
Van 	de 	Velde 	was 	a 	Socialist 	and 	hoped 	that 	industrial
mass 	production 	of 	his 	objects 	might 	make 	visual
quality 	available 	to 	the 	broad 	masses; 	yet 	his
statements 	of 	architectural 	intent 	remained 	within 	a
fairly 	aloof circle 	of patronage. 	In 	the 	Cologne 	Theatre
of 	1 9 14, 	he 	attempted 	to 	create 	his 	version 	of 	a
communal 	building 	celebrating 	widely 	held 	social
values. 	But 	this 	Gesamtkwislwerk 	still 	remained 	the
property 	of a 	cultivated 	eUte.
Art 	Nouveau 	did 	not 	always 	remain 	the 	aloof
creation 	of 	an 	avant-garde. 	Indeed, 	the 	style 	was
quickly 	popularized in 	graphic 	and 	industrial design, 	in
glassware, 	furniture, 	jewellery, 	and 	even 	clothing. 	The
rapid 	spread 	of 	ideas 	was 	encouraged 	by 	the 	emer-
gence 	of 	periodicals 	like 	the 	Studio 	which 	had 	a 	great
impact 	on 	fashion; 	and 	by 	the 	pioneering 	commercial
attitudes 	of men 	Uke 	Samuel 	Bing, 	who 	opened 	a 	shop
for 	modern 	art 	called 	L'Art 	Nouveau 	on 	the 	Rue 	de
Provence 	in 	Paris 	in 	1895. 	Bing. 	and 	the 	German 	art
critic 	Julius 	Meier-Graefe. 	had 	discovered 	van 	de
Velde's 	house 	at 	Uccle 	and 	invited 	the 	artist 	to 	design
some 	rooms 	for 	the 	shop. 	The 	fashion 	caught 	on
quickly: 	and 	among 	those 	influenced 	were 	Emile 	Galle

-- 27 of 420 --

26 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
the 	glass-maker, 	and 	Hector 	Guimard 	the 	architect. 	In
New 	York, 	meanwhile. 	L. 	C. 	Tiffany 	was 	designing
glass 	with 	delicate 	vegetal 	forms 	and 	rich 	stains 	of
colour. 	In 	fact, 	he 	had 	come 	upon 	this 	manner
independently, 	which 	tended 	to 	lend 	weight 	to 	the
notion 	that 	here 	at 	last 	was 	a 	true 	expression 	of 	the
underlying spirit of the age. 	The 	full triumph 	of the 	new
style 	in 	the 	public 	taste 	was 	clearly 	evident 	at 	the 	Paris
exhibition 	of 	1900 	and 	the Turin 	exhibition 	of 	1902, 	in
which 	'Art 	Nouveau', 	'Jugendstil', 	or the 	'Style 	Liberty'
(such 	were 	its 	various 	names), 	was 	dominant. 	By 	the
turn 	of 	the 	century, 	then, 	Art 	Nouveau 	had 	taken 	on
an 	international 	character. 	It 	was 	perceived 	to 	be 	a
way 	out 	of the 	interminable 	jumbling 	of eclectic 	styles.
and 	a 	valid 	reflection 	of 	exotic, 	somewhat 	escapist,
somewhat 	progressivist. 	fin 	de 	siecle 	attitudes 	of 	mind.
This 	is 	the 	way 	the 	Italian 	critic 	Silvius 	Paoletti
responded 	to 	the Turin 	exhibition
:
To 	take 	the 	place 	of pitiless 	authoritarianism, 	rigid
and 	regal 	magnificence, 	burdensome 	and
undecorated 	display, 	we 	have 	delicate 	and 	intimate
refinement, 	fresh 	freedom 	of thought, 	the 	subtle
enthusiasm 	for 	new 	and 	continued 	sensations. 	All
man's 	activities 	are 	more 	complex, 	rapid, 	intense
and 	capture 	new 	pleasures, 	new 	horizons, 	new
heights. 	And 	art 	has 	new 	aspirations, 	new 	voices
and 	shines 	with 	a 	very 	new 	light.
While 	one 	ideal 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	was 	the 	perfectly
crafted 	and 	unified 	interior, 	the 	style 	also 	revealed 	its
possibilities 	for 	much 	broader 	public 	applications. 	Most
notable 	of 	these, 	perhaps, 	were 	Hector 	Guimard's
designs 	for 	the 	Paris 	Metro 	of 	1900 	(fig. 	2.6), 	in 	which
naturally 	inspired 	forms 	were 	used 	to 	create 	arches
and 	furnishings 	in 	iron 	which 	were 	then 	mass-
produced 	from 	moulds. 	Like 	Horta. 	Guimard 	had
passed 	through 	the 	academy, 	having 	been 	at 	the 	Paris
Ecole des 	Beaux-Arts 	from 	1 	SS =; 	to 	the early 	1 	8908. 	At
the 	Ecole 	des 	Arts 	Decoratifs 	from 	i8cS2 	to 	i88s. 	he
had 	already 	become 	acquainted 	with 	VioUet-le-Duc's
Gothic 	rationalism, 	which 	he 	had 	then 	sought 	to
reinterpret 	in 	a 	highly 	personal 	way. 	Another 	key
influence 	was 	the 	British 	Arts 	and 	Crafts, 	which 	he
studied 	while 	visiting 	England 	and 	Scotland 	in 	the
1 890s. 	He 	also 	visited 	Horta. 	and 	this 	provided 	the
essential 	catalyst.
Guimard 	began 	experimenting 	with 	the 	new 	style 	in
his 	design 	for 	an 	exclusive 	block 	of flats 	in 	the 	recently
developed 	i6eme 	arrondissement. 	known 	as 	the
Castel-Beranger, 	in 	Rue 	la 	Fontaine. 	Here 	the 	entrance
details 	and 	ornamental 	flourishes 	were 	somewhat
isolated 	Art 	Nouveau 	incidents 	in 	an 	otherwise
inconsistent 	design. 	Working 	a 	decade 	later 	at a 	much
smaller 	scale, 	in 	the 	nearby 	Villa 	Flore 	(fig. 	2.7),
Guimard 	was 	able 	to 	infuse 	the 	whole 	design 	with 	the
bulbous 	and 	swelling 	character 	of a 	natural 	growth,
and 	to 	model 	brick 	surfaces 	and 	iron 	details 	so 	that
they 	seemed 	subservient 	to 	a 	single 	aesthetic 	impulse.
The 	plan, 	with 	its 	suave 	links 	between 	oval 	forms 	and
dilTerent 	diagonal 	axes, 	suggests 	that 	Guimard 	may
have 	consulted 	the 	sophisticated 	solutions 	for 	tight
urban 	sites 	of 	eighteenth-century 	Parisian 	hotels;
indeed, 	the 	playfulness 	and 	curvilinear 	tracery 	of 	the
Rococo 	may 	be 	counted 	among 	the 	possible 	sources 	of
Art 	Nouveau 	ornament.
However, 	in 	the 	hands 	of 	major 	talents. 	Art
Nouveau 	was 	far 	more 	than 	a 	change 	in 	architectural
dress, 	far 	more 	than 	a 	new 	system 	of decoration. 	In 	the
best 	works 	of 	Horta. 	Guimard. 	and van 	de 	Velde. 	the
very 	anatomy 	and 	spatial 	character 	of 	architecture
were 	fundamentally 	transformed. 	Their 	forms 	were
usually 	tightly 	constrained 	by 	functional 	discipline
and 	by 	a 	Rationalist 	tendency 	to 	express 	structure 	and
material. 	Furthermore, 	each 	artist 	in 	his 	own 	way
attempted 	to embody 	a 	social 	vision 	and 	to enhance 	the
institutions 	for 	which 	he 	built.
Similar 	points 	can 	be 	made 	about 	the 	Catalan
architect 	Antoni 	Gaudi. 	whose extreme 	originality 	and
idiosyncrasies 	show 	him 	to 	have 	been 	only 	a 	loose
affiliate 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	ideals. 	Indeed, 	one 	has 	to
beware 	of pushing 	a 	historical 	abstraction 	too 	hard: 	a
style 	phase 	in 	architecture 	is 	a 	sort 	of 	broad 	base 	of
shared 	motifs, 	modes 	of 	expression 	and 	themes, 	from

-- 28 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament
2.6 	(/(/() 	Hector
Guimard. 	Metro 	station.
Paris, 	I <)()().
2.7(Mim'l 	Hector
Guimard. 	Villa 	Flore.
Paris. 	1404.
2.8 	(riy/il) 	Antoni
Gaudi. 	Kxpiatory 	Church
of the 	Sagrada 	Familia.
Barcelona. 	1884- 	1926.
transept 	facade.

-- 29 of 420 --

28 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
which 	a 	great 	variety of personal 	styles 	may 	emerge.
Gaudi 	was 	born 	in 	1852 	and 	died 	in 	1926. 	His
earliest 	works 	date 	from 	the 	1870s 	and 	indicate 	his
reaction 	against 	the 	prevalent 	Second 	Empire 	mode
towards 	the 	neo-Gothic. 	He 	was 	an 	avid 	reader 	of
Ruskin's 	works 	and 	the 	inspiration 	of his 	early 	designs
is 	clearly 	medieval, 	but 	there 	emerges 	early 	on 	that
sense 	of 	the 	bizarre 	which 	was 	to 	characterize 	his
highly 	personal 	style 	after 	the 	turn 	of 	the 	century. 	In
the 	Palau 	Giiell 	of 	1885-9 	the 	interiors 	were
transformed 	into 	spaces 	of 	an 	almost 	ecclesiastical
character, 	while 	the 	fagades 	were 	elaborately 	orna-
mented 	with 	wave-like 	ironwork 	preceding 	Horta's
experiments 	in 	Brussels 	by 	some 	years. 	Thus 	Gaudi's
style, 	like 	Guimard's. 	was 	in 	part 	an 	abstraction 	of
medieval 	forms. 	The 	imaginative 	transformation 	of
these 	prototypes 	was 	motivated 	by 	Gaudi's 	private
imagery 	and 	by 	his 	obsession 	with 	finding 	a 	truly
Catalan 	'regional' 	style.
In 	1884. 	Gaudi 	was 	commissioned 	to 	continue
Francisco 	del 	Villar's 	designs 	for 	the 	Expiatory 	Temple
of 	the 	Holy 	Family 	(the 	'Sagrada 	Familia') 	on 	the
outskirts 	of 	Barcelona 	(fig. 	2.8). 	The 	crypt 	followed
Villar's 	design 	based 	on 	thirteenth- 	and 	fourteenth-
century 	Gothic 	prototypes. 	The 	lowest 	visible 	levels
were 	completed 	to 	Gaudi's 	design 	by 	1893 	in 	a
transitional 	Gothic 	manner. 	To 	then 	move 	upwards
through 	the 	various 	stages 	of 	the 	termination 	of 	the
crossing 	is 	to 	be 	confronted 	bit 	by 	bit 	with 	the

-- 30 of 420 --

2.10 	ilefn 	Antoni
Gaiidi. 	Casa 	Batllo,
Barcelona. 	1905-7.
2. 1 1 	(right) 	Antoni
Gaudi. 	Casa 	Mila.
Barcelona. 	1905-7.
chimneys.
2.12 	[below
right) 	Antoni 	Gaudi.
Casa 	Mila. 	Barcelona,
1905-7. 	detail 	of facade
at 	ground 	level.
/"^.^
2.9 	[far left] 	Antoni
Gaudi. 	wire 	model 	of the
structure of the 	Chapel
for the Colonia 	Giiell.
1898-1900.
AVVVV
yvvvVv'
The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	• 	29
architect's 	flowering 	into 	one 	of the 	most 	curious 	and
original 	architects 	of 	the 	past 	two 	hundred 	years.
Elements 	which 	suggest 	a 	vague 	afiinity 	with 	Art
Nouveau 	give 	way 	finally 	to 	a 	language 	of 	utter
fantasy, 	evocative 	of 	vegetable 	stems 	and 	dream-like
anatomies. 	In 	fact, 	these 	surreal 	forms 	were 	not
entirely 	without 	precedent, 	since 	it 	seems 	clear 	that
Gaudi 	(who 	had 	worked 	briefly 	in 	North 	Africa) 	knew
of the 	mud constructions of the Berbers, 	with 	their own
inspiration 	in 	natural 	forms, 	their 	curious 	hermetic
imagery, 	and 	their 	manifestation 	of animist 	beliefs.
The 	richness 	ofGaudi's 	art 	lies 	in 	the 	reconciliation
of the fantastic 	and 	the 	practical, 	the 	subjective 	and 	the
scientific, 	the spiritual and 	the material. 	His 	fortns 	were
never 	arbitrary, 	but 	rooted 	in 	structural 	principles 	and
in 	an 	elaborate 	private 	world 	of social 	and 	emblematic
meanings. 	The 	structure 	of 	the 	Sagrada 	Familia 	and
designs 	like 	that 	for 	the 	crypt 	of 	the 	Santa 	Coloma 	de
Cervello 	(begim 	in 	1898). 	were 	based 	on 	the 	optimiz-
ation 	of 	structural 	forces 	which 	led 	the 	architect 	to
variations 	on 	parabolic 	forms. 	Gaudi 	was 	thus 	much
more of a 	'Rationalist' 	than 	his 	work 	would 	lead 	one 	to
believe 	on 	superficial 	inspection. 	But 	this 	appellation
does 	not 	do 	him 	justice 	either, 	for 	he 	was 	deeply
religious 	and 	believed 	that 	the 	material 	qualities 	of
architecture 	must 	be 	the 	outer 	manifestation 	of 	a
spiritual 	order. 	He 	intuited the 	presence of this 	order 	in
the 	structures 	of 	nature 	which 	he 	felt 	to 	be 	a 	direct
reflection 	of 	the 	Divine 	Mind. 	The 	'laws' 	of 	structure,
then, 	were 	not 	mere 	laws 	of 	materialist 	physics, 	but
were 	evidence 	of 	the 	Creator. 	The 	parabola, 	in
particular, 	with 	its 	beautiful 	economy, 	became 	an
emblem 	for 	the 	sacral 	(fig, 	2.9).
Thus 	Gaudi's 	vocabulary 	was 	infused 	with 	an
elaborate symbolism 	for which 	the Gothic 	revival of his
youth 	had 	provided 	a 	useful, 	conventional 	starting-
point. 	His 	pantheism, 	like 	Ruskin's, 	extended 	to 	the
smallest 	mineralogical 	wonders 	and 	to 	the 	grandest 	of
natural 	forces. 	These 	features 	of 	nature 	were 	ab-
stracted 	and 	expressed 	in 	a 	vocabulary 	loaded 	with
metaphor 	and 	association. 	It 	is 	little 	wonder 	that 	the
Surrealist 	generation 	of 	the 	twenties 	(particularly 	his
fellow 	Catalan 	Salvador 	Dali) 	should 	have 	felt 	such 	an
affinity 	for 	his 	work. 	For 	in 	Gaudi 	at 	his 	most 	bizarre
there 	is 	the 	sensation 	of 	contact 	with 	deep 	psychic
forces 	and 	irrational 	patterns 	of imaginative 	thought.
Gaudi's 	completely 	personal 	late 	style 	first 	emerged
in 	the design 	for 	the 	Park 	Giiell, 	carried 	out 	between
1900 	and 	1911. 	Beast-like 	benches 	embedded 	with
fragments 	of 	coloured 	tile 	mark 	off 	the 	edges 	of 	the
stepped 	terraces 	olTering 	views 	over 	the 	city. 	There 	are
nightmarish 	underground 	grottoes 	suggestive 	of dark
clearings 	in 	some subterranean 	forest, 	and 	steps which
fiow 	like 	lava.
Gaudi's 	principal 	secular 	works 	were 	conceived 	in

-- 31 of 420 --

50 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
parallel 	with 	the 	park, 	beginning 	with 	the 	Casa 	BatUo
of 	1905-7. 	a 	remodelling 	of a 	block 	of flats 	(fig. 	2.10).
Here 	a 	virtual 	sport 	of 	spotting 	analogies 	can 	be 	(and
has 	been) 	played. 	Thus 	some 	critics 	have 	emphasized
the 	maritime 	references 	of 	waves, 	corals, 	fishbones,
and 	gaping jaws, 	while 	others 	have 	commented 	on 	the
dragon-like 	roof and 	the 	possible 	religious 	significance
of this 	as 	an 	allegory 	of 	good 	and 	evil. 	Whether 	such
analogies 	strike 	close 	to 	Gaudi's 	intentions 	may 	never
be 	known, 	but 	they 	suggest 	the 	powerful 	impact 	of the
architect's 	forms 	on 	the 	imagination.
In 	the 	Casa 	Mila 	of 	1 905-7. 	the 	plastic 	conception 	of
swirling 	curves 	was 	applied 	not 	just 	to 	the facade 	(fig.
2.12). 	but 	to 	the 	plan 	and 	interior 	spaces 	as 	well. 	The
elevation 	is 	in 	constant 	motion 	with 	its 	deep-cut.
overlapping 	ledges. 	Once 	again 	wave 	and 	cliff 	images
come 	to 	mind 	(the 	building 	was 	known 	locally 	as 	'La
Pedrera' 	- 	the 	quarry), 	but 	it 	is 	a 	naturalism 	achieved
by 	the 	most 	sophisticated 	ornamentation 	and 	stone-
cutting. 	The 	contrived 	textures 	of 	the 	ledges 	give 	the
impression 	that 	these 	forms 	have 	come 	about 	over 	the
years 	through 	a 	process 	of gradual 	erosion.
Gaudi's 	buildings 	were 	so 	bizarre 	as 	to 	be 	inimitable
(fig. 	2.11), 	which 	naturally 	inhibited 	the 	propagation
of 	his 	style 	in 	a 	local 	tradition. 	One 	of 	the 	complaints
lodged 	against 	Art 	Nouveau 	in 	the 	first 	decade 	of 	this
century 	was 	that 	its 	propositions 	relied 	too 	completely
on 	a 	subjective 	approach, 	and 	that 	they 	were 	not
geared 	sufficiently 	to 	the 	ideal 	of 	designing 	types 	for
standardized 	mass 	production. 	This 	criticism 	has 	to 	be
taken 	with 	some 	salt. 	for. 	as 	has 	been 	shown, 	both
Guimard 	and van 	de 	Velde 	were 	able 	to 	mass-produce
standardized 	profiles 	of 	some 	visual 	complexity.
Moreover. 	Art 	Nouveau 	proved 	itself 	well 	suited 	to
repeating 	print 	processes 	in 	such 	things 	as 	posters, 	and
became 	a 	sort 	of popular 	style 	related 	to 	consumerism.
By 	the 	turn 	of 	the 	century 	it 	had 	spread 	to 	many
provincial 	centres 	which 	contributed 	their 	own
regional 	accent. 	However, 	there 	was 	some 	resistance.
In 	England, 	for 	example. 	Art 	Nouveau 	was 	regarded
with 	suspicion 	as 	a 	wily 	and 	decadent 	departure 	from
the 	sober 	aims 	of the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts. 	But 	in 	Scotland 	a
style 	of enormous 	originality, 	related 	to 	Art 	Nouveau.
was created by 	another 	uncategorizable 	individual, 	the
Glasgow 	architect 	Charles 	Rennie 	Mackintosh.
Mackintosh 	is 	important 	at 	this 	juncture 	not 	only
because 	of 	the 	imaginative 	force 	of 	his 	own 	designs,
particularly 	the Glasgow 	School 	of Art. 	of 	189 7-1 909.
but 	because 	his 	development 	encapsulated 	the 	path
beyond 	Art 	Nouveau 	towards 	a 	more 	sober 	form 	of
expression 	in 	which 	broad 	dispositions 	of 	simple
masses and sequences of dynamic spaces 	were 	stressed.
His 	style 	emerged 	independently 	of 	Horta's 	but 	from
loosely 	similar 	sources 	and 	concerns, 	and 	appeared
first 	in 	his 	decoration 	of 	Miss 	Kate 	Cranston's 	various
'tea-rooms' 	in 	Glasgow 	of 	1 897-8. 	These 	designs 	were
linear, 	abstract 	and 	heavily 	laden 	with 	Gaelic 	symbol-
ism 	and 	Celtic 	references; 	it 	comes 	as 	no 	surprise 	to
discover 	that 	the 	term 	'Spook 	School' 	was 	invented 	to
characterize 	Mackintosh 	and 	his 	circle 	(including 	his
wife). 	In 	1897 	he 	won 	the 	competition 	to 	design 	the
new 	School 	of 	Art 	in 	Glasgow. 	The 	building 	was 	to
stand 	on 	an 	almost 	impossibly 	steep 	slope, 	which
seemed 	to 	suggest 	that 	the 	main 	facade should 	be 	set 	at
the 	highest 	part 	of 	the 	site 	(fig. 	2.13). 	from 	which
access 	could 	be 	had 	to 	the 	interiors. 	The 	programme
was 	also demanding : 	the functions 	to 	be included 	were
several 	studios, 	a lecture 	theatre, 	a 	library, 	a 	room 	and
private 	studio 	for 	the 	director. 	Spaces 	to 	display 	work
and 	to 	house 	a 	permanent 	collection 	of casts 	were 	also
needed.
Mackintosh 	dealt 	with 	these 	constraints 	by 	laying
2.13 	Charles Rennie
Mackintosh. 	Glasgow
School 	of Art.
1 897-1909. 	facade.

-- 32 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	3
1
W 	GLA5Ci°W 	Kh°°L 	op 	ART.
5ECTI9N 	A. A. 	iECTIPN 	D.D
jiiii i i i i ir 	4 	birmswooD 	iouM"^
,
Olasoow. 	Ncvcmreb 	1910.
.
2.14 	Charles 	Rennie
Mackintosh. 	Glasgow
School 	of Art,
1 8^7-1909. 	sections.
out 	two 	tiers 	of 	studios 	along 	the 	north 	side 	facing
Renfrew 	Street 	(the 	high 	end 	of 	the 	site) 	and 	further
studios, 	the 	anatomy 	school, 	life 	modelling, 	the
architecture 	school, 	the 	design 	and 	composition
rooms, 	facing 	east 	and 	west. 	The 	director's 	room 	and
studio 	were 	placed 	over 	the 	entrance, 	while 	the
museum 	was 	set 	to 	the 	rear 	of the 	scheme 	at 	an 	upper
level 	where 	it 	could 	be 	top 	lit. 	The 	richness 	of 	the
scheme 	arose 	from 	the 	juxtaposition 	and 	sequence 	of
rooms 	of 	different 	sizes, 	and 	the 	orchestration 	of
different 	qualities 	of light: 	from 	the 	clever 	overlapping
of 	the 	spaces 	in 	section 	(fig. 	2.14): 	and 	from 	the 	way
the 	stairs, 	corridors, 	and 	museums 	were 	modelled 	as 	if
from 	a 	continuous 	voluine 	of 	space. 	The 	interior
movements 	and 	juxtapositions 	were 	partly 	expressed
in 	the 	dynamics 	of 	the 	exterior 	forms. 	Thus 	the 	north
elevation 	was 	a 	subtle 	fusion 	of 	symmetry 	and
asymmetry, 	in 	which 	the 	grand 	upper 	windows 	of the
main 	studios 	were 	set 	into 	massive, 	grim 	masonry
forms. 	The 	entrance 	way 	was 	emphasized 	by 	a 	cluster
of motifs 	and 	an 	arch, 	over 	which 	the 	director's 	study
was 	set 	in 	a 	recess. 	To 	the 	sides, 	the 	building's 	flanking
walls 	fell 	away 	to 	the 	lower 	portion 	of the 	site 	as 	large
expanses 	of 	subtly 	articulated 	stone 	surface, 	recalling
(among 	other 	things) 	the 	architect's 	interest 	in
regional 	farmhouse 	prototypes 	and 	Scottish 	baronial
halls. 	The 	ironwork 	on 	the 	exterior, 	in 	the 	railings 	and
in 	the 	cleaning 	brackets 	on 	the 	main 	windows, 	was
loosely 	analogous 	to 	Art 	Nouveau, 	in 	its 	abstraction 	of
natural 	motifs, 	but 	like 	the 	building 	as a 	whole, 	these
details 	spoke 	less 	of 	effete 	curves 	and 	more 	of a 	taut,
sculptural 	discipline 	(fig. 	2.1 	s).
These 	qualities 	were 	brought 	to 	the 	fore 	without
distracting 	fussiness, 	in 	the 	library 	wing 	of the 	school.

-- 33 of 420 --

>Ji%lM^->f.
\i
fH
^	^Bf
/.

-- 34 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	3 3
2.1^ 	[left) 	Charles
Rennie 	Mackintosh.
Glasgow 	School 	of Art.
1897-1909. 	detail 	of
ironwork.
2.ih{ric]ht} 	Otto
Wagner. 	Post 	Office
Savings 	Bank. 	Vienna.
1904 	(1. 	interior.
designed 	around 	1908, 	in 	which 	chiselled 	abstract
shapes 	and 	groups 	of vertical 	windows 	on 	the 	outside
(Plate 	1) 	were 	supplemented 	by 	rectangidar 	wood
brackets 	in 	the 	reading-room 	interiors. 	The 	verticalily
of 	the 	proportions 	recalls 	Art 	Nouveau. 	but 	the
stripped, 	pristine 	quality 	of 	the 	forms, 	and 	their
rectangular 	character, 	speak 	of 	a 	new 	direction. 	It 	is
understandable 	that 	Pevsner 	should 	have 	singled 	out
this 	interior 	as 	an 	early 	example 	of 	the 	sort 	of 	spatial
effects 	which 	were 	later 	to 	be 	central 	to 	the 	modern
movement.
It 	is 	therefore 	ironical 	that 	Mackintosh 	should 	have
been 	written 	off 	by 	English 	critics 	as 	dangerously
exotic, 	since 	it 	was 	precisely 	his 	geometrical 	control
and 	tendency 	to 	abstraction 	which 	appealed 	in
European 	artistic 	centres 	- 	partly 	as 	a 	support 	for 	their
own 	revulsion 	against 	the 	excesses 	of 	Art 	Nouveau.
Mackintosh 	was 	less 	appreciated 	in 	London 	than 	in
Vienna, 	where 	publications 	of his 	plans 	and 	drawings
made 	him 	known 	and 	influential, 	especially 	in
Secessionist 	circles 	around 	J.M. 	Olbrich. 	Olbrich 	and
the 	older 	Otto 	Wagner 	disliked 	both 	the 	pomposities 	of
Classical 	Academic 	design, 	and 	the 	'new 	decadence' 	of
Art 	Nouveau. 	Indeed. 	Olbrich's 	Art 	Gallery 	designed
for 	the 	Friedrichstrasse 	in 	Vienna 	in 	1898-9 was 	a
somewhat 	bizarre 	attempt 	at 	formulating 	an 	ex-
pressive 	language 	of 	pure 	geometries 	and 	massive
pylon 	forms. 	Wagner's 	Majolica 	House, 	a 	block 	of flats
built 	between 	1898 	and 	1 900. 	also 	implied 	a 	return 	to
fundamental 	architectonic 	values 	and 	to 	strict 	rec-
tilinear 	proportions, 	despite 	the 	lingering 	feeling 	of
vegetal 	motifs 	in 	soine 	of 	the 	detailing. 	In 	the 	late
1 	890s. 	in 	an 	article 	published 	in 	Dckomtiw 	Kunst
(Munich). 	August 	Endell. 	another 	Viennese 	architect,
wrote of a 	'non-historical' 	style of pure forms capable of
moving the spirit in 	a 	manner similar to the 	rhythms of
music.
They 	teach 	us 	that 	there 	can 	be 	no 	new 	form, 	that
all 	possibilities 	have 	been 	exhausted 	in 	the 	styles 	of
the 	past, 	and 	that 	all 	art 	lies 	in 	an 	individually
modified 	use 	of old 	forms. 	It 	even 	extends 	to 	.selling
the 	pitiful 	eclecticism 	of the 	last decades 	as 	the 	new
style.
To 	those 	with 	understanding, 	this 	despondency
is 	simply 	laughable. 	For 	they 	can 	clearly 	see. 	that
we 	are 	not 	only 	at 	the 	beginning 	of a 	new 	stylistic
phase, 	but 	at 	the 	same 	time 	at 	the 	threshold 	of a
completely 	new 	Art. 	An 	Art 	with 	forms 	which
signify 	nothing, 	and 	remind 	us 	of nothing, 	which
arouse 	our 	souls 	as 	deeply 	and 	as 	strongly 	as 	music
has 	always 	been 	able 	to 	do 	. 	.
.
This 	is 	the 	power 	of form 	upon 	the 	mind, 	a 	direct,
immediate 	influence 	without 	any 	intermediary
stage 	. 	. 	. 	(me 	of direct 	empathy.
r 	"iff 	ill'
In 	1895. 	Otto 	Wagner 	published 	Moderne 	Architek-
tw: 	in 	which 	he 	spoke 	of 	the 	need 	for 	architecture 	to
orientate 	itself 	to 	'modern 	life', 	and 	recommended
qualities 	of simplicity 	and 	'almost 	military uniformity'.
Moreover, 	he 	argued 	that 	the 	new 	style 	should 	be 	a
'realist' 	one, 	which 	seems 	to 	have 	implied 	a 	direct
expression 	of 	the 	means 	of 	construction 	and 	an
admiration 	for 	modern 	techniques 	and 	materials.
Finally, 	he 	seems 	to 	have 	felt 	that 	flat, 	slab-like cornices
and 	horizontal 	lines 	should 	be 	employed.
If 	we 	follow 	Wagner 	from 	his 	late 	nineteenth-
century designs 	to the 	Vienna 	Post Office 	Savings 	Bank
of 	1904-6 	(fig. 	2.16). 	we 	enter 	an 	entirely 	different
world 	from 	that 	of 	Art 	Nouveau. 	a 	world 	in 	which 	a
nuts 	and 	bolts 	rationality 	and 	a 	stable 	and 	dignified
order 	have 	replaced 	the 	dynamic 	tendrils 	and
curvaceous 	effects. 	Indeed. 	Vienna, 	and 	a 	little 	later
Berlin 	and Paris, 	were 	to 	be amongthe strongholds of a
reaction 	against 	Art 	Nouveau 	which 	acquired 	increas-
ing 	momentum 	in 	the 	first 	decade. 	This 	reaction 	was
fed in 	part by the Arts and 	Crafts 	ideals of simplicity 	and
integrity: 	by 	an 	abstract 	conception 	of 	Classicism 	as
something 	less 	to 	do 	with 	the 	use 	of 	the 	Orders, 	than
with 	a 	feeling 	for 	the 	'essential' 	Classical 	values 	of
symmetry 	and 	clarity 	of 	proportion: 	and 	by 	a 	sense
that 	the 	architect 	must 	strive 	to 	give 	expression 	to 	the
values 	of 	the 	modern 	world 	through 	frank 	and
straightforward 	solutions 	to 	architectural 	problems 	in
which 	disciplines 	of 	function 	and 	structure 	must 	play

-- 35 of 420 --

34 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
1.1/ 	Ikj't} 	Josef
HofI'mann. 	Palais
Stoclet. 	Brussels. 	1905.
detail 	of porch.
an 	increasing, 	and 	attached 	ornament 	a 	decreasing,
role.
Apart 	from 	Wagner, 	who 	was 	already 	in 	his 	early
sixties 	at 	the 	turn 	of 	the 	century, 	the 	two 	chief
exponents 	of a 	new 	architecture 	in 	Vienna 	were 	Josef
Hoffmann 	(1870-1954) 	and 	Adolf 	Loos
(1870-1935). 	Hoffmann 	founded 	the 	Wiener
Werkstatte 	in 	1 	903 	as 	a 	centre 	of activity 	in 	the 	field 	of
decoration. 	In 	his design 	for the 	Purkersdt)rf convalesc-
ent 	home 	(1903), 	he 	reduced 	the 	walls 	to 	thin 	planar
surfaces. 	His 	greatest 	opportunity 	came 	in 	1905 	with
the 	commission 	of 	a 	luxurious 	mansion 	to 	be 	built
outside 	Brussels 	for 	a 	Belgian 	financier 	who 	had 	lived
in 	Vienna. 	The 	Palais 	Stoclet 	was 	to 	be 	a 	sort 	of
suburban 	palace 	of 	the 	arts 	in 	which 	Adolphe 	and
Suzanne 	Stoclet 	would 	assemble 	their 	treasures 	and
entertain 	the 	artistic 	elite 	of 	Europe, 	it 	had 	thus 	to
combine 	the 	moods 	of a 	museum, 	a 	luxury 	residence,
and 	an exemplary 	setting 	of modern 	taste.
Hoffmann 	was 	able 	to 	respond 	to 	the 	'aura' 	of 	the
programme 	in 	a 	house 	of 	immense 	sophistication,
combining 	devices 	of 	formality 	and 	informality.
characteristics of an 	honorific 	and 	a 	more 	humble 	sort
{figs. 	2.17, 	2.18). 	The 	rooms 	were 	linked 	en 	suite 	in 	a
plan 	employing 	ingenious 	changes 	of 	direction 	and
axes, 	in 	which 	such 	major 	spaces 	as 	the 	hall, 	the
dining-room 	and 	the 	music-room 	(with 	its 	little 	stage)
were 	expressed 	as 	protruding 	volumes 	in 	the 	fai;ades.
The overall 	composition 	was 	ingeniously 	balanced, 	but
asymmetrical, 	the 	main 	points 	of 	emphasis 	being 	the
fantastic 	stepped 	stair-tower 	with 	its 	attached
statuary, 	the 	bow 	windows, 	and 	the 	porte-cochere. 	The
forms 	were 	coated 	in 	thin 	stone-slab 	veneers 	detailed
with 	linear 	mouldings 	to 	accentuate 	the 	planarity. 	On
the 	interiors 	materials 	were 	stern, 	rectilinear, 	and
precise, 	and 	included 	polished 	marbles 	and 	rich 	wood
finishes. 	The 	influence 	of 	Mackintosh 	is 	felt 	in 	this
house 	(a 	prototype 	for the 	design 	was 	clearly the 	Scot's
House 	for 	an 	Art 	Lover' 	of 	1 902 ), 	but 	where 	he 	would
have 	stressed 	the 	rustic 	and 	the 	humble, 	Hoffmann
emphasized 	the 	grandiose 	and 	the 	cosmopolitan. 	The
disciplined 	elegance 	of 	the 	Stoclet 	house 	is 	enhanced
by 	the 	furnishings 	and 	by 	Klimt's 	splendid 	mural
decorations. 	As 	well 	as 	echoes 	from 	Mackintosh, 	there
are 	also 	memories of Olbrich, 	perhaps 	even 	of Schinkel.
But 	the 	Palais 	Stoclet 	is 	one 	of 	those 	designs 	where
there 	is 	little 	point 	in 	listing 	the 	sources 	and 	influences,
as 	these 	have 	been 	digested 	and 	restated 	in 	a
convincing 	personal 	style. 	In 	its 	imagery 	and 	mood 	it
portrayed 	an 	exclusive 	way 	of life 	of a 	kind 	which 	was
to 	be 	swept 	away 	by 	the 	devastation 	of the 	First 	World
War 	a 	sort 	of aristocratic 	bohemianism.
I

-- 36 of 420 --

The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the 	Problem 	of Ornament 	• 	3 5
2. 	i.S 	(;»i'/(m>l 	loscf
HolTmann, 	I'alais
Stodct. 	Brussels, 	lyos-
Adolf 	Loos's 	move 	towards 	a 	rectilinear 	and
volumetric 	simplification 	was 	even 	more 	drastic 	than
Hoffmann's. 	Loos 	was 	little 	alTected 	by 	Art 	Nouvcau, 	in
part 	because 	he 	spent 	the 	mid-i<S<-)()s 	in 	America 	(a
country 	he 	praised 	highly 	for 	its 	plumbing 	and 	its
bridges); 	in 	part 	because 	he 	seems 	to 	have 	sensed 	that
that 	movement's 	reaction 	against 	the 	'dead 	forms' 	of
the 	academy 	was 	swinging 	too 	far 	towards 	the 	wilful,
the 	personal 	and 	the 	decorative 	- 	all 	of which 	he 	felt 	to
be 	inimical 	to 	lasting 	achievement 	in 	art. 	But 	Loos
brought 	the 	perspective 	too 	of 	someone 	who 	had
reflected 	on 	the 	form 	of many 	simple 	everyday 	objects.
which 	he 	contrasted 	to 	the 	pretentious 	inventions 	of
much 	self-conscious 	art. 	Some 	of his 	most 	penetrating
essays 	are 	on 	such 	things 	as 	gentlemen's 	suits,
sportswear, 	and 	Michael 	Thonet's 	mass-produced
wooden 	chairs. 	He 	seems 	to 	have 	felt 	that 	these 	were
the 	objects 	which 	gave 	evidence 	of. 	as 	it 	were, 	an
unconscious 	style.
Up 	to 	19 10 	much 	of 	Loos's 	design 	effort 	went 	into
small-scale 	conversions. 	In 	his 	few 	house 	designs 	of
that 	period 	he 	reduced 	the 	external 	\focabulary 	to
rectangular 	stucco 	boxes 	punctured 	by 	simple 	open-
ings, 	without 	even 	the 	reminiscence 	of a 	cornice 	or 	a

-- 37 of 420 --

36 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
plinth. 	Usually 	his 	interiors 	were 	more 	elaborate, 	yet
still 	distinguished 	by 	an 	overall 	rectangular 	control.
and 	in 	the 	case 	of 	the 	Karntner 	Bar 	of 	1907. 	clearly
influenced 	by 	a 	stripped 	Classical 	tendency. 	Perhaps
the 	outstanding 	design 	of Loos's 	mature 	years 	was 	the
Steiner 	House 	in 	Vienna 	of 	1910 	(fig. 	2.19). 	where
architectural 	effect 	relied 	on 	the 	adroit 	placement 	of
large 	plate-glass 	windows 	in 	stripped 	and 	undecorated
planar 	surfaces. 	However, 	it 	is 	still 	a 	long 	way 	(in
meaning 	as 	well as 	form) 	from 	this 	villa, 	with 	its 	'neo-
classical' 	plan 	and 	its 	strict 	symmetry, 	to 	the 	inter-
penetrating 	planes 	and 	dynamic 	asymmetries 	of 	the
International 	Style 	of 	the 	1920s. 	Even 	so. 	the
achievement 	of 	such 	a 	drastic 	simplicity 	within 	a
decade 	and 	a 	half 	of 	the 	beginnings 	of 	Art 	Nouveau,
and 	a 	full 	decade 	before 	Le 	Corbusier's 	white, 	cubic
villa 	designs 	of the 	1920s, 	is 	worthy 	of comment.
In 	fact, 	it 	is 	by 	no 	means 	certain 	that 	Loos's 	pre-war
designs 	had 	much 	influence 	on 	the 	emergence 	of 	the
International 	Style 	after 	the 	First 	World 	War. 	His
theories, 	especially 	on 	ornament, 	were 	far 	better
known, 	perhaps because they 	put 	into words a 	number
of 	concurrent, 	but 	not 	necessarily 	connected 	pre-
judices, 	which 	the 	later 	generation 	was 	determined
should 	be 	a 	unified 	doctrine. 	As 	a 	polemicist. 	Loos 	was
brilliant: 	in 	an 	article 	entitled 	'Ornament 	and 	Crime',
he 	inveighed 	against 	'ornament', 	on 	the 	grounds 	that
it 	was 	evidence 	of a 	decadent 	culture.
Children 	are 	amoral, 	and 	- 	by 	our 	standards 	- 	so
arc 	Papuans. 	If a 	Papuan 	slaughters 	an 	enemy 	and
eats 	him. 	that 	doesn't 	make 	him 	a 	criminal. 	But 	if a
modern 	man 	kills 	someone 	and 	eats 	him, 	he 	must
be 	either 	a 	criminal 	or 	a 	degenerate. 	The 	Papuans
tattoo 	themselves, 	decorate 	their 	boats, 	their 	oars,
everything 	they 	can 	get 	their 	hands 	on. 	But 	a
modern 	man 	who 	tattoos 	himself is 	either 	a
criminal 	or 	a 	degenerate. 	Why, 	there 	are 	prisons
where 	eighty 	percent 	of the 	convicts 	are 	tattooed,
and 	tattooed 	men 	who 	are 	not 	in 	prison 	are 	either
latent 	criminals 	or 	degenerate 	aristocrats. 	When 	a
tattooed 	man 	dies 	at 	liberty, 	it 	simply 	means 	that 	he
hasn't 	had 	time 	to 	commit 	his 	crime. 	. 	. 	. 	What 	is
natural 	to 	children 	and 	Papuan 	savages 	is 	a
symptom 	of degeneration 	in 	modern 	man.
I 	have 	therefore 	evolved 	the 	following 	maxim,
and 	pronounce 	it 	to 	the 	world: 	the 	evolution 	of
culture 	marches 	with 	the 	elimination 	of ornament
from 	useful 	objects.
Translated 	into 	the 	situation 	in 	which 	Loos 	found
himself 	this 	meant 	that 	Art 	Nouveau. 	for 	all 	its
emancipation 	from 	the 	Academy, 	had 	to 	be seen 	as 	yet
another 	of 	the 	superficial 	and 	transitory 	'styles'. 	The
discovery 	of 	a 	true 	style 	for 	the 	times 	would 	be 	found
when 	ornament 	was 	done 	away 	with, 	and 	essential
underlying 	qualities 	of 	form, 	proportion, 	clarity, 	and
measure 	were 	allowed 	to 	emerge 	unadorned. 	At 	least,
this 	is 	what 	Adolf 	Loos 	believed, 	and 	there 	was 	a
generation 	of 	later 	architects 	ready 	to 	follow 	this 	lead
in 	its 	search 	for 	the 	supposed 	'universal 	style' 	for
modern 	times.
2. 1 g 	Adolf Loos. 	Steiner
House. 	Vienna, 	19 10,
rear view.

-- 38 of 420 --

3. 	Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering 	Tradition,
and 	Reinforced 	Concrete
Living 	architecture 	is 	that 	which 	faithfully 	expresses 	its 	time. 	We 	shall 	seek 	it
in 	all 	domains 	of construction. 	We 	shall 	choose 	works 	that, 	strictly
subordinated 	to 	their 	use 	and 	realized 	hy 	the 	judicious 	use 	of material, 	attain
beauty 	by 	the 	disposition 	and 	harmonious 	proportions 	of the 	necessary
elements 	of which 	they 	are 	made 	up.
A, 	Ferret, 	1923
While 	Art 	Nouveau 	appeared 	to 	brealc 	with 	the 	bonds
of the past, 	to be 	a new style, 	it was soon 	perceived to be
a 	subjective 	creation 	insufficiently 	rooted 	in 	lasting
principles 	and 	incompletely 	attuned 	to 	the 	means 	and
needs 	of 	an 	industrial 	society. 	In 	this 	view 	even 	men
like 	Horta 	and 	Guimard, 	who 	had 	approached 	the
heart 	of 	the 	matter 	of 	a 	new 	style, 	were 	lumped
together 	with 	the 	most 	facile 	Art 	Nouveau 	decorators.
In 	part 	the 	reaction 	was 	impelled 	by 	vaguely 	moral
yearnings 	for 	the 	stern 	and 	unadorned, 	in 	part 	by
Rationalist 	ideas 	which 	required 	a 	practical 	justifica-
tion 	for 	formal 	effects. 	This 	was 	somewhat 	ironical
because, 	as 	has 	been 	shown, 	Rationalism 	inspired
some 	of the 	more 	disciplined 	creations 	of Art 	Nouveau.
By 	1905, 	then, 	the 	style 	which 	had 	so 	quickly
flowered 	was 	already 	beginning 	to 	wither; 	but 	after 	it.
things 	could 	not 	be 	the 	same 	again. 	It 	opened 	up 	a
language 	of 	abstraction 	and 	implied 	new 	ways 	in
which 	nature's 	lessons 	could 	be 	incorporated 	into
architecture. 	A 	fruitful 	nadition 	of expressive, 	organic
form 	was 	founded, 	which would 	culminate 	in 	the 	free
experimentation 	of Erich 	Mendelsohn, 	and 	the emotive
creations 	of the 	so-called 	'Amsterdam 	School' 	around
the 	end 	of the 	First 	World 	War. 	More 	important 	still 	in
the 	shorter 	term 	was 	the reaction 	against 	Art 	Nouveau.
This 	took 	a 	number 	of 	different 	forms. 	In 	Vienna,
Hoffmann 	and 	hoos 	suggested 	that 	the 	way 	forward 	to
a 	true 	modern 	style 	lay 	in 	increasing 	formal 	simplifica-
tion; 	in 	Berlin, 	Behrcns 	resorted 	to 	Classical 	principles
which 	he 	attempted 	to 	restate 	in 	a 	new 	form; 	in 	Paris.
Perret 	sought 	a 	formal 	discipline 	in 	the 	constraints 	and
creative 	potentials 	of 	new 	constructional 	systems.
especially 	reinforced 	concrete, 	in 	the 	belief 	that 	this
would 	lead 	to 	genuine 	architectural 	forms 	of 	lasting
quality.
This 	last 	notion, 	of 	course, 	stemmed 	from 	the 	ideas
of 	Viollet-le-Duc, 	who 	had 	influenced 	some 	of 	the
structural 	inventiveness of Art 	Nouveau. 	It 	has 	already
been 	suggested 	that 	his 	theories 	were 	at 	times 	over-
mechanical, 	but 	they 	still 	had 	an 	immense 	impact 	on
those 	who 	felt, 	at 	the 	turn 	of 	the 	century, 	that 	a
language 	based 	on 	'U-uth 	to 	structure 	and 	truth 	to 	the
programme' 	might 	be 	the 	best 	antidote 	to 	academic
revivalism 	on 	the 	one 	hand 	and 	to 	personal 	whimsy on
the 	other. 	Here 	one 	must 	mention 	the 	role 	of 	the
nineteenth-century 	engineering 	tradition 	which 	had
already 	demonstrated 	the 	possibility 	of 	new 	forms 	in
new 	materials, 	and 	which 	Viollet-le-Duc 	had 	himself
singled 	out 	in 	contrast 	to 	the 	'dead 	languages' 	of 	the
architects.
. 	. 	. 	naval 	architects 	and 	mechanical 	engineers 	do
not. 	when 	building 	a 	steamship 	or 	a 	locomotive,
seek 	to 	recall 	the 	forms 	of sailing 	ships 	or 	harnessed
stage 	coaches 	of the 	Louis 	xiv 	period. 	They 	obey
unquestioningly 	the 	new 	principles 	which 	are
given 	them 	and 	produce 	their 	own 	character 	and
proper 	style.
One 	effect 	of 	Viollet-le-Duc's 	opinions 	was 	to 	found 	a
tradition 	of 	architectural 	history 	in 	which 	the 	role 	of
practicality 	in 	great works of the 	past was 	overstressed.
Thus 	Auguste 	Choisy. 	in 	his 	HisWire 	dc 	ianhilfcturc 	of
1899. 	spoke 	of Gothic 	architecture 	as 	the 	triumph 	of

-- 39 of 420 --

38 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
logic 	in 	art', 	whose 	form 	was 	'governed 	not 	by
traditional 	models, 	but 	by 	its 	function 	and 	by 	its
function 	alone.' 	This 	view 	was 	reinforced 	by 	stun-
ningly 	simple 	drawings 	in 	which 	buildings 	were
portrayed 	as 	structural 	diagrams, 	as 	if 	structure 	and
only 	structure 	had 	been 	the 	architect's 	concern 	(fig.
3.1). 	The 	implication 	of 	the 	Rationalist 	position
seemed 	to 	be: 	if only 	modern 	architects 	would 	think 	as
clearly 	as 	these 	predecessors 	and 	concentrate 	on
function 	and 	structure, 	then 	their 	results 	would 	have
the 	same 	authenticity.
In 	a 	sense 	both 	Viollet-le-Duc 	and 	Choisy 	were
projecting backwards 	the values 	of nineteenth-century
engineers. 	The 	stunning 	new 	eflects 	of visual 	lightness
and 	transparency 	of 	buildings 	like 	Paxton's 	Crystal
Palace 	of 	1851 	(fig. 	3.2) 	or 	Baltard's 	market 	sheds 	at
Les 	Halles 	seemed 	indeed 	to 	be 	traceable 	to 	a 	judicious
attention 	to 	the 	demands 	of programme 	and 	structure:
but 	did 	these 	buildings 	in 	iron, 	and 	later 	utilitarian
structures 	in 	steel, 	constitute 	a 	new 	nnlutccturc} 	Even
those 	who 	could 	admire 	the 	structural 	feats 	(and 	the
occasional 	formal 	elegance) 	of 	engineering 	realized
that 	a 	certain 	poetic 	character 	of 	form 	might 	be
missing. 	Thus, 	while 	the 	Rationalists 	and 	the 	en-
gineers, 	each 	in 	their 	difl'erent 	ways, 	seemed 	able 	to
emancipate 	themselves 	from 	revivalism, 	they 	faced
another 	danger: 	the 	proliferation 	of a 	bland, 	material-
istic 	functionalism 	lacking 	in 	the 	quality 	of 	a 	true
expressive 	style.
One 	architect 	to 	feel 	such 	dilemmas 	acutely 	towards
the 	end 	of 	the 	century 	was 	the 	American 	Louis
Sullivan, 	who 	confronted 	the 	issue 	directly 	in 	trying 	to
define a 	genuine 	form 	for 	the 	tall 	office 	building 	based
on 	a 	steel-cage 	construction. 	Influenced 	by 	Viollet-le-
Duc. 	he 	attempted 	to 	make 	the 	form 	'follow' 	from 	the
function, 	but 	discovered 	that 	a 	number 	of 	arrange-
ments 	might 	be 	equally 	tenable 	and 	that 	the 	brute
heap 	of 	matter 	which 	was 	the 	tall 	building 	could 	only
acquire 	aesthetic 	value 	through 	an 	intuitive 	inter-
vention 	on 	the 	part 	of 	the 	artist. 	Although 	Sullivan
disclaimed 	the 	value 	of 'rules 	and 	other 	impedimenta'.
^. 	1 	(/ii'/ou'/ifO 	Auguste
Choisy. 	plate 	from
Histuirc lie I'architecturc,
1894, 	showing 	Hagia
Sophia: 	architectural
form 	as 	the 	'rational'
result 	of structure.
?.2 	ihi'low) 	Joseph
Paxton. 	Crystal Palace,
London. 	1851.

-- 40 of 420 --

Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	•	
39
3.5 	{below) 	Louis
Sullivan. 	VVainvvright
Buildinj'. 	St. 	Louis.
Missouri. 	iSys-
5.4 	(below
right) 	Frani;ois
Hennebique. 	trabeated
system 	for reinforced
concrete. 	1892.
his 	solution 	lor 	the 	skyscraper 	was 	guided 	by 	the
tripartite 	division 	of 	the 	Classical 	order 	(base, 	shaft,
and 	capital) 	and 	was 	reliant 	on 	analogies 	with 	natural
form 	(fig. 	3.?). 	Sullivan 	had 	discovered 	that 	function
and 	structure 	could 	not 	on 	their 	own 	'generate' 	an
adequate 	form, 	without 	the 	intervention 	of 	highly
abstracted 	historical 	or 	natural 	examples. 	Indeed,
Viollct-le-l)uc's 	own 	clumsy 	attempts 	at 	evolving 	a
system 	'true to 	iron' 	had 	been 	influenced 	by 	medieval
precedents, 	and 	perhaps 	even 	by 	the 	forms 	of bones.
So 	history 	had 	not 	dropped 	out 	of 	the 	picture
completely. 	Quite 	the 	contrary, 	for 	the 	question 	in 	a
sense 	became: 	which 	qualities 	abstracted 	from 	tradit-
ion 	might 	best 	serve 	the 	forms 	suggested 	inherently 	by
new 	construction 	techniques.- 	At 	any 	rate, 	a 	query 	of
this 	sort 	underlay 	many 	of 	the 	experiments 	of 	the
early 	pioneers 	of a 	reinforced-concrete 	architecture.
Concrete 	had 	been 	employed 	by 	Roman 	and 	Early
Christian 	architects 	but 	had 	then 	dropped 	out 	of 	use
through most 	of 	the 	Middle 	Ages 	and 	Renaissance. 	It
was 	not 	until 	the 	second 	half of the 	nineteenth 	century
that 	the material 	was 	fully 	explored 	again, 	but 	usually
for 	mundane 	purposes 	where 	its 	cheapness, 	its 	wide
spans 	and 	its 	fireproof 	character 	all 	recommended 	it.
The 	invention 	of 	reinforcing, 	whereby 	steel 	rods 	were
inserted 	to 	increase 	the 	strength, 	belonged 	to 	the
18705. 	Ernest 	Ransome 	in 	America 	and 	Francois
Hennebique 	in 	France, 	each 	evolved 	frame 	systems
employing 	this 	principle 	(fig. 	3.4). 	These 	proved 	to 	be
well 	suited 	to 	the 	creation 	of 	open-plan 	work-spaces
with 	large 	windows 	where 	fire 	had 	previously 	been 	a
danger. 	Hennebique's system 	employed 	slender 	vert-
ical 	posts, 	thin 	lateral 	beams 	on 	brackets, 	and 	floor
slabs. 	The 	result 	was 	somewhat 	like 	a 	timber 	frame,
which 	was 	scarcely 	surprising 	since 	the 	form-work
was 	generally 	made 	from 	wood. 	But 	concrete, 	of 	all
materials, 	was 	one 	of the 	most 	flexible, 	one 	of the 	least
determinant 	of form. 	It 	relied 	on 	the 	shape of the 	mould
and 	the 	shaping 	intelligence 	of 	the 	designer. 	Some
forms 	rather 	than 	others 	were certainly 	more 	logical 	in
certain 	situations: 	but 	the 	material 	in 	and 	of 	itself did
not 	generate 	a 	vocabulary.
This 	became 	all 	the more obvious when 	architects 	in
the 	last 	few 	years 	of the 	nineteenth 	century 	attempted
to 	discover 	a 	style 	based 	on 	the 	material. 	Where 	one
designer 	might 	argue 	that 	the 	malleable 	character
made 	it 	natural 	for 	Art 	Nouveau 	expression, 	another
might 	emphasize 	the 	role 	of a 	frame 	and 	panel 	system
and 	claim 	the 	value 	of Gothic 	antecedents 	- or 	even 	of
steel 	and 	glass 	ones. 	A 	similar 	range 	of positions 	might

-- 41 of 420 --

40 	The 	Formative Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
vrs
H' 	m

-- 42 of 420 --

Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering 	Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	• 	41

-- 43 of 420 --

42 	TheFormativeStrandsof Modern 	Architecture
were 	expressed 	by 	slight 	overhangs 	and 	a 	variable
placement 	of 	windovi^ 	depths 	within 	the 	U-shaped
recess. 	The 	underlying 	rectangular 	frame 	was 	not
exposed 	directly, 	but 	its 	presence 	was 	suggested 	by
contrasting 	colours 	and 	textures 	in 	the 	tiles 	of 	the
fapade. 	while 	the 	theme 	of 	infill, 	non-weight-bearing
panels 	was 	suggested 	by 	recessed, 	floral-designed
ceramic 	surfaces. 	At 	the 	sixth 	storey, 	though, 	the
frame 	broke 	free 	of the wall 	surfaces, 	giving 	some 	hint
of the 	sort 	of airy 	and 	transparent 	effects 	to 	be 	pursued
in 	modern 	architecture 	a 	generation 	later 	(fig. 	3.6 1.
The 	result 	of 	Ferret's 	careful 	attention 	to 	proportion,
detail 	and 	interval 	was 	a 	calculated 	work 	of 	great
sobriety 	and 	repose. 	The 	whole 	was 	suffused 	with 	a
serene 	Classicism, 	yet 	without 	the 	overt 	use 	of 	the
Classical orders. 	The 	Rue 	Franklin 	flats, 	along 	with 	the
later wing of the 	Glasgow 	School 	of Art by 	Mackintosh.
the 	Stoclet 	house 	by 	Hoffmann, 	the 	Larkin 	building 	by
Wright, 	the 	A\IC 	Turbinenfabrik 	in 	Berlin 	by 	l?ehrens.
and perhaps a 	handful of others, 	must certainly 	rank 	as
one 	of 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	the 	early 	modern
movement. 	However, 	part 	of its 	strength 	lay. 	precisely,
in 	the 	authoritative 	way 	in 	which 	it 	announced 	the
potentials 	of a 	new 	material 	in 	a 	phraseology 	rooted 	in
tra(//(;o)i 	(Plate 	2).
In 	1905, 	Ferret 	made 	a 	further 	step 	by 	leaving 	the
concrete 	completely 	exposed 	(though, 	admittedly,
protected 	by 	white 	paint) 	in 	the 	garage 	design 	at 	51
Rue 	de 	Ponthieu. 	It 	is 	possible 	that 	he 	felt 	freer 	to 	do
this 	in 	a 	building 	whose 	function 	lay 	closer 	to 	the
concrete 	'warehouse 	aesthetic' 	of 	Hennebique. 	than
did 	bourgeois 	apartments. 	And 	it 	may 	be 	that 	in 	his
articulation 	of 	the 	garage 	fa(;ade 	(fig. 	3.9). 	Ferret 	was
reacting 	to 	knowledge 	of 	Chicago 	frame 	buildings. In
any 	case, 	the 	result 	transcends 	its 	influences 	in 	a 	clear
statement 	infused 	with 	a 	true 	personal 	style. 	The
concrete 	frame 	on 	the 	interior 	allowed 	considerable
flexibility 	in 	planning 	to 	facilitate 	the 	circulation 	and
parking 	of 	cars. 	In 	less 	sensitive 	hands 	this 	interior
organization 	might 	well 	have 	led 	to 	a 	crude 	as-
semblage 	of 	rectangular 	openings 	and 	stanchions 	in
the facade. 	Ferret 	brought 	order 	to 	the design 	by 	subtle
placement 	of the 	window 	panes 	to 	give 	the 	right 	sense
of depth, 	and 	by 	organizing 	the 	pattern 	of vertical 	and
horizontal 	visual 	stresses 	- 	the 	apparent, 	not 	just 	the
actual 	structure 	- 	in 	a 	simple 	rhythm 	of 	primary 	and
secondary 	accents. 	The 	armature 	of 	the 	whole
composition 	was 	defined 	by 	the 	stripped 	'pilasters'
rising 	from 	top 	to 	bottom 	supporting 	the 	abstracted
'cornice' 	at 	the 	top.
There 	can 	be 	little doubt 	that 	Ferret 	had 	by 	this 	time
decided 	that 	the 	'correct' 	forms 	for 	concrete 	were
rectangular 	ones, 	in 	part 	because 	of 	his 	aesthetic
prejudices, 	in 	part 	because 	of the 	simplicity 	of making
rectangular 	timber 	form-work 	from 	which 	the 	con-
1.9 	Auguste 	Ferret,
tliirage 	at 	5 1 	Rue de
Ponthieu. 	Paris. 	1905
facade.
3.10 	Auguste 	Ferret.
Theatre des 	Champs-
lilysees. 	Paris, 	191 1.
diagram 	of concrete
frame.
rajyj^^

-- 44 of 420 --

Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	• 	43
VI 	I 	Albert 	Kahii,
automohilc 	factory 	in
concrete. 	IJetroit.
Michigan, 	c. 	1904,
Crete 	was 	cast 	in 	simple 	standard 	sections; 	thus 	his
concrete 	vocabulary 	was 	reminiscent 	in 	some ways 	of
wooden-t'rame 	buildings 	of the 	past. 	But 	his 	father 	had
trained 	him 	in 	the 	intricacies 	of 	stone-cutting 	and
stereotomy. 	and 	the 	mouldings 	and 	details 	of 	Perrefs
designs, 	which 	he 	could 	usually 	justify 	on 	extremely
practical 	grounds 	(e.g., 	as drip 	mouldings), 	seem 	to 	be
historical 	relatives 	of the flat 	wall 	and 	bracket 	elements
observable 	in 	the 	French 	Classical 	tradition 	running
back 	to 	the 	seventeenth 	century. 	It 	is 	intriguing 	to
speculate 	how 	the 	Abbe 	Laugier 	(the 	mid-eighteenth
century 	theorist 	mentioned 	in 	Chapter 	1 	) 	might 	have
reacted 	to 	Ferret's 	work 	if he 	could 	have 	been 	brought
back 	to 	life 	in 	1902. 	One 	suspects 	that 	he 	would 	have
recognized 	the 	intention 	of 	restating 	certain 	essen-
tials 	of 	Classicism 	for 	new 	purposes 	and 	in 	new
materials 	immediately. 	One 	guesses 	too 	that 	he 	might
have 	respected 	the 	sentiinents 	underlying 	Perret's
dictum 	that 	'one 	must 	never 	allow 	into a 	building 	any
element 	destined 	solely 	for 	ornament, 	but 	rather 	turn
to 	ornament 	all 	the 	parts 	necessary 	for 	the 	support.'
By 	1911 	the 	Pcrret 	brothers 	had 	become 	the
undisputed 	leaders 	in 	concrete 	construction 	in 	France.
They 	were 	approached 	by 	the 	impresario 	Gabriel
Anstuc, 	who 	wished 	to 	erect 	a 	new 	theatre 	and 	hoped
that 	Perret 	might 	help 	to 	implement 	a 	design 	by 	Henry
van 	de 	Velde. 	This 	collaboration 	was 	short-lived 	- 	as
might 	have 	been 	expected 	- 	and 	the 	Champs-Elysees
Theatre 	was 	carried 	out to Perret's 	design 	with 	fagades
based 	on 	van 	de 	Velde's 	elevations. 	Once 	again 	Perret
demonstrated 	the 	depth 	of 	his 	Classical 	allegiances 	in
the 	use 	of 	elements 	recalling 	stripped 	pilasters 	and
cornices. 	On 	the 	interior, 	the 	spanning 	power 	of
concrete 	was 	used 	to 	minimize 	interruptions 	of 	the
view 	of 	the 	stage. 	The 	concrete 	frame 	of 	the 	building
was 	almost 	a 	work 	of 	art 	in 	its 	own 	right 	(tig. 	3.10).
and 	was 	certainly 	to 	become 	a 	inajor 	inspiration 	to 	the
generation 	which 	created 	the 	modern 	movement 	of
the 	1920s: 	the 	external 	treatment 	of the 	theatre 	they
preferred to 	forget, 	as 	its 	traditionalism 	was 	not 	in 	tune
with 	their 	aims.
In 	the 	United 	States, 	in 	parallel 	with 	Hennebique's
pioneering 	experiments, 	the 	engineer 	Ernest 	Ransomc
and 	the 	architect 	Albert 	Kahn 	discovered 	many
applications 	for 	the 	new 	material 	in 	factory, 	ware-
house, 	and 	even 	grain 	silo 	design. 	Kahn 	devoted 	much
of 	his 	life 	to 	the 	design 	of car 	factories, 	worked 	closely
with 	Henry 	Ford. 	and. 	by 	1 90S. 	was already producing
his 	characteristic 	framed 	buildings 	in 	and 	around
Detroit 	(fig. 	5. 1 	1 	1. 	He 	found 	concrete 	to 	be 	almost 	ideal

-- 45 of 420 --

44 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
5.12 	Robert 	Maillart,
concrete 	bridge.
Tavanasa. 	Switzerland.
c. 	1905.
in 	handling 	such 	fundamental 	requirements 	as
cheapness, 	standardization, 	clear 	lighting, 	extensive
ventilation, 	and 	unobstructed, 	flexible 	interiors
through 	which 	the 	assembly 	line 	could 	be 	threaded. 	A
characteristic 	morphology 	of 	grid 	plans, 	and 	simple
rectangular 	elevations 	of pleasing 	proportion 	resulted.
But 	Kahn 	never 	thought 	of 	his 	utilitarian 	designs 	as
Architecture 	with 	a 	large 	'A': 	it 	was 	the 	European
avant-garde, 	seeing 	them 	in 	photographs, 	who
referred 	to 	them 	as 	icons 	of a 	new. 	universal 	language
of architecture.
The one outstanding architect in 	the 	United States 	to
grapple 	with 	the 	potentials 	of 	the 	new 	material 	was
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	He 	was 	certainly 	attracted 	to 	it
because 	of 	its 	cheapness 	and 	because 	it 	could 	create
wide 	spans. 	Moreover, 	it 	could 	easily 	be 	moulded 	to 	his
spatial 	ideas. 	With 	his 	'Arts 	and 	Crafts' 	emphasis 	on
the 	nature 	of materials, 	Wright 	also 	thought 	it 	best 	to
leave 	the 	surfaces 	of 	concrete 	bare. 	One 	of 	his 	early
masterpieces, 	the 	Unity 	Temple 	in 	Oak 	Park 	of 	1906.
was 	constructed 	in 	concrete. 	This 	building 	is 	best
discussed 	in 	more 	detail 	in 	the 	context 	of 	Wright's
philosophy 	and 	evolving 	vocabulary 	of 	abstract 	form;
here 	it 	is 	enough 	to 	say 	that 	the 	building, 	like 	Ferret's
apartments, 	gave 	enhanced 	status 	to 	concrete, 	and
lent 	further 	weight 	to 	the 	impression 	that 	the 	'correct'
forms 	for 	the 	material 	were 	rectangular, 	stripped, 	and
abstract, 	although 	Wright 	did 	not. 	like 	Ferret, 	rely 	on
the frame.
But 	rectangular 	forms 	were 	by 	no 	means 	the 	only
ones 	suitable 	to 	concrete, 	as 	was 	well 	demonstrated 	by
the 	engineering 	feats 	of 	Eugene 	Freyssinet 	in 	France
and 	Robert 	Maillart 	the bridge 	builder 	in 	Switzerland,
in 	the 	first 	two 	decades. 	Freyssinet's 	vast 	airship
hangars 	at 	Orly 	(19 16) 	were 	parabolic 	in 	section,
while 	Maillart's 	bridges 	tended 	to 	rest 	on 	slender,
attenuated 	curved 	supports 	(fig. 	3.12). 	Max 	Berg's
lahrhunderthalle 	at 	Breslau, 	of 	1 9 1 	1 	, 	also 	made 	much
of 	the 	vast 	spanning 	potential 	of 	arcuated 	con-
struction, 	and 	suggested 	an 	expressionist, 	dynamic
tendency 	quite 	unlike 	Ferret's. 	This 	great 	variation 	of
possible 	forms 	for 	concrete 	only 	serves 	to 	emphasize
that 	the 	tendency 	to 	think 	of the 	rectangular 	forms 	of
the 	modern 	movement 	as 	somehow 	indelibly 	linked 	to
concrete 	is 	an 	oversimplification. 	The 	generation
which, 	for 	a variety of aesthetic 	and 	symbolic 	reasons,
sought 	effects 	of thin 	planarity, 	overhanging 	horizon-
tality, 	and 	geometrical 	simplicity, 	saw 	its 	forefathers 	as
being 	Ferret 	and 	Wright, 	while 	ignoring 	an 	equally
viable 	curvilinear 	tradition.

-- 46 of 420 --

«!
Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	•
45
Among 	the 	architects 	to 	provide 	a pedigree 	for 	the
later 	rectangular 	aesthetic 	was 	the 	Frenchman 	Tony
Gamier, 	who 	also 	linked 	the 	new 	material 	to 	another
development 	to 	become 	crucial 	in 	the 	twenties: 	town
planning 	for 	an 	industrial 	society. 	Ciamier 	was 	born
five 	years 	earlier 	than 	Perret. 	in 	j 	Sd^. 	and 	also
attended Guadet's 	lectures 	at 	the 	Ecole 	des 	Beaux-Arts
in 	the 	1 890s. 	In 	i 	899 	he 	won 	the 	Prix 	de 	Rome 	with 	a
design 	for 	a 	'State 	Banking 	House' 	which 	was 	an
exemplary 	demonstration 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	planning 	in
the 	use 	of 	primary 	and 	secondary 	axes, 	absolute
symmetry 	and 	the 	separation 	of circulation 	from 	areas
served. 	Ostensibly 	Garnier 	was 	to 	have 	spent 	his 	time
in 	Rome 	studying 	the 	monuments 	of 	antiquity, 	and
doing 	reconstructions 	of 	Herculaneum; 	instead 	he
turned 	his 	mind 	to 	the 	design 	of a 	modern 	ideal 	city
known 	simply 	as 	the 	'Cite 	Industrielle'. 	which 	was 	not
published 	until 	1917. 	by 	which 	time 	the 	architect 	had
managed 	to 	implement 	some 	of 	his 	ideas 	in 	the 	new
town outside Lyons. The Cite Industrielle (fig. 	3. 	1 	3) was
based 	on 	the 	notion 	of 	distinct 	zoning 	for 	residential,
industrial, 	transport, 	and 	health 	areas, 	and 	drew
together 	French 	urbanistic 	precedents 	in 	its 	use 	of
grandiose 	axes. 	English 	Garden 	City 	ideals, 	and 	social
ideas 	from 	the 	Utopian-Socialist 	tradition. 	But 	these
houses 	were 	far 	from 	the Arts 	and 	Crafts 	in 	their 	use 	of
flat 	roofs, 	their 	simple 	cubic 	geometries, 	and 	their 	use
of concrete 	and 	standardization. 	If anything, 	the 	style
l.M 	Tony 	Garnier, 	Cite
industrielle. 	city centre,
residential 	district,
c. 	1904-17 	(from 	tlie
Cite 	Ifuhistik'lk. 	1917).
1.14 	Tony 	Garnier. 	Cite
Industrielle, 	city centre,
railway 	station,
c. 	1 904- 1 	7 	(from 	the
Cite 	liuhistriclk: 	1917I.
PTi-'A^—

-- 47 of 420 --

46 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
was 	a 	sort 	of 	stripped 	'Grecian', 	but 	the 	minimum
reference 	was 	made 	to 	Classical 	mouldings. 	The
dwellings 	had 	simple 	rectangular 	windows 	punched
through 	their 	surfaces, 	and 	in 	places 	concrete 	frames
rose clear of the 	roofs 	and 	supported 	horizontal 	parasol
slabs, 	lending 	an 	air 	of 	transparency 	to 	the 	imagery.
The 	central 	railway 	station 	(fig. 	3.14) 	was 	also
constructed 	from 	concrete 	and 	made 	dramatic 	use 	of
cantilevers 	and 	horizontal 	overhangs. 	Garnier's 	Cite
gave 	a 	convincing 	imagery 	to 	the 	functions 	of 	a
modern 	town 	and 	lent 	extra 	weight 	to 	the 	notion 	that
rectangular 	cubic 	forms 	were 	the 	most 	suitable 	to
reinforced-concrete 	construction 	and 	to 	standardiz-
ation. 	Moreover, 	there 	was 	the 	further 	suggestion 	that
sober 	values 	of 	clear 	geometrical 	repetition 	were 	the
correct' 	ones 	for 	an 	emergent 	machine-age 	society.
Among 	those 	to 	be 	convinced 	of 	these 	patterns 	of
thought, 	and to adhere to some of the 	principles 	behind
Ferret's 	vision 	of 	a 	reinforced-concrete 	architecture,
was 	Charles 	Edouard 	Jeanneret, 	later 	to 	become 	Le
Corbusier. 	So 	important 	is 	this 	figure 	to 	the 	history 	to
be 	covered 	by 	this 	book, 	that 	it 	seems 	best 	to 	treat 	his
formation 	individually 	in 	a 	later 	chapter. 	Here 	it 	is
enough 	to say that Jeanneret was born in La Chaux-de-
Fonds. 	Switzerland, 	in 	1887: 	that 	his 	early 	designs
reveal 	a 	mixture 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	and 	Regionalist
influences: 	that 	he 	spent 	part 	of 	his 	early 	twenties
working 	in 	Ferret's 	atelier 	where 	he 	learned 	the 	basic
lessons 	of 	reinforced 	concrete, 	and 	imbibed 	V'iollet-le-
Duc's ideas ; 	and that 	he 	worked 	two years 	later 	( 	1 9 1 o
)
in 	the 	office 	of 	Peter 	Behrens 	in 	Berlin, 	where 	he
absorbed 	the 	idea 	that 	a 	new 	architecture 	must 	rest 	on
the 	idealization 	of 	types 	and 	norms 	designed 	to 	serve
the 	needs 	of 	modern 	society, 	while 	being 	in 	harmony
with 	the 	means 	of 	mass 	production. 	At 	least 	this 	is
sufficient 	to 	supply 	a 	context 	to his 	seminal 	'Dom-ino'
concrete 	housing 	system 	ofl9i4-l5.
This 	was 	designed 	as 	a 	housing 	kit 	to 	help 	in 	the
rapid 	reconstruction 	of 	war-ravaged 	Flanders.
Jeanneret 	optimistically 	expected 	that 	the 	war 	would
end 	quickly 	and 	his ideal 	was 	to 	mass-produce 	a 	basic
set 	of components, 	including 	the 	necessary 	moulds 	to
make 	a 	simple, 	six-point 	support 	concrete 	skeleton
with 	cantilevered 	slabs. 	The 	framework 	of the 	dwelling
could 	then 	be 	assembled 	in 	less 	than 	three 	weeks, 	and
rubble 	walls 	made 	from 	ruined 	buildings 	could 	be 	used
as 	an 	infill. 	Windows 	and 	furnishings, 	all 	mass
produced, 	were 	to 	be modelled 	on 	local precedents, 	and
inserted 	into 	the 	skeleton. 	The 	very 	name 	'Dom-ino'
implied 	the 	Latin 	word 	for 	house 	(Domus) 	and 	the
game 	'dominoes' 	(the 	plan 	of 	a 	whole 	suburb 	did
loosely 	resemble 	a 	row 	of 	number 	six 	dominoes).
Intrinsic 	was 	the 	idea 	that 	simple, 	rectangular, 	mass-
producible 	components 	be 	arranged 	to 	make 	modern
dwellings 	and 	communities. 	From 	the 	very 	beginning

-- 48 of 420 --

Rationalism, 	the 	Engineering Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete 	47
3.15 	Ciiarles Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusierl.
Dom-ino 	houses.
1914-IS.
3.16 	Ciiarles 	Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusier).
Dom-ino 	skeleton.
1914-1 	5 	(as 	drawn 	in
Oi'inre complete, 	volume
I. 	1910-29).
we 	can 	sense 	thie 	future 	I.e 	Corbusier's 	preoccupation
with 	defining 	the 	elements 	of a 	new 	architectural 	and
urbanistic 	language.
The 	central 	generator 	of the 	Dom-ino 	system 	and 	of
both 	the 	architecture 	and 	the 	urbanism 	of the 	later 	Le
Corbusier 	was 	the 	skeleton 	itself 	(designed 	with 	the
help 	of 	Max 	Dubois). 	This 	was 	a 	structural 	unit
consisting 	of three 	horizontal 	slabs, 	smooth 	below 	and
above, 	each 	of 	the 	upper 	two 	supported 	on 	square
sectional 	posts 	of 	concrete, 	the 	lower 	level 	lifted 	from
the 	ground 	on 	squat 	concrete 	blocks 	(fig. 	3. 16 1. 	In 	the
perspective 	of this 	skeleton 	(which 	was 	published 	only
in 	the twenties) concrete stairs were shown 	connecting
the 	levels. 	It 	was 	noticeable 	that 	the 	Dom-ino. 	by
contrast 	with. 	say. 	the 	system 	of Hennebique. 	made 	no
use 	of 	brackets 	or 	beams. 	Employing 	the 	principle 	of
the 	cantilever, 	the 	slabs, 	moreover, 	extended 	well
beyond 	the 	line 	of supports. 	In 	fact 	they 	were 	not 	to 	be
monolithic 	concrete, 	but 	pot-tile, 	covered 	over 	with
concrete 	and 	reinforced 	with 	interior 	beams of steel.
One 	advantage 	of 	Jeanneret's 	system 	would 	have
been 	its 	rapid 	construction, 	but 	this 	was 	not put 	to 	the
test. 	Another 	was 	intrinsic 	and 	indubitable; 	it 	did 	with
concrete what-Perret's 	system 	had 	not. 	It separated out
the 	structural 	and 	the 	screening 	functions 	of the wall
by 	removing 	the 	fill 	from 	the frame. 	Now 	the 	fill 	was
attached 	to 	the 	end 	of the 	slabs, 	with 	the 	possibility 	of
its 	existing 	as 	a 	planar surface 	hovering 	in 	space 	above
a 	void. 	As 	the 	weight 	of the 	building 	was 	now 	held 	up
by 	the 	skeleton, 	the 	external 	'wall' 	(or 	other 	form 	of
cladding) 	could 	be 	arranged 	without 	thought 	for 	the
load 	on 	it 	and 	without 	the 	interruption 	of the frame. 	It
could 	become 	effectively 	a 	sort 	of 	membrane 	to 	be
punctured 	as 	functional 	necessities 	or 	compositional
instincts 	required. 	In 	the 	Dom-ino 	houses 	glass 	was
placed 	tantalizingly 	at 	the 	corners 	in 	some 	places, 	just
where 	a 	traditional 	masonry 	structure 	would 	have
been 	most 	solid 	structurally.
On 	the 	interior 	the 	Dom-ino 	system 	also 	allowed
new 	freedoms. 	Partitions 	could 	be 	placed 	where 	one
wished, 	in 	or out of line 	with 	the 	grid 	of supports. 	Space
was 	saved 	and 	a 	new 	degree 	of 	functional 	fiexibility
achieved. 	Aesthetically 	the 	emphasis 	could 	now 	shift
from 	the 	cutting 	out 	of 	spaces 	from 	masses, 	to 	the
modulation 	of spaces 	with 	minimal 	supports.
However, 	this 	is 	to 	look 	at the Dom-ino skeleton 	with
the 	help 	of 	hindsight, 	and 	with 	the 	knowledge 	of 	the
transparent 	and 	lightweight 	effects 	of 	the 	later
'International 	Style'. 	It 	is 	therefore 	only 	fair 	to 	point
out 	that 	the 	Dom-ino 	houses 	of 	191 	=; 	were 	dumpy 	in
visual 	effect 	for 	all 	their 	simplicity 	of volume, 	and 	that
their 	interiors 	were 	confined 	and 	traditional 	for 	all 	the
spatial 	potentials 	of 	the 	structural 	skeleton. 	They
probably 	reflected 	Jeanneret's 	admiration 	for 	the
unadorned 	dwellings 	of the 	Mediterranean, 	with 	their
flat 	roofs 	and 	cubic 	shapes 	modelled 	by 	light. 	Indeed,
the 	Dom-ino 	houses 	were 	the 	first 	of 	a 	number 	of
attempts 	by 	the 	architect 	at 	founding 	a 	modern,
industrialized 	equivalent 	to 	the 	vernaculars 	of the 	past
(fig- 	3-1 	Si-
But 	if the 	Dom-ino 	ideas 	anticipated 	some 	aspects 	of
the 	architecture 	of the 	twenties, 	they 	also 	rested firmly
in 	the 	Rationalist 	tradition. 	When 	Jeanneret 	had
worked 	for 	Perret 	in 	1908. 	he 	had 	used 	his 	first
pay-packet 	to 	buy 	V'iollet-le-Duc's 	Dictionnaire 	de
rarchitecture. 	In 	one 	of 	the 	margins 	he 	referred 	in 	a
note 	to 	Perret's 	insistence 	on 	the 	'structural 	skeleton'.
In 	his 	own 	Dom-ino 	theorem 	the 	young 	man 	laid 	the
basis 	for 	his 	future 	architectural 	system, 	but 	with 	help
from 	his 	mentors, 	past 	and 	contemporary. 	In 	much 	the
same 	way. 	Rationalism 	and 	reinforced 	concrete 	were
two 	elements, 	but 	only 	two 	among 	many, 	which
would 	eventually 	coalesce 	in 	the 	'heroic' 	period 	of
modern 	architecture, 	the 	1920s.

-- 49 of 420 --

4- 	Arts 	and 	Crafts Ideals 	in 	England
and 	the 	USA
The 	arts 	and 	crafts 	are 	called 	upon 	to 	restore 	our 	awareness 	of honesty,
integrity 	and 	simplicity 	in 	contemporary 	society. 	If this 	can 	be 	achieved, 	the
whole 	of our 	cultural 	life 	will 	be 	profoundly 	affected 	The 	success 	of our
movement 	will 	not 	only 	alter 	the 	appearance 	of houses 	and 	flats 	but 	will 	have
direct 	repercussions 	on 	the 	character 	of an 	entire 	generation 	If the 	new
trends 	are 	genuine, 	then 	an 	original, 	lasting 	style 	will 	emerge 	. 	.
.
H. 	Muthesius. 	1907
The 	search 	for 	values 	of 	simplicity 	and 	directness
which 	motivated 	so 	many 	artistic 	developments 	in 	the
first 	decade 	of 	the 	twentieth 	century 	had 	its 	roots 	in 	a
variety 	of earlier intellectual 	positions. 	The 	last 	chapter
traced 	one 	of these 	- 	Rationalism 	- 	and 	suggested 	how
this 	aided 	the 	discovery 	of 	forms 	based 	on 	reinforced-
concrete 	construction. 	There 	was 	another 	strand 	of
ideas, 	however, 	which 	stemmed 	from 	Pugin. 	Ruskin.
and 	Morris, 	according 	to 	which 	the 	'corruption 	of
nineteenth-century 	styles' 	would 	be 	counteracted 	by
inspired craftsmanship, 	and 	which 	maintained 	that 	an
authentic 	architecture 	would 	be 	achieved 	through 	the
direct 	expression 	of 	pristine 	moral 	virtues. 	Each 	of
these 	English 	thinkers 	was 	disgusted 	in 	his 	own 	way
with 	the 	impact 	of 	the 	industrial 	revolution 	on 	the
social 	organization, 	the 	methods 	of 	building, 	and 	the
very 	moral 	basis 	of culture. 	Morris, 	in 	particular, 	had
hoped 	to usher in 	a 	new 	period of integrated 	wholeness
in 	which 	the 	highest 	aesthetic 	qualities 	would 	be
ripped 	from 	the 	museum 	pedestal 	and 	linked 	again
with 	the 	tools 	and 	artifacts 	of 	everyday 	use. 	The
architect 	must 	therefore 	become 	a 	master of craft ; 	and,
to 	judge 	by 	Phillip 	Webb's 	and 	Morris's 	Red 	House 	of
1859 	(fig. 	4.1), 	this 	attitude 	tended 	to 	be 	translated
formally 	into a 	medievalizing 	vocabulary 	in 	which 	the
direct 	qualities 	of vernacular 	design 	were 	emulated 	to
create 	a 	suitable 	emblem 	of the 	simple, 	good 	life.
Nikolaus 	Pevsner 	has 	traced 	the 	evolution 	of 	Arts
and 	Crafts 	ideals 	through 	the 	last 	three 	decades 	of 	the
nineteenth 	century 	and 	has 	demonstrated 	the 	impact
of 	Morris's 	thinking 	on 	Walter 	Gropius 	and 	the
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	in 	Germany 	in 	the 	first 	decade 	of
this 	century. 	It 	was 	only 	when 	Morris's 	ideals
concerning 	the 	reintegration 	of art 	and 	life, 	craft 	and
utility, 	were 	transformed 	to 	allow 	for 	mechanization
that 	they 	became 	directly 	useful 	to 	the 	creation 	of the
modern 	movement. 	But 	history 	does 	not 	work 	in
straight 	lines, 	and 	the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	inheritance
permeated 	a 	number 	of developments 	around 	the 	turn
of the century 	which 	did 	not. 	it so 	happens, 	bear 	fruit 	in
specifically 	'modern' 	architecture.
It 	is 	natural 	to 	begin 	the 	story 	in 	England 	with 	the
legacy 	of 	domestic 	architectural 	ideals 	handed 	down
from 	Webb. 	Shaw. 	Godwin, 	and 	Mackmurdo. 	to 	a 	later
generation 	including 	Voysey. 	Lutyens. 	Baillie-Scott,
Mackintosh, 	Ashbee, 	and 	Lethaby, 	Charles 	Francis
Voysey 	was 	born 	in 	1857 	and 	produced 	his 	own
unique 	style 	just 	before 	the 	turn 	of 	the 	century 	in
designs 	like 	that 	for 	a 	house 	in 	Bedford 	Park 	of 	i 	89 1 	or
for 	a 	studio 	in 	St. 	Dunstan's 	Road. 	West 	Kensington, 	of
the 	same 	year. In 	these, 	the 	aesthetic 	effect 	arose 	from
the 	disposition 	of 	simple 	pebble-dashed 	and 	white-
washed 	volumes 	punctured 	by 	rows 	of 	windows 	and
enhanced 	by 	the 	geometrical 	play 	of 	chimneys 	and
low-angled 	roofs. 	It 	is 	not 	hard 	to 	understand 	how
formalist 	historians 	seeking 	a pedigree 	for 	the 	stripped
white 	forms 	of 	later 	modern 	architecture 	should 	have
turned 	to 	Voysey; 	however, 	the 	architect 	expressed
embarrassment 	at 	having 	this 	role 	of 	'pioneer 	of
modern 	design' 	thrust 	upon 	him. 	His 	immersion 	in 	the
simple 	joys 	of 	English 	vernacular 	design, 	his 	lack 	of
fuss, 	his 	almost 	childlike 	obsession 	with 	the 	com-
position 	of rain 	barrels 	and 	gutters 	in 	fagades. 	has 	very
little 	in 	common 	with 	the 	ideas 	of a 	later 	generation 	for

-- 50 of 420 --

Arts 	and 	Crafts Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	49
4.1 	I'hilipVVebli. 	the
Red 	House'. 	Bexley
Heath. 	Kent. 	iSsq.
whicii 	simplicity 	had 	a 	very 	dilTerent 	universal 	and
mechanistic 	significance.
Voysey's 	vision 	seems 	to 	have 	come 	to 	full 	maturity
in 	his 	large 	houses 	in 	rural 	settings, 	such 	as
Perrycroft. 	designed 	for 	a 	site 	in 	the 	Malvern 	hills 	in
1893 	Ifig. 	4.2). 	or 	the 	Sturgess 	house 	of 	1896.
designed 	for 	the 	'Hog's 	Back' 	in 	Surrey. 	The 	first 	of
these 	made 	much 	use 	of sloping 	buttresses 	and 	deeply
overhanging 	eaves, 	not 	only 	as 	structural, 	climatic,
and 	compositional 	devices, 	but 	as 	ways 	of 	linking 	the
building 	to 	the 	ground 	and 	suggesting 	continuity 	with
local 	vernacular design. 	This 	was 	a 	central 	idea 	of Arts
and 	Crafts 	architectural 	doctrine: 	indigenous
materials 	and 	usages 	were 	to 	be 	translated 	to 	good 	use
by 	the 	modern 	practitioner.
Although 	Voyscy 	was 	not 	a 	craftsman 	himself, 	he
turned 	his 	mind 	to 	the 	design 	of wallpapers, 	furniture,
fixtures, 	and 	fittings, 	for 	he 	felt 	that 	the 	same 	impulses
should 	permeate 	all 	the 	interiors 	of 	a 	house 	as
conditioned 	the 	overall 	form. 	Here 	again 	he 	pursued 	a
rhetorical 	simplicity 	(fig. 	4.3), 	which 	made 	a 	pointed
contrast 	with 	the 	clutter 	and 	complexity 	of 	earlier
Victorian 	design. 	Pevsner 	tended 	to 	associate 	this
youthfulness 	with 	a 	wider 	reaction 	in 	values.
It 	is 	well 	known 	that 	everywhere 	in 	English
cultural 	life 	a 	longing 	for 	fresh 	air 	and 	gaiety
expressed 	itself at 	the 	end 	of Queen 	Victoria's reign.

-- 51 of 420 --

50 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
U 	1
4.2 	Ciiarles 	Francis
Voysey, 	Perrycroft.
Malvern.
Worcestershire. 	1893.
4. 3 	Charles 	Francis
Voysey. 	The 	Orchard.
Chorlcywood.
Hertfordshire. 	1893.
interior.

-- 52 of 420 --

Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	• 	5
1
4.4 	Charles 	Rennie
Mackintosh, 	Hill 	House,
Helensburgh. 	Glasgow,
perspective 	from 	the
south-west. 	1903. 	Pen
and 	ink. 	133 x 	223in.
(3 	3.6 	x57.2cm.).
Glasgow School 	of Art.
Another 	novel 	feature 	of 	Voysey's 	designs 	was 	the
way 	they 	opened 	up 	interior 	volumes 	so 	that 	they
tended 	to 	flow 	into 	one 	another. 	In 	Broadley's. 	a
house 	overlooking 	Lake 	Windermere, 	the 	hall 	was
carved 	out 	as 	a 	double 	space. 	In 	plan 	the 	main
elements 	were 	subtly 	disposed 	within 	an 	order
combining 	some 	degree 	of 	symmetry 	and 	formality
with 	informal 	and 	asymmetrical 	qualities. 	In 	these
ways 	Voysey 	succeeded 	in 	giving 	form 	to 	the 	patterns
of social 	life 	of the 	English 	well-to-do 	at 	the 	turn 	of the
century. 	It 	was 	a 	sort 	of 	procured 	rusticity; 	an
emulation 	of 	the 	'common 	speech' 	of 	the 	vernacular
which 	was, 	of course, 	very 	self-conscious.
M. 	H. 	Baillie-Scott 	was 	nine 	years 	Voysey's 	junior
and. 	unlike 	him. 	did 	much 	work 	on 	the 	continent. 	In
his 	Blackwell 	house 	of 	1900, 	also 	on 	Lake 	Win-
dermere, 	he 	attempted 	to 	open 	up 	the 	interior 	space. 	Of
course, 	this 	was 	not 	simply 	an 	aesthetic 	matter, 	but 	an
attempt 	at 	expressing 	a 	way 	of life. 	Baillie-Scott 	has 	left
evocative 	descriptions 	conjuring 	up 	the 	life 	of 	the
middle-class 	home 	with 	the 	fire 	crackling 	in 	a 	central
hall, 	the 	living-rooms 	opening 	out 	into 	one 	another,
the 	inglenooks. 	the 	music 	gallery, 	the 	broad, 	winding
stairs. 	Such 	arrangements 	were 	heavily 	loaded 	with
deliberate 	manorial 	associations, 	with 	references 	to 	a
romanticized 	national 	past. 	Both 	Voysey 	and 	Baillie-
Scott 	managed 	to 	conjure 	up 	a 	powerful 	image 	of the
Englishman's 	home 	which 	would 	eventually 	be
disseminated 	through 	the 	building 	catalogues 	to
provide 	many 	of 	the 	standard 	cliches 	of 	inter-war
domestic 	suburban 	design.
Another 	central 	feature 	of 	much 	creative 	domestic
design 	of 	the 	Edwardian 	period 	was 	the 	interest 	in
fusing the 	building with 	the garden 	setting through 	the
use 	of 	pergolas, 	pathways, 	sunken 	gardens, 	and 	the
like. 	To 	be 	sure, 	the 	'rusticity' 	of 	the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
house 	was 	not 	allowed 	to 	be 	too 	rude 	or 	too 	removed
from 	the 	gentility 	and 	urbanity 	of 	the 	middle-class
users. 	In 	Hill 	House 	at 	Helensburgh 	of 	1903 	(fig. 	4.4),
designed 	for 	Blackie 	the 	publisher, 	Charles 	Rennie
Mackintosh 	designed 	not 	only 	the 	house 	and 	all 	its
fixtures 	and 	fittings, 	but 	the 	outbuildings, 	the 	garden
gates, 	the 	walls, 	the 	terraces, 	and 	the pergolas 	as 	well 	-
all 	as 	part 	of a 	unified 	aesthetic 	conception. 	The 	result
was a 	total 	work 	of art, 	an 	aesthetic enhancement of all
the 	rituals of family 	life, 	from 	the 	'public face' 	presented
to arriving 	guests 	in 	the 	hall, 	to 	the 	relative formality of
dining-room 	and 	living-room, 	to 	the 	more 	informal
and 	private 	worlds 	of 	inglenooks, 	bedrooms, 	library,
and 	garden 	seats.

-- 53 of 420 --

52 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
Some 	of the 	richest 	creations 	of this 	type 	in 	England
were 	designed 	by 	Edwin 	Lutyens 	(1869-1944). 	who
frequently 	worked 	closely 	with 	his 	cousin, 	the 	garden
designer 	Gertrude 	Jekyll. 	for 	whom 	he 	built 	one 	of 	his
earliest 	houses, 	at 	Munstead 	Wood 	near 	Godalming.
Surrey. 	This 	was 	soon 	followed 	by 	a 	number 	of 	other
outstanding 	houses 	in 	the 	area, 	including 	the
Orchards 	at 	Godalming 	and 	Tigbourne 	Court 	(tig.
4.5 ). 	also 	in 	Surrey 	and 	also 	of 	1 	89S. 	Lutyens 	received
direct 	inspiration 	from 	Shaw 	and 	Webb 	but 	exceeded
both 	in 	the 	breadth 	of 	his 	sources, 	the 	range 	of 	his
imagination, 	and 	his 	capacity 	for 	wittily 	turning 	a
vernacular 	usage 	to 	his 	own 	advantage. 	He 	believed
strongly 	in 	the 	use 	of 	local 	crafts 	and 	materials, 	both
because 	this 	was 	practical 	and 	because 	it 	was 	liable
to 	lead 	to 	a 	harmony 	between 	the 	house 	and 	its
architectural 	or 	natural 	setting. 	Thus 	in 	his 	early
designs one 	finds 	him employing Surrey tile fascias 	and
wooden 	frames 	based 	on 	yeomen's 	houses, 	and
varying 	the 	depth 	of 	his 	eaves 	according 	to 	local
character 	and 	precedent. 	In 	Overstrand 	Hall. 	Norfolk
(1901 	1, 	typical 	indigenous 	combinations 	of 	Hint 	and
red-brick 	courses 	were 	employed, 	but 	adeptly 	trans-
formed 	into 	a 	vocabulary 	suave 	in 	its 	accents 	and
enhanced 	by 	clever collisions 	of Classical 	and 	medieval
fragments.
It 	would 	be 	entirely 	inadequate, 	however, 	to 	reject
Luytens 	as 	a 	mere 	eclectic 	who 	raided the 	rag-bag 	of
history 	in 	order 	to 	satisfy 	the 	taste 	for 	exotic 	weekend
scenarios of his extremely 	wealthy 	patrons. 	Underlying
the 	play 	was 	a 	controlling 	sense 	of 	proportion 	and
organizational 	principle: 	beneath 	the 	sparkle 	was 	a
sober 	and 	probing 	mind, 	which 	was 	eventually 	to 	seek
the 	certainties 	of Classical 	design. 	Moreover, 	the 	unity
of 	Lutyens's 	designs 	was 	achieved 	by 	a 	judicious
combination 	of axes 	and 	repeating 	geometrical 	motifs.
Thus 	one 	finds 	'themes' 	played 	out 	in 	plan, 	elevation,
and 	volume, 	as 	when 	an 	arch 	turns 	into 	a 	semi-
circular 	step, 	to 	be 	rediscovered 	as 	a 	wall 	niche, 	a
dome, 	or 	a 	luxurious 	hemispherical 	Edwardian 	bath
lined 	with 	mosaic. 	Geometrical 	play 	could 	extend 	to
the 	elements 	of 	garden 	design 	as 	well. 	At 	the
Plaisaunce 	(also 	in 	Norfolk. 	1901) 	the 	convex
spherical 	form 	of 	the 	baking-oven 	was 	restated 	in 	the
concave 	hemisphere 	of 	the 	brick 	garden-seat 	canopy:
the 	sunken 	gardens 	were 	in 	turn 	linked 	to 	the 	house 	by
amphitheatre-like 	steps 	(tig. 	4.6I. 	circular 	ground
patterns 	and 	curved 	levels.
4. S 	( Icfl ) 	Edwin Lutyens.
Tighnurne Court.
Surrey. 	1898. 	view of
entrance.
4.(1 	Inij/iO 	Edwin
Lutyens. 	thie
Plaisaunce.
Overstrand. 	Norfolk.
1901. 	view of garden
steps.

-- 54 of 420 --

• 	-: 	Kkr-

-- 55 of 420 --

54 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modem 	Architecture
Lutyens 	was 	also 	fascinated by 	the special 	character
of 	each 	client 	and 	site, 	and 	always 	attempted 	to
produce 	a 	unique 	response 	to 	these. 	At 	Lindisfarne 	he
was 	requested 	to 	remodel 	a 	Scottish 	castle 	on 	a
promontory 	overlooking 	the 	sea. 	He 	transformed 	the
requirements 	into 	a 	bijou 	fortress, 	whose 	parapets
harmonized 	with 	the 	surrounding 	rocks 	and 	whose
imagery 	was entirely 	at one with 	the 	spirit 	of the 	place.
At 	Heathcote. 	Ilkley 	(1906). 	the 	client 	required 	a 	more
magnificent 	and 	prestigious 	imagery 	than 	was 	usual
for 	Lutyens, 	and 	the 	site, 	being 	almost 	suburban 	and
hemmed 	in 	by 	buildings 	on 	both 	sides, 	suggested 	the
qualities 	of a 	formal 	villa. 	Thus 	the 	architect 	varied 	his
manner 	to 	include 	something 	of 	the 	character 	of 	the
English 	Baroque, with 	quotations 	from 	Vanbrugh 	and
Hawskmoor. 	The 	body 	of 	the 	house 	was 	ingeniously
linked 	to 	the 	setting 	by 	parterres, 	an 	apsidal 	'great
lawn' 	and subtle cross axes. 	The materials, 	meanwhile,
were 	local 	ones: 	Guiseley 	stone 	with 	grey 	dressings
from 	the 	Morley 	quarries. 	The 	result 	was 	a 	massive
heap 	of a 	certain 	dour 	quality, 	perfectly 	suited 	to 	its
region 	and 	placement. 	In 	the 	'Salutation' 	at 	Sandwich.
Kent, 	the 	gate lodge 	was 	made 	to 	harmonize 	with 	the
character 	of a 	Kentish 	riverside 	town 	through 	the 	use
of local tiles 	and white woodwork, 	which 	were 	handled
with 	a 	sort 	of 	procured 	irregularity 	blending 	superbly
with 	the 	aging 	character 	of 	the 	surroundings.
Nowhere 	in 	Lutyens 	is 	there 	the 	disturbance 	of 	new
social forces or of the 	industry 	whose 	very owners 	were
frequently 	his 	clients. 	His 	designs 	evoked 	a 	safe 	and
stable 	world 	of 	national 	continuity. 	They 	implied 	the
conceit 	that 	the 	crafts 	had 	remained 	perpetually 	the
same 	from 	region 	to 	region 	over 	the 	ages.
Voysey, 	Lutyens, 	Baillie-Scott. 	Prior, 	and 	the 	other
English 	architects 	who 	might 	be 	loosely 	grouped 	as
'Arts 	and 	Crafts' 	in 	the 	first 	decade 	of 	the 	twentieth
century 	were 	bold 	innovators 	in 	domestic 	design, 	but
in 	most 	respects 	were 	traditionalists. 	The 	'freedom' 	of
their 	planning 	and 	the 	directness 	and 	'honesty' 	of their
use of materials 	were 	perhaps 	emblematic 	of a 	reaction
against 	the 	clutter 	and 	pomposity 	of 	earlier 	English
domestic 	architecture, 	but 	these 	architects 	were
certainly 	far 	from 	attempting 	the 	creation 	of a 	brave
new world. 	In a 	sense their designs were microcosms of
deeply 	felt 	values 	concerning 	the 	meaning 	of 	the
home: 	worlds 	in 	miniature 	in 	which 	details 	like 	door
latches 	or 	dovecotes, 	as 	well 	as 	the 	overall 	mood, 	were
infused 	with 	a 	sense 	of 	reverence 	for 	the 	ideal 	of 	a
happy 	family 	life 	lived 	in 	a 	natural 	setting.
It 	was 	customary 	before 	the 	First 	World 	War 	to refer
to 	the 	new 	style 	as 	'the 	English Free 	Architecture', 	but
by 	1 9 10 	a 	strong 	reaction 	had 	set 	in. 	in 	favour 	of a
direct 	neo-classical 	revival 	and 	a 	dependence 	on
foreign 	and 	'cosmopolitan' 	models 	rather 	than 	native,
vernacular 	ones. 	At 	about 	the 	same 	time 	that 	the
French Beaux-Arts was beginning to exert its influence
in 	England. 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	values 	were 	being, 	as 	it
were, 	exported 	to 	Germany. 	A 	key 	personality 	here
was 	Hermann 	Muthesius, 	who 	was 	posted 	at 	the
German 	embassy 	in 	London 	precisely 	to 	study 	English
domestic 	design. 	His 	book 	Das 	englische 	Hans 	of 	1902
was 	a 	masterly 	survey 	of 	the 	national 	tradition 	of
houses. 	Undoubtedly 	he 	was 	catering 	to 	a 	taste 	in
Germany, 	stretching 	well 	back 	into 	the 	nineteenth
century, 	for 	the 	English 	cottage 	and 	garden. 	But 	there
were 	weightier 	ideals 	at 	work 	as 	well. 	Muthesius 	was
working 	for 	a 	German 	elite 	who 	felt 	strongly 	the
inferiority 	of 	their 	culture, 	and 	its 	disruption 	by
industrialization. 	They 	sensed 	in 	the 	English 	move-
ment 	an 	unruffled, 	sober 	character, 	as 	well 	as 	an
intelligent 	application 	of 	formal 	quality 	to 	everyday
design. 	Muthesius 	mythologized 	the 	Englishman 	and
his 	home 	in 	this 	way:
... 	let 	me 	repeat once 	more 	that 	the 	Modern 	English
artistic 	movement 	has 	no 	trace 	of those 	fanciful,
superfluous 	and 	often 	affected 	ideas 	with 	which 	a
part 	of the 	new 	continental 	movement 	is 	still
engaged. 	Far 	from 	this, 	it 	tends 	more 	towards 	the
primitive 	and 	the 	rustic; 	and 	here 	it 	fits 	perfectly
well 	with 	the 	type 	of traditional 	rural 	house.
Moreover 	this 	outcome 	is 	perfectly 	to 	the 	taste 	of
the 	Englishman 	for 	whom 	there 	is 	nothing 	better
than 	plain 	simplicity 	A 	minimum 	of 'forms'.
and 	a 	maximim 	of peaceful, 	comfortable 	and 	yet
lively 	atmosphere, 	that 	is 	what 	he 	aims 	for. 	. 	. 	. 	Such
accord 	seems 	to 	him 	to 	be 	a 	link 	with 	beloved
mother 	Nature, 	to 	whom, 	despite 	all 	higher
cultures, 	the 	English 	nation 	has 	remained 	more
faithful 	than 	any 	other 	people. 	And 	today's 	house
is 	proof of this 	.. 	. 	The 	way 	in 	which 	it 	fits 	so
admirably 	into 	surrounding 	Nature 	in 	the
happiness 	of its 	colouring 	and 	the 	solidity 	of its
form : 	in 	all 	these 	ways 	it 	stands 	there 	today 	as
cultural 	proof of the 	healthy 	tendencies 	of a 	nation
which 	amid 	all 	its 	wealth 	and 	advances 	in
civilization 	has 	retained, 	to 	a 	remarkable 	degree, 	its
appreciation 	of what 	is 	natural. 	Urban 	civilization,
with 	its 	destructive 	influences, 	with 	its 	senseless
haste 	and 	press, 	with 	its 	hothouse 	stimulation 	of
those 	impulses 	towards 	vanity 	which 	are 	latent 	in
man, 	with 	its 	elevation 	of the 	refined, 	the 	nervous,
the 	abnormal 	to 	unnatural 	proportions, 	all 	this 	has
had 	practically 	no 	harmful 	effect 	on 	the 	English
nation.
German 	admiration 	of 	the 	English 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
went 	further 	than 	this. 	It 	included 	an 	attempt 	at
emulating 	the 	values 	of 	honesty 	of 	materials, 	etc, 	in
the 	design 	of 	everyday 	objects, 	in 	the 	teaching

-- 56 of 420 --

Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	• 	5 5
4.7 	Henry 	Hobson
Richardson. 	Ames Gate
Lodge. 	North Easton.
Massachusetts. 	1882.
programmes 	of 	schools 	of 	design, 	and 	eventually
extended 	to 	a 	wholesale 	national 	obsession 	with 	the
ideal 	of 	good 	formal 	quality 	in 	industrial 	design.
Looking back 	in 	1 	s 	i 	5. 	William 	Lethaby. 	who 	had 	been
deeply 	involved 	with 	the 	English 	movement, 	could
express 	his 	sadness 	at 	the 	'timid 	reaction 	and 	the 	re-
emergence 	of 	the 	catalogued 	styles' 	in 	England; 	and
his 	admiration 	for 	advances 	in 	German 	industrial
design 	founded 	on 	the 	English 	arts 	and 	crafts'. 	The
manner 	in 	which 	a 	movement 	which 	had 	been
conceived, 	in 	part, 	as a 	reaction 	against the 	crudities 	of
mechanization 	became 	the 	basis 	of 	a 	national 	in-
dustrial 	design 	philosophy, 	must 	be explained 	in 	a 	later
chapter: 	suffice 	it 	to 	say 	that 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	values.
once 	exported 	and 	transformed, 	were 	another 	major
element 	in 	the 	jigsaw 	puzzle 	of the 	modern 	movement.
This 	was 	true 	not 	only 	in 	Europe, 	but 	also 	in
America, 	where 	the 	catalyst 	of 	transformation 	was
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	He 	was 	undoubtedly 	the 	most
original 	architect 	to 	be 	influenced 	by 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
ideals 	and. 	to 	that 	extent, 	can 	scarcely 	be 	considered
typical. 	Nonetheless 	his 	formation 	occurred 	in 	a 	milieu
of 	ideas 	derived 	from 	the 	earlier 	nineteenth 	century.
There 	was 	no direct equivalent 	to 	V\'illiam 	.Morris 	in 	the
American 	tradition, 	but 	his 	ideas 	were 	certainly 	well
known. 	In 	the 	figure 	of Andrew 	Jackson 	Downing 	one
has 	a 	mid-century 	thinker 	and 	designer 	who 	put 	a
great 	store 	by 	the 	image 	of 	the 	individual, 	wooden-
battened 	house 	- 	the 	rustic 	retreat 	- 	as 	somehow
quintessentially 	American 	and 	democratic. 	Vincent
Scully 	has 	traced 	the 	ensuing 	development 	of 	the 	so-
called 	'Stick' 	and 	'Shingle' 	Styles 	in 	the 	last 	three
decades 	of the 	nineteenth 	century, 	in 	which 	the 	direct
expression 	of 	wooden 	construction, 	informal 	open-
planning, 	verandas, 	and 	a 	romantic 	display 	of 	hipped
roofs, 	chimneys, 	and 	gazebo 	elements 	all 	played 	a 	part.
Arguably 	Shaw's 	influence on 	these developments was
considerable: 	certainly 	local 	traditions 	of 	wooden
construction 	played 	their 	part: 	but 	there 	was 	also
something 	less 	definable 	an 	ethos 	of 	freedom, 	and 	a
concern 	for 	the 	relationship 	of the 	individual 	dwelling
to 	its 	natural 	setting. 	As 	always, 	American 	archi-
tectural 	development 	was 	helped 	and 	hindered 	by 	the
lack 	of 	a 	long, 	coherent 	national 	tradition: 	helped
because 	this 	situation 	encouraged 	a 	degree 	of 	exper-
imentation: 	hindered 	because 	there 	was 	relatively
little 	guidance 	from 	earlier 	norms. 	It 	is 	in 	the 	figure 	of
Henry 	Hobson 	Richardson 	- 	Beaux-Arts 	trained, 	with
a 	deep 	appreciation 	of 	medieval 	sources 	and 	a 	rare
instinct 	for 	what 	was 	most 	relevant 	to 	the 	emergent
social 	order 	of 	the 	United 	States 	- 	that 	one 	finds 	a
synthesis 	of the 	indigenous 	and 	the 	imported, 	of great
force. 	The 	Ames 	Gate 	Lodge 	of 	18S2 	at 	North 	Easton.
Massachusetts 	(fig. 	4.7), 	is 	linked 	to 	its 	site 	and 	its
region 	by a strong sense of place 	and 	by 	an exaggerated
use 	of 	indigenous 	stonework: 	yet 	the 	rusticity 	of 	the
imagery 	is 	ennobled, 	formalized, 	enhanced 	by 	the
architect's 	knowledge 	of 	far 	distant 	traditions 	includ-
ing 	such 	exoticisms 	as 	early 	Christian 	arches 	from
Syria 	and 	French 	medieval 	farm 	buildings.
Thus 	the search 	for 	a 	model 	domestic 	architecture 	in
America 	was 	never 	very 	far 	from 	the 	larger question 	of
defining 	an 	American 	architecture 	in 	general. 	There
followed 	close 	behind 	a 	series 	of 	formulations 	and
emotions 	unfolding 	around 	such 	ideas 	as: 	the 	search
for 	a 	pastoral or 	middle-landscape 	ideal: 	the 	notion 	of
an 	honest 	expression 	unfettered 	by 	European 	de-
cadence: 	a 	conception 	of 	native 	functionalism: 	an
aspiration 	towards 	a 	fitness 	and 	commodity 	mirroring
nature's, 	which 	would 	lead 	by 	a 	short 	route 	to 	beauty
and 	deeper 	meanings. 	Tinged 	with 	nostalgia 	for 	an
earlier 	search 	for 	paradise 	in 	the 	'New 	World', 	this
sophisticated 	quest 	for 	a 	simplicity 	in 	touch 	with
natural 	values 	crystallized 	in 	that 	most 	cultivated 	and
artificial 	of 	'natural' 	settings: 	the 	suburbia 	which
began 	to 	proliferate 	around 	the 	mechanized 	American
cities 	from 	the 	1 	880s 	onwards.
As 	we 	shall 	see 	in 	Chapter 	6. 	Wright 	grasped 	the 	full
meaning 	of 	this 	situation 	and 	managed 	to 	take 	the
suburban 	family 	house 	and 	weave 	a 	mythology
around 	it. 	His 	earliest 	designs 	were 	drawn 	from 	the
Shingle 	Style, 	from 	Japanese 	sources, 	from 	the
Midwestern 	vernacular, 	and 	from 	the Queen 	Anne 	and
Colonial 	revivals 	which 	briefly 	touched 	the 	Midwest 	of
his 	youth 	in 	the 	1880s 	and 	early 	1890s 	(fig. 	4.8). 	Arts
and 	Crafts 	ideals 	imported 	from 	England, 	concerning
the 	direct 	response 	to 	the 	nature 	of 	materials 	and 	the

-- 57 of 420 --

S6 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
total 	design 	of furnishings 	and 	building, 	including 	the
setting, 	early 	permeated 	his 	outlook. 	However, 	unlike
Morris 	and 	his 	English 	contemporaries. 	Voysey, 	Webb,
and 	Lutyens, 	he 	grasped 	the 	positive 	importance 	of
mechanization 	as 	well. 	In 	his 	essay 	'The 	Art 	and 	Craft
of 	the 	Machine', 	of 	1901, 	he 	acknowledged 	that 	the
machine 	is 	here 	to stay' 	and 	that 	this 	would 	influence
not 	only 	the 	artist's 	techniques 	in 	building 	(e.g..
straight 	lines 	of simple 	cut 	wood) 	but 	the 	entire 	fabric
of the society 	for 	which 	he 	would 	build. 	A 	traditionalist
in 	many 	senses. 	Wright 	remained; 	but 	his 	powerful
feeling 	for 	abstract 	form 	and 	his 	vision 	of a 	new 	social
order made 	him 	a 	link between 	the 	nineteenth-century
craft 	ideal, 	and 	the 	propelling 	ideas of the 	later 	modern
movement 	in 	Europe.
As 	well 	as 	the 	Prairie 	School 	extension 	of 	Wright's
architecture, 	there 	were 	other 	developments 	in 	the
United 	States, 	especially 	on 	the 	West 	Coast, 	which
extended 	the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts movement. 	The 	West 	was
still 	regarded 	as 	a 	last 	frontier 	and 	thus 	collected 	the
detritus 	of over 	a 	century 	of pioneer 	mythology. 	From
1901 	to 	1916. 	Gustav 	Stickley 	spread 	the 	message 	of
the 	'Craftsman's 	Movement' 	in 	a 	magazine 	called 	The
Craftsman. 	This 	recorded 	developments 	in 	bungalow
and 	furniture 	design 	and 	illustrated 	ideal 	projects 	for
individual 	homes 	(fig. 	4.10). 	Among 	these 	suggestions
were 	ones 	for 	single 	and 	double 	storey 	homes 	with
deep 	overhanging 	eaves, 	verandas, 	climbing 	plants,
and 	rusticated 	chimneys. 	The 	interiors 	were 	simple
evocations 	of 'home' 	in 	which 	bare 	beams 	and 	wooden
uprights, 	inglenooks 	and 	built-in 	benches, 	humble'
materials 	and 	fireplaces 	in 	the 	hallway 	all 	contributed.
The 	sources 	for 	this 	imagery 	were 	diverse, 	and 	seemed
to 	include 	Swiss 	chalets. 	Japanese 	wooden 	houses, 	and
a 	variety 	of 	American 	regional 	cabin 	and 	shack
prototypes.
In 	California 	there 	was 	not 	only 	the 	sense 	of a 	new
society, 	unbounded 	by 	conventions 	and 	(as 	yet)
untainted 	by 	industry; 	there 	were 	also 	plentiful 	lots 	of
land. 	Moreover, 	the 	climate 	encouraged 	an 	archi-
tecture 	opening 	to 	the 	outside. 	The 	masters 	of 	the
genre 	of 	the 	luxurious, 	but 	.still 	'simple'. 	California
bungalow 	were 	the 	brothers 	Charles 	and 	Henry
Greene 	(born 	in 	1868 	and 	1870) 	who 	were 	educated
in 	Calvin 	Woodward's 	Manual 	Training 	School 	in 	St.
Louis 	in 	the 	late 	1870s, 	where 	they 	were 	encouraged
to 	handle 	natural 	materials 	(especially 	wood) 	and 	to
give 	their 	conceptions 	visual 	form. 	In 	the 	late 	i88()s
the 	brothers 	went 	East 	and 	studied 	at 	MIT 	(Mas-
sachusetts 	Institute of Technology ) 	where 	they 	learned
some 	of 	the 	axial 	devices 	and 	intellectual 	strategies 	of
Beaux-Arts 	design. 	After 	graduating 	they 	spent 	some
time 	working 	in 	the 	Boston 	area, 	where 	they 	no 	doubt
examined 	the 	works 	of 	Richardson 	and 	a 	variety 	of
local 	Stick 	and 	Shingle 	Style 	examples. 	Finally 	they
moved 	to 	the 	West. 	It 	was 	to 	take 	them 	a 	decade 	to
work 	out 	a 	style 	based 	on 	their 	earlier 	influences; 	on
the 	hybrid 	indigenous 	styles 	of 	California 	(especially
those 	using 	simple 	wooden 	construction 	and 	deep
overhanging 	balconies), 	and 	even 	on 	Japanese 	proto-
types 	in 	which 	elegant 	proportions, 	finely 	handled
joints, 	and 	a 	superb 	combination 	of the 	formal 	and 	the
informal 	were 	achieved.
The 	masterpiece 	of their 	new 	regional 	style 	was 	the
Gamble 	House 	in 	Pasadena 	of 	1907-8 	(fig. 	4.9). 	built
for 	one 	of 	the 	millionaire 	partners 	of 	the 	soap 	firm
Procter 	and 	Gamble. 	The 	house 	represented 	the 	full
aggrandizement 	and 	ennoblement 	of 	the 	California
bungalow 	image, 	yet 	the 	building 	was 	still 	striking 	for
its 	intimacy, 	intricacy, 	and 	scale. 	An 	effect 	of 	nobility
was 	conferred 	on 	the 	whole 	by 	its 	placement 	on 	a 	sort
of 	terrace 	plinth, 	lifted 	slightly 	above 	the 	level 	of 	the
surrounding 	lawns 	and 	banks 	of 	ferns. 	The 	relative
solidity 	of the 	main 	gabled 	portions 	was 	heightened 	by
the 	delicate 	transparency 	of 	the 	sprawling 	Stick Style
balconies 	containing 	sleeping 	porches, 	with 	their
overlapping 	struts 	and 	deep 	reveals 	of 	shadow. 	The
main 	materials 	on 	the 	exterior were 	the redwood of the
beams 	and 	frame, 	and 	the 	olive-green 	'shakes' 	(giant
shingles) 	which 	blended 	well 	with 	the 	surrounding
natural 	colours. On 	the 	interior these material 	qualities
and 	textures 	were 	supplemented 	by 	glistening 	stained-
glass 	panels, 	hand-polished 	maple, 	and 	the 	glow 	of
Tiffany 	glass 	fixtures. 	The 	elegance 	of 	the 	overall
proportions 	was 	continued 	into 	the 	smallest 	parts 	and
details 	the 	articulation 	of 	earthquake-proof 	sliding
joints 	with 	pegs 	and 	thongs, 	and 	the 	visual 	subtlety 	of
4.8 	(«/)(nr) 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright's own 	house. 	Oak
Park. 	Illinois 	(near
Chicago). 	1893.
4.1) 	(ri;//it) 	Charles 	and
Henry 	Greene, 	Gamble
House. 	Pasadena.
California. 	1907-8.
4.io(()('/(nv
riiiht) 	Gustav 	Stickley.
bungalow design 	from
The 	Craftsimm. 	c. 	190s.
interior.

-- 58 of 420 --

Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	• 	57
^
tapering 	beam 	ends 	in 	the 	balconies. 	One 	is 	not
surprised 	to 	discover 	that 	the 	house 	was 	modifled 	(as
were most of the Greene brothers designs) in 	the 	course
of 	construction, 	with 	the 	architects 	themselves
frequently 	fashioning 	the 	wooden 	details 	on 	site 	to
ensure 	a 	precise 	effect.
The 	Gamble 	House 	plan 	gives 	further 	clues 	to 	the
architects' 	intentions. 	One 	arrives 	by 	way 	of 	an 	open
terrace; 	the 	front 	door 	gives 	straight 	on 	to 	a 	wide 	open
hall 	passing 	straight 	through 	the 	house 	to 	another
terrace 	at 	the 	rear. 	The stairs, 	dining-room, 	and 	living-
room 	(the 	latter 	two 	looking 	out 	over 	the 	pool 	and
fernery) 	are 	all 	linked 	by 	this 	major 	space. 	The 	living-
room, 	as 	in 	so many 	of Wright's contemporary designs,
is 	symmetrical 	and 	on 	axis 	with 	the 	main 	fireplace,
which 	is 	conceived 	as 	a 	major 	incident. 	The 	plan, 	and
the 	spaces 	generated 	from 	it. 	admittedly 	lack 	the

-- 59 of 420 --

58 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
tension 	and 	control 	of Wright's 	prairie 	houses, 	but 	the
combination 	of 	formal 	and 	informal 	qualities 	so
appropriate 	to 	the 	social 	role 	and 	meaning 	of 	such 	a
dwelling 	is 	a 	widely 	shared 	feature 	of 	much 	Arts 	and
Crafts design 	of the 	period. 	So is 	the 	attempt 	at 	unifying
the 	building 	with 	its 	setting, 	achieved 	in 	this 	case 	by
the prevalent 	horizontality, 	the 	ambiguous situation 	of
porches 	half 	inside, 	half 	outside, 	the 	sympathy 	for
nature 	of 	the 	materials, 	the 	provision 	made 	for
planting, 	and 	the 	irregularly 	edged 	plan 	blending 	with
the 	garden. 	It 	is 	the 	theme 	of the 	'natural 	house' 	taken
to 	an 	extreme 	which 	the 	California 	climate 	and 	flora
encouraged.
While 	'craftsmen's' 	ideals 	were 	usually 	carried
through 	in 	domestic 	contexts, 	this 	was 	not 	their 	only
outlet, 	and 	both 	Mackintosh's 	School 	of 	Art 	and
Wright's 	Unity 	Temple 	were 	notable 	examples 	of
similar 	ideas 	being 	worked 	through 	in 	institutional
settings. 	In 	Northern 	California. 	Bernard 	Maybeck
produced 	an 	exemplary 	craftsman's 	building 	in 	his
First 	Church 	of 	Christ. 	Scientist, 	in 	Berkeley 	of
1909-11 	(fig. 	4.11). 	Actually, 	the 	building 	defies
simple 	categorization: 	it 	is 	both 	unique 	and 	eccentric.
Maybeck 	had 	been 	trained 	as 	a 	furniture 	maker 	and
had 	then 	revelled 	in 	his 	Beaux-Arts 	education 	in Paris.
The 	church 	is 	steeped 	in 	tradition 	and 	relies 	strongly
on 	the 	ceremonial 	axial 	compositional 	ideas 	basic 	to
the 	Beaux-Arts outlook. 	But 	the 	architectural 	elements
assembled 	above 	this 	hieratic 	plan 	have little to do 	with
the 	grand 	Classical 	manner 	(although 	the 	same
architect's 	designs 	at 	the 	Pacific 	Exhibition 	of 	191
5
were to 	show 	him 	a 	master of a 	personal 	style 	rooted 	in
Classical 	prototypes): 	rather 	we 	are 	confronted 	by 	a
jumble 	of 	styles 	- 	Gothic. 	Suburban 	California. 	Stick
Style, 	and 	an 	almost 	fantastic 	variety 	of 	materials,
including 	carved 	wood, 	industrial 	sash, 	asbestos, 	and
wisteria. 	Yet the 	design 	has 	a 	convincing 	unity 	and 	far
transcends 	its 	sources.
If 	Maybeck 	represents 	a 	rugged 	and 	obsessive
extreme 	of 	the 	Craftsman's 	Movement 	in 	the 	western
United 	States, 	then 	Irving 	Gill 	must 	be 	taken 	as 	the
complement 	because 	of 	the 	sobriety 	and 	broad
simplicity 	of 	his 	approach. 	Born 	in 	1870. 	he 	was
largely 	self-taught 	and 	much 	influenced 	by 	the 	fact
that 	his 	father 	was 	a 	building 	contractor 	with 	a 	knack
for 	finding 	short 	cuts 	in 	construction. 	Gill 	himself was
an 	early 	advocate 	of 	reinforced 	concrete 	in 	domestic
design, 	and 	like 	Perret 	thought 	that 	the 	material
required 	a 	simple 	rectangular 	vocabulary. 	He 	was
reinforced 	in this 	view 	by 	his 	personal 	reactions 	to 	the
regional 	traditions 	of the 	south-western 	United 	States,
especially 	the 	mud 	adobe constructions 	of the 	area 	and
the 	white-walled 	Mission 	style 	dwellings 	with 	their
planar, 	white 	surfaces, 	low 	roofs, 	and 	extending
pergolas. 	But 	Gill's 	was 	no mere 	grass 	roots 	romantic-
ism: 	his 	work 	was 	motivated 	by 	a 	social 	vision 	of
considerable 	breadth. 	He 	thought 	of California 	as 	the
last 	frontier, 	and 	therefore 	a 	suitable 	place 	for 	the
expression 	of a 	new 	way 	of life 	based 	on 	the 	best 	of old
American 	democratic 	ideals. 	The 	significance 	of
stripped 	simplicity 	in 	his 	work 	was 	therefore 	partly
moral, but 	very 	far 	in 	its 	meanings 	from 	the 	machine
idolization 	of 	the 	avant-garde 	in 	Europe 	who 	were 	to
create 	the 	modern 	movement 	of 	the 	twenties. 	On 	the
contrary. 	Gill 	sought 	to 	make 	the 	broad 	masses 	of 	his
own 	designs 	an 	equivalent 	to 	the 	structures 	of nature.
We 	should 	build 	our 	house 	simple, 	plain 	and
substantial 	as a 	boulder, 	then 	leave 	the
ornamentation 	of it 	to 	Nature, 	who 	will 	tone 	it 	with
lichens, 	chisel 	it 	with 	storms, 	make 	it 	gracious 	and
friendly 	with 	vines 	and 	flower 	shadows 	as 	she 	does
the stone 	in 	the 	meadow. 	I 	believe 	also 	that 	houses
should 	be 	built 	more 	substantially 	and 	should 	be
made 	absolutely 	sanitary. 	If the 	cost 	of unimportant
ornamentation were 	put 	into 	construction, 	then 	we
would 	have 	a 	more 	lasting 	and 	a 	more 	dignified
house.
Gill's 	interpretation 	of 'Nature' 	went 	deeper 	than 	an
interest 	in 	sensitive 	siting 	and 	the 	elTects 	of weathering
on 	surfaces. 	Like 	Wright 	and 	Sullivan, 	he 	believed 	that
the 	best 	geometries 	were 	those 	abstracted 	from
nature's 	structures 	and 	processes: 	and 	that 	the 	forms
of art 	should 	emulate 	the 	fitness 	to 	purpose 	of 	natural
forms. 	In 	Gill's 	mind, 	the 	basic 	shapes 	of architectural
grammar 	were 	analogous 	to 	natural 	features 	and
capable 	of 	impressing 	the 	emotions 	of a 	spectator 	in
precise 	ways 	(fig. 	4.12).
4. 1 1 	Bernard 	Maybeck.
First 	Church 	of Christ.
Scientist, 	Berkeley.
California, 	iqog-ii.

-- 60 of 420 --

Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and 	the 	USA 	59
4. 1 2 	Irving 	Cill. 	Dodge
House. 	Los 	Angeles,
California. 	19 14-16.
EvLTV 	artist 	must 	sooner 	or 	later 	reckon 	directly.
personally 	with 	these 	four 	principles 	- 	the 	mightiest
of lines. 	The 	straight 	line 	borrowed 	from 	the
horizon 	is 	a 	symbol 	of greatness, 	grandeur 	and
nobility: 	the 	arch 	patterned 	Irom 	the 	dome 	of the
sky 	represents 	exultation, 	reverence, 	aspiration: 	the
circle 	is 	the 	sign 	of completeness, 	motion 	and
progression, 	as 	may 	be seen 	when 	a 	stone 	touches
water: 	the 	square 	is 	the 	symbol 	of power, 	justice,
honesty 	and 	Hrmness. 	These 	are the 	bases, 	the 	units
of architectural 	language, 	and 	without 	them 	there
can 	be 	no 	direct 	or 	inspired 	architectural 	speech.
In 	the 	broad 	picture of the transition 	from the 	"styles'
of 	the 	nineteenth 	century 	to 	the 	creation 	of 	modern
architecture, 	the 	continuation 	of 	the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
Movement 	into 	the 	twentieth 	century 	played 	a 	partial
role, 	and 	inspired 	individual 	work 	of 	outstanding
quality. 	Rather than 	a unified style, 	there 	were 	broadly
shared 	concerns. 	It 	so 	happened 	that 	Gill 	anticipated
some 	superficial 	aspects 	of 	the 	white, 	geometrical
architecture 	of the 	1920s, 	but 	his 	work 	was 	virtually
unknown 	in 	Europe 	and 	his 	outlook 	quite 	different.
Indeed 	much 	of the 	effort 	of the 	generation 	which 	was
to create the modern 	movement in Europe was directed
aijainst 	handicraft 	aspirations. 	Nonetheless. 	Arts 	and
Crafts 	ideals 	had 	an 	important 	purgative 	function 	by
stressing 	values 	of 	simplicity, 	honesty, 	and 	necessity.
Ideals 	such 	as 	these 	were 	to 	be 	fundamental 	to 	the
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	in 	Germany, 	an 	organization
which 	sought 	a 	more 	direct 	confrontation 	with
mechanization.

-- 61 of 420 --

5. 	Responses 	to 	Mechanization: 	the
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism
The 	problem 	of modern 	architecture 	is 	not 	a 	problem 	of rearranging 	its 	lines;
not 	a 	question 	of finding 	new 	mouldings, 	new 	architraves 	for 	doors 	and
windows: 	nor 	of replacing 	columns, 	pilasters 	and 	corbels 	with 	caryatids,
hornets 	and 	frogs. 	. 	. 	. 	But 	to 	raise 	the 	new-built 	structure 	on 	a 	sane 	plan,
gleaning 	every 	benefit 	of science 	and 	technology, 	settling 	nobly 	every
demand 	of our 	habits 	and 	our 	spirits, 	rejecting 	all 	that 	is 	heavy, 	grotesque
and 	unsympathetic 	to 	us 	(tradition, 	style, 	aesthetics, 	proportions),
establishing 	new 	lorms. 	new 	lines, 	new 	reasons 	for 	existence, 	solely 	out 	of the
special 	conditions 	of Modern 	living, 	and 	its 	projection 	as 	aesthetic 	value 	in
our 	sensibilities.
A. 	Sant' 	Elia. 	1914
From 	tlie 	beginning 	tlie 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	movement 	had
been 	permeated 	with 	preservationist 	sentiments 	and 	a
nostalgia 	for 	a 	supposed 	integrated 	society 	preceding
the 	chaotic 	effects 	of 	industrialization. 	By 	contrast, 	in
the 	decade 	before 	the 	First 	World 	War. 	especially 	in
Germany 	and 	Italy, 	philosophical, 	poetic, 	and 	eventu-
ally 	formal 	attitudes 	emerged 	in 	which 	an 	adulatory
view 	of mechanization 	was 	to 	be 	found. 	U 	has 	already
been 	suggested 	that 	the 	very 	notion 	of 	'modern'
architecture 	presupposed 	a 	progressivist 	sense 	of
history: 	it 	is 	only 	by 	examining 	the 	theories 	of 	the
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	in 	Germany 	and 	of the 	Futurists
in 	Italy 	(which 	contrasted 	considerably) 	and 	the
parallel 	architectural 	ideas 	of men 	like 	Peter 	Behrens.
Walter 	Gropius. 	and 	Antonio 	Sant' 	Elia. 	that 	one 	may
grasp how mechanization came to be regarded as a 	sort
of 	essential 	motor 	to 	the 	forward 	march 	of 	history,
requiring 	an 	appropriate 	expression 	in 	architecture
and 	design.
This 	is 	not 	to 	suggest 	for 	one 	minute 	that 	u
consensus 	was 	reached 	on 	just 	how 	this 	should 	be
done. 	In 	Germany, 	which 	industrialized 	later 	than
England 	and 	France, 	and 	experienced 	some 	of 	the
opportunities 	and 	traumas 	of the 	process 	deeply, 	there
was 	much 	debate 	concerning 	the 	ideal 	relationship
between 	the 	artist 	and 	industry. 	Broadly 	speaking
there 	were 	four 	main 	strands 	of 	opinion. 	One 	of these
was 	a 	direct 	continuation 	of 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	values 	in
the 	Kunstgewerbeschulen. 	where 	the 	belief 	was
maintained 	that 	quality 	goods 	would 	be 	achieved 	only
through 	a 	concentration 	on 	handicrafts. 	Closely
related 	to 	this 	view 	was 	a 	highly 	individualistic 	idea 	of
the 	role 	of artistic 	invention 	which 	held 	that 	authentic
forms 	in 	architecture 	could 	arise 	only 	from 	the 	imprint
of the 	expressive 	temperament: 	this 	position 	tended 	to
extend 	the 	most 	subjective 	aspects 	of Art 	Nouveau 	and
led 	to 	the 	'Expressionist' 	outlook. 	A 	third 	position 	was
materialist 	and 	down-to-earth 	by 	contrast, 	and 	tended
to 	hold 	that 	the 	best 	forms 	would 	be those 	emerging
from 	the logical 	and direct 	use of new 	materials 	to solve
building 	problems: 	it 	was, 	in 	other 	words, 	a 	function-
alist 	outlook. 	The 	fourth 	position 	(the 	one 	which 	will
principally 	concern 	us) 	tended 	to 	regard 	the 	function-
alist 	as 	an 	uncultivated 	brute, 	the 	expressionist 	as 	an
irrelevant 	remnant 	of 	the 	cult 	of 	genius, 	and 	the
craftsman 	as 	an 	extinct 	entity 	unless 	directed 	to 	the
problems 	of 	designing 	objects 	for 	mass 	production.
Thus 	it 	became 	the 	business 	of 	the 	artist/architect 	to
design 	the 	'type 	forms' 	- 	be they 	objects 	of 	industrial
design, 	building 	elements, 	or 	pieces of urban 	structure
- 	of a 	new. 	mechanized 	and. 	let 	it 	be 	said. 	German
civilization. 	It 	was 	an 	ideology 	in 	which 	the 	artist 	had
to 	function 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	mediator 	between 	formal
invention 	and 	standardization, 	between 	personal 	style
and 	the 	appropriate 	form 	for 	the 	Zcittjeist 	(or 	'spirit 	of
the 	times'), 	between 	a 	sense 	of 	the 	contemporary
world, 	and 	reliance 	on 	age-old 	artistic 	principles.
One 	of the 	most 	vocal 	proponents 	of such 	an 	outlook
was 	Hermann 	Muthesius. 	the 	founder of the 	Deutscher
Werkbund 	in 	1907. 	This 	organization 	was 	set 	up
precisely 	to 	forge 	closer 	links 	between 	German
industry 	and 	artists, 	in 	order 	to 	upgrade 	the 	quality 	of
national 	product 	design 	in 	emulation 	of 	what
Muthesius had seen 	in 	England. 	From 	the start 	this was
OVI-RI.KAF
S.2 	Peter 	Behrens.
turbine 	factory 	for 	AF.Ci.
Berlin. 	1908.

-- 62 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism 	6
1
5.1 	Peter Behrens. 	lamp
designs 	for mass
production, 	c. 	1908.
seen 	as 	being 	far 	more 	than 	a 	commercial 	matter, 	but
one 	involving 	deep 	probings 	into 	the 	nature 	of 	'the
German 	spirit', 	the 	role 	of 	form 	in 	industry 	and 	the
psychic 	life 	of the 	nation.
Far 	higher 	than 	the 	material 	is 	the 	spiritual : 	far
higher 	than 	function, 	material 	and 	technique,
stands 	form. 	These 	three 	aspects 	might 	be
impeccably 	handled 	but 	- 	if form 	were 	not 	- 	we
would 	still 	be 	living in 	a 	merely 	brutish 	world. 	So
there 	remains 	before 	us 	an 	aim, 	a 	much 	greater 	and
more 	important 	task 	- 	to 	awaken 	once 	more 	an
understanding 	of Form, 	and 	the 	renewal 	of
architectonic 	sensibilities.
Muthesius 	put 	his 	faith 	in 	the 	cultivated 	industrial
elite 	who, 	he 	hoped, 	could 	be 	educated 	to 	lead 	the
German 	nation 	on 	its 	innate mission: 	the elevation 	of a
general 	taste 	to 	a 	position 	of 	supremacy 	in 	world
markets 	and 	atTairs, 	and 	the 	efflorescence 	of 	an
intluential 	and 	genuine 	Kultur. 	The 	moral 	tenor 	of life
was 	to 	be 	raised 	through 	the 	impact 	of 	well-designed
objects 	in 	the 	market-place, 	in 	the 	home, 	and 	in 	the
work-place 	- 	indeed, 	in 	the 	environment 	as 	a 	vv'hole.
Evidently 	he 	envisaged 	a 	sort 	of unified 	style 	to 	replace
the 	confectionery 	of 	nineteenth-century 	eclecticism,
which 	should 	be 	as 	clearly 	expressed 	in 	a 	lamp-post,
a 	teacup, 	a 	monument, 	or 	even 	a 	factory 	building.
Central 	to 	his 	outlook 	was 	a 	belief 	in 	the 	return 	to
fundamental 	formal 	qualities 	which 	would 	express
architectonically 	the 	dignity 	and 	the 	calm 	endeavour
of a 	new, 	confident 	national 	German 	spirit. 	There 	are
echoes 	in 	this 	outlook 	of 	the 	writings 	of 	Gottfried
Semper, 	who 	had 	forecast 	the 	necessity 	of 	a 	style
appropriate 	to 	machine 	methods 	after 	his 	visit 	to 	the
Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition 	of 1 8 5 1 . 	And it
comes 	as 	no 	surprise 	to 	find 	that 	Muthesius 	had 	a
considerable 	sympathy 	for 	the 	grandeur 	of 	the
Classical 	tradition 	- 	especially 	as 	manifested 	in 	the
work 	of Karl 	Friedrich 	Schinkel - 	which 	seemed 	to 	sum
up 	so 	well 	the 	combination 	of 	martial 	values 	and
impersonal 	power, 	scholarship and formal abstraction,
that 	Muthesius 	perhaps 	envisaged 	as 	essential 	to 	the
necessary 	style 	for 	his 	own 	times.
. 	. 	. 	the 	re-establishment 	of an 	architectonic 	culture
is 	a 	basic 	condition 	of all 	the 	arts. 	... 	It 	is 	a 	question
of bringing 	back 	into 	our 	way 	of life 	that 	order 	and
discipline 	of which 	good 	Form 	is 	the 	outward
manifestation.
From 	the 	English 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	tradition
Muthesius 	inherited 	a 	concern 	for 	the 	moral 	power 	of
design 	to 	influence 	people's 	lives, 	a 	sense of integrity 	in
the 	expression 	of the 	nature 	of materials, 	a 	feeling 	for
the dignified embodiment of function, 	and an 	obsession
with 	the 	'dishonesty' 	of 	false 	revivalism. 	However,
these 	notions 	were 	cross-bred, 	as 	it 	were, 	with 	the 	ideal
of 	designing 	for 	the 	machine 	and 	with 	philosophical
concepts 	derived 	from 	the 	German 	idealist 	tradition.
Central 	to 	these 	was 	the 	notion 	that 	it 	was 	the 	destiny
of Germany to realize some higher idea 	in the historical
scheme 	of 	things, 	and 	a 	related 	notion 	that 	a 	sort 	of
'will-to-form' 	with 	a 	strong 	national 	taint 	would
realize 	the 	forms 	of a 	genuine 	style. 	Such 	a 	style 	would
not 	then 	be 	seen 	as 	a 	merely 	personal, 	conventional 	or
wilful 	matter, 	but 	as 	an 	inevitable 	force 	of 	destiny: 	a
universal 	necessity.
It 	is 	evident 	that 	the 	ephemeral 	is 	incompatible
with 	the 	true 	essence 	of architecture. 	The 	peculiar
qualities 	of architecture, 	constancy, 	tranquillity
and 	permanence 	and 	its 	thousand-year-old
traditions 	of expression, 	have 	almost 	come 	to
represent 	what 	is 	eternal 	in 	human 	history. 	... 	Of
all 	the 	arts, 	architecture 	is 	the 	one 	which 	tends
most 	readily 	towards 	the 	typical 	and 	only 	thus 	can
it 	really 	fulfil 	its 	aims. 	It 	is 	only 	by 	steadily striving
for a 	single 	target 	that 	we 	shall 	be 	able 	to 	recover
the 	quality 	and 	the 	unerring 	surety 	of touch 	that
we 	admire 	in 	the 	achievements 	of the 	past, 	where
singleness 	of purpose 	was 	inherent 	in 	the 	age.
It 	would be 	too simple, 	and 	too convenient, 	to see the
architecture 	of Peter 	Behrens 	as 	a 	direct 	illustration 	of
Muthesius's 	aspirations: 	but 	after 	about 	1907 	there
was 	a 	considerable 	consonance 	in 	their 	positions,
especially 	in 	the 	designs 	that 	Behrens 	executed 	for 	the

-- 63 of 420 --

62 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture

-- 64 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and Futurism 	6 3
giant 	electrical 	concern. 	AFXr. 	these 	included 	objects
for 	mass 	production, 	like 	lamps 	(tig. 	5.1 	). 	posters, 	and
furniture, 	as well 	as buildings. 	His 	artistic career to that
date 	had 	been 	symptomatic 	of 	more 	general 	develop-
ments, 	starting 	with 	an 	immersion 	in 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
ideals 	while 	present 	at 	the 	Darmstadt 	Artists' 	Colony,
founded 	by 	the 	Grand 	Duke 	Ernst 	Ludwig 	von 	Hessen
in 	1899. 	Behrens, 	while 	one 	of 	the 	seven 	founding
inmates 	of 	the 	colony 	(l.M. 	Olbrich 	was 	another),
wrote 	of 	the 	'physical 	pleasure 	existing 	in 	the 	useful
and 	the 	suitable' 	and 	stressed 	the 	need 	for 	a 	new
integration 	of the 	two. 	His 	own 	house 	of 	1902 	shows
him 	to 	have 	passed 	through 	a 	dreamy 	Art 	Nouveau
phase, 	with 	a 	rich 	fusion 	of 	curvilinear 	forms 	and
melancholic 	emotions 	of the 	sort 	which 	appealed 	to 	an
inward-looking 	frame 	of 	mind. 	Behrens's 	search 	for 	a
genuine 	German 	art 	then 	seems 	to 	have 	taken 	him
through 	a 	rapijel a 	Vordre 	which 	manifested 	itself in 	the
stereometric 	and 	planar 	geometries of his 	Romanesque
inspired 	buildings 	at 	the 	Oldenburg 	Exhibition 	of
190s- 	By 	the 	time 	he 	worked 	for 	the 	AEG. 	his 	outlook
had matured considerably and 	his vocabulary began to
exhibit 	overtly 	neo-classical 	characteristics. 	Like
Muthesius. 	Behrens 	sensed 	in 	Schinkel 	a 	combination
of nationalist 	and 	idealistic 	associations 	suitable 	to his
own 	task 	of formulating 	an 	imagery 	for 	the 	industrial
elite. 	Here 	it 	has 	to 	be 	said 	he 	was 	fortunate 	in 	the
attention 	and 	interest 	of 	Emil 	Rathenau 	as 	his 	chief
AEG 	patron, 	for 	here 	was 	a 	man 	who 	combined
cultural 	and 	technical 	interests 	in 	a 	single 	outlook.
Both 	Rathenau 	and 	Behrens felt that industrial 	tasks
must 	be seen 	as 	the 	essential 	cultural 	ones 	of the 	time.
The 	factory 	thus took on 	a 	far 	greater significance 	than
it 	had 	usually 	possessed. 	Behrens 	realized 	that 	his
client 	required 	impressive 	and 	cultivated 	looking
buildings 	in 	the 	grand 	manner. 	Many 	of 	the 	factories
and 	warehouses 	he 	designed 	for 	the 	AEG 	between
1908 	and 	1 9 14 	were 	ingenious 	fusions 	of 	abstracted
Classical 	vocabulary 	and 	straightforward 	structural
skeletons. 	The 	Berlin Turbinenfabrik 	of 	1 908 	(tig. 	5.2 ).
for example, 	had the 	character of a temple 	dedicated 	to
some 	industrial 	cult. 	The 	colossal 	turbines 	had 	to 	be
lifted 	and 	moved 	from 	one end 	of the 	hall 	to 	the 	other
while 	work 	was 	done 	on 	them, 	a 	process 	requiring 	an
uninterrupted 	central 	aisle 	and 	an 	overhead 	moving
gantry. 	Behrens's 	solution 	was 	to 	make 	the 	whole
building 	a 	series 	of 	elegant, 	parallel 	two-sided 	cranes
meeting 	at 	the 	peak 	of 	the 	roof. 	There 	was 	a 	grand,
even 	ennobling 	character 	to 	the 	whole, 	and 	effects 	of
visual 	lightness 	and 	massiveness 	were 	cleverly 	or-
chestrated 	to 	emphasize 	the 	overall 	lines. 	Had 	Behrens
been 	a 	mere 	functionalist 	he 	might 	simply 	have
optimized 	the 	functions 	and 	clothed 	the 	resulting
structure 	in 	cheap 	materials 	without 	concern 	for
proportion, 	let 	alone 	the 	impact 	of forms 	on 	the 	spirit:

-- 65 of 420 --

64 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
had 	he 	been 	an 	'expressionist' 	(like 	his 	contemporary
Hans 	Poelzig 	in 	Breslau) 	he 	might 	have 	sought 	to
dramatize 	the 	process 	of 	movement 	with 	a 	highly
sculptural 	formal 	arrangement. 	But 	Behrens 	steered 	a
way 	between 	these 	approaches 	in 	a 	search 	for 	a 	sober
and, 	indeed, 	'typical' 	form 	in 	the 	'Classical/German
spirit'. 	The 	supports 	and 	profile 	were 	adjusted 	to 	give 	a
dignified 	rhythm 	and 	impression 	of repose: 	the 	gantry
shape 	was 	blended 	ingeniously 	with 	the 	image 	of a
Classical 	pediment: 	and 	the 	repeated 	exposed 	steel
supports 	along 	the 	side 	elevations 	were 	given 	the
character 	of a 	Iravee 	of Classical 	supports. 	Meanwhile
the 	vast 	areas 	of 	glass 	in 	the 	main 	facade 	were 	laid
flush 	with 	the 	pediment 	plane, 	so 	as 	to 	give the sense 	of
a 	thin 	screen 	hovering 	in 	front 	of 	the 	massive 	corner
quoins 	in 	concrete, 	which 	provided 	a 	suitable 	sense 	of
structural 	stability 	to 	the 	eye.
Behrens's 	intuition 	for 	primary 	geometrical 	volumes
in 	the 	Classical 	tradition 	(perhaps 	enhanced 	by 	his
reading 	of 	formalist 	art 	historians 	like 	Heinrich
VVolfflinI 	allowed 	him 	to 	bring 	a 	sense 	of proportion 	to
numerous 	other 	categories 	of industrial 	structure. 	His
design 	for 	a 	gasworks 	at 	Frankfurt 	of 	191 	1 	(fig. 	S-3).
for 	example, 	was 	composed 	of 	simple 	cylinders 	in
dramatic 	juxtaposition. 	Indeed 	engineering 	aesthetics
was 	a 	topic 	of 	recurrent 	interest 	to 	the 	Deutscher
Werkbund. 	and 	it 	was 	not 	unusual 	for 	debates 	to 	be
held 	comparing 	the 	relative 	aesthetic 	value 	of 	one
signal 	gantry 	over 	another. 	The 	Deutscher 	Werkbund
jahrhuch 	of 	191 	3 	even 	illustrated 	battleships 	and 	grain
silos 	as 	examples 	of designs 	combining 	functional 	logic
with 	impressive 	qualities 	of abstract 	form 	(fig. 	5.4).
In 	the 	same 	book 	there 	was 	an 	article 	entitled 	'The
Development 	of 	Modern 	Industrial 	Architecture' 	by 	a
young 	architect 	called 	Walter 	dropius 	who 	praised 	the
AEG 	factories 	as 	'monuments 	of 	sovereign 	strength,
commanding 	their 	surroundings 	with 	truly 	Classical
grandeur', 	and 	spoke 	too 	of:
, 	, 	, 	the 	compelling 	monumentality 	of the 	Canadian
and 	South 	African 	grain 	silos 	, 	, 	, 	and 	the 	totally
modern 	workshops 	of the 	North 	American 	firms
which 	bear 	comparison 	with 	the 	buildings 	of
Ancient 	Egypt 	, 	,
,
He 	further 	praised 	the 	'natural 	feeling 	for 	large
compact 	forms, 	fresh 	and 	intact' 	and 	suggested 	that
modern 	European 	architects 	might
:
. 	. 	. 	take 	this 	as 	a 	valuable 	hint 	and 	refuse 	to 	pay
any 	more 	heed 	to 	fits 	of historical 	nostalgia 	or 	other
intellectual 	considerations 	. 	. 	. 	which 	stand 	in 	the
way 	of true 	artistic 	naivete.

-- 66 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism 	6 5
5.3 	(fp/O 	Peter Behrens,
gasworlcs. 	Frankfurt.
It) 1 1.
5.4 	{below
left) 	American 	grain
silos, 	fnim 	Di-utscher
Werkbund lahrbuch,
1913.
5.5 	(below) 	Hans
Poelzig. 	L'liemical
factory. 	Luban, 	1411.
But 	Gropius 	went 	further 	still 	and 	claimed 	that 	the
spirit 	of modern 	times 	required 	its 	own 	expression 	in 	a
new 	style 	characterized 	by 	'exactly 	stamped 	form 	. 	.
.
clear 	contrasts, 	the 	ordering 	of 	members 	. 	. 	. 	unity 	of
form 	and 	colour 	. 	.
.'. 	which 	he 	argued 	was 	appropriate
to 	'the 	energy 	and 	economics 	of 	public 	life'. 	Among
those 	'to 	take 	this 	valuable 	hint' 	was 	the 	young
Charles 	Edouard 	Jeanneret 	(later 	Le 	Corbusier). 	who
worked 	in 	Behrens's 	office 	in 	19 10 	and 	remained 	in
touch 	with 	German 	developments 	after 	that 	date.
It 	is 	instructive 	to 	contrast 	Behrens's 	gas 	works
design 	with 	Hans 	Poelzig's 	for 	a 	water 	tower 	in 	Brcslau
in 	1 	908. 	or 	with 	the 	same 	architect's 	design 	for 	a
chemical 	works 	at 	Luban 	in 	1911 	(fig. 	5.5), 	as 	this
gives 	some 	sense 	what 	is 	meant 	by 	the 	'Expressionist
Wing' 	of 	the 	Werkbund. 	'Expressionism' 	is 	a 	blurred
term 	at 	best, 	and 	has 	little 	validity 	as 	a 	stylistic 	label. 	In
this 	context 	of 	industrial 	design 	it 	refers 	to 	an 	attitude
in 	which 	sobriety 	and 	stability 	were 	eschewed 	in
favour 	of restless, 	dynamic, 	and 	highly 	emotive 	forms.
In 	fact the functional 	rationale 	behind 	Poelzig's designs
was 	every 	bit 	as 	tight 	as 	that 	governing 	Behrens's. 	but
the 	emphasis 	of 	formal 	expression 	was 	dilTerent. 	The
roots 	of Expressionist 	vocabulary 	lie 	in 	this 	case 	in 	Art
Nouveau, 	and 	it was 	Art 	Nouveau 	with 	its emphasis on
individualism 	which 	most 	disturbed 	Muthesius.
Indeed, 	at 	the 	Werkbund 	Congress of 19 14 	there 	was a
celebrated 	debate 	between 	Henry 	van 	de 	Velde 	and
Muthesius 	which 	tended 	to 	be 	framed 	in 	terms 	of 	the
individualist 	outlook 	versus 	the 	philosophy 	of 	'the
typical'. 	Ultimately, 	such 	a 	discussion 	was 	one 	over
appropriateness: 	what 	should 	the 	true' 	modern 	style
belike.'
Behrens's 	office, 	with 	its 	stress 	on 	all 	aspects 	of
industrial design, 	was 	the 	training 	ground of a 	number
of 	artists 	who 	were 	to 	inherit 	the 	tensions 	and

-- 67 of 420 --

66 	• 	TheFormativeStrandsof Modern 	Architecture
successes 	of 	the 	pre-1914 	period 	and 	to 	contribute 	to
the 	Extremely 	creative 	phase 	of 	the 	1920s. 	Chief
among 	these 	were 	the 	future 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Mies 	van
der 	Rohe 	and 	Walter 	Gropius 	himself: 	indeed, 	these
three 	may 	have 	'overlapped' 	briefly 	in 	1910. 	Gropius
was 	born 	in 	1884 	and 	trained 	at 	the 	Charlottenburg
Hochschule 	and 	Munich: 	his 	earliest 	designs 	for
housing 	show 	a 	marked 	concentration 	on 	simple
volumes 	and 	shapes. 	In 	191 	1, 	after 	a 	thorough
training 	in 	Behrens's 	office, 	he 	received 	his 	own
commission 	to 	redesign 	the 	Fagus 	shoe-last 	factory 	at
Alfeld 	(fig. 	5.6). 	This 	belonged 	to 	Karl 	Benscheidt. 	who
had 	already 	overseen 	a 	design 	by 	one 	Eduard 	Werner,
an 	industrial 	architect 	from 	Hanover. 	The 	plan 	and
elevations 	had been 	fixed 	and had even 	passed 	the 	local
building 	authorities 	when 	Gropius 	was 	brought 	in 	to
provide 	improvements 	to 	the 	external 	treatment. 	He
modified 	the 	interior 	suggestions 	of 	his 	predecessor
only 	slightly. 	It is 	the 	visual 	treatment 	of the 	workshop
block 	which 	is 	significant 	in 	the 	creation 	of 	an
industrial 	style, 	indeed 	in 	the 	formation 	of a 	'factory
aesthetic' 	which 	would 	eventually 	influence 	the
universal 	machine 	style 	of a 	decade 	later. 	The 	devices
of the 	external 	wrapping 	of the 	building 	are 	intelligent
adaptations 	of 	Behrens. 	but 	the 	effect 	is 	absolutely
different, 	as 	here everything conspires 	to 	give a 	sense of
weightlessness 	and 	transparency 	rather 	than 	of mass.
The 	wall-piers 	have 	been 	recessed 	so 	that 	the 	glazing
appears 	to 	float 	as 	a 	transparent 	skin. 	Window 	bars,
brick 	mouldings 	and 	joints 	reinforce 	the 	main 	pro-
portions, 	and 	the 	image 	successfully 	incorporates 	a
symboUc 	reaction 	to 	mechanization 	as 	an 	idea. 	To 	be
sure. 	Gropius seems to 	have 	grasped the essential 	mood
of 	the 	programme 	of 	his 	client, 	which 	included 	the
provision 	of 	the 	latest 	that 	modern 	American 	in-
dustrial 	planning 	could 	offer: 	good 	ventilation, 	a
logical 	open 	plan 	for 	machine 	serial 	production, 	well-
lit 	spaces 	for 	draughtsmen 	and 	managers 	to 	go 	about
their 	business 	of 	helping 	improve 	the 	health 	of 	those
with 	foot 	problems.
However, 	it 	is 	interesting 	to 	contrast 	the 	'Fagus-
werk' 	with 	Albert 	Kahn's 	contemporary 	Ford 	factory
designs 	in 	Detroit 	(mentioned 	in 	Chapter 	3 	in
connection 	with 	reinforced-concrete 	construction).
These 	factories 	were 	built 	around 	naked 	commercial
and 	functional 	considerations. 	Admittedly 	due 	at-
tention 	was 	given 	to 	the 	relationship 	of 	solids 	and
voids, 	but 	it 	does 	not 	seem 	to 	have 	occurred 	to 	either
Kahn or Ford that their buildings might 	be the 	'index 	to
the 	spirit of the 	new 	times' ! 	In 	Germany 	the 	attitude 	to
factory 	design 	was 	quite 	different, 	and 	clothed 	in
philosophical 	speculation. 	As 	Gropius 	was 	to 	put 	the
matter 	after 	the 	war: 	his 	architecture 	was 	an 	attempt,
not 	only 	at 	accommodating 	the 	functions 	of 	the
modern 	world, 	but 	at 	symbolizing 	that 	world 	as 	well.
'4w
In 	1914 	Gropius 	and 	Adolt 	.Meyer 	were 	given 	the
important 	task 	of designing 	the 	Werkbund 	pavilion 	for
the 	Cologne 	exhibition. 	This 	was 	to 	house 	objects 	of
German 	industrial 	design 	in 	a 	framework 	which
should 	itself 	be 	an 	exemplary 	demonstration 	of
Werkbund 	ideals. 	The 	largest 	function 	was 	the
Machine 	Hall, 	placed 	on 	the 	main 	axis 	and 	expressed
as 	a 	simple, 	neo-classical 	railway 	shed. 	This 	was
approached 	through 	a 	courtyard 	enclosed 	by 	a
symmetrical 	entrance 	pavilion 	flanked 	by 	open 	glazed
staircases. 	The 	symmetry 	of the 	scheme 	was 	broken 	by
the 	'Deutzer 	Gasmotoren' 	pavilion 	(fig. 	5.8), 	attached
to 	the 	rear 	end 	of 	the 	machine 	hall 	on 	the 	cross 	axis.
The discipline 	of the 	plan 	(fig. 	S-?) 	recalled 	Beaux-Arts'
precedents, 	and 	the 	arrangement 	had 	a 	marked
processional 	character.
The 	forms 	rising 	into 	space 	above 	this 	plan,
however, 	had 	no 	obvious 	historical 	precedent. 	The
stripped 	brick 	volumes 	of 	the 	entrance 	block 	with
overhanging 	roofs 	and 	sharp 	horizontal 	parapets 	were
perhaps 	an 	echo 	of 	Wright 	in 	a 	formal 	mood. 	But 	the
glazed 	wrapping 	to 	the 	rear 	and 	the 	transparent,
streamlined 	stair-towers 	(with 	the 	spiral 	stairs 	visible
inside 	them) 	were 	stunning 	inventions 	which 	created,
not 	only 	a 	.sense 	of weightlessness 	and 	space, 	but 	also
an 	aura 	of crisp 	and 	disciplined 	machinery, 	of elegant
and 	dignified 	industrial 	control. 	Here 	there 	was
another 	quasi-sacral 	building 	dedicated 	to 	the 	values
of Germany's 	industrial 	elite, 	and 	it 	was 	typical 	of 	the
mood 	and 	taste 	of the 	whole, 	that 	a 	reclining 	Classical

-- 68 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization: 	the 	DeutscherWerkbund 	and 	Futurism 	67
5.6 	(/i7() 	Wiilter tiropius
and 	Adolf Meyer, 	shoe-
last 	factory. 	Aifeld.
191 1, 	general 	view
showing 	glass curtain
wall.
5.7lrifl/itl 	Walter
Gropius. 	Werkbund
Pavilion. 	Cologne. 	iyi4.
plan.
5.8(Mou') 	Walter
Gropius, 	Werkbund
Pavilion. 	Cologne. 	1 9 1 4.
view 	showing 	glass
stairs 	and 	gas 	motor
pavilion 	in 	far
background.
OVERLEAF
5.9 	Walter Gropius.
Werkbund 	Pavilion.
Cologne. 	1 4 14. 	roar
view 	showing 	Deutzer
Gasmotoren 	Pavilion,
right, 	and Maschinen
Halle, 	left.
• .. M 	f 	\-
"- 	''S!S3'-?.>

-- 69 of 420 --

68 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
liHP^*nT^y%;r?ftfTii«n 	r.

-- 70 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism 	69

-- 71 of 420 --

70 	• 	The Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
statue 	should 	have 	been 	placed 	at 	the 	end 	of 	a 	pool
leading 	up 	to 	the 	Deutzer 	Pavilion 	preceding 	the
'sacral 	object': 	a 	gas 	turbine 	engine 	(fig. 	S-9).
This 	transparent 	pavilion 	may 	well 	have 	been
inspired 	by 	an 	even 	more 	fantastic 	evocation 	of
industrialization. 	Bruno 	Taut's 	steel 	industry 	pavilion
at 	the 	Leipzig 	fair 	of 	1913 	(fig. 	S.io). 	This 	had 	been
built 	in 	the 	form 	of a 	ziggurat 	surmounted 	by 	a 	sphere,
the 	whole 	being 	constructed 	out 	of an 	elegant 	frame 	in
the material the 	pavilion 	had 	been 	built 	to 	celebrate
and 	advertise. 	Taut's 	work 	had 	more 	affinities 	with 	the
'Expressionist' 	wing 	of 	the 	Werkbund 	than 	with
Gropius, 	and 	was 	pervaded 	by 	a 	mystical, 	if 	not
Utopian, 	spirit somewhat 	at odds with 	the 	restraint 	and
sobriety, 	the 	beliefs 	in 	standardization 	and 	normative
solutions, 	of 	men 	like 	Behrens 	and 	Muthesius. 	Taut's
design 	for 	the 	Glass 	Pavilion 	at 	Cologne 	(fig. 	5.11)
made 	the 	contrast 	even 	more 	clear. 	This 	was 	in 	the
form 	of a 	sort 	of 	industrial 	mausoleum 	- 	a 	geodesic
dome 	of 	different 	coloured 	glass 	standing 	on 	a 	high
plinth 	reached 	by 	a 	grand 	flight 	of stairs. 	The 	interior
was 	dappled 	with 	different 	coloured 	patches 	of 	light
which 	reflected 	off 	glass 	brick 	stair-risers 	and 	slender
steel 	surfaces, 	and were 	accentuated by 	moving 	lenses.
There 	was 	all 	the 	craft 	here, 	and 	something 	of 	the
atmosphere, 	of 	an 	elaborately 	chased, 	carefully 	made
piece 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	tableware. 	But 	the 	fin 	dc 	siecle
qualities 	were 	transcended 	by 	a 	Utopian, 	forward-
looking 	aspiration: 	indeed 	it 	seems 	likely 	that 	the 	poet
and 	fantastic 	novelist 	Paul 	Scheerbart, 	who 	saw 	glass
as 	the 	material 	of 	the 	future, 	may 	have 	influenced
Taut's 	imagery.
We 	live 	for 	the 	most 	part 	in 	closed 	rooms. 	These
form 	the 	environment 	from 	which 	our 	culture
grows. 	Our 	culture 	is 	to 	a 	certain 	extent 	the 	product
of our 	architecture. 	If we 	want 	our 	culture 	to 	rise 	to
a 	higher 	level, 	we 	are 	obliged, 	for 	better 	or 	for
worse, 	to 	change 	our 	architecture. 	And 	this 	only
becomes 	possible 	if we 	take 	away 	the 	closed
character 	from 	the 	rooms 	in 	which 	we 	live. 	We 	can
only 	do 	that 	by 	introducing 	glass 	architecture,
which 	lets 	in 	the 	light 	of the 	sun, 	the 	moon 	and 	the
stars, 	not 	merely 	through 	a 	few 	windows, 	but
through 	every 	possible 	wall, 	which 	will 	be 	made
entirely 	of glass 	- 	of coloured 	glass. 	The 	new
environment 	which 	we 	thus 	create 	must 	bring 	us 	a
new 	culture.
It 	scarcely 	needs 	emphasizing 	that 	Gropius 	and
Taut, 	each 	in his own way, 	was attempting to 	celebrate
industrialization, 	to 	reveal 	its 	capacity 	for 	poetry, 	and
to suggest 	its 	genuine, 	progressive cultural 	potential. 	It
was 	to 	be 	the 	Gropius 	outlook 	and 	vocabulary,
however, 	with 	the 	inherent 	suggestion 	that 	rectan-
S.uM/f/fl 	Bruno Taut.
Steel 	Pavilion. 	Leipzig.
5. 1 	1 	[below left) 	Bruno
Taut, 	Glass 	Pavilion,
Cologne. 	1 9 14.

-- 72 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the 	Deutscher 	Wericbund 	and 	Futurism 	71
5.12 	Umberto 	Boccioni.
Stales of Mind. 	The
Farewells. 	191 1. 	Oil 	on
canvas, 	27I 	x 	i75in.
(70.5 	X 	96.2cm.). 	New
York. 	Museum of
Modern 	Art. 	gift 	of
Nelson 	A. 	Rockefeller.
gularity 	and 	transparency 	were 	appropriate 	visual
features 	of a 	new 	industrial 	architectonic 	order, 	which
would 	be 	more 	influential. 	However, 	before 	these
fragmentary 	suggestions 	of 	Gropius's 	pre-war 	build-
ings 	could 	congeal 	as 	the 	mature 	style 	of the 	twenties,
other 	catalysts 	would 	be 	necessary: 	particularly 	the
spatial 	and 	formal 	devices 	of 	abstract 	art. 	and 	the
poetic 	attitudes 	of 	Futurism, 	which would 	themselves
be 	fused 	in 	the 	philosophy 	and 	form 	of 	De 	StijI 	at 	the
end 	of the 	1910s.
Futurism 	was 	a 	poetic 	movement 	before 	it 	became 	a
movement 	in 	painting 	and 	sculpture, 	and 	an 	archi-
tectural 	movement 	in 	the 	limited 	sense 	that 	there 	was
a 	Futurist 	Manifesto 	of 	architecture 	of 	1914. 	and 	an
architect. 	Sant' 	Elia. 	whose 	drawings 	attempted 	to
translate 	Futurist 	ideals 	into 	a 	new 	urban 	imagery 	-
La 	Citta 	Nuova' 	(The 	New 	City'). 	The 	Foundation
Manifesto 	of Futurism 	was 	published 	in 	U' 	Fiiiaro 	of 20
February 	1 	909. 	and 	was 	the 	creation 	of 	the 	poet
Tommaso Filippo 	Marinetti. 	The 	Manifesto was 	a 	lively
attack 	on 	traditionalism 	in 	culture, 	and 	championed
an 	expression 	nourished 	by 	contemporary 	forces 	and
the 	poetic 	sensations 	released 	by 	a 	new 	industrial
environment. 	Anarchist 	in 	inspiration, 	the 	Futurist
outlook 	had 	no 	particular 	political 	affiliation, 	but 	was
in 	favour 	of revolutionary 	change, 	speed, 	dynamism 	of
all 	sorts, 	and 	an 	aggressive 	adulation 	of 	the 	machine.
Typically, 	the 	Foundation 	Manifesto 	suggested 	the
destruction 	of museums 	and 	academies: 	the 	vitality 	of
contemporary 	life 	was 	opposed 	to 	the 	tiredness 	of
inherited 	art 	forms:
We 	declare 	that 	the 	splendour 	of the 	world 	has
been 	enriched 	by 	a 	new 	beauty 	- 	the 	beauty 	of
speed. 	A 	racing 	car 	with 	its 	bonnet 	draped 	with
exhaust 	pipes, 	like 	fire-breathing 	serpents 	- 	a
roaring 	racing 	car. 	rattling 	along 	like 	a 	machine
gun. 	is 	more 	beautiful 	than 	the 	winged 	Victory 	of
Samothrace.
Of course 	Marinetti's 	writing did 	belong 	to 	an 	aesthetic
tradition, 	one stretching back 	through 	French 	Symbol-
ism 	to 	Baudelaire, 	the 	'poet 	of modern 	life'. 	In 	a sense,
then, 	the 	aim 	was 	to 	make 	the 	frontiers 	of art 	broader
and 	more 	inclusive, 	rather 	than 	to 	do 	away 	with 	them
altogether. 	The 	typical 	subject-matter 	of Futurism 	was
the 	modern 	metropolis, 	seen 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	collective
expression 	of the 	forces 	of society.
We 	will 	sing 	of the 	stirring 	of great 	crowds 	-
workers, 	pleasure 	seekers, 	rioters 	- 	and 	the
confused 	sea 	of colour 	and 	sound 	as 	revolution
sweeps 	through 	a 	modern 	metropolis. 	We 	will 	sing
the 	midnight 	fervour 	of arsenals 	and 	shipyards
blazing 	with 	electric 	moons: 	insatiable 	stations
swallowing 	the 	smoking 	serpents 	of their 	trains:
factories 	hung 	from 	the 	clouds 	by 	the 	twisted
threads 	of their 	smoke: 	bridges 	Hashing 	like 	knives
in 	the sun, 	giant 	gymnasts 	that 	leap 	over 	rivers:
adventurous 	steamers 	that 	scent 	the horizon: 	deep-
chested 	locomotives 	that 	paw 	the 	ground 	with 	their
wheels, 	like 	stallions 	harnessed 	with 	steel 	tubing:
the 	easy 	flight 	of aeroplanes, 	their 	propellers
beating 	the 	wind 	like 	banners, 	with 	a 	sound 	like 	the
applause 	of a 	mighty 	crowd.
The 	Futurist 	Manifestos 	of 	Painting 	(1910) 	and
Sculpture 	(191 2) 	attempted 	to 	extend 	Futurist 	sensi-
bility 	still 	further. 	Dynamism 	was 	the 	shared 	central
conception, 	and 	the 	early 	painters 	in 	the 	movement,
among 	them 	Boccioni 	and 	Severini, 	attempted 	to
translate 	the 	Futurist 	ethos 	not 	only 	by 	choosing 	such
subjects 	as 	trains 	leaving 	stations, 	building 	sites 	on 	the
edge 	of 	industrial 	cities, 	and 	strikes, 	but 	by 	treating
these 	themes 	in 	a 	vital 	play 	of complementary 	colours,
divisionist 	lighting 	effects 	and 	unstable 	diagonal
compositions. 	In 	19 11 	the devices of analytical Cubism

-- 73 of 420 --

J2 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
began 	to 	be 	absorbed 	by 	the 	Futurist 	painters, 	with 	the
result 	that 	fragmentation, 	interpenetrations 	of 	space
and 	form, 	abstraction 	and 	elements 	of 	reality 	were
incorporated. 	The 	Cubist 	device 	of 	showing 	different
viewpoints 	of 	an 	object 	was 	co-opted 	to 	express
duration 	and 	the 	different 	states of objects 	unfolding 	in
their 	environment 	Ifig. 	5.12). 	This 	was 	a 	key 	element
of 	Futurist 	doctrine, 	related 	no 	doubt 	to 	the 	artists'
adulation 	of 	Henri 	Bergson's 	philosophical 	ideas 	on
time 	and 	flux, 	Bergson 	emphasized 	the 	primacy 	of
change 	in 	all 	reality 	and 	the 	role 	of 	intuition 	in
perceiving 	it. 	Futurist 	painters 	far 	transcended 	any
banal 	'realism 	of 	contemporary 	appearances' 	by
attempting 	to 	create 	symbolic 	ci/K/wi/cnts 	to 	their
excited 	state 	of 	mind 	when 	faced 	by 	entirely 	new
stimuli 	like speed, 	artificial 	light, 	steel 	and 	fast car rides.
Futurist 	sculpture 	likewise 	opened 	up 	new
expressive 	territory 	in 	an 	attempt 	at 	expressing 	'the
universal 	dynamism' 	- 	the 	flux 	of 	modern 	life. 	The
Sculpture 	Manifesto 	announced 	that 	the 	basis 	of 	this
new 	form 	would 	be 	'architectonic':
. 	. 	. 	not 	only 	as a 	construction 	of masses, 	but 	also
because 	the 	sculptural 	block 	will 	contain 	within
itself architectonic 	elements 	from 	the 	sculptural
environment 	in 	which 	the 	object 	e.xists.
Boccioni's 	drawing 	Bottigha + 	Tnvola + Casseggiata 	of
191 	2 	seems 	to 	demonstrate 	this 	'field' 	conception 	of
space, 	and 	suggests 	how 	important 	transparency 	and
the 	intersection 	of planes 	were 	as 	principles 	of Futurist
composition. 	When 	he 	came 	to 	translate 	these 	ideas
into 	sculpture, 	the 	artist 	had 	to 	adopt 	different
techniques, 	obviously, 	and 	his 	Bottle 	Unfolding 	in 	Spnce
(fig. 	5.1 	3) 	attempted 	to 	evoke 	the 	shifting 	energies 	of
an 	object, 	its 	palpitation 	and 	movement 	in 	its
surroundings. 	Forms 	of Continuity 	in 	Space - 	a 	dynamic
human 	figure 	striding 	forward 	with 	flailing 	planes 	of
bronze 	rushing 	from 	its 	edges 	- used 	the 	evanescent
lighting effects of polished 	surfaces to evoke dynamism.
However, 	the 	Sculpture 	Manifesto 	was 	in 	theory
opposed 	to 	traditional 	hierarchies 	of 	material 	value
(bronze, 	marble, 	etc.) 	and 	suggested 	(again, 	no 	doubt,
following 	the 	juxtaposition 	of 	humble 	and 	heroic
values 	in 	Cubism) 	the 	incorporation 	of new 	synthetics:
Destroy 	the 	purely 	literary 	and 	traditional 	nobility
of bronze 	and 	marble. 	Deny 	that 	only 	one 	material
should 	be 	used 	exclusively 	for 	the 	whole 	of a
sculptural 	construction. 	Affirm 	that 	even 	twenty
different 	materials 	can 	join 	in 	one 	work 	to 	increase
the 	scope 	of its 	plastic 	emotion. 	We 	enumerate
.some: 	glass, 	wood, 	iron, 	cement, 	hair, 	leather,
cloth, 	electric 	light, 	etc.
Although 	there 	was 	not. 	properly 	speaking, 	a
'Futurist 	Architecture', 	there 	was 	a 	sort 	of 	Futurist
manifesto 	on 	the 	subject. 	This 	was 	perhaps 	composed
by 	Antonio 	Sant' 	Efia. 	a 	young 	architect, 	with 	the 	help
of 	Marinetti, 	In 	its 	first 	version 	- 	known 	as 	the
'Messaggio' 	- 	it 	functioned 	as 	the 	introduction 	to 	a
show 	of 	Sant' 	Elia's 	drawings 	of 	the 	Citta 	Nuova 	in
1914 	(fig, 	5,14). 	Not 	surprisingly, 	this 	theoretical
architecture 	was 	conceived 	as 	a 	direct 	expression 	of
contemporary 	forces, 	and 	a 	dynamic 	celebration 	of the
uprooted, 	anti-natural 	tendencies 	of the 	modern 	city.
Such 	an 	architecture 	cannot 	be 	subject 	to 	any 	law
of historical 	continuity. 	It 	must 	be 	new 	as 	our 	state
of mind 	is 	new. 	... 	In 	modern 	life 	the 	process 	of
consequential 	stylistic 	development 	comes 	to 	a 	halt.
Architecture, 	exhausted 	by 	tradition, 	begins 	again,
forcibly 	from 	the 	beginning.
S. I s 	llmberto 	Boccioni.
Bottle 	Unfolding 	in Space,
1 9 1 2. 	Chalk drawing,
133 	X 	92'n.
(33.4X 	23.9cm.). 	Milan,
Raccolta 	Bertarelli.

-- 74 of 420 --

Responses 	to 	Mechanization : 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism 	7 	5
5.14 	Antonio 	Sant' 	Eiia,
LaCittaNuova. 	i')i4.
the central 	railway
station 	and 	airport.
Como. 	Museo 	Civico.
Thus 	the 	new 	architecture 	was 	to 	express 	'new
spiritual 	attitudes'; 	but 	it 	was 	also 	to 	find 	forms
appropriate 	to 	new 	materials 	and 	means 	of
construction:
Calculations 	of the 	resistance 	of materials, 	the 	use
of reinforced 	concrete 	and 	iron, 	exclude
'Architecture' 	as 	understood 	in 	the 	Classical 	and
traditional 	sense. 	Modern 	structural 	materials 	and
our 	scientific 	concepts 	absolutely 	do 	not 	lend
themselves 	to 	the 	disciplines 	of historical 	styles, 	and
are 	the 	chief cause 	of the 	grotesque 	aspect 	of
modish 	constructions 	where 	we 	see 	the 	lightness
and 	proud 	slenderness 	of girders, 	the 	slightness 	of
reinforced 	concrete, 	bent 	to 	the 	heavy 	curve 	of the
arch, 	aping 	the 	solidity 	of marble.
So 	far 	this 	was 	a 	negative 	definition 	which 	did 	not
imply 	a 	precise 	form 	beyond 	saying 	that 	new 	buildings
should 	be 	lighter 	and 	more 	open 	in 	expression, 	and 	no
longer 	fettered 	by 	inappropriate 	inherited 	ideas. 	Later
in 	the 	'Messaggio'. 	a clearer idea 	was 	given 	of the 	style
of this 	new 	expression 	of the 	times:
We 	must 	invent 	and 	rebuild 	ex 	novo 	our 	Modern
City 	like 	an 	immense 	and 	tumultuous 	shipyard,
active, 	mobile 	and 	everywhere 	dynamic, 	and 	the
modern 	building 	like 	a 	gigantic 	machine. 	Lifts 	must
no 	longer 	hide 	away 	like 	solitary 	worms 	in 	the
stairwells, 	but 	the 	stairs 	- 	now 	useless - 	must 	be
abolished; 	and 	the 	lifts 	must 	swarm 	up 	the fagades
like 	serpents 	of glass 	and 	iron. 	The 	house 	of cement,
iron 	and 	glass, 	without 	curved 	or 	painted
ornament, 	rich 	only 	in 	the 	inherent 	beauty 	of its
lines 	and 	modelling, 	extraordinarily 	brutish 	in 	its
mechanical 	simplicity 	. 	. 	. 	must 	rise 	from 	the 	brink
of a 	tumultuous 	abyss; 	the 	street 	itself will 	no
longer 	lie 	like 	a 	door-mat 	at 	the 	level 	of the
thresholds, 	but 	plunge 	stories 	deep 	into 	the 	earth,
gathering 	up 	the 	traffic 	of the 	metropolis 	connected
for 	necessary 	transfers 	to 	metal 	cat-walks 	and 	high-
speed 	conveyor 	belts.
For 	these 	reasons 	I 	insist 	that 	we 	must 	abolish
the 	monumental 	and 	the 	decorative; 	that 	we 	must
resolve 	the 	problem 	of modern 	architecture 	without
cribbing 	photographs 	of China. 	Persia 	or 	Japan, 	not
stultifying 	ourselves 	with 	Vitruvian 	rules, 	but 	with
strokes 	of genius, 	equipped 	only 	with 	a 	scientific
and 	technological 	culture; 	that 	everything 	must 	be
revolutionized: 	that 	we 	must 	exploit 	our 	roofs 	and
put 	our 	basements 	to 	work; 	depreciate 	the
importance 	of fai^ades; 	transfer 	questions 	of taste
out 	of the 	field 	of petty 	inouldings. 	fiddling 	capitals
and 	insignificant 	porticoes, 	into 	the 	vaster 	field 	of
the 	grouping 	of masses 	on 	the 	grandest 	scale. 	. 	.
.
That 	the 	new 	architecture 	is 	the 	architecture 	of
cold 	calculation, 	. 	. 	. 	boldness 	and 	simplicity: 	the
architecture 	of reinforced 	concrete, 	iron, 	glass,
textile 	fibres 	and 	all 	those 	replacements 	for 	wood,
stone 	and 	brick 	that 	make 	for 	the 	attainment 	of
maximum 	elasticity 	and 	lightness.
The 	'Messaggio' 	then 	draws 	to 	a 	close 	with 	a plea 	for
'raw. 	naked 	and 	violently 	coloured 	materials' : 	with 	an
affirmation 	that 	'real 	architecture' 	transcends 	func-
tionalism 	by 	being 	'synthesis 	and 	expression': 	with 	the
suggestion 	that 	inspiration 	be 	found 	in 	'the 	new
inechanical 	world 	we 	have 	created, 	of 	which 	archi-
tecture 	must 	be 	the 	fairest 	expression, 	the 	fullest
synthesis, 	the 	most 	effective 	artistic 	integration.'
It 	is 	probable 	that 	the 	'Messaggio' 	was 	inspired 	by
Sant' 	Elia's 	sketches 	rather 	than 	the 	other 	way 	round,
but 	these were 	themselves intuitive 	responses 	to earlier
Futurist 	attitudes. 	Although 	the 	theine 	of 	the 	exhibi-
tion 	was 	La 	Citta 	Nuova. 	there 	was 	no 	overall 	plan,
rather 	a 	collection 	of 	new 	building 	types 	and 	sug-
gestions 	for 	such 	things 	as 	power 	stations 	(fig. 	5.16),
airports, 	airship 	hangars, 	multi-level 	stations, 	and
stepped 	apartment 	buildings 	of 	a 	type 	called 	Caaa 	a
GiadiiuUe 	(fig. 	5.15). 	Although 	it 	was 	claimed 	that
these 	buildings 	had 	no 	roots 	in 	tradition, 	the 	style 	of

-- 75 of 420 --

74 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
some 	of 	the 	sketches 	suggested 	a 	purification 	of 	Art
Nouveau. 	and 	Sant' 	Elia 	had 	clearly 	been 	inspired 	- 	as
Gropius. 	Behrens, 	and 	Muthesius had - by 	the 	bold 	and
dramatic forms of nineteenth-century 	warehouses 	and
bridges. 	It 	is 	possible 	too. 	that 	the 	theme 	of 	the 	multi-
level 	city, 	like 	a 	colossal 	dynamic 	mechanism, 	may
have 	been 	inspired 	by 	photographs 	or 	sections 	of New
York 	City, 	showing 	multi-level 	elevated 	railways, 	and
skyscrapers. 	Among 	Sant' 	Elia's 	jottings 	were 	some
drawings 	which 	stripped 	buildings 	down 	to 	their 	most
essential 	volumes 	of 	rectangles, 	cylinders, 	and 	cones.
These 	were 	never 	as 	static 	in 	quality 	as 	Behrens's
industrial 	designs 	of the 	same 	period, 	but 	they 	were 	a
reminder 	that 	the 	Futurists, 	like 	the 	German 	archi-
tects, 	felt 	that 	pure 	forms 	and 	crisp 	straight 	lines 	were
in 	some 	sense 	appropriate 	to 	mechanization. 	The
Futurist 	Manifesto 	of sculpture 	had 	asserted 	that:
The 	straight 	line 	will 	be 	alive 	and 	palpitating: 	will
lend 	itself to 	all 	the 	expressive 	necessities 	of our
material, 	and 	its 	basic 	severity 	will 	be 	a 	symbol 	of
the 	metallic 	severity 	of the 	lines 	of modern
machinery.
Sant' 	Elia 	died 	in 	the 	war, but 	his 	ideas, 	and 	some 	of
his 	images, 	lived 	on 	in 	avant-garde 	circles 	in 	Holland,
Russia, 	Germany, 	and 	France. 	The 	importance 	of
Futurism 	in 	the 	context 	of 	the 	history 	of 	modern
architecture 	is 	clear: 	it 	pulled 	together 	a 	collection 	of
progressivist 	attitudes, 	anti-traditional 	positions 	and
tendencies 	towards 	abstract 	form, 	with 	the 	celebration
of modern 	materials, 	and 	an 	indulgence 	in 	mechanical
analogies. 	The 	contrast 	between 	the 	dynamic 	and
anarchical 	values 	of 	Futurism 	and 	the 	more 	stolid,
organized 	thought 	of 	the 	Deutscher 	VAerkbund 	is
obvious: 	but 	both 	movements 	rested 	on 	the 	central
assumption 	that 	the 	spirit 	of 	the 	times 	was 	inevitably
tied 	to 	the 	evolution 	of 	mechanization, 	and 	that 	an
authentic 	modern 	architecture 	must 	take 	this 	into
account 	in 	its functions, 	its methods of construction, 	its
aesthetics, 	and 	its 	symbolic 	forms.
5.15 	(/p/O 	Antonio 	Sant'
Elia. 	Casa a Gradinale.
1 9 14. 	Como. 	Museo
Civico.
S.ifi 	(nhoir) 	Antonio
Sant' 	Elia. 	power station.
1 9 1 3. 	Como. 	Museo
Civico.

-- 76 of 420 --

6. 	The 	Architectural 	System 	of
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright
Radical 	though 	it 	may 	be. 	the 	work 	here 	illustrated 	is 	dedicated 	to 	a 	cause
conservative 	in 	the 	best 	sense 	of the 	word. At 	no 	point 	does 	it 	involve 	denial
of the 	elemental 	law 	and 	order 	inherent 	in 	all 	great 	architecture, 	rather 	it 	is 	a
declaration 	of love 	for 	the 	spirit 	of that 	law 	and 	order, 	and 	a 	reverential
recognition 	of the 	elements 	that 	made 	its 	ancient 	letter 	in 	its 	time 	vital 	and
beautiful.
F. 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	1908
Occasionally 	a 	single artist 	emerges 	who so 	profoundly
reorganizes 	the 	basic 	assumptions 	of a 	period 	that 	he
deserves 	to 	be considered 	in 	isolation. 	The 	creations 	of
such 	individuals 	are 	marl^ed 	by 	an 	extraordinary
consistency 	and 	integrity 	traceable 	to 	both 	a 	mastery
of means 	and 	a 	capacity 	to give an 	idealistic 	world view
a 	deep 	expression. 	The 	solutions 	embodied 	in 	their
work 	seem 	to 	solve 	problems 	that 	are 	relevant 	far
beyond 	their 	particular 	circumstances. 	Whether 	they
intend to or not. 	artists 	with 	such 	charisma 	become the
founders 	of new 	traditions. 	In 	the 	formation 	of modern
architecture 	two 	figures 	of 	this 	imaginative 	and
intellectual 	calibre 	obviously 	stand 	out: 	Le 	Corbusier
and 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright's 	architecture 	has 	occupied 	a
curious 	position 	in 	the 	histories 	of 	modern 	design. 	He
has 	been 	portrayed 	as 	one 	of 	the 	first 	architects 	to
break 	with 	eclecticism 	and 	to 	found 	a 	new 	style 	based
on 	a 	spatial 	conception 	of interpenetrating 	planes 	and
abstract 	masses, 	which 	(the 	story 	runs) 	then 	evolved,
especially 	through 	its 	influence 	on 	Dutch 	develop-
ments, 	into 	the 	International 	Style. 	In 	this 	view.
Wright's 	scattered 	remarks 	on 	the 	relevance 	of
machine 	production 	to 	architecture 	are 	to 	be 	taken 	as
evidence 	of 	his 	'forward-looking' 	stance. 	But 	there 	is
another 	version 	of Wright 	which 	emphasizes 	his 	roots
in 	American 	social 	ideals 	and 	plays 	up 	his 	regionalist
character 	and 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	allegiances. 	In 	this
scenario 	he 	emerges 	as 	a 	traditionalist 	intent 	on
preserving 	the 	values 	of an 	individualist 	yet 	democra-
tic 	frontier 	America 	against the 	onslaughts 	of mecha-
nization. 	Both 	views 	contain 	some 	truth 	- 	and 	the 	very
fact 	that 	so 	much 	can 	be seen 	in 	the 	work 	and 	thought
of a 	single 	artist 	should 	alert 	us 	to 	possible 	polarities 	in
a 	single 	outlook. 	The 	emphasis 	of 	this 	chapter 	will 	be
on 	the 	way 	this 	outlook 	was 	expressed 	in 	V\'right's
forms. 	It 	will 	be 	concerned 	with 	the 	way 	in 	which 	a
mythical 	and 	ideal 	view 	of society 	was condensed 	in 	an
architecture 	based 	on 	intuitive 	rules 	that 	was 	still
capable 	of a 	varied 	and 	rich 	expression.
Wright 	was 	born 	in 	1867. 	His 	father 	was 	a 	preacher
and 	his 	mother 	held 	the 	fervent 	belief 	that 	her 	son
would 	be 	a 	great 	architect. 	His 	parents 	eventually
separated, 	and 	it 	is 	arguable 	that 	Wright's 	later
obsession 	with 	the 	expression 	of 	idealized 	family
relationships 	may 	have 	owed 	something, 	in 	a 	com-
pensatory 	way. 	to 	the 	effect 	of 	an 	unhappy 	and
uprooted 	home 	life 	on 	a 	sensitive 	nature. 	A 	strong
early 	influence 	was 	the 	experience 	of 	working 	on 	his
uncle's 	farm 	in 	Wisconsin: 	Wright 	later 	recalled 	how
he 	would 	fix 	his 	attention 	on 	a 	tree, 	a 	hill, 	or a flower
and 	wander 	off 	into 	reveries 	of 	abstract 	forms 	and
shapes. 	Another 	crucial 	formative 	influence 	was 	some
'Froebel' 	blocks 	which 	his 	mother 	acquired 	for 	him 	at
the Philadelphia 	exhibition 	of 	iS/t) 	(fig. 	6.^)). 	Wright
derived 	great 	delight 	from 	arranging 	these 	simple
geometrical 	forms 	into 	formal 	patterns 	matching 	his
intuitive compositional sense. 	It was 	part of the 	Froebel
method 	that 	a 	configuration 	should 	be 	linked 	to 	a
cosmic 	theme. 	The 	architect's 	later 	formal 	strategies in
design, 	and 	his 	belief 	in 	the 	universality 	of 	funda-
mental 	geometrical 	forms 	may 	be 	traced 	in 	part 	to
these 	early 	experiences.
Wright's 	architectural 	training 	was 	far 	from 	ortho-

-- 77 of 420 --

The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
i
dox. 	He 	began 	by 	studying 	engineering 	in 	1 	885 	at 	the
University 	of 	Wisconsin 	but 	did 	not 	stay 	the 	course.
Instead 	he 	moved 	to 	Chicago 	where 	he 	worked 	in 	the
office 	of Joseph 	Lyman 	Silsbee. 	a 	designer 	of suburban
houses. 	Here he 	learned 	much 	about 	the basic 	business
of 	domestic 	design 	and 	immersed 	himself 	in 	the
prevalent 	modes 	of 	suburban 	architecture. 	In 	1887
Wright 	moved 	on 	to 	work 	for 	Louis 	Sullivan 	who. 	at
the 	time, 	was 	occupied 	with 	evolving 	the 	principles
and 	forms 	of an 	organic 	architecture, 	especially 	for 	the
design 	of 	skyscrapers. 	As 	was 	suggested 	in 	an 	earlier
chapter. 	Sullivan 	was 	an 	idealist 	who 	believed 	that 	the
architect 	in 	the 	Midwest 	had 	a 	unique 	opportunity 	to
form 	the 	images 	of a 	culture, 	uncluttered 	by imported
and 	foreign 	forms, 	yet 	founded 	upon 	the 	ancient
principles 	of 	architecture. 	His 	frequent 	use 	of 	organic
analogies 	in 	his 	writings, 	building 	forms 	and 	orna-
mental 	designs 	was 	the 	outward 	expression 	of a 	belief
^'»~*gitr2: 	.^7T|j{^,,„T|nril.

-- 78 of 420 --

The 	Architectural 	System 	ot' Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	• 	77
(-1.1 	I above} 	("rank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Winslow 	House.
River 	1-orest. 	near
Chicago. 	Illinois. 	1893;
the emergence of a 	clear
tripartite division 	in 	the
facade. 	(For 	plan 	see 	fig.
h.io.)
6.2 	(/p/O 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Winslow 	House.
River Forest. 	Illinois.
184^. 	rear 	view.
in 	the 	roots 	of 	architecture 	and 	society 	in 	a 	natural
order. 	By 	a 	feat 	of visionary 	abstraction 	the 	artist 	was
to 	dig 	below 	the 	surface 	of his 	society 	and 	see 	the 	inner
meaning 	of 	human 	institutions, 	then 	give 	them 	an
appropriate 	form, 	iie 	was 	obsessed 	with 	the 	idea 	that
the 	architect 	was 	specially 	endowed 	with 	the 	gift 	of
prophesying 	the 	'true' 	form 	of democracy.
Much 	of 	this 	Wright 	absorbed 	and 	eventually
elaborated 	in 	his 	own 	way 	but 	in 	the 	realm 	of 	the
individual 	family 	dwelling. 	He 	was quickly 	given 	much
responsibility 	in 	the 	office but 	broke 	away 	after a 	period
of 	about 	five 	years 	to 	set 	up 	his 	own 	practice 	in 	his
studio 	alongside 	his 	home 	in 	Oak 	Park, 	a 	suburb 	of
Chicago. 	His 	own 	house, 	designed 	when 	he 	was 	22.
gives 	some 	idea of 	his 	formative 	period. 	Shingle 	Style
influences 	stemming 	from 	Silsbec 	were 	controlled 	by 	a
strong 	formal 	discipline: 	elements 	like 	the 	porch 	and
the 	overhanging 	roof 	were 	intrinsic 	to 	the 	Chicago
suburban 	vernacular, 	being 	.sensible 	ways 	of 	dealing
with 	the 	extremes 	of 	climate 	and 	of 	linking 	house 	to
garden : 	the 	focal 	position 	of 	the 	hearth 	was 	another
traditional 	feature 	of 	the 	American 	home, 	which
Wright 	was 	gradually 	to 	infuse 	with 	his 	own
meanings. 	But 	the 	spaces 	of the 	lower 	floor 	flowed 	into
one 	another 	more 	than 	was 	usual 	in 	a 	design 	of 	this
kind, 	and 	the 	whole 	form 	was 	ingeniously 	controlled
by 	axes 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	there 	was 	the 	feeling 	of
rotation 	about 	the 	central 	core. 	With 	hindsight, 	one
may 	begin 	to 	grasp 	here 	certain 	underlying 	tendencies
which 	were 	to 	become 	clearer 	later 	on.
Wright's 	breakthrough 	building 	was 	the 	Winslow
House 	of 	1893, 	built 	in 	River 	Forest, 	a 	suburb 	of
Chicago 	near 	Oak 	Park. 	Mr. 	Winslow 	was 	a 	business-
man 	who 	had 	recently 	moved 	to 	Chicago 	and 	who
wanted 	a 	house 	devoid 	of 	frills, 	but 	with 	a 	solid
elegance. 	The 	formality 	of the 	building 	is 	evident 	in 	the
first 	view. 	The 	main 	fai^ade 	(fig. 	6.1) 	is 	entirely
symmetrical 	about 	the 	front 	door, 	which 	is 	set 	into a
stone 	panel 	brought 	forward 	slightly 	from 	the 	wall
plane. 	The 	second 	level 	is 	set 	back 	and 	textured 	in 	dark
terracotta, 	and 	by 	contrast 	with 	the 	light-coloured
bricks 	of 	the 	lower 	storey 	this 	zone 	appears 	to 	recede.
The 	composition 	is 	capped 	by 	a 	third 	element, 	also
strongly 	horizontal 	in 	emphasis, 	an 	overhanging 	roof
with 	deep 	eaves. 	The 	detail 	is 	crisp, 	the 	lines 	are sharp,
the 	joints 	are 	clearly 	expressed : 	the 	form 	is 	sober 	and
dignified, 	but 	not 	lacking 	in 	vitality.
At 	the 	front 	the chimney 	is visible above 	the centre of
the 	house, 	and 	when 	one 	passes 	to 	the 	interior 	one
comes 	face 	to 	face 	with 	a 	fireplace 	set 	back 	behind 	a
sort 	of 	rood-screen: 	an 	image 	suggesting 	that 	the
hearth 	be 	seen 	in 	quasi-sacral 	terms 	as 	the 	emblem 	of
the 	morally 	upright 	home. 	Formally 	the 	hearth 	stands
at 	the 	core 	of the 	dwelling 	and 	forces 	the 	visitor 	into 	a
rotational 	sequence 	through 	the 	reception 	spaces.
culminating in 	the 	dining-room 	on 	the 	main 	axis to 	the
rear, 	and 	expressed 	externally 	as 	an 	apsidal 	volume.
The 	rear elevation 	lacks 	the 	coherence 	of the 	front as 	it
presents 	an 	asymmetrical, 	rather 	sprawling 	arrange-
ment 	of 	forms 	(fig. 	6.2). 	It 	was 	typical 	of 	Wright's
planning 	approach 	that 	he 	should 	have 	placed 	the
master 	bedroom 	over 	the 	most 	formal 	room 	below 	-
the 	dining-room 	- 	and on 	the 	same 	axis. 	To 	the 	back
end 	of the site, 	beyond 	the porte-cochere, 	is 	a 	little 	stable
restating 	the 	vocabulary 	of 	the 	main 	house 	in
miniature. 	It 	was 	here 	that 	Mr. 	Winslow 	and 	Wright
together 	published 	a 	limited 	edition 	of 	exquisitely
printed 	and 	illustrated 	volumes 	of 	William 	Channing
Gannett's 	House 	Beautiful. 	The 	themes 	of 	this 	book
have 	some 	bearing 	on 	Wright's 	own 	attitudes 	to 	the
home, which 	he 	seems 	to 	have 	regarded 	as 	an 	almost
sacred 	institution, 	requiring 	a 	noble 	and 	formal
architectural 	treatment. 	The 	sense 	of the 	dwelling 	as a
moral 	and 	religious 	influence 	was 	embedded 	in 	the
culture 	in 	which 	Wright 	worked, 	but 	probably 	had 	an
extra 	poignant 	and 	personal 	relevance 	to 	him. 	Norris
Kelly 	Smith 	has 	even 	gone 	so 	far 	as 	to 	claim 	that 	the
combination 	of 	formality 	and 	informality 	in 	Wright's
house 	designs 	be 	read 	as 	an 	institutional 	metaphor
expressing 	the 	artist's 	vision 	of 	the 	nature 	of 	freedom
and 	dependence 	intrinsic 	to 	family 	life.
But 	themes 	on 	their 	own 	do 	not 	make 	an 	archi-
tecture 	without forms. 	What 	made 	the 	Winslow 	House
so 	remarkable 	was 	the 	way 	it 	combined 	influences, 	yet
transcended 	them, 	so 	implying 	the 	ingredients 	of
Wright's 	own 	style. 	Silsbee 	was 	left 	far 	behind: 	the
Classical 	tradition 	was 	raided 	for 	its 	axial 	control, 	the
Shingle 	Style 	for 	its 	rotating 	plans: 	Sullivan's 	nature
abstraction 	was 	reinterpreted, 	as 	was 	the 	master's
intuition 	that 	buildings 	should 	have 	a 	base, 	a 	middle,
and 	a 	head 	(also 	an 	idea 	with 	Classical 	overtones 	- 	the
column 	with 	base, 	shaft, 	and 	capital). 	However,
Wright's 	forms 	probed 	beyond 	inherited 	schemata 	to
an 	instinctive 	sense 	of 	the 	order 	in 	nature, 	as 	one
commentator 	well 	understood:
... 	it 	is 	the 	broadest, 	most 	satisfying 	thing 	that 	he
has 	done, 	. 	. 	. 	Upon 	the 	chosen 	site, 	nature has 	been
at 	work 	for 	years, 	building 	the 	wonderful 	elm 	- 	and
the 	character 	of the 	house 	was 	somewhat
determined 	by 	the 	character 	of this 	tree. 	The
sympathy 	that 	has 	been 	cultivated 	between 	them 	is
felt 	by 	the 	cultivated 	and 	the 	uncultivated 	. 	. 	. 	the
impression 	conveyed 	by 	the 	exterior 	is 	the 	impres-
sion 	conveyed 	by 	the 	elm 	... 	a 	certain 	simple 	power
of an 	organic 	nature 	that 	seems 	to 	have 	as 	much
right 	to 	its 	place 	and 	is 	as 	much 	part 	of the 	site 	as
the 	tree. 	The 	analogy 	begins 	there 	and 	continues,
for 	the 	details 	of the 	house 	are 	as 	much 	in 	their
place 	and 	as 	constant 	in 	themselves 	and 	in 	relation

-- 79 of 420 --

78 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
to 	each 	other 	as 	the 	whole 	house 	is 	to 	its
surroundings. 	. 	. 	. 	The 	architect 	shows 	his
sympathy 	with 	nature.
This 	critic 	might 	have 	gone 	further 	in 	his 	sug-
gestions 	of analogies 	with 	nature. 	The 	metaphor 	of the
tree 	was 	to 	become 	a 	central 	one 	in 	Wright's 	thought,
with 	implications 	of 	order 	and 	rootedness 	yet 	a
capacity 	for 	growth 	and 	change. 	The 	tripartite 	scheme
of 	roots, 	trunk, 	and 	branches 	was 	in 	turn 	to 	infiltrate
his 	formal 	arrangements. 	At 	Winslow 	House 	the 	triple
division 	of 	base, 	middle, 	and 	overhanging 	roof 	was
spelled 	out 	with 	unprecedented 	clarity.
Without 	clients 	there 	would 	be 	no 	architecture 	and
it 	is 	intriguing 	to 	speculate 	just 	what 	it 	was 	about
Wright's 	buildings 	which 	brought 	him 	over 	a 	hundred
commissions 	in 	the 	ensuing 	fifteen 	years. 	At 	the 	time
Chicago 	was 	developing 	rapidly 	and 	so 	were 	its
suburbs. 	These 	formed 	prosperous 	middle-class 	com-
munities 	of 	new 	money, 	but, 	on 	the 	whole, 	con-
servative 	values. 	Many 	of 	Wright's 	clients 	were 	self-
made 	men 	whom 	the 	architect 	himself 	described 	as
having 	'unspoiled 	instincts 	and 	untainted 	ideals'.
Leonard 	K. 	Eaton 	more 	recently 	attempted 	to 	charac-
terize 	them 	as 	'outwardly 	conventional 	[but 	tending]
to 	possess 	a 	streak 	of 	artistic 	or 	technological 	interest
which 	predisposed 	them 	to 	accept 	new 	and 	radical
solutions 	to 	the 	architectural 	problem 	of 	the 	dwelling
house.' 	Moreover, 	Wright's 	clients 	wanted 	value 	for
money 	and 	his 	was 	an 	architecture 	devoid 	of 	the
elaborate 	trappings 	typical 	of 	much 	late 	nineteenth-
century 	domestic 	design 	in 	the 	area. 	Flis 	plans 	were
logical 	and 	well 	worked 	out 	to 	match 	each 	client's
requirements, 	and 	were 	fitted 	to 	their 	sites 	so 	as 	to
make 	the 	most 	of 	the 	small 	rectangular 	lots 	typically
available. 	Considerable 	attention 	was 	devoted 	to 	the
design 	of hot 	and 	cold 	water 	systems, 	and 	a 	crude 	form
of 	air-conditioning 	was 	sometimes 	incorporated. 	In
turn, 	this 	was 	an 	architect 	who 	liked 	to 	oversee
building 	work 	closely 	and 	to 	supervise 	the 	very 	details
of his 	designs.
However, 	one 	suspects 	that 	the 	appeal 	went 	deeper
than 	just 	these 	pragmatic 	considerations. 	With 	their
ample 	horizontal 	lines, 	their 	elegantly 	proportioned
details, 	their 	built-in 	furniture 	and 	overhanging eaves,
their 	ever-changing 	moods 	and 	qualities 	of 	space,
Wright's 	designs 	possessed 	sobriety, 	fantasy, 	and 	a
noble 	quality 	of 	scale. 	At 	the 	heart 	a 	broad 	fireplace
finished 	with 	thin 	Roman 	bricks 	was 	usually 	set 	with
logs 	on 	the 	very 	floor 	of 	the 	prairie, 	while 	in 	summer
the 	stained-glass 	windows 	with 	their 	abstracted
vegetal 	forms 	let 	the 	changing 	light 	dapple 	the
interiors. 	The 	Wrightian 	prairie 	houses 	responded 	to
the 	rituals 	and 	aspirations 	of 	a 	new 	suburban
bourgeoisie 	(dinner 	parties 	and 	the 	like) 	but 	also
evolved 	a 	traditional 	image 	of the 	American 	home. 	In 	a
sense, 	the dwellings helped an emergent class 	to find 	its
own 	identity.
The 	path 	from 	the 	Winslow 	House 	to 	the 	fully
developed 	type 	of 	the 	'I'rairie 	House', 	nearly 	a 	decade
later, 	was 	not 	straightforward. 	It 	was 	a 	process 	of
endless 	experiment 	in 	which 	each 	new 	task 	allowed
the 	extension 	and 	refinement 	of 	principles. 	Wright's
domestic 	ideas 	were 	obviously 	stamped 	with 	Arts 	and
Crafts 	values 	of the 	sort 	which 	encouraged 	restrained
simplicity, 	the 	honest 	and 	direct 	use 	of 	materials, 	the
integration 	of the 	building 	with 	nature, 	the 	unification
of 	fixtures 	and 	fittings, 	and 	the 	expression 	of 	an
elevated 	moral 	ideal. 	But he 	set 	out 	to 	reinterpret 	these
premisses 	radically. 	He 	was 	more 	concerned 	with
mechanization 	than 	most 	of 	his 	predecessors 	and
contemporaries 	within 	the 	Arts and 	Crafts 	tradition. 	In
1 	90 	1, 	in 	a 	paper 	entitled 	'The 	Art 	and 	Craft 	of 	the
Machine', 	Wright 	explained 	that 	simple 	geometrical
forms 	could 	most 	easily 	be 	turned 	out 	by 	machine
saws, 	and 	suggested 	that 	the 	architect 	must 	remain
open 	to 	the 	tremors 	of a 	new 	mechanized 	age. 	By 	this
he 	intended 	to 	imply 	not 	that 	the 	machine 	should 	be
celebrated 	directly 	in 	mechanical 	analogies 	or 	images,
but 	that 	industrialization 	be 	understood 	as a 	means 	to
the 	larger 	end 	of 	providing 	a 	decent 	and 	uplifting
environment 	for 	new 	patterns 	of life.
It 	was 	Japanese 	architecture 	which 	helped 	Wright
achieve 	his 	synthesis. 	He did 	not 	visit 	the 	country 	until
igos. 	but 	long 	before 	that 	he 	had 	studied 	Oriental
examples 	in 	books 	and 	in 	representations 	in 	Japanese
prints 	(fig. 	ft. II). 	Evidently 	he 	admired 	the 	refined
proportions, 	the 	exquisite 	carpentry, 	the 	use 	of humble
materials, 	and 	the 	subtle 	placement 	in 	nature.
Moreover, 	this 	was 	an 	architecture 	which 	modulated
space 	and 	charged 	it 	with 	a 	spiritual 	character: 	the
opposite, 	in 	his 	mind, 	of 	the 	Renaissance 	tendency 	to
put 	up 	walls 	around 	box-like 	closed 	rooms 	and 	to
decorate 	them 	with 	ornament. 	Wright 	was 	seeking 	an
integral 	three-dimensional 	expression 	in 	which 	the
exterior 	would 	convey 	interior 	volumes, 	and 	in 	which
human 	scale 	would 	permeate 	all 	the 	parts. 	Moreover,
Japanese 	prints 	- 	aside 	from 	their 	representation 	of
architecture 	- 	suggested 	a 	language 	of 	shape 	and
colour 	directly 	attuned 	to 	the 	feelings 	(rather 	as 	the
Froebel 	blocks 	had 	done 	in 	earlier 	life). 	In 	other 	words,
the 	prints 	provided 	further 	lessons 	in 	abstraction: 	they
gave 	Wright 	deeper 	insight 	into 	the 	intuitive 	appre-
hension 	of 'higher' 	spiritual 	values.
More 	than 	that, 	the 	prints 	encouraged 	Wright 	to try
and 	formulate 	a 	sort of ideal 	type for 	the dwelling above
the 	particulars 	of 	any 	one 	case; 	Sullivan 	had 	tried
something similar 	for 	the 	skyscraper, 	a 	formulation 	'so
broad 	as 	to 	admit 	no 	exception'. 	For 	Wright 	the 	key
phase 	of 	crystallization 	seems 	to 	have 	been 	around

-- 80 of 420 --

The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	•	
79
<*^"-
L—j/ »fr—«-- 	-)-—-—r-
/j^'/
f-i^ -^
6. 	? 	Franlc 	Lloyd 	Wright,
proiect 	for 	'A 	Home in 	a
Prairie Town' 	(from
Uidies' 	Home 	loiirnal.
191)1). 	Exterior view
and 	section.
1901 	when 	he 	published 	his 	idea 	for 	'A 	Home 	in 	a
Prairie 	Town' 	in 	the 	Ladies' 	Home 	Journal 	(fig. 	6.3). 	In
retrospect, 	one 	may 	see 	this 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	'theorem'
suinming 	up 	his 	discoveries 	to 	date, 	and 	laying 	the
basis 	of a 	great 	period 	of creativity 	running 	from 	1 	901
to 	1910, 	and 	including 	such 	masterpieces 	as 	the
Martin 	House, 	the 	Coonley 	House, 	the 	Robie 	House,
the 	Larkin 	building, 	and 	the 	Unity 	Temple. 	The 	'Home
in 	a 	Prairie 	Town' 	was 	formed 	from 	long 	low
horizontals 	stretching 	parallel 	to 	the 	flat 	land 	of 	the
site. 	The 	sprawling 	roofs 	extended 	to 	the 	surroundings
and drew 	the 	porches, 	the 	/lortc-ioc/icrc 	and 	the 	main
volumes 	into 	a 	vital, 	asymmetrical 	unity, 	Windows
were 	reduced 	to 	simple 	screens 	- 	there 	were 	few 	solid
walls 	- 	and 	the 	spaces 	inside 	were 	linked 	together.
Much 	of the 	furniture 	was 	built-in 	and 	the 	character 	of
the 	interiors 	was 	commodious yet elegant. 	At 	the 	heart
was 	the 	hearth 	and 	all 	the 	diverse 	spaces 	of the 	house
were 	placed 	relative 	to 	this 	centripetal 	element. 	There
was still 	axial 	control 	and 	hierarchy, 	but 	the rotational
and 	asymmetrical 	were 	combined 	with 	this 	in 	an
architecture 	of 	sliding 	and 	overlapping 	planes 	en-
livened 	by 	an 	intense 	rhythm.
The 	Ward 	Willitts 	House 	of 	1902 	(tig. 	6.4), 	built 	in
the 	North 	Chicago suburb of Highland 	Park, 	was one of
the first 	in the mature 	phase of Wright's 	work. 	It stands
back from 	the 	road, 	and 	the 	first 	impression 	is 	of 	low
roofs 	extending 	behind 	the 	nearby 	trees 	and 	of hooded
windows 	with 	dark 	chinks 	of glass .set 	under eaves. 	The
building 	is 	broken 	down 	into 	four 	main 	wings, 	so 	that
the 	size 	is 	never 	overwhelming. 	One 	enters 	from 	a
porte-cochere 	to 	the 	right 	of the 	building 	up 	some 	steps.
Wright's 	houses 	usually 	had 	a 	'path' 	running 	through
them: 	in 	this 	case there 	is 	the 	instant 	choice 	of either
turning 	back 	up 	the square 	spiral 	stairs to 	the 	bedroom
level, 	or 	taking 	the 	most 	prominent 	route 	out 	of 	the
vestibule 	by 	following 	the 	diagonal 	view 	into 	the
living-room. 	This 	is 	on 	the 	main 	axis 	and 	is 	one 	and 	a

-- 81 of 420 --

8o 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
half 	storeys 	high. 	It 	has 	the 	chimney 	on 	its 	axis 	and
vertical 	screen 	windows. 	The 	walls 	are 	plastered 	and
smooth 	and 	there 	are 	slats 	of wood 	which 	bring 	down
the 	scale 	and 	relate 	structure, 	furnishings 	and 	details
to the main 	proportions. 	From 	this 	space one can see 	in
turn 	along 	another 	diagonal 	into 	the 	dining-room,
situated 	on 	a 	cross 	axis, 	with 	views 	on 	three 	sides 	into
the garden ; 	in 	the 	rear wing of the 	house 	is the 	kitchen.
Details 	such 	as 	grilles, 	brick 	textures 	in 	the 	fireplace,
window 	muUions. 	even 	the 	leaded 	lines 	of 	the 	glass,
bear 	the 	imprint 	of the 	same 	formal 	intelligence 	which
conceived 	the 	whole, 	as 	if the 	smallest 	parts 	all 	had 	the
generating 	idea 	implicit 	within 	them. 	Thus 	the
abstract 	shapes 	of the 	plan, 	and 	the 	ornamentation 	of
the 	windows, 	are 	sensed 	as 	variants 	on 	the 	same
geometrical 	patterns. 	Indeed, 	the 	plan 	is 	almost 	a 	work
of art 	in 	its 	own 	right 	and 	serves 	to 	illustrate 	Wright's
compositional 	principles 	(fig. 	6.5). 	There 	are 	primary
and 	secondary 	axes 	which 	are 	reinforced 	by 	the centre
lines of the 	roofs and 	the 	placement 	of the chimney, 	but
many 	of 	the 	rooms 	are 	shifted 	on 	to 	subsidiary 	axes
parallel 	to 	the 	main 	ones. 	The 	result 	is 	a 	sort 	of 	'pin-
wheel' 	rotation, 	experienced 	in 	three 	dimensions 	as a
spatial 	tension 	which 	varies 	as 	one 	moves 	through 	the
interior 	spaces. 	Parts 	and 	whole 	are 	held 	in 	a 	vital
equilibrium. 	To 	Wright 	this 	dynamism 	was 	perhaps
equivalent 	to 	the 	life 	force 	he 	sensed 	in 	nature: 	it 	gave
his 	dwellings 	something 	of 	the 	quality 	of 	a 	spatial
music 	in 	which 	rhythm, 	movement, 	repetition, 	and
variation 	of 	similar 	elements 	achieved 	moods 	and
emotions 	of different 	pitch 	and 	intensity.
The 	Willitts 	House 	was 	an 	early 	experiment 	with
Wright's 	recently 	conceived 	theories. 	In 	it 	he 	tried 	out
the 	various 	pieces 	of 	his 	'Prairie 	House 	Type'. 	Over
twenty 	years 	later 	he 	looked 	back 	on 	this 	period 	and
attempted 	to 	put 	in 	writing 	the 	guiding principles of his
domestic 	designs.
First. 	To 	reduce 	the 	number 	of necessary 	parts 	of
the 	house 	and 	the 	separate 	rooms 	to 	a 	minimum,
and 	make 	all 	come 	together 	as 	enclosed 	space 	-
so 	divided 	that 	light, 	air 	and 	vista 	permeated the
whole 	with 	a 	sense 	of unity.
Second. 	To 	associate 	the 	building 	as 	a 	whole 	with
its 	site 	by 	extension 	and 	emphasis 	of all 	the
planes 	parallel 	to 	the 	ground, 	but 	keeping 	the
floors 	off the 	best 	part 	of the 	site, 	thus 	leaving
that 	better 	part 	for 	use 	in 	connection 	with 	the 	life
of the 	house. 	Extended 	level 	planes 	were 	found
useful 	in 	this 	connection.
Third. 	To 	eliminate the 	room 	as a 	box 	and 	the
house 	as 	another 	by 	making 	all 	walls 	enclosing
screens 	- 	the 	ceilings 	and 	floors 	and 	enclosing
screens 	to 	flow 	into 	each 	other 	as 	one 	large
enclosure 	of space, 	with 	inner 	subdivisions 	only.
Make 	all 	house 	proportions 	more 	liberally
human, 	with 	less 	wasted 	space 	in 	structure, 	and
structure 	more 	appropriate 	to 	material, 	so 	the
whole 	more 	liveable. 	Liberal 	is 	the 	best 	word.
Extended 	straight 	lines 	or 	streamlines 	were 	useful
in 	this.
Fourth. 	To 	get 	the 	unwholesome 	basement 	up 	out
of the 	ground, 	entirely 	above 	it, 	as a 	low 	pedestal
for 	the 	living-position 	of the 	home, 	making 	the
foundation 	itself visible 	as 	a 	low 	masonry
platform 	on 	which 	the 	building 	should 	stand.
fi.4 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Ward 	Willitts House,
Highland 	Park, 	near
Chicago, 	Illinois, 	1902.

-- 82 of 420 --

6.S 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Ward 	V\'illitts 	House.
Highland 	Park. 	Illinois.
1902, 	plans ol'ground
level 	(hc/ini'l 	and 	tirst
floor 	(»/)()«). 	(Prom
Wasmuth 	portfolio.)
Fifth. 	To 	harmonize 	all 	necessary 	openings 	to
'outside' 	or 	to 	'inside' 	with 	good 	human
proportions 	and 	make 	them 	occur 	naturally 	-
singly 	or 	as 	a 	series in 	the 	scheme 	of the 	whole
building. 	Usually 	they 	appeared 	as 	'light-screens'
instead 	of walls, 	because 	all 	the 	'Architecture' 	of
the 	house 	was 	chiefly 	the 	way 	these 	openings
came 	in 	such 	walls 	as 	were 	grouped 	about 	the
rooms 	as 	enclosing 	screens. 	The 	mom 	as 	such
was 	now 	the 	essential 	architectural 	expression,
and 	there 	were 	to 	be 	no 	holes 	cut 	in 	walls 	as
holes 	are cut 	in 	a 	box. 	because 	this 	was 	not 	in
keeping 	with 	the 	ideal 	of 'plastic' 	Cutting 	holes
was 	violent.
Sixth. 	To 	elinimate 	combinations 	of different
The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	8
1
materials 	in 	favour 	of mono 	materials 	so 	far as
possible: 	to 	use 	no 	ornament 	that 	did 	not 	come
out 	of the 	nature 	of the 	materials 	to 	make 	the
whole 	building 	clearer 	and 	more 	expressive 	as 	a
place 	to 	live 	in. 	and 	give 	the 	conception 	of the
building 	appropriate 	revealing emphasis.
Geometrical 	or 	straight 	lines 	were 	natural 	to 	the
machinery 	at 	work 	in 	the 	building 	trades 	then, 	so
the 	interiors 	took 	on 	this 	character 	naturally.
Seventh. 	To 	incorporate 	all 	heating, 	lighting,
plumbing 	so 	that 	these 	systems 	became
constituent 	parts 	of the 	building 	itself 	These
service 	features 	became 	architectural 	and 	in 	this
attempt 	the 	ideal 	of an 	organic 	architecture 	was
at 	work.
Eighth. 	To 	incorporate 	as 	organic 	architecture 	- 	as
far 	as 	possible 	- 	furnishings, 	making 	them 	all 	one
with 	the building 	and 	designing 	them 	in 	simple
terms 	for 	machine 	work. 	Again 	all 	straight 	lines
and 	rectangular 	forms.
Ninth. 	Eliminate 	the 	decorator. 	He 	was 	all 	curves
and 	all 	efflorescence, 	if not 	all 	'period.'
This 	is 	not 	to 	suggest 	that 	Wright's 	'system' 	was
rigid 	and 	prescribed. 	On 	the 	contrary 	it 	allowed 	him 	a
firm 	base 	from 	which 	to 	experiment. 	Its 	flexibility 	was
well 	demonstrated 	in 	his 	responses 	to different 	sizes 	of
dwelling. 	Many 	of his 	early 	houses 	were 	modest, 	but 	as
his 	reputation 	grew, 	so 	did 	the 	size 	of his 	commissions,
to 	the 	point 	where 	he 	was 	soon 	building 	for 	the
extremely 	wealthy. 	In 	the 	Martin 	House 	in 	Bufl'alo,
New 	York 	(1904). 	he 	had 	to 	accommodate 	all 	the
functions 	of a 	luxurious 	estate: 	stables, 	a 	guest-house,
a 	large 	main 	dwelling, 	pergolas, 	gardens, 	a 	con-
servatory, 	etc. 	This 	is 	where 	Wright's 	method 	of
organizing 	a 	plan 	with 	the help 	of 	a 	geometrical 	grid
helped 	him 	to 	maintain 	uniform 	dimensions 	and 	to
orchestrate 	axes 	and 	directions. 	The 	plan 	of the 	Martin
House 	is 	a 	most 	sophisticated 	abstract 	pattern, 	not
unlike 	a 	Mondrian 	painting, 	in 	which 	interior 	and
exterior 	spaces, 	figure 	and 	ground, 	have 	equal 	value
(fig. 	7.3). 	In 	other 	words, 	the 	lawns, 	pergolas, 	and
spaces 	between 	were 	organized 	by 	the 	same 	formal
principles 	as 	those 	in 	the 	main 	buildings. 	The 	Coonley
House 	of 	1908 	in 	Riverside 	(fig. 	6.6) 	was 	another 	case
where 	an 	entire 	wealthy 	precinct 	was 	unified 	but 	with
full 	respect 	for 	ditTerent 	functional 	demands. 	These
prairie 	house 	'palaces' 	combined 	an 	aura 	of 	mag-
nificence 	and 	dignity 	suitable 	to 	their 	patrons 	with
subtle 	and 	refined 	control 	of detail 	and 	scale 	(fig. 	6.7).
In 	them 	Wright 	demonstrated 	that 	he 	could 	'stretch'
his 	vocabulary 	without 	loss 	of coherence.
Another 	major 	variant 	with 	which 	Wright 	had 	to
cope 	was 	the 	site. 	Many 	of 	his 	early 	houses 	were
situated 	on 	flat, 	rectangular 	lots 	of 	small 	to 	medium

-- 83 of 420 --

82 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
size. 	But 	in 	1904 	he 	encountered 	an 	entirely 	new
character 	of terrain 	when 	he 	was 	asked 	to 	design 	the
small 	Glasner 	House 	in 	Glencoe 	on 	the 	North 	Shore 	of
Chicago 	(fig. 	6.8). 	The 	site 	was 	perched on 	the edge of a
ravine 	which 	was 	heavily 	wooded. 	The 	habitual
arrangement 	of 	a 	plinth-based, 	basementless 	house
simply 	would 	not 	fit. 	Wright 	therefore 	planned 	the
house 	so 	that the 	horizontal 	datum 	was 	supplied 	by 	the
roofline: 	the 	forms 	of 	the 	building 	cascaded 	down-
wards 	from 	this 	line 	to 	meet 	the 	ravine 	at 	various
levels. 	One 	entered 	on 	the 	upper 	level 	from 	the 	rear
past 	the 	kitchen, 	to 	find 	the 	living/dining-room
(combined) 	and 	master 	bedroom; 	the 	other 	rooms
were 	placed 	downstairs. 	The 	volumes 	were 	anchored
in 	place 	by 	three 	vertical elements, 	polygonal 	in 	plan : 	a
library 	at 	one 	end, 	a 	tea-house 	over 	a 	bridge 	at 	the
other 	(not 	built), 	and 	a 	sewing 	room 	alongside 	the
master 	bedroom 	(tig. 	h. 	1 	o).
As 	the 	living-room 	was 	at 	tree-top 	height 	and
surrounded 	by 	bushes, 	flies 	and 	insects 	could 	be
expected 	in 	the summer months. 	If all 	the windows had
been 	made 	openable. 	they 	would 	have 	needed 	insect
screens, 	which 	would 	have 	blocked 	the 	view. 	Wright
solved 	the 	problem 	by 	cross-breeding 	his 	usual 	'prairie
house' 	fenestration 	with 	the 	well-tried 	'Chicago
window' 	(a 	central, 	fixed 	pane exclusively for 	light, 	and
two 	small, 	side, 	vertical 	panes 	with 	screens 	exclusively
for 	ventilation), 	which 	he 	stole 	from 	its 	usual
commercial 	context; 	in 	this 	way it was 	possible 	to 	keep
large 	areas 	free 	of insect 	meshes. 	The 	view 	through 	the
long 	tmvcc 	of 	windows 	with 	abstracted 	stained-glass
tree 	motifs 	in 	them 	was quite 	magical. 	The 	interior 	was
(i.f) 	Frank Lloyd 	VVrighi.
Coonley 	House.
Riverside, 	near Chicago.
Illinois. 	1908: 	the
Prairie 	House on 	a
palatial 	scale. 	(For plan
see 	tig. 	(i.io. I

-- 84 of 420 --

fi.j 	liihcvc 	right] 	Frank
Lloyd 	Wright. 	Coonley
House. 	1 4<)S. 	interior.
6.8 	inijht) 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	C.lasner 	House,
Clencoe. 	Illinois. 	1404.
view 	through 	living-
room 	windows. 	(For
plan 	see 	tig. 	h.io.)
The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	83
rendered 	sensitive 	to 	every 	change 	of light 	and 	colour
in 	the 	ravine 	(fig. 	6.8). 	The 	resulting 	character 	was
rustic 	rather than 	suburban, 	and 	was 	reinforced 	by 	the
horizontal 	batten 	boarding of the 	lower portion, as well
as 	the 	gazebo 	imagery 	of 	the 	polygonal 	volumes. 	The
rich 	effect 	of 	a 	cantilevered 	rootline 	hovering 	above
uneven 	terrain 	was 	one 	which 	Wright 	would 	employ
again.
The 	artist's 	style 	may 	be thought 	of as 	a 	set 	of typical
elements organized 	into 	wholes 	which 	themselves 	take
on 	characteristic, 	generic 	patterns. 	A 	style 	based 	on
principle 	will 	embody 	a 	sort 	of 	'system' 	of 	building
forms 	which 	combine 	and 	recombine 	according 	to
grammatical 	and 	intuitive 	rules 	(figs. 	6.9-1 	1). 	Such 	a
'formula' 	is 	the 	opposite 	of a 	dry, 	repetitive 	'cliche' ; 	it is
an 	abstraction 	which 	allows 	many 	creative 	possi-
bilities 	around 	a 	few 	central 	themes. 	For 	such 	an 	artist
and 	Wright 	was 	such 	an 	artist 	- 	each 	new 	building
task 	is 	a 	further 	opportunity 	to 	explore 	the 	ideal 	type
(Plate 	3). 	On 	occasion, 	an 	opportunity 	may 	arise
which 	prompts 	the 	clarification 	of the 	artist's 	guiding
vision.
Perhaps 	the 	Robie 	House 	of 	1908 	(fig. 	6.12) 	was
among 	the 	clearest 	of 	Wright's 	expressions 	of 	the
Prairie 	House 	ideal; 	rather 	as 	the 	Villa 	Malcontenta
was 	one 	of the 	most 	complete 	realizations 	of Palladio's
dream 	of the 	villa. 	The 	client. 	Mr. 	Robie, 	was 	a bicycle
manufacturer 	and 	only 	27 	years 	old 	when 	he
employed 	Wright 	to 	design 	a 	home 	for 	him 	on 	an
extremely 	tight 	corner 	site 	in 	South 	Chicago. 	He
required 	a 	servants' 	wing and 	a 	billiard 	room, 	as 	well
as 	the 	usual 	dining- 	and 	living-rooms, 	bedrooms,
kitchen 	and 	bathrooms, 	and 	indicated 	that 	he 	wanted
to 	'see 	his 	neighbours 	on 	the 	side-walk 	without 	being
seen' 	and 	that 	he 	would 	also 	like, 	if possible, 	views 	of a
park 	situated 	a 	block 	away diagonally opposite. 	Wright
interpreted 	these 	givens 	by 	translating 	them 	into 	form
via 	his 	evolving 	vocabulary. 	In 	plan 	he arranged 	the
building 	as 	two 	bands, 	sliding 	alongside 	one 	another.
with 	some 	degree 	of 	overlap 	between 	(fig, 	6.14). 	The
smaller 	of 	these 	was 	to 	the 	rear 	of 	the 	site 	and
contained 	the 	garage, 	boiler-room, 	laundry, 	and
entrance 	on 	the 	ground 	fioor, 	servants' 	rooms, 	the
kitchen, 	and 	a 	guest-room 	on 	the 	first 	level. 	The 	other
'strip' 	was 	more 	prominent 	and 	arranged 	with
chimney 	and 	stairs 	as 	a 	unit 	passing 	up 	through 	the
centre. 	The 	billiard 	room 	and 	children's 	room 	were 	in
the 	semi-basement, 	while 	the 	living- 	and 	dining-rooms
were on 	the 	first 	level 	which 	became 	a 	sort 	of 	piano
iwbik. 	Indeed, 	it 	was 	not 	so 	much 	two rooms 	as 	one 	- a
single 	space 	partially 	divided 	by 	the 	chimney-piece,
detailed 	so 	as 	to 	give 	the 	effect 	that 	the 	ceiling 	lid
hovered 	as 	a 	continuous 	plane 	from 	one end 	to 	the
other 	(fig, 	6.15). 	At 	the 	ends 	of 	this 	long 	space 	were
window 	seats 	in 	prow-like 	protrusions, 	reinforcing 	the

-- 85 of 420 --

84 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
:	
'ill
1 	1
	1
	1 	M 	j 	i
	i
1
iL 	_

-- 86 of 420 --

The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd Wright 	• 	8 5
6.9 	{far left) The
Froebel educational
blocks.
6. 1 1 	(fl/xm'l 	lapanese
print of thie 	kind 	which
inspired 	Wright 	by 	their
abstraction: 	Hukuju 	If],
1802-54), 	'Monkey
Bridge in 	Koshu
Province', 	colour 	print.
C. 	182s. 	London.
Victoria 	and 	Albert
Museum.
^im.
- 	—Oif-
1 1 	•% .3 	^_^i I
y34M 	=_'»'

-- 87 of 420 --

86 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
U'.y>t---^.^/U-;tMti^
sense 	of 	the 	longitudinal 	axis, 	and 	echoing 	the
triangular 	forms 	of the 	pitched 	roofs 	above. 	From 	this
space. 	Mr. Robie 	could 	look 	dou'n 	but not 	be 	seen, 	for
the 	parapets 	and overhangs 	ensured 	visual protection.
The 	interior 	of 	the 	main 	space 	of 	the 	Robie 	House
illustrates 	how 	ingeniously 	Wright 	could 	attune 	his
customary 	solutions 	to 	a 	new 	individual 	case 	on
formal, 	functional, 	structural, 	and 	symbolic 	levels
simultaneously. 	Along 	each 	side 	of the 	main 	space 	was
a 	rim 	set 	even 	lower 	than 	the 	rest 	of the 	ceiling. 	This
reinforced 	the 	character 	of enclosure 	and 	accentuated
the 	horizontality 	of 	the 	room. 	But 	it 	also 	served 	a
number 	of 	functions 	because 	small 	'Japanese' 	globe
lights 	were 	attached 	to 	the 	rim, 	wires 	were 	set 	into 	it.
and 	so 	were 	vents 	and 	spaces 	for 	moving 	air. 	The 	roof
as 	a 	whole 	was 	an 	ingenious 	environmental 	device
capable 	of 	being 	a 	heating 	cushion 	in 	winter 	or 	an
extract 	flue 	in 	summer. 	The 	overhangs 	extended
dramatically 	into the setting, 	supported 	by 	a 	steel 	beam
from 	a 	shipyard 	in 	their 	broadest 	span. 	But 	again, 	this
was 	not 	done 	for 	visual 	efl'ect 	alone. 	The 	extending

-- 88 of 420 --

...... 	. 	I 	r 	1 	I
y
The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	• 	87
planes 	enhanced 	the 	feeling 	of 	shelter, 	protected 	the
windows from 	rain, 	snow, 	and 	glare, 	released 	the edges
of 	the 	building 	from 	any 	great 	structural 	load
(permitting 	the 	extensive 	screen-windows) 	and
mediated 	between 	inside 	and 	outside. 	The 	result 	of 	all
these 	devices 	together 	was 	the 	antithesis 	of the 	closed
box: 	it 	was 	as 	if 	the 	Winslow 	House 	of 	fifteen 	years
before 	had 	been 	exploded 	outwards.
An 	architectural 	system 	requires 	a 	constant 	attitude
in 	detailing 	as 	well 	as 	in 	the 	disposition 	of 	the 	main
forms, 	and 	just 	as 	the 	overall 	formula' 	must 	adjust 	as
each 	new 	unity 	is 	found, 	so 	typical 	details 	must 	be
adjusted 	and 	transformed. 	In 	the 	Robie 	House 	Wright
used elongated 	'Roman' 	bricks 	laid with deep reveals 	of
shadow 	in 	the 	joints 	so 	as 	to 	rhyme 	with 	the
predominant 	horizontals 	(fig. 	6.1 	3). 	Another 	charac-
teristic 	detail 	was 	the 	urn 	with 	a 	coping-stone 	top: 	in
the 	Robie 	House 	these 	were 	made 	integral 	to 	the
composition 	and 	adjusted 	to 	echo 	roof 	lines 	and
parapets: 	yet 	another 	customary 	Wrightian 	element
was 	the 	leaded, 	stained-glass 	window 	with 	motifs
abstracted 	from 	natural 	forms: 	in 	the 	Robie 	House 	the
patterns 	were 	attuned 	to 	the 	dominant 	horizontality.
and 	to 	the 	triangular 	themes 	of 	the 	plan 	(fig. 	6.j6|.
Thus 	all 	the 	parts 	were 	drawn 	into 	a 	symphony 	- 	a
master-work 	transcending 	merely 	period 	concerns.
6.12 	(n/mw \ejl] 	Frank
Uoyd 	Wright, 	Robie
House. 	Chicago. 	1908.
5.13 	(/p/t) 	Robie House.
1908. 	detail 	of urn.
6.14 	(flhov'cl 	Robie
House. 	Chicago. 	1908.
plans of main 	level 	and
ground 	floor.
6. 15 	(rifl/iO 	Robie
House. 	1908. 	interior at
main 	living/dining 	room
level.
6.16 	(fur hiiht) 	Robie
House. 	1 90S. 	detail 	of
leaded 	glass 	window.

-- 89 of 420 --

88 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
Alongside 	it. 	the designs 	of the 	so-called 	Prairie 	School
- the 	followers 	of Wright 	- 	were 	mere 	shadows.
While 	most 	of 	Wright's 	works 	up 	to 	19 lo 	were
houses, 	he 	also 	received 	commissions 	for 	other
functions. 	His 	'system' 	had 	then 	to 	stretch 	to
accommodate 	new 	functional 	and 	expressive 	de-
mands, 	hi 	1904. 	for 	example, 	the 	Larkin 	mail 	order
company 	in 	Buffalo. 	New 	York, 	asked 	him 	to design 	an
office 	building 	around 	their 	requirements. 	The site 	was
by 	a 	railway 	and 	close 	to 	a 	gasworks. 	An 	inward-
looking, 	hermetically 	sealed 	solution 	seemed 	ad-
visable. 	From 	the 	Prairie 	House 	vocabulary 	Wright
adopted 	the 	theme 	of trays 	slung 	from 	vertical 	piers,
which he arranged around 	a 	high, 	top-lit atrium space.
The 	stairs 	and 	ventilating 	equipment 	were 	set 	in 	tall
towers to the corners 	from 	which 	the 	inner system 	was
slung. 	These 	gave 	a 	massive 	and 	monumental
character 	to 	the 	exterior 	and 	provided 	vertical
emphases 	sufficient 	to 	unify 	the 	smaller 	parts 	and
make 	the 	overall 	form 	coherent. 	With 	its 	severe.
dominating 	silhouette, 	its 	strong 	axial 	character 	and
its 	airy, 	nave-like 	interior 	space 	(fig. 	7.4), 	it 	was
perhaps 	understandable 	that 	the 	Larkin 	building
should 	have 	been 	dubbed 	'a 	cathedral 	of work' 	(it 	was
inscribed 	with 	moralistic 	mottoes 	suggesting 	the
religious 	value 	of labour), 	but 	the 	building 	also 	closely
resembled 	Wright's 	designs 	for 	sideboards 	or 	other
domestic 	furniture. 	Large 	or 	small, 	every 	design 	was
handled 	according 	to 	consistent 	formal 	principles.
In 	1906 	Wright 	was 	commissioned 	to 	design 	a
building 	with 	a 	truly 	sacral 	function. 	The 	Unitarians 	in
Oak 	Park 	needed 	a 	new 	meeting-place. 	Evidently 	they
thought 	of it 	in 	traditional 	terms 	involving 	a 	spire. 	But
Wright 	insisted 	on 	redefining 	the 	programme 	and
probing 	some 	of 	its 	fundamental 	meanings 	for 	a 	place
of assembly. 	He 	decided 	to 	'abolish 	in 	the 	art 	and 	craft
of 	architecture, 	literature 	in 	any 	symbolic 	form
whatsoever', 	and 	to 	provide 	a 	dignified 	space 	'in 	which
to 	study 	man 	himself 	for 	his 	God's 	sake'. 	He 	started
with 	a 	room 	not 	unlike the 	most 	formal 	of 	his 	public
reception 	or dining 	spaces 	in his 	houses 	- 	symmetrical,
hieratic, 	focused 	by 	means 	of balconies 	on 	the 	pulpit:
... 	a 	noble 	room 	for 	worship 	in 	mind, 	and 	let 	that
great 	room 	shape 	the 	whole 	edifice. 	Let 	the 	room
inside 	be 	the architecture 	outside.
During 	the 	course 	of 	the 	design. 	Wright 	was
intrigued 	by 	(). 	Kakuzo's 	Hook 	of 	Tea 	in 	which 	the
author referred 	to 	the rituals of the traditional 	Japanese
tea 	ceremony, 	and 	described 	the space 	of the 	tea-house
as 	'the 	abode 	of 	vacancy'. 	For 	the 	main 	room 	of 	the
Unity 	Temple 	Wright 	chose 	a 	square 	as 	a 	generator,
perhaps because 	this 	was 	a centralized, 	focal 	and 	stable
form 	with 	an 	inherent 	suggestion 	of 	wholeness 	and
unity. 	This 	he 	endowed 	with 	a 	numinous 	character
through 	the 	subtle 	control 	of 	proportion 	and 	the
filtering 	of light. 	The 	presence 	of this 	main 	volume 	was
sensed 	directly 	on 	the 	exterior 	through 	the 	straightfor-
ward 	expression 	of 	the 	building's 	geometry 	and
hierarchy 	of supports 	(fig. 	6.17).
As 	well 	as 	a 	'temple', 	the 	Unitarians required 	a 	space
for 	children's 	Sunday 	School 	and 	a 	meeting-hall 	for
get-togethers. 	These 	Wright 	placed 	in 	a 	lateral 	oblong,
which 	he 	set 	with 	its 	short 	axis 	aligned 	to 	the 	square.
The entrance 	hall 	to 	both 	spaces 	was 	placed 	as a 	'neck'
between 	them 	and 	was 	reached 	from 	the 	street 	up
some 	steps 	on 	to 	a 	terrace. 	Over 	thirty-four 	studies
were 	attempted 	before 	Wright 	was 	satisfied 	with 	the
relationship 	between 	these 	main 	volumes. 	The 	power
(1.17 	Frank Lloyd
Wright. 	Unity Temple.
Oak 	Park, 	near Chicago.
I <-)of), 	exterior view. 	The
main 	space 	is to 	the 	left,
the 	Sunday School 	to 	the
right, 	the entrance zone
between 	the two. 	(For
plan 	.see 	Fig. 	6. 10.
1

-- 90 of 420 --

The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	89
of 	the 	result 	lies 	in 	tense 	and 	elemental 	relationships
and 	in 	the 	way 	the 	main 	themes 	are 	restated 	in 	all 	the
smaller 	parts. 	Wright 	chose 	concrete 	as 	his 	building
material 	because 	it 	was 	cheap 	and 	easy 	to 	use; 	but 	(as
has 	been 	suggested ) 	this was 	an 	extremely 	bold 	step 	for
someone 	to 	take 	in 	1906. 	especially 	for 	a 	religious
building, 	the 	more 	so 	because 	he 	decided 	to 	leave 	the
material 	bare 	on 	the 	exterior.
The 	main 	elements 	of 	vocabulary 	ingeniously
controlled 	transitions 	in 	size 	between 	the 	overall
volumes 	and 	the smaller 	parts, 	and 	recalled 	once 	again
the typical 	elements 	of the 	Prairie 	House formula. 	They
included 	corner 	piers 	(containing 	the 	stairs), 	walls.
screen-windows, 	and 	thinner 	versions 	of 	the 	main
piers 	to 	support 	the 	structure 	of 	the 	roof. 	This 	last
element 	was 	flat 	and 	lifted 	free 	of 	the 	box 	beneath 	it.
giving 	the 	impression 	of a 	sort 	of classical 	overhang 	at
the top 	of the 	composition. 	The 	building 	had 	a 	clearly
defined 	base 	as 	well, 	so 	that 	the 	tripartite 	'grammar' 	of
the 	elevation 	was 	once 	again 	employed. 	This 	fact 	was
not 	lost 	on 	Wright's 	contemporaries, 	and 	one 	of 	his
draughtsmen 	commented 	on 	the 	abstracted 	Classicism
of the 	result, 	referring 	time 	and 	again 	to 	'the 	temple'. 	It
seems 	that 	Wright 	was 	fully 	aware 	of 	the 	Classical
resonances 	in 	his 	design, 	and 	the 	suggestion 	has
recently 	been 	made 	that 	he 	may 	have 	been 	influenced
by 	the 	stripped 	Classical 	work 	of the 	early 	nineteenth-
century 	German 	architect 	Schinkel, 	which 	was 	well
known 	and 	liked 	in 	Chicago 	at 	the 	time. 	In 	Wright's
mind, 	no 	doubt. 	Unity 	Temple 	was 	an 	exercise 	in 	'first
principles'.
Part 	of 	the 	richness 	of 	the 	Unity 	Temple 	form 	arose
from 	the 	way 	the 	symmetrical 	spaces 	were 	in 	fact
perceived 	on 	diagonals 	from 	the 	circuitous 	route
passing 	through 	them; 	this 	was 	another 	consistent
theme 	from 	the 	houses. 	The 	path 	to 	the 	interior 	passed
through 	the 	hall, 	then 	down 	some 	steps 	into 	a 	half-
level 	access 	cloister 	by 	which 	one 	negotiated 	the
passage 	and 	the 	pulpit 	into 	the 	space 	under 	the 	side
balconies. 	These 	were 	hung 	from 	four 	burly 	piers 	into
which 	service 	ducts 	were 	run. 	The 	vitality 	of 	the
interior 	space 	was 	created, 	in 	part, 	by 	the 	secondary
rhythm 	of the 	half levels, 	and 	thecharacter 	of the 	light
filtering 	in 	through 	leaded 	screen-windows 	at 	cleres-
tory 	level; 	these 	were 	detailed 	to 	give 	the 	impression
that 	the 	slab 	was 	floating 	(flg. 	6.18).
Thus 	the 	solution 	to 	the 	Unity 	Temple 	was 	found 	by
the 	application 	of 	the 	principles 	Wright 	had 	been
pursuing, 	and 	their 	reconsideration 	in 	the 	light 	of 	a
sacred 	institution. 	He 	did 	not 	rely 	on 	a 	spurious
.symbolism, 	but 	on 	the 	direct 	impact 	of 	spaces, 	lit
volumes, 	and 	forms 	suffused 	with 	a spiritual character.
Whether 	Wright 	really 	regarded 	a 	'church' 	as 	more
sacred 	than 	a 	'home' 	is, 	perhaps, 	open 	to 	question, 	but
his 	response 	was 	to 	lend 	his 	domestic 	system 	an
unusually 	hieratic, 	formal, 	and 	symmetrical 	grandeur.
As 	in 	the 	Winslow 	House. 	Classical 	values 	were
abstracted 	and 	transformed 	to 	the 	point 	where 	the
architect's 	forms 	seemed 	to 	possess 	an 	almost 	natural
character. 	This 	magnificent 	synthesis 	was 	a 	further
reminder 	that 	Wright, 	for 	all 	his 	power 	of innovation,
was 	a 	traditionalist 	interested 	in 	'the 	elemental 	law
and 	order 	inherent 	in 	all 	great 	architecture'.
In 	1909 	Wright 	left 	his 	wife 	to 	live 	with 	Mamah
Borthwick 	Cheney, 	the 	wife of 	one 	of 	his 	clients'. 	The
tbllowing 	year 	he 	went 	with 	her 	to 	Europe 	for 	some
months 	during 	which 	he 	assembled 	drawings 	of 	his
past 	years 	of 	activity. 	These 	he 	published 	in 	the 	so-
called 	Wasmutli 	Voluiiifs. 	On 	his 	return 	to 	the 	United
States, 	he 	withdrew 	from 	the 	framework 	of 	suburban

-- 91 of 420 --

go 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
life 	and 	family 	responsibilities, 	to 	the 	Wisconsin
countryside, 	where 	he 	built 	'Taliesin'. 	a 	house 	on 	the
hill, 	in 	which 	the 	Prairie 	House 	system 	was 	further
extended 	to 	meet 	the 	irregular 	levels 	of 	the 	land. 	This
became 	his 	retreat, 	and 	his 	hymn 	to 	nature. 	He 	found
himself increasingly 	divorced 	from 	the 	milieu 	in 	which
he 	had 	first 	formed 	his 	architecture. 	In 	1914. 	tragedy
struck 	Taliesin 	when 	Wright's 	newly 	adopted 	family
was 	massacred 	by 	a 	mad 	servant 	and 	the 	property 	was
burned 	to 	the 	ground. 	The 	possible 	effects 	of 	the
ensuing 	psychological 	disorientation 	on 	Wright's
architecture 	are 	dealt 	with 	in 	a 	later 	chapter.
Thus 	by 	the 	outbreak 	of the 	First 	World 	War 	Wright
had 	already created 	over a dozen 	masterpieces 	and had
established 	an 	architectural 	language 	based 	on
principles. 	Like 	his 	contemporaries 	in 	Europe, 	he 	had
inherited 	the 	confusions 	of 	'The 	Styles' 	and 	imbibed
lessons 	from 	Viollet-le-Duc 	and 	the 	Arts 	and 	Crafts, 	as
well 	as 	uniquely 	American 	intluences. 	to 	formulate 	a
grammar 	of design 	which 	far 	transcended 	the 	Chicago
suburbs 	in 	its 	universal 	implications. 	His 	influence 	in
America 	was 	already 	considerable, 	especially 	among
those 	Midwestern 	followers 	of 	the 	so-called 	'Prairie
School': 	some 	of 	these 	(one 	thinks 	particularly 	of
Walter 	Burley 	Griffin) 	established 	worthwhile 	vocabu-
laries of their own, which 	obviously 	bore 	the 	imprint of
the 	master: 	but 	most 	produced 	pastiche. 	Wright's
immediate 	influence 	was 	not 	restricted 	to 	America: 	the
Wasinulh 	\'ohinu's. 	and 	the 	occasional 	foreign 	visitor,
ensured 	that 	the 	work 	also 	became 	known 	in 	Europe.
This 	happened 	mainly 	through 	photographs 	and
drawings. 	Thus 	a 	sort 	of 	'mythological' 	version 	of
Wright 	was 	created 	in 	various 	architects' 	minds,
particularly 	in 	Holland, 	and 	was 	used 	to 	prop 	up 	a
range 	of 	emergent 	theories 	and 	ideals 	in 	the 	general
quest 	for 	a 	modern 	style.
h.iS 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wrigiit. 	linity Temple.
Oak 	Park. 	Illinois. 	1906,
interior.

-- 92 of 420 --

7. 	Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of 	Space
The 	new 	architecture 	is 	anti-cubic; 	that 	is, 	it 	does 	not 	seek 	to 	tix 	the 	various
space 	cells 	together 	within 	a 	closed 	cube, 	but 	throws 	the 	functional 	space
cells 	. 	. 	. 	away 	from 	the centre 	. 	. 	. 	towards 	the 	outside, 	whereby 	height, 	width,
depth 	+ 	time tend 	towards 	a 	wholly 	new 	plastic 	expression 	in 	open 	space. 	In
this 	way 	architecture 	acquires 	a 	more 	or 	less 	floating 	aspect 	that, 	as 	it 	were,
works 	against 	the 	gravitational 	forces of nature.
T. 	van 	Doesburg. 	1924
If 	an 	architectural 	historian 	highly 	attuned 	to 	the
significant 	traits of his 	own time 	had positioned 	himself
in 	1 	q 1 4 	and looked 	back over the previous two decades
in 	Western 	Europe 	and 	the 	United 	States, 	his 	main
impression 	would 	have 	been 	of 	a 	rich 	and 	varied
pluralism. 	In 	France, 	the 	United 	States, 	and 	England
Beaux-Arts 	Classicism 	would 	have 	been 	seen 	extend-
ing 	its 	influence, 	alongside 	pockets 	of 	continued
Medieval 	Revival; 	strands 	of 	National 	Romanticism
linked 	to 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	and 	Regionalist 	ideals 	would
also 	have 	been 	prominent. 	Against 	this 	varied
backdrop 	the 	innovations 	defined 	in 	earlier 	chapters 	-
from 	Art 	Nouveau 	to Futurism, 	from 	Gaudi to 	Wright -
would 	have 	stood 	out 	firmly. 	But 	even 	these 	'modern'
tendencies 	would 	have 	revealed 	a 	great 	diversity 	of
approach.
Had 	the 	same 	historian 	positioned 	himself 	twenty
years 	later 	and 	surveyed 	the 	scene of the 	preceding 	few
decades, 	he 	might 	have 	been 	struck 	by 	the 	way 	the
various 	pre-war strands of modern 	architecture 	tended
to 	converge 	around 	1920, 	culminating 	in 	the 	broadly
shared qualities of the 	'International Style'. 	Admittedly
the 	historical 	landscape 	would 	have 	still 	contained
major 	tributaries 	of 	revivalism, 	but 	these 	would 	have
flowed 	with 	less 	force. 	Moreover. 	Art 	Dcco 	and 	the
various 	forms 	of 	Expressionism 	would 	have 	appeared
as 	parallel 	movements 	of 	modern 	architecture, 	occa-
sionally 	diverging 	from, 	occasionally 	overlapping
with, 	the 	International 	Style.
Some 	of 	the 	elements 	which 	contributed 	to 	the
synthesis 	of 	the 	post-war 	era 	have 	been 	singled 	out
already: 	the 	very 	idea 	of 	a 	modern 	architecture;
Rationalist 	approaches 	to 	history 	and 	construction;
visual 	and 	philosophical 	concerns 	with 	mechaniz-
ation; 	attempts 	at 	distilling 	certain 	essentials 	of
Classicism; 	moral 	yearnings 	towards 	honesty, 	integ-
rity, 	and 	simplicity. 	However, 	without 	the 	influence 	of
Cubism 	and 	Abstract 	art, 	the 	architecture 	of 	the
twenties 	would 	probably 	have 	been 	very 	different. 	This
was 	not 	a 	matter 	of 	architects 	lifting 	motifs 	from
paintings 	and 	aping 	their 	forms, 	so 	much 	as 	it 	was 	a
matter 	of 	infusing 	the 	entire 	three-dimensional
anatomy of architecture with 	a 	geometrical 	and spatial
character 	analocious 	to 	that 	first 	discovered 	in 	the
illusionistic 	world 	behind 	the 	picture 	plane.
In 	fact 	the 	various 	paths 	from 	the 	discoveries 	of
painters 	and 	sculptors 	to 	the 	vocabularies 	of 	archi-
tectural 	design 	were 	rarely 	straightforward. 	Aside
from 	particular 	routes 	of 	influence 	from, 	say. 	Cubism
to 	Russian 	geometrical 	abstraction 	to 	Constructivist
design, 	or 	from 	Cubism 	to 	Purism 	to the 	architecture 	of
Le 	Corbusier. 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	divine 	broad 	underlying
areas 	of 	shared 	concern 	between 	the 	artists 	and
architects 	of 	the 	avant-garde 	in 	the 	first 	part 	of 	this
century. 	One 	finds 	the 	recurrent 	theme 	of purification
of 	the 	means 	of 	expression 	through 	the 	device 	of
abstraction. 	The 	emphasis 	on 	the 	underlying 	'archi-
tectonic' 	order of the visual 	work of art 	is. 	in 	turn, 	often
linked 	to 	a 	belief 	in 	'higher', 	more 	spiritual 	meanings,
transcending 	the 	mere 	reproduction 	of 	appearances.
The 	rejection 	of 	traditional 	means 	of 	representation
like 	perspective 	is 	in 	turn 	often 	linked 	to 	rediscoveries
of 	'primitive' 	and 	'exotic' 	sources 	- African 	sculpture,
Japanese 	prints. 	Oriental 	carpets. 	Considerable 	emo-

-- 93 of 420 --

92 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
tlonal 	investment 	is 	made 	in 	the 	idea 	of 	the 	creative
individual 	preserving 	his 	authenticity 	in 	the 	face 	of the
supposedly 	decaying 	forms 	of 	official. 	Academic and
bourgeois 	culture.
Another 	feature 	of this 	intellectual 	scenario 	was 	the
very 	idea 	of 	an 	avant-garde 	whose 	business 	was 	seen
as 	the 	jettisoning 	of dead 	forms 	in 	a 	constant 	quest 	for
innovation. 	Curiously 	though, 	the 	impetus 	towards
permanent 	iconoclasm. 	accompanied 	by 	a 	contempt
for 	the 	recent 	past, 	was 	often 	also 	linked 	to 	a
generalized 	respect 	for 	far 	distant 	history. 	It 	was 	as
though 	being 	'modern' 	required 	that 	one 	should
rettirn to 	the 	fundamentals 	of one's 	art. 	and 	rethink 	it
from 	the 	groimd 	up. 	Moreover, 	the 	modern 	artist 	- 	as
Kandinsky 	put 	the 	matter 	overtly 	in 	Concerning 	the
Spiritual 	in 	Art 	(191 2) 	- 	should 	function 	as 	a 	sort 	of
high 	priest 	and 	prophet 	of a 	new 	culture. 	Once 	again
one 	glimpses 	the 	progressivist 	notion 	of 	history, 	the
pervasive 	beUef in 	a 	Zeitgeist 	- 	the 	myth 	of the 	modern
artist 	as 	someone 	who 	is 	supposed 	to 	make 	the 	inner
meaning 	of 	his 	own 	times 	visible. 	Past 	styles 	were
therefore, 	at 	least 	in 	theory, 	barriers 	against 	the 	deep
mission 	of 	revealing 	abstract 	form 	in 	its 	universal
character. 	It 	was 	as 	if the 	true 	modern 	style 	was 	to 	be
the 	style 	to 	end 	all 	styles, 	as 	if 	it 	was 	supposed 	to 	be
privy 	to 	some 	esperanto 	of 	expression, 	transcending
countries 	and 	conventions, 	and 	rooted 	in 	central
structures 	of the 	mind. 	The 	stripped 	white 	geometries
of the 	modern 	movement, 	and 	the 	recurrent 	obsession
with 	'essentials' 	in 	surrounding 	polemics, 	can 	scarcely
be 	understood 	apart 	from 	such 	trans-historical 	and
pan-cultural 	aspirations.
It 	is 	ironical 	that 	rebellious 	avant-garde 	positions
should 	have 	been 	influenced 	by 	scholars 	and 	his-
torians 	of 	art. 	hi 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	century, 	such
writers 	as 	Heinrich 	Wolfflin 	and 	Konrad 	Fiedler 	had
discussed 	style 	as 	if 	it 	could 	be 	defined 	in 	terms 	of
dominant 	modes 	of 	spatial 	or 	formal 	patterning, 	and
had 	gone 	so 	far 	as 	to 	suggest 	that 	such 	underlying
visual 	structures 	were 	the 	key 	way 	in 	which 	past
Zeitgeists 	had 	been 	expressed. 	The 	lesson 	for 	someone
in 	the 	present 	who 	held 	a 	similar 	view 	of 	the
relationship 	between 	culture 	and 	form 	was 	therefore
obvious: 	he 	should 	seek 	the 	true 	sense 	of a 	modern
style 	in 	some 	new 	spatial 	conception 	which 	(sup-
posedly) 	gave 	direct 	expression 	to 	"the 	spirit 	of modern
times'.
Another 	strand 	contributing 	to 	the 	ideal 	of 	ab-
straction 	stemmed 	from 	late 	nineteenth-century
Symbolist 	ideas 	and 	from 	the 	notion 	of 	'empathy'. 	We
have 	seen 	how 	August 	Endell 	in 	Vienna 	could 	write 	of
a 	'new 	art' 	capable 	of expression 	without 	anecdote: 	at
the 	turn 	of 	the 	century 	there 	were 	numerous 	other
suggestions 	of a 	painting 	equivalent 	to 	music, 	and 	of a
pure 	language 	of 	lines, 	shapes, 	volumes, 	colours, 	and

-- 94 of 420 --

7.1 	Ueft) 	Pablo 	Picasso.
VAficionado. 	iqi2.
Oil on canvas.
52tx37iin.
(134 X 	8icm.). 	Basle.
Kunstmuseum.
7 	J 	lri<(/it) 	Piet
\l. iiidrian. 	Composition
in 	Blue. 	.4. 	Oil 	on 	canvas.
IMJ 	X 	I7|in.
I 	^i) 	X 	44cm. I. 	Otterlo,
Rijksmuseum. 	Kriillcr-
Miiller.
7, 	', 	ibflow) 	Frank 	Lloyd
W 	right, 	Martin 	Kstate,
liulTalo. 	New 	York,
1 	1)1)4. 	pl^n 	(from
l\i!.s™nt/i 	portlblio).
PI
£LE|
^>,
Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	93
tones. 	This 	no 	doubt 	betokened 	a 	strong 	reaction
against 	the 	moral 	and 	literary 	emphases 	of 	mid-
nineteenth-century 	art. 	Even 	a champion of Classicism
like 	Geoffrey 	Scott, 	in 	The 	Architecture 	of Humanism 	of
1914, 	could 	write 	of 	the 	direct 	impact 	on 	tactile
sensibility 	of space, 	visual 	weight 	and 	tectonic pattern:
'Architecture 	directly 	and 	immediately 	perceived, 	is 	a
combination 	of masses, 	of spaces 	and 	of lines.'
The 	influence 	of Cubism 	on 	architectural 	form 	was
not 	direct, 	but 	through 	derivative 	artistic 	movements.
In 	the 	crucial, 	formative 	stage 	between 	about 	1907
and 	191 	2. 	Pablo 	Picasso 	and 	Georges 	Braque.
following 	certain 	hints 	in 	the 	late 	works 	of 	Cezanne
and 	in 	Negro 	sculpture, 	developed 	a 	visual 	language
blending 	abstraction 	with 	fragments 	of 	observed
reality, 	allowing 	space 	and 	form 	to 	come 	to 	new 	terms,
forcing 	heroic 	and 	humble 	subject-matter 	into 	new
combinations 	(fig. 	7.1). 	The 	effects 	of 	this 	visual
revolution 	would 	be 	felt 	in 	sculpture, 	film, 	the 	graphic
arts 	and. 	eventually, 	architecture. 	One 	crucial 	trans-
ition 	between 	Cubism and 	a 	more 	ordered 	vocabulary
took 	place 	in 	France 	between 	1912 	and 	1920 	and
culminated 	(as 	will 	be 	shown 	in 	the 	next 	chapter) 	in
the 	doctrines 	and 	forms 	of Purism, 	then, 	eventually, 	in
the 	architecture 	of Le 	Corbusier. 	This 	general 	develop-
ment 	in 	which 	Cubist-derived 	forms 	were 	gradually
simplified 	and 	infused 	with 	a 	machine-age 	content,
would 	be 	repeated 	in 	Germany 	and 	Russia 	in 	the 	late
1910s 	and 	early 	1920s 	(one 	thinks 	of the 	abstractions
of 	Kasimir 	Malevich, 	Laszlo 	Moholy-Nagy 	and 	El
Lissitzky 	and 	their 	eventual 	role 	as 	sources 	of
architectural 	form ). 	but 	only 	after the 	ground 	had 	been
laid 	by 	the 	'De 	Stijl' 	movement 	in 	Holland. 	This 	was
founded 	in 	191 7 	and 	brought 	together 	painters,
sculptors, 	a 	furniture-maker, 	and 	architects 	in 	a 	loose
affiliation 	of 	beliefs, 	and 	a 	broadly 	shared 	style 	of
abstract 	and 	rectangular 	emphasis: 	chief 	among 	the
painters 	were 	Theo 	van 	Doesburg 	and 	Piet 	Mondrian.
As 	early 	as 	1907 	Mondrian 	had 	already 	been
tending 	towards 	abstraction 	in 	his 	paintings 	of 	trees
and 	natural 	scenes. 	By 	1914. 	with 	the 	help 	of Cubism,
he 	had 	managed 	to simplify 	the language of painting to
the 	point 	where 	he 	used 	combinations 	of 	vertical 	and
horizontal 	lines; 	but 	these 	still 	referred, 	schematically,
to 	observed 	phenomena. 	Increasingly, 	though, 	the
elements 	of 	his 	paintings 	achieved 	their 	own 	auton-
omy, 	as 	Mondrian 	began 	to 	sense that 	a 	pure 	language
of form, 	colour, 	and 	rhythm 	- 	a 	visual 	music 	in 	touch
with 	the 	emotions 	- 	might 	be 	possible 	(fig. 	7.2). 	His
theosophical 	beliefs 	and 	his 	reading of Schoenmaekers's
writings 	on 	'spiritual 	mathematics' 	were 	certainly 	a
stimulus 	here: 	the 	painter 	was 	in 	search 	of 	thought
forms' 	to 	match 	his 	intuitions 	of 	a 	higher 	order
transcending 	mere 	appearances. 	Indeed, 	the 	De 	Stijl
movement 	as 	a 	whole 	- 	to 	which 	Mondrian 	would 	be

-- 95 of 420 --

94 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
loosely 	affiliated 	- 	would 	claim 	for 	abstract 	art 	a 	lofty
role 	as 	a 	sort of tool 	of revelation.
It 	was 	Theo 	van 	Doesburg 	and 	Gerrit 	Rietveld 	who
grasped 	most 	clearly 	the 	three-dimensional 	im-
plications 	of 	such 	a 	geometrical 	abstraction. 	The
general 	aim 	was 	not 	to 	decorate 	the 	modern 	building
with 	painted 	murals, 	but 	to 	treat 	it 	as a 	sort 	of abstract
sculpture, 	a 	'total-work-of-art'. 	an organism 	of colour,
form, 	and 	intersecting 	planes. 	By 	1918-20 	Mon-
drian's 	and 	van 	Doesburg's 	paintings 	had 	become
distillations 	of 	black, 	white, 	and 	primary 	colours 	and
the 	simplest 	rectangular 	geometries, 	which 	made 	it 	all
the easier 	to 	think 	of translating 	such 	qualities 	into 	the
shapes 	of a 	functioning 	architecture, 	in 	which 	walls,
floor 	planes, 	roofs, 	or 	windows 	might 	have 	analogous
formal 	character 	to 	the 	flanges 	in 	the 	paintings. 	By
192 	^, 	van 	Doesburg was 	able 	to 	produce 	a 	remarkable
set 	of models 	and 	diagrams 	for 	a 	house 	in 	which 	earlier
De 	StijI 	experiments 	were 	synthesized 	(fig. 	7.12). 	The
resulting 	order 	represented 	a 	complete 	break 	with 	the
axial 	schemata 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	Classicism. 	Instead 	of
simple 	symmetry, 	there 	was 	dynamic, 	asymmetrical
balance: 	instead 	of 	voids 	set 	into 	solids, 	there 	were
tense 	interactions 	of form 	and 	space: 	instead 	of closed
forms, 	there 	were 	dynamic 	extensions 	of 	coloured
planes 	into 	the 	surroundings.
The 	achievement 	of 	this 	novel 	spatial 	conception'
was 	more 	than 	a 	three-dimensional 	projection 	of
Mondrian's 	painting 	ideas, 	however: 	it 	reflected 	too
the 	absorption 	of 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright's 	architectural
ideas 	by 	the 	European 	avant-garde 	(fig. 	7.?). 	These
were 	known 	in 	Holland 	by 	i9icj-ii 	through 	the
superb 	plates 	of 	the 	Wasmitth 	Volumes, 	published 	in
these years, 	and 	through 	the 	praise 	lavished on 	Wright
by 	Hendrik 	Petrus 	Berlage, 	a 	sort 	of 	father-figure 	of
modern 	architecture 	in 	Holland, 	whose 	bold 	and
simple 	forms 	(e.g.. 	the 	Amsterdam 	Stock 	Exchange 	of
1897-1904. 	fig. 	7.5) 	bear 	some 	comparison 	with
Mackintosh's 	or 	Richardson's. 	Berlage 	was 	deeply
concerned with 	the 	problem 	of a 	genuine 	modern 	style.
which 	he 	spoke 	of in 	terms 	of clear 	proportions, 	planar
walls, 	and 	the 	primacy 	of space. 	It 	is 	not 	too 	surprising
to 	discover 	how 	deeply 	he 	admired 	the architecture 	of
Wright, 	which 	he 	had 	actually 	seen 	first-hand: 	this
was 	his 	reaction 	to 	the 	Larkin 	building 	of 	1904 	(fig.
7-4):
1 	came 	away 	with 	the 	conviction 	that 	I 	had 	seen 	a
truly 	modern 	building, 	and 	filled 	with 	respect 	for 	a
master who 	could 	create 	such 	a 	work, 	whose 	equal
is 	yet 	to 	be 	found 	in 	Europe.
In 	other 	words. 	Berlage 	found 	in 	Wright 	qualities
which 	corroborated 	his own 	ideals. 	Dutch 	'Expression-
ists' 	like 	Michel 	de 	Klerk 	and 	Piet 	Kramer - also found
much 	to 	admire 	in 	his 	work 	that 	supported 	their 	own.

-- 96 of 420 --

Cubism and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	•	
9 5
7.4 	(/(/() 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Larkin 	building.
Buffalo. 	New 	York.
1904. 	interior.
7.
5
( above
right ) 	Hendrik 	Pctrus
Berlage. 	Stock
Exchange. 	Amsterdam.
1897-1904. 	view of
main 	hall.
7.6 	(rig/U) 	Michel 	de
Klerk. 	Zaanstraat
Housing, 	Amsterdam.
19 1 7. 	the 	Post Office.

-- 97 of 420 --

96 	• 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
7. 7 	Rob van 	t'Hoff. 	villa
at 	Huis 	ter Heide. 	1 9 1 6.
very different, 	aims. 	Even 	so 	idiosyncratic 	a 	building 	as
de 	Klerk's 	Zaanstraat 	Post 	Office 	in 	Amsterdam 	of
1 91 7, 	with 	its 	bizarre 	brick 	patterns, 	its 	humped 	roof
profiles, 	and 	its 	textured 	tower, 	recalls 	the 	example 	of
Wright 	in 	its 	horizontal 	dynamism, 	its 	layering 	of
space, 	and 	its 	use 	of materials 	(fig. 	7.6). 	In 	this 	case, 	it
was, 	perhaps, 	the 	'handicraft 	Wright', 	rather 	than 	the
"abstract 	Wright', 	who 	was 	being 	appreciated.
The 	generation 	of 	Gerrit 	Rietveld, 	Theo 	van
Doesburg, 	and 	J. 	P, 	Oud, 	who 	were 	to 	contribute 	to 	'De
Stijl', 	and 	who 	rejected 	Expressionism 	as 	an 	outmoded
manner 	from 	the 	era 	of individualism 	and 	handicraft,
also claimed 	Wright 	as one of their 	guiding 	lights. 	They
ignored 	his 	suburban 	and 	naturalistic 	imagery, 	and
concentrated 	exclusively 	on 	the 	spatial 	character 	and
the 	vocabulary 	of 	hovering 	and 	intersecting 	planes,
which 	they 	perceived 	almost entirely 	divorced 	from 	the
original 	social 	context. 	The 	fact 	that 	they 	knew
Wright's 	work 	chiefly 	through 	drawings 	and 	photo-
graphs 	may 	have 	been 	important 	here, 	and 	it 	may 	be,
as 	Banham 	has 	suggested, 	that 	this 	'version' 	of Wright
was 	partly 	created 	by 	the 	introduction 	to 	the 	second
Wasiuuth 	volume by 	C. 	R. 	Ashbee, 	who emphasized 	the
architect's 	'struggle 	for 	mastery 	over 	the 	machine'.
The 	'De 	Stijl 	version 	of Wright' 	was 	an 	oddly 	distorted
but 	fruitful 	one. 	whose 	forms 	they 	believed 	symbolized
the 	advance 	of machine 	civilization.
Holland 	had 	the 	benefit 	of peace 	between 	1914 	and
1918, 	and 	this 	allowed 	a 	gradual 	maturation 	of 	pre-
war 	ideas 	such 	as 	was 	scarcely 	possible 	elsewhere 	in
Europe, 	The 	fusion 	of 	Wrightian 	and 	Mondrianesque
abstraction 	occurred 	in 	an 	atmosphere 	of 	continuous
experimentation. 	Typical 	of 	this 	exploratory 	stage 	is
the 	Villa 	at 	Huis 	ter 	Heide 	of 	1916 	by 	Rob 	van 	t'Hoff
(tig, 	~.j). 	This 	was 	flat-roofed, 	formed 	from 	simple
rectangles and 	made 	from 	reinforced concrete; 	in 	some
respects 	it 	was 	similar 	to 	Jeanneret's 	slightly 	earlier
Dom-ino 	house 	projects. 	The 	influence 	of 	Wright 	was
clear 	in 	the 	overhangs, 	the 	extending 	horizontals 	and
the 	sliding 	volumes. 	In 	fact, 	van 	t'Hofl' 	was 	one 	of 	the
few 	European 	modern 	architects 	to 	have 	seen 	the
American's 	work 	first-hand. 	There 	was 	little 	applied
ornament: 	the 	main 	effects 	arose 	from 	the 	subtle
division 	of 	masses 	and 	voids, 	the 	play 	of 	light 	and
shade. 	Ideas 	which 	had 	permeated 	European 	and
American 	avant-garde 	discussions 	just 	before 	the 	war
were 	here 	able 	to 	find 	expression 	in 	an 	actual 	building.
j. 	P. 	Oud's 	project 	for 	seaside 	housing 	of 	1917 	(fig.
7.8 1 	was 	also 	stripped 	to 	the 	most 	essential 	geometrical
forms 	with 	flat 	roofs 	and 	a 	rhythm 	arising 	from
repetition 	of 	similar 	parts. 	His 	scheme 	for 	a 	small
factory 	of 	19 19 	(fig. 	7.9) 	attempted 	an 	inter-
relationship 	of planes 	about 	the 	corner 	in 	an 	overlapp-
ing, 	asymmetrical 	fashion, 	but 	the 	effect 	was 	earth-
bound 	and 	contrived 	in 	comparison 	to 	Wright's
accomplished 	works 	of over 	a 	decade 	before. 	It 	would
be 	some 	years 	before 	the 	full 	implications 	of 	an 	open-
form, 	dynamic 	spatial 	conception 	would 	be 	sensed,
then 	drawn 	together 	in 	three 	dimensions, 	in 	van
Doesburg's 	aforementioned 	models, 	in 	the 	archi-
tectonic 	constructions 	of Malevich 	and 	Lissitzky, 	in 	the
Schroeder 	House 	by 	Rietveld 	of 	1924, 	in 	Friedrich
Kiesler's 	extraordinary 	floating 	construction 	Cite 	dans
I'cspace 	of 	1926. 	and 	eventually 	in 	Gropius's 	Bauhaus
buildings 	at 	Dessau 	of 	the 	same 	year. 	Even 	Oud's
remarkable 	housing 	at 	the 	Hook 	of 	Holland 	of
1924-28 	relied 	on 	traditional 	planning 	devices 	of
regular 	symmetry.
The 	period 	between 	the 	end 	of 	the 	war 	and 	the
creation 	of 	these 	seminal 	works 	was 	characterized 	in
Holland 	by 	an 	active 	exchange 	of 	ideas 	between 	the
main 	artists 	of 	the 	De 	Stijl 	group, 	who 	were 	capable 	-

-- 98 of 420 --

7.8 	I. 	P. 	Oud, 	'Strand
boulevard' 	or seaside
housing project. 	191 	7.
7.9 	J. 	P. 	Oud. 	project 	for
afactory. 	1919.
through 	their 	varied 	roots 	and 	experiences 	- 	of
drawing 	on 	most 	strands 	of 	pre-war. 	avant-garde
theory. 	I)e 	Stiji 	means 	simply 	The 	Style, 	or 	to 	be 	more
precise 	The 	Style, 	for 	it 	was 	the 	common 	aim 	of all 	the
participants 	to 	create 	a 	language 	of forms 	appropriate
to 	contemporary 	realities, 	and 	free 	of 	the 	supposed
bogus 	historical 	residues 	of nineteenth-century 	eclect-
icism. 	By 	1417. 	it 	so 	happened, 	the 	influences 	of
Wright 	and 	Mondrian 	had 	tended 	to 	foster 	a 	vocabu-
lary 	in 	which 	simple 	geometrical 	forms, 	rectilinear
grids, 	and 	intersecting 	planes 	were 	indeed 	part 	of 	a
shared 	style; 	moreover, 	it 	was 	a 	style 	which 	seemed 	to
have 	an 	alinost 	universal 	application 	from 	painting 	to
typography 	to 	sculpture 	to 	furniture 	design 	to
architecture. 	Typically, 	the 	early 	polemics 	of 	De 	StijI
claimed 	for 	this 	coincidental 	and 	happy 	unity 	of aim 	an
almost 	divine 	sanction, 	as 	if the 	ZeiUieist 	of the 	modern
VrjIJKlil 	VI 	1 	LhJ 	HI 	HTElrRDNDE 	N 	VOOR 	- HUIZENRU • RHN - ttN 	STRRNDBDULEVRRD
Cubism and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	•	
97
era 	had 	singled out 	a 	group of men 	in 	Holland 	for 	some
epic 	intervention. 	Thus 	the 	emergent 	shared 	vocabu-
lary 	was 	claimed 	as 	the 	most 	true 	one 	for 	the times 	and
clothed 	in 	a 	moral 	rectitude 	and 	Utopian 	sentiinent
which 	contrasted 	it 	with 	the 	'archaistic 	confusion' 	of
'inodern 	baroque' 	(i.e., 	the 	sort 	of 	husky 	brick
'Expressionism' 	of 	Kramer 	and 	de 	Klerk). 	By 	1920 	De
StijI 	had 	succeeded 	in 	drawing 	together 	the 	devices 	of
abstract 	art 	with 	a 	inulti-layered 	content 	including
Futurist 	ideals, 	the 	spiritualism 	of Mondrian, 	the 	drive
towards 	simple 	and 	typical 	forms 	espoused 	by 	Gropius
in 	the 	pre-war 	years, 	and 	a 	Utopian 	slant 	that 	took
these 	forms 	to 	be 	appropriate 	to 	the 	social 	emancipa-
tion 	of the 	post-war era. 	There 	is 	here a 	loose 	parallel 	to
the 	Parisian 	development 	of Purism 	in 	the same period,
where 	a 	rappel 	« 	I'ordre 	also 	succeeded 	in 	drawing
together 	the 	Cubist 	tradition 	with 	a 	language 	of
symbolic 	forms 	felt 	to 	be 	appropriate 	to 	the 	'machine
age': 	the 	difference, 	obviously, 	lay 	in 	the 	'non-
objective' 	character 	of 	De 	StijI, 	and 	in 	the 	tendency 	of
the 	Dutch 	movement 	to 	avoid 	using 	curves.
Froni 	the 	beginning, 	De 	StijI 	proclamations 	em-
phasized 	the 	emergence 	of 	a 	new 	order 	in 	which
materialism' 	was 	to 	be 	left 	behind 	and 	replaced 	by
spiritualized, 	mechanized 	abstraction.
The 	machine 	is 	piir exccUence 	a 	phenomenon 	of
spiritual 	discipline. 	Materialism 	as a 	way 	of life 	and
art 	took 	handicraft 	as 	its 	direct 	psychological
expression. 	The 	new 	spiritual 	artistic 	sensibility 	of
the 	twentieth 	century 	has not 	only 	felt 	the 	beauty
of the 	machine, 	but 	has 	also 	taken 	cognizance 	of its
unlimited 	possibilities 	for 	the 	arts. 	Under 	the
supremacy 	of materialism, 	handicraft 	reduced 	men
to 	the 	level 	of machines: 	the 	proper 	tendency 	for
the 	rnachine 	(in 	the 	sense 	of cultural 	development)
is 	as 	the 	unique mediuin 	for 	the 	very 	opposite,
social 	liberation.

-- 99 of 420 --

98 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
The 	appropriate 	symbolic 	visual 	expression 	of 	this
outlook 	was 	felt 	to 	lie 	in 	what 	Oud 	later 	characterized
as 	'an 	unhistorical 	Classicism' 	- 	in 	other 	words 	a 	style
which 	took 	simplification 	even 	further 	than 	it 	had
gone 	in 	the 	pre-war 	generation. 	Here, 	indeed, 	was 	the
value 	of 	Mondrian's 	paintings 	and 	Wright's 	archi-
tecture 	to 	De 	Stijl, 	for 	each 	seemed 	to 	imply 	a 	formal
language 	of 	tensely 	related, 	simple 	forms 	and 	shapes
resolved 	into 	compelling 	unities. 	Controlled 	asymme-
try 	and 	the 	enlivened 	contrast 	of hovering 	planes 	seem
to 	have 	taken 	on 	an 	almost 	sacral 	meaning 	to 	De 	Stijl
artists 	as 	the 	correct 	mode 	for 	revealing 	the 	nature 	of
the 	emergent 	epoch 	(fig. 	7. 1 	1 ).
Spatial 	ideas 	that 	were 	later 	to 	be 	drawn 	into
architecture 	were 	often 	first 	revealed 	at 	the 	smaller
scale 	of 	painting 	or 	sculpture, 	or 	in 	mere 	drawings 	of
buildings 	where 	technical 	problems 	of 	realization
could 	be 	avoided. 	A 	pivotal 	work 	of early 	De 	Stijl 	was
Rietveld's chair design 	of 	1 9 1 7-1 8 	(fig. 	7. 10), 	because
here 	an 	attempt 	was 	made 	to 	find 	a 	functioning
equivalent 	in 	three dimensions 	to 	a 	rectilinear 	abstract
painting. 	There 	can 	be 	no 	doubt 	that 	Rietveld 	received
some 	stimulus 	from 	Wright's 	earlier 	furniture 	designs
(with 	their 	own 	pedigree 	in 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	ideals,
machine-cut 	wood, 	and 	Japanese 	simplicity), 	but 	here
the 	meaning 	was 	a 	little 	different. 	Despite 	the 	fact 	that
the 	chair 	was 	clearly 	a 	one-off, 	handmade 	object, 	it
was 	intended 	to 	have 	the 	symbolic 	significance 	of 	a
prototype 	of 	machine 	art 	and 	the 	character 	of 	a
standardized 	object, 	manifesting:
The 	need 	for 	number 	and 	measure, 	for 	cleanliness
and 	order, 	for 	standardization 	and 	repetition, 	for
perfection 	and 	high 	finish 	. 	.
.
The 	struts 	and 	rails 	of 	the 	chair 	were 	detailed 	to
suggest that one element was floating 	independently of
another, 	with 	the 	implication 	that 	all 	the 	parts 	were
hovering in 	a 	tangible, 	continuous space. 	Probably this
was 	conceived 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	three-dimensional 	equiva-
lent 	to 	the 	space 	of 	Mondrian's 	paintings 	with 	their
lines 	'extending 	to 	infinity'. 	But 	the 	significance 	of this
spatial 	conception 	in 	the 	minds 	of 	De 	Stijl 	artists 	was
nothing 	less 	than 	epochal. 	It 	was 	seen 	as 	the 	true 	one
for 	the 	twentieth 	century 	- 	an 	'optically 	immaterial,
almost 	hovering 	appearance'. 	Such 	an 	ideal 	was 	to
blend 	particularly 	well 	with 	the 	possibilities 	of
cantilevered 	concrete 	construction, 	and 	the 	shimmer-
ing, 	transparent 	effects 	of 	industrial 	glazing 	in
architecture.
Van 	Doesburg's 	remarkable 	spatial 	diagrams 	(fig.
7,12) 	and 	models 	of 	1923 	have 	been 	mentioned
already, 	but 	these 	were 	never 	realized 	directly 	as
architecture: 	probably 	the 	first 	actual 	building 	to
embody 	the 	full 	range 	of 	De 	Stijl 	formal, 	spatial, 	and

-- 100 of 420 --

Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	•	
99
iconographic 	intentions 	was 	therefore 	the 	Schroeder
House 	of 	1923-4 	(fig- 	71 	3). 	designed 	by 	Rietveld 	as 	a
family 	dwelling 	for 	a 	site 	at 	the 	end 	of a 	suburban 	row
in 	Utrecht. 	With 	its 	rectangular, 	smooth 	shapes 	and
the 	bright 	primary 	colours 	of its 	struts, 	the 	Schroeder
House 	stands 	out 	dramatically 	from 	its 	dark 	brick
neighbours. 	The 	building 	is 	formed 	from 	intersecting
planar 	walls 	detailed 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	some 	of them
appear 	to 	hover 	in 	space, 	while 	others 	extend
horizontally, 	and 	still 	others 	join 	to 	define 	thin
volumes. 	There 	is 	no 	single 	axis 	or 	simple 	symmetry:
rather 	one 	part 	is 	held 	in 	tenuous, 	dynamic 	and
asymmetrical 	relationship 	to 	the 	other, 	as 	had 	been
suggested 	in 	Mondrian's 	paintings 	seven 	years 	earlier.
The 	planes 	are 	in 	turn 	articulated 	by 	the 	thin 	lines 	of
window 	mullions. 	balcony 	railings 	and 	upstanding
struts, 	which 	are 	coloured 	black, 	blue. 	red. 	and 	yellow,
and 	stand 	out 	cleanly 	against the 	grey 	and 	white 	wall
surfaces. 	Again 	De StijI painting comes to mind, 	but the
manner 	in 	which 	one 	element 	is 	expressed 	independ-
ently, 	and made to stand discretely 	in 	space, 	also recalls
the 	'Elementarism' 	of Rietveld's 	chair. 	Some 	of the 	thin
metal supports 	are 	in 	fact attached 	girders - quotations
^'y-^'f. 	9 	3
«
7.10 	iahiwe left) 	Gerrit
Thomas 	Rietveld. 	Red-
Blue Chair, 	191 7-1 8.
7. 1
1
[hfhwkft) 	DeStijl
group exhibition 	at
Leonce 	Rosenberg. 	Paris.
1925.
j.iHabovenfiht) 	Thco
van 	Doesburg. 	spatial
diagram 	for a 	house.
1923: 	the centrifugal
conception of space,
with 	planes extending
into 	the surroundings.
Gouache on 	paper.
22j 	X 	22 	in.
I 	S6. 	? 	X 	s6 	cm.).
Amsterdam. 	Stedelijk
Museum.
7.1 	Mrij]ht] 	Gerrit
Thomas 	Rietveld.
Schroeder House.
Utrecht. 	1923-4.

-- 101 of 420 --

lOO 	The 	Formative 	Strands 	of Modern 	Architecture
from 	the 	worid 	of industrial 	standardization 	- 	detailed
to 	give 	the 	sense 	that 	all 	the 	parts 	of 	the 	building 	are
weightless. 	Voids 	and 	volumes 	of space 	are 	integrated
in 	the composition 	as active 	constituents.
The 	interiors 	of 	the 	Schroeder 	House 	continue 	the
same 	aesthetic 	themes. 	Details 	like 	the 	light 	fixtures 	or
the glass 	stair-casing 	are 	integrated 	with 	the 	building's
overall 	style 	and 	proportions. 	The 	downstairs 	contains
two 	bedrooms 	and 	a 	studio, 	with 	the 	kitchen/living
area 	to 	the 	south-east 	corner, 	where 	it 	originally
afforded 	views 	over 	the 	neighbouring 	flat 	landscape 	(a
motorway 	now 	blocks 	the 	view). 	Upstairs 	there 	are
working/sleeping 	areas 	giving 	on 	to 	balconies, 	and 	a
living-room, 	but 	partitions 	may 	be 	removed 	altogether
to 	give 	an 	entirely 	free 	plan 	(fig. 	7.14). 	The 	client, 	Mrs.
Schroeder. 	was 	herself 	a 	pioneer 	and 	wanted 	an
unconventional 	environment 	for 	her 	three 	children
which 	would 	also 	give 	her 	a 	place 	to 	work 	at 	her 	own
art. 	It 	seems 	probable 	that 	she 	inspired 	some 	of 	the
more 	'revolutionary' 	aspects 	of 	the 	building, 	like 	the
openness 	of 	the 	upstairs 	'free 	plan' 	and 	some 	of 	the
ingenious 	built-in 	furniture.
Rietveld 	worked 	closely 	with 	his 	client 	in 	the 	course
of 	design 	by 	using 	demountable 	cardboard 	and
wooden 	models. 	The 	earliest 	scheme 	was 	more 	cubic
and 	closed 	in 	character 	than 	the 	final 	one, 	and 	it 	was
only 	gradually 	that 	the 	three-dimensional 	vitality 	was
achieved. 	One 	advantage 	of 	this 	method 	of 	work 	was
that 	it 	allowed 	a 	consistency 	of approach 	from 	small 	to
large. 	The scale of the 	building 	is 	in 	fact 	quite 	petite and
intricate, 	and 	considerable 	attention 	has 	been 	given 	to
small 	touches 	like 	ledges, 	stairs, 	shelves, 	window
ledges 	and 	mullions. 	Details 	inside 	and 	out 	are
themselves 	like 	small 	'models' 	of 	the 	whole 	and 	have
been 	fashioned 	to 	reveal 	the 	life 	of the 	underlying 	form
(fig. 	7.15). 	One 	is 	reminded 	constantly 	of 	Rictveld's
artistry 	as 	a 	cabinet-maker; 	it 	is 	as 	if 	the 	whole 	was
some 	oversized 	intricate 	piece 	of De 	Stijl 	furniture. 	The
Schroeder 	House 	is 	thus 	a 	'total-work-of-art' 	in 	which
fixtures 	and 	overall 	form 	are 	consistent 	expressions 	of
the 	same 	idea, 	and 	in 	which 	painting, 	sculpture,
architecture, 	and 	the 	practical 	arts 	are 	all 	fused.
While 	the 	Schroeder 	House, 	like 	Rietveld's 	earlier
furniture 	designs, 	was 	built 	through 	the 	most 	careful
handicraft, 	carpentry, 	and 	intuitive 	trial 	and 	error, 	its
symbolic 	message 	concerned 	a 	new 	way 	of life 	created
by 	the 	supposed 	spiritual 	liberation 	of mechanization.
If these 	crisp, 	superbly 	proportioned 	shapes 	and 	rooms
had 	been merely 	pleasing 	forms, 	they 	would 	probably
have 	had 	no 	lasting 	power; 	as 	it 	is, 	they 	are 	the
outward 	manifestation 	of 	a 	polemical 	content, 	of 	a
transcending social 	ideal. 	They embody a version 	of the
'good 	life', 	and 	this 	adds 	extra 	force 	to 	the 	formal
arrangement. 	Architecture 	is. 	after 	all, 	an 	art, 	an
7.14 	Gerrit Thomas
Rietveld, 	Schroeder
House, 	Utrecht, 	1923-4,
interior of upper 	level
with 	screens removed.

-- 102 of 420 --

Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of Space 	• 	loi
7. 1 	5 	Cerrit 	Thomas
Rielveld. 	Sihroeder
House. 	Utrecht. 	1423-4.
detail 	of light 	fixture.
expressive 	language 	for 	the 	iirticuiation 	i)f 	ideas 	and
feelings 	as 	well 	as 	for 	the 	service 	of 	utilitarian
functions. 	Part 	of the 	richness 	of the 	Schroeder 	House
lies 	precisely 	in 	the 	way 	function 	and 	structure, 	and
such 	'straightforward 	facts' 	as 	the girders 	or 	the 	simple
slabs, 	have 	been 	rarefied, 	given 	a 	deeper 	significance
(Plate 	4 1. 	As 	Oud 	had 	written 	some 	years 	earlier,
anticipating 	such an 	architecture:
*
Without 	falling 	into 	barren 	rationalism, 	it 	would
remain 	above 	all 	objective, 	but within 	this
objectivity 	would 	experience 	higher 	things 	. 	.
.
He 	had 	gone 	on 	to 	say 	that:
... 	an 	architecture 	rationally 	based 	on 	the
circumstances 	of life 	today 	would 	be 	in 	every 	sense
opposed 	to 	the 	sort 	of architecture 	that 	has 	existed
until 	now. 	... 	its 	ordained 	task 	would 	be. 	in 	perfect
devotion 	to 	an 	almost 	impersonal 	method 	of
technical 	creation, 	to 	shape 	organisms 	of clear 	form
and 	pure 	proportions. 	In 	place 	of the 	natural
attractions 	of uncultivated 	materials 	... 	it 	would
unfold 	the 	stimulating 	qualities 	of sophisticated
materials, 	the 	limpidity of glass, 	the 	shine 	and
roiuidness 	of finishes, 	lustrous 	and 	shining 	colour,
the 	glitter 	of steel 	and 	so 	forth. 	Thus 	the develop-
ment 	of the 	art 	of building 	goes 	towards 	an
architecture 	inore 	bound 	to 	matter 	than 	ever 	before
in 	essence, 	but 	in 	appearance 	rising 	clear 	of
material 	considerations: 	free 	from 	all 	impressionist
creation 	of atmosphere, 	in 	the 	fullness 	of light,
brought 	to 	purity 	of proportion 	and 	colour, 	organic
clarity 	of form: 	an 	architecture 	that, 	in 	its 	freedom
from 	inessentialism, 	could surpass 	even 	Classical
purity.
There 	is 	much 	in 	this 	passage 	which 	could 	be
translated 	without 	much 	distortion 	and 	applied 	to 	the
seminal 	works 	of 	Walter 	Gropius. 	Lc 	Corbusier 	and
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	in 	the 	early 	twenties. 	Each 	of these
architects 	was 	seeking 	in 	his 	own 	way 	to 	give 	form 	to
his 	poetic 	reactions 	to 	the 	technological 	and 	social
realities 	of his 	time: 	each 	had 	grown 	up 	in 	the 	dusk 	of
Art 	Nouveau 	and had 	been 	exposed 	to 	the 	ideas 	of
Rationalism 	and 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund: 	each 	too
had 	imbibed 	spiritual 	conceptions 	of the 	typical 	and 	of
abstraction. 	Moreover, 	each 	had 	learned 	crucial
lessons 	from 	the 	stripped 	Classicism 	of the 	first 	decade,
and 	from 	the 	syntax 	of 	Cubism, 	before 	achieving 	his
own 	version 	of an architecture that 	'in 	its freedom 	from
inessentialism 	could 	surpass 	even 	Classical 	purity'. 	In
turn 	each 	architect 	had 	experienced 	the traumas 	of the
First 	World 	War. 	and 	optimistically 	hoped 	to 	en-
courage 	a 	new 	world 	to 	rise 	out 	of 	the 	ashes. 	It 	is
scarcely surprising 	therefore 	- given 	the community 	of
forinative 	ideas 	- 	that 	there 	should 	have 	emerged 	a
certain 	consonance 	of 	expression 	in 	the 	latter 	half 	of
the 	twenties. 	However, 	it 	is 	insufficient 	simply 	to 	lump
the 	whole 	matter 	together 	as 	'the 	New 	Objectivity' 	or
"the 	International 	Style'. 	As 	was 	suggested 	in 	the
introduction : 	shared themes 	are best understood in the
light 	of individual 	intentions 	and 	unique 	conditions.

-- 103 of 420 --



-- 104 of 420 --

o-o 	-o
(D 	O 	lO
(D Q..
D 	<D 	H
fi) 	=. 	(0

-- 105 of 420 --

8. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form
Architecture 	is 	the 	masterly, 	correct 	and 	magnificent 	play 	of volumes
brought 	together 	in 	light.
LeCorbusier, 	1923
The 	1920s 	in 	Fairope. 	Russia 	and. 	to 	some 	degree, 	the
United 	States 	was 	one 	of 	those 	rare 	periods 	in 	the
history 	of 	architecture 	when 	new 	forms 	were 	created
which 	seemed 	to 	overthrow 	previous 	styles 	and 	set 	a
new. 	common 	basis 	for 	individual 	invention. 	Known
as 	the 	'International 	Style', 	this 	shared 	language 	of
expression 	was 	more 	than 	a 	mere 	style: 	it 	was 	also
more 	than 	a revolution 	in 	building 	technique, 	though
its 	characteristic 	effects 	of 	hovering 	volumes 	and
interpenetrating 	planes 	admittedly 	relied 	on 	the
machine-age 	materials 	of 	concrete, 	steel, 	and 	glass.
Like 	most 	major 	shifts 	in 	the 	history 	of 	forms, 	the
modern 	movement 	gave 	body 	to 	new 	ideas. 	It
expressed 	polemical 	attitudes 	and 	Utopian 	sentiments:
and 	whatever 	qualities 	individual 	buildings 	may 	have
shared, 	they 	were 	still 	the 	products 	of 	artists 	with
personal 	styles 	and 	private 	preoccupations. 	It 	is only 	by
probing 	into 	the 	fantasies 	behind 	the 	forms 	that 	one
may 	understand 	their 	meaning. 	This 	applies 	partic-
ularly 	to 	Le 	Corbusier. 	whose 	vast 	imaginative 	world
included 	a 	vision 	of 	the 	ideal 	city, 	a 	philosophy 	of
nature, 	and 	a 	strong 	feeling 	for 	the 	Classical 	tradition.
He 	was 	one 	of 	those 	rare 	individuals 	who 	succeed 	in
investing 	their 	creations 	with 	a 	universal 	tone.
Le Corbusier 	(whose real 	name 	was 	Charles 	Edouard
Jeanneretl 	was 	born 	in 	the 	Swiss 	watch-making 	town
of 	La 	Chaux-de-Fonds 	in 	1887 	and 	was 	therefore
twenty 	years 	younger 	than 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	a
generation 	younger 	than 	Hoffmann 	and 	Ferret, 	and
almost 	the 	same 	age 	as 	Walter 	(Iropius 	and 	Mies 	van
der 	Robe. 	He 	trained 	as 	an 	engraver, 	and 	a 	watch-case
he 	made 	at 	the 	age 	of 	1 	5 	won 	a 	prize 	at 	the 	Turin
exhibition 	of 	1902. 	It 	shows 	clearly 	the 	impact 	of 	Art
Nouveau. 	as 	do 	the 	decorations 	of a 	number 	of chalet-
like 	structures 	he 	designed 	in 	his 	late 	teens 	and 	early
twenties 	around 	his 	native 	town. 	A 	major 	early
influence 	on 	his 	formation 	was 	L' 	Eplattenier. 	his
teacher 	at 	the 	local 	art 	school. 	It 	was 	he 	who
encouraged 	Jeannerct's 	habit 	of 	the 	close 	study 	and
observation 	of nature. 	He 	prompted 	his 	student 	to 	look
beyond 	appearances 	to 	the 	underlying 	structures 	of
plants 	and 	fossils 	and 	stressed 	the 	beauty 	of 	simple
geometrical 	forms. 	Jeanneret's 	design 	for 	an 	art 	school
of 	1910 	(fig. 	8.1 	lis a 	useful 	gauge ofhis early 	thinking.
PREVIOUS 	PAGE
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Barnsdall 	House. 	Los
Angeles. 	California.
1920, 	view 	towards
court 	and 	water garden.
8.1 	Charles 	Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusier).
project for 	an 	art 	school.
1910.
.	
, 	-^^^^^

-- 106 of 420 --

Le 	Corbusicr's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	los
8.2 	Charles 	Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusier),
sketch 	of the 	Acropolis
in 	Athens done 	during
the 	'Voyage d'Orient'.
igii.
with 	its 	emphasis 	on 	simple 	cubes 	and 	a 	pyramid, 	and
its 	unadorned 	surfaces. 	It 	perhaps 	shows 	debts 	to
Egyptian 	architecture 	or 	even 	to 	the 	stripped 	Classi-
cism 	of 	the 	eighteenth-century 	architect 	Ledoux. 	But
one 	should 	beware 	of reading 	too 	clear 	a 	development
into 	Jeanneret's 	early 	years: 	he 	tried 	many 	different
styles 	and 	forms 	of expression 	before 	he 	found 	his 	true
way.
The 	young 	]eanneret 	was 	deeply 	introspective. 	He
oscillated 	between 	periods 	of 	great 	uncertainty 	and
periods 	of exaggerated 	confidence 	when 	he 	sensed 	he
must 	have 	some 	Olympian 	destiny. 	He 	read 	Nietzsche
and 	absorbed 	a 	messianic 	view 	of the 	artist 	as someone
in 	touch 	with 	a 	higher 	order 	who 	produces 	redemptive
forms 	for 	the 	world 	below, 	jeanneret 	was 	suspicious 	of
the 	conventional 	system 	of Beaux-Arts 	education 	and
avoided 	it 	(though 	some 	of 	its 	lessons 	later 	crept 	into
his work). 	He preferred 	to 	learn 	by doing and his erratic
self-education 	included 	much 	reading, 	extensive
travel, 	and 	experience 	in 	a 	variety 	of 	architectural
ateliers. 	He 	seems 	to 	have 	had 	an 	uncanny 	talent 	for
turning 	up 	in 	what 	history 	has 	since 	proved 	to 	be 	the
'right' 	places. 	By 	the 	time 	he 	was 	24. 	he 	had 	managed
to 	work 	in 	the 	offices 	of 	two 	of 	Pevsner's 	'Pioneers' 	of
modern 	architecture: 	Auguste 	Perret 	and 	Peter
Behrens.
.As 	was 	shown 	in 	Chapter 	3. 	Perret 	taught 	jeanneret
the 	business 	of 	reinforced-concrete 	construction 	and
introduced 	him 	to 	the 	tradition 	of 	French 	Rationalist
theory 	stemming 	from 	Auguste 	Choisy 	and 	Eugene
Viollet-le-Duc. 	Jeanneret was only 	20 	when 	he 	worked
for 	a 	few 	months 	in 	the 	master's 	office, 	but 	it 	was
enough 	to 	convince 	him 	that 	this 	material 	should, 	in 	a
sense, 	become 	his 	own. 	By 	19 	14. 	with 	the 	aid 	of 	Max
Dubois, 	he 	had 	invented 	the 	Dom-ino 	system 	which
went 	far 	beyond 	Perret 	in 	its 	exploitation 	of 	the
cantilever 	principle 	and 	its 	inherent 	possibility 	of 	an
architecture 	of 	hovering, 	horizontal 	volumes.
Moreover, 	the 	Dom-ino 	skeleton 	would 	become 	a
central 	instrument 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	urbanism, 	as 	well
as of his 	architecture.
jeanneret's 	curious 	blend 	of 	practicality 	and 	ideal-
ism 	was 	next 	enriched 	by 	working 	in 	(jcriTiany 	in
1910 	for 	Peter 	Behrens. 	who 	was 	then 	designing 	his
factories 	for 	the 	AEG. 	As 	we 	have 	seen 	in 	an 	earlier
chapter, 	Behrens 	had 	connections 	with 	Hermann
Muthcsius 	and 	the 	Deutscher Werkbund and 	tended to
see 	mechanization 	as 	a 	central, 	positive 	force 	in 	the
creation 	of a 	new 	culture, 	so 	long 	as 	the 	artist 	could
inject 	the 	higher 	values 	of 	form 	into 	the 	industrial
process. 	In 	Germany 	jeanneret 	encountered 	the 	forces
of 	big 	business 	and 	the 	idea 	that 	an 	architect 	should
oversee 	the 	smallest 	and 	largest 	articles 	of 	design. 	It
may 	have 	been 	there 	that 	he 	came 	to 	believe 	in 	the
necessity 	for 	'types' 	- 	standard 	elements 	of 	design
amenable 	to 	mass 	production 	on 	the 	one 	hand 	and 	to
the 	uses 	of society 	on 	the 	other. 	He 	saw 	and 	admired
the 	Fagus 	factory 	and 	Werkbund 	Pavilion 	by 	Gropius,
with 	their 	exciting 	use 	of glass 	envelopes, 	and 	began 	to
grasp 	the 	necessity 	for 	an 	alliance 	between 	art 	and 	the
machine.
But 	in 	considering 	the 	early 	influences 	on 	the 	artist
one 	cannot 	be 	restricted 	to 	developments 	which 	were
contemporary 	with 	his 	formation. 	From 	his early 	days.
Jeanneret 	had 	been 	in 	the 	habit 	of sketching 	buildings
of all 	periods 	in 	order 	to 	understand 	their 	organization
and 	underlying 	principles. 	In 	191 	1. 	he 	set 	out 	on 	a
long 	journey 	through 	Italy. 	Greece, 	and 	Asia 	Minor.
This 	was 	very 	much 	in 	the 	tradition 	of 	the 	Northern
Romantic 	who 	goes 	to 	the 	Mediterranean 	in 	search 	of
Western 	cultural 	roots 	and 	he 	later 	called 	it 	his
'Voyage 	d' 	Orient'. 	It 	was 	a 	quest 	for 	the 	perennial
values 	of 	architecture, 	and 	his 	sketchbooks 	are 	filled
with 	drawings 	of mosques 	in 	Istanbul, 	the 	white 	cubic
dwellings 	of the 	Greek 	coast 	and 	the 	Roman 	houses 	at
Pompeii. 	But 	the 	greatest 	impression 	was 	made 	by 	the
Acropolis 	at 	Athens. 	He 	visited 	the 	Parthenon 	every
day. 	sometimes 	for 	hours, 	sketching 	it 	from 	many
angles 	(fig. 	8.2). 	He 	was 	impressed 	by 	the 	strength 	of
the 	underlying 	idea, 	by 	the 	sculptural 	energy, 	by 	the
precision 	of 	the 	forms 	(even 	then 	he 	compared 	the
Parthenon 	to 	a 	'machine' I. 	and 	by 	the 	relationship 	to
the 	site 	and 	far 	distant 	views 	of 	mountain 	and 	sea.
There 	was 	something 	too 	about 	the 	ceremonial
procession 	over 	rising 	strata 	of 	rock 	which 	Jeanneret
never 	forgot. 	The 	Parthenon 	gave 	him 	a 	glimpse 	of an
elusive 	absolute 	which 	continued 	to 	haunt 	him.
jeanneret's 	attitude 	to 	tradition 	was 	far 	from 	that 	of
the 	superficial 	copyist. 	He 	drew 	incisive 	thumbnail
sketches 	to 	help 	him 	pick 	out 	salient 	features 	and 	to

-- 107 of 420 --

io6 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
lock 	images 	in 	his 	memory. 	He 	attempted 	to 	cut
through 	to 	the 	anatomy 	of past 	architecture, 	to 	reveal
principles 	of 	organization, 	and 	to 	relate 	plan 	shape 	to
the 	dynamic 	and 	sensuous 	experience 	of 	volumes 	in
sequence 	and 	in 	relation 	to 	setting. 	One 	minute 	it
might 	be 	a 	Turkish 	wooden 	interior 	which 	captured
his 	attention, 	the 	next 	it 	might 	be 	the 	symphonic
character 	of 	the 	volumes 	of 	the 	Suleimanyie 	mosque
(which, 	revealingly. 	he 	drew 	in 	an 	axonometric,
perhaps 	following 	the 	schematic 	guidance 	of 	Choisy's
drawings). 	All 	these impressions then 	blended 	together
to 	become 	part 	of a 	rich 	stock 	of forms - 	the 	stuff of the
later 	Le 	Corbusier's 	imagination.
In 	Italy 	he 	was 	repelled 	by 	the 	encrustations 	of 	the
decadent 	phase 	of 	the 	Baroque 	and 	by 	various
nineteenth-century 	horrors ; 	he 	was 	repelled 	too 	by 	the
inteHectiial 	'encrustations' 	formed 	by 	Academic
opinion 	which 	he 	felt 	distorted 	Classical 	antiquity 	by
serving 	it 	up 	as 	a 	series 	of 	'tasteful' 	and 	'correct'
recipes. 	Jeanneret 	took 	his intellectual 	revenge 	on 	this
position 	by 	pursuing 	the 	underlying 	formal 	vitality 	of
Classical 	antiquity. 	If it 	is 	true, 	as 	one 	notable 	historian
of 	Renaissance 	architecture 	has 	claimed, 	that 	'every
great 	artist 	finds 	his 	own 	antiquity', 	then 	Jeanneret's
'version' 	lay 	in 	the 	giant 	brick 	volumes 	of the 	Baths, 	in
the 	cylinder 	of 	the 	Pantheon, 	in 	the 	spatial 	dramas 	of
Hadrian's 	Villa 	at 	Tivoli, 	and 	in 	the 	systematic 	and
ordered 	standardization 	of 	the 	Classical 	devices 	of
construction 	and 	support. 	In 	191 	1. 	he 	wrote 	reveal-
ingly 	of the 	Italian 	phase 	of his 	great 	journey:
Italy 	is 	a 	graveyard 	where 	the 	dogma 	of my 	religion
now 	lies 	rotting. 	All 	the 	bric-a-brac 	that 	was 	my
delight 	now 	fills 	me 	with 	horror. 	I 	gabble
elementary 	geometry : 	I 	am 	possessed 	with 	the
colour 	white, the 	cube, 	the 	sphere, 	the 	cylinder
and 	the 	pyramid. 	Prisms 	rise 	and 	balance 	each
other, 	setting 	up 	rhythms 	... 	in 	the 	midday 	sun 	the
cubes 	open 	out 	into a 	surface, 	at 	nightfall
a 	rainbow 	seems 	to 	rise 	from 	the 	forms, 	in 	the
morning 	they 	are 	real, 	casting 	light 	and 	shadow
and 	sharply 	outlined 	as a 	drawing. 	. 	. 	. 	We 	should
no 	longer 	be 	artists, 	but 	rather 	penetrate 	the 	age.
fuse 	with 	it 	until 	we 	are 	indistinguishable 	. 	. 	. 	We
too 	are 	distinguished, 	great 	and 	worthy 	of past
ages. 	We 	shall 	even 	do 	better 	still, 	that 	is 	my
belief. 	.
.
Jeanneret 	spent 	the 	first 	two 	years 	of 	the 	war 	in
Switzerland, 	working 	towards 	the 	foundation 	of a Jura
Regionalist 	movement 	drawing 	together 	a 	supposed
'Mediterranean' 	synthesis 	of 	Germanic 	and 	French
ideas, 	but 	this 	did 	not 	come 	to 	much. 	Even 	so. 	the
ambition 	is 	of 	some 	use 	in 	understanding 	the 	Villa
Schwob, 	a 	private 	house 	which 	he 	was 	asked 	to 	design
for 	a 	site 	on 	the 	edge 	of 	La 	Chaux-de-Fonds 	(fig. 	8.3).
This 	was 	made 	from 	reinforced 	concrete, 	had 	a 	double-
height 	central 	space 	with 	overhanging 	galleries, 	a 	flat
roof 	and 	double 	glazing 	in 	its 	windows. 	Ferret's, 	and
perhaps 	Tessenow's. 	influences 	can 	be 	seen 	in 	the
elevations 	and 	the 	use 	of 	concrete: 	Wright's 	in 	the
spacious 	interiors 	(Jeanneret 	probably 	knew 	illus-
trations 	of 	the 	American's 	work 	in 	the 	Wasmuth
Volumes): 	and 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	discern, 	in 	the 	cornice.
8.3 	Charles 	Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusier),
Villa 	Schwob. 	La 	Chaux-
de-l'onds, 	Switzerland.
1916.

-- 108 of 420 --

8.4 	Charles Edouard
Jeanneret 	(Le 	Corbusier),
Still Life. 	1920. 	Oil 	on
canvas. 	3X5 	x 	54^ 	in.
(80.9 	X 	99.7 	cm.). 	New
York. 	Museum 	of
Modern 	Art. 	Van 	Gogh
Purchase 	Fund.
symmetry 	and 	proportions, 	a 	pervading 	Classical
sense. 	Among 	the 	architect's 	sketches 	some 	indicate
that the cornice 	was 	partly inspired 	by Turkish 	wooden
houses. 	But 	this 	building 	was 	more 	than 	the 	sum 	of its
sources: 	its 	powerful 	combinations 	of 	curved 	and
rectangular 	forms 	pointed 	to 	a 	strong 	organizing
talent. 	However, 	it 	was 	a 	talent 	still 	trying 	to 	find 	its
true 	mode 	of expression.
By 	1917 	jeanneret 	had 	settled 	in 	Paris. 	There 	had
been 	legal 	wrangles 	over 	the 	Villa 	Schwob. 	and 	in 	any
case 	he 	may 	have 	found 	provincial 	life 	too 	stifling.
Soon 	he 	met 	Amedee 	Ozenfant, 	who 	introduced 	him 	to
the 	post-Cubist 	avant-garde, 	including 	such 	artists 	as
Fernand 	Leger 	and 	the 	poet 	Guillaume 	Apollinaire.
Ozenfant. 	the eventual 	author of I'oiiinhitions of Modern
An. 	had 	many 	interests: 	painting, 	photography,
psychology, 	anthropology, 	and 	pamphleteering. 	Like
Jeanneret 	he 	was 	intrigued 	by 	the 	beauty 	of machines.
He 	tended 	to 	see 	them 	as 	the 	Futurists 	had 	done 	a 	little
earlier, 	as purveyors of Romantic 	sensations. 	However.
in 	this 	intellectual 	milieu, 	which 	was 	much 	pre-
occupied 	with 	the 	Golden 	Section 	and 	the 	supposed
constant 	laws 	of 	perception, 	Futurist 	attitudes 	were
given 	a 	geometrically 	disciplined 	visual 	form. 	The
synthesis 	of 	industrial 	subject-matter 	and 	a 	hieratic
manner 	shows 	clearly 	in 	such 	paintings 	as 	The 	City 	by
Fernand 	Leger 	of 	1 9 	1 	7.
Ozenfant 	encouraged 	Jeanneret 	to 	paint 	and 	intro-
duced 	him 	to 	the 	ideas 	of modern 	art 	which 	had 	been
evolving 	in 	Paris since 	the 	days 	of Cezanne: 	evidently
Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	• 	107
jeanneret 	had 	known 	little 	about 	these 	developments
during 	his 	1908 	stay 	in 	the 	city 	when 	he 	had 	worked
with 	Perret 	and 	had 	spent 	lonely 	hours 	wandering
around 	the 	museums 	or 	looking 	at 	the recent 	steel 	and
glass 	structures. 	Jeanneret 	felt 	at 	home 	with 	the 	new
medium 	immediately 	and 	by 	1918 	he 	and 	Ozenfant
had 	collected 	enough work 	together 	to 	exhibit. 	They
called 	themselves 	'Purists' 	and 	their 	catalogue 	was 	a
sort 	of 	manifesto 	entitled 	.4pr<'s 	le 	Cubisme 	(After
Cubism I. 	While 	their 	paintings 	took 	over 	from 	Cubism
such 	devices 	as 	the 	combination 	of abstract 	forms 	with
representational 	fragments, 	and 	the 	handling 	of space
in 	tight, 	ambiguous 	layers, 	their 	new 	direction 	was 	a
critique 	of the 	bizarre 	and 	fragmented 	world 	of Picasso
and 	Braque 	in 	favour 	of 	mathematical 	order 	and
preci.sion. 	This 	rapivl 	a 	I'oidre 	perhaps 	expressed 	a
feeling 	of consolidation 	after 	the 	chaos 	of the 	war. 	The
Purists, 	moreover, 	established 	their 	pedigree 	in 	the
Classical 	tradition: 	they 	revered 	Poussin, 	Seurat 	and
Piero della 	Francesca, 	and 	praised 	the dignity 	and 	calm
intellectual 	control 	of their 	works.
Ozenfant 	and 	Jeanneret 	were 	aware 	of 	the 	ab-
straction 	of 	De 	Stijl 	but 	rejected 	a 	non-objective 	art.
Their 	subject-matter 	followed 	Cubism 	in 	being 	drawn
from 	the 	banal 	objects 	of the 	cafe 	table, 	the 	studio 	and
the 	machine 	shop: 	guitars, 	bottles, 	and 	pipes 	were
presented 	in 	their 	most 	typical 	forms. 	A 	strain 	of
Platonism 	in 	the 	Purist 	outlook 	led 	the 	artists to 	pursue
essential 	underlying 	ideas 	and 	to 	be 	preoccupied 	with
the 	classification 	of 	ideal 	types 	in 	design. 	Jeanneret's
still 	life 	of 	1920 	(fig. 	8.4) 	is 	a 	goodexampleof his 	work
in 	this 	period. 	The 	outlines 	of 	bottle 	and 	guitar 	have
been 	reduced 	to 	simple 	geometrical 	shapes 	laid 	out
parallel 	to 	the 	picture 	surface: 	outlines 	and 	colours 	are
crisp 	and 	distinct; 	visual 	tension 	is 	introduced 	by
overlaps 	and 	spatial 	ambiguities: 	the 	Cubist 	principle
of 	fusing 	different 	views 	of 	an 	object 	has 	been
regularized 	- 	the 	bottle 	top, 	for 	example, 	is 	a 	pure
circle. 	An 	attempt is 	made 	to 	reveal 	the heroic 	qualities
of simple, 	everyday, 	mass-produced 	things.
Jeanneret's 	activity 	as 	a 	painter 	was 	to 	be 	most
important 	to 	him 	when 	he 	became 	Le 	Corbusier 	the
architect, 	because 	it 	provided 	him 	with 	a 	laboratory 	of
forms. 	Dissatisfied 	with 	the 	eclecticism 	of 	the
nineteenth 	century, 	with 	Art 	Nouveau 	and 	the 	various
'styles', 	he 	required 	a 	vocabulary 	which 	conformed 	to
his 	private 	ideas 	and 	his 	taste 	for 	simple 	geometry, 	but
which 	also 	seemed 	to 	have 	relevance 	to 	the 	mechan-
ized 	world 	in 	which 	he 	Uved. 	As 	much 	as 	possible 	too.
he 	required 	forms 	with 	a 	universal 	character 	which
addressed, 	over 	time, 	the 	basic 	aesthetic 	values 	he 	had
sensed 	in 	tradition. 	Now 	Purist 	paintings 	provided 	all
these 	things, 	and 	henceforth 	he 	was 	to 	believe 	that
pure, 	precise 	geometrical 	forms 	were 	the 	appropriate
ones 	for 	the 	machine 	age.

-- 109 of 420 --

io8 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
Jeanneret's 	first 	years 	in 	Paris 	brought 	him 	no
commissions 	and 	much 	anxiety, 	but 	by 	1920 	he 	was
at 	last 	beginning 	to 	sense 	his 	true 	direction 	as 	an
architect. 	It 	was 	then 	that 	he 	took 	the 	name 	'Le
Corbusier' 	and 	founded 	the 	magazine 	L' 	Esprit 	Nouveau
with 	Ozenfant. 	This 	opened 	on 	a 	positive 	note 	which,
again, 	suggested 	a 	consolidation 	after 	the 	upheaval 	of
the 	war years:
There 	is 	a 	new 	spirit; 	it 	is 	a 	spirit 	of construction
and 	synthesis 	guided 	by 	a 	clear 	conception.
Some 	of 	the 	articles 	which 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
published 	in 	the 	magazine 	were 	later 	gathered
together 	as 	a 	book 	which 	appeared 	in 	1923 	with 	the
title 	Vers 	ime 	architecture 	- 	Towards 	an 	Architecture
(frequently 	mistranslated. 	Towards 	a 	New 	Architec-
ture'). 	This 	has 	been 	one 	of 	the 	most 	influential
architectural 	books 	of 	the 	century, 	combining 	deep
wisdom, 	poetic 	observation, 	rich 	illustration 	of 	ideas,
and 	a 	confident 	appeal 	in 	favour 	of 	an 	architectural
language 	in 	tune 	with 	the 	machine 	era 	that 	Le
Corbusier 	sensed 	rising 	around 	him. 	But 	as 	well 	as
putting 	the 	case 	for 	a 	new 	architecture, 	and 	providing
some 	hints 	(for himself as 	well 	as others) 	concerning 	its
eventual 	appearance. 	Le 	Corbusier 	also 	stressed 	the
role 	of 	tradition 	in 	providing 	great 	examples 	whose
lessons 	might 	be 	transformed 	to 	contemporary 	pur-
poses. 	Vers 	une architecture was certainly 	far 	from 	being
a 	defence 	of 	'functionalism' 	(as 	some 	commentators
have 	complained): 	indeed, 	it 	was 	permeated 	with 	a
lofty 	view 	of the 	role 	of 	art 	and 	emphasized 	the 	poetic
value 	of sculptural 	form.
The 	Architect, 	by 	his 	arrangement 	of forms, 	realizes
an 	order 	which 	is 	a 	pure 	creation 	of his 	spirit; 	by
forms 	and 	shapes he 	affects 	our 	senses 	to 	an 	acute
degree 	and 	provokes 	plastic 	emotions: 	by 	the
relationships 	which 	he 	creates, 	he 	wakes 	profound
echoes 	in 	us. 	. 	.
.
FA-tending 	some 	of 	the 	ideas 	of 	Purist 	painting 	to
architecture. 	Le Corbusier argued 	that 	there were 	basic
and 	absolutely 	beautiful 	forms 	transcending 	the 	mere
conventions 	of 	period 	and 	style. 	Like 	his 	contempor-
aries 	in 	Holland, 	the 	artists 	of De 	Stijl. 	he 	believed 	in 	a
sort 	of universal 	visual 	language 	of the 	spirit.
Architecture 	is 	the masterly, 	correct 	and
magnificent play 	of volumes 	brought 	together 	in
light. 	Our eyes 	are 	made 	to 	see 	forms 	in light; 	light
and 	shade 	reveal 	these 	forms: 	cubes, cones, 	spheres
and 	cylinders 	or 	pyramids 	are the 	great 	primary
forms 	which 	light 	reveals 	to 	advantage. 	The 	image
of these 	is 	distinct 	and 	tangible 	within 	us 	and
ivi 	s 	WHirn 	Of) 	\(>T 	si:i
AN.^ i>i.AN 	r,\f 	n;'
" 	ArMlutiire 	is 	the 	masterly, 	correct 	mil magnificent pld\
ic'tllir 	in 	liilt"
without 	ambiguity. 	It 	is 	for 	this 	reason 	that 	these
are 	beautiful forms, 	the 	nwst 	beautiful forms.
Everybody 	is 	agreed 	to 	that, 	the 	child, 	the 	savage
and 	the 	metaphysician. 	It 	is 	of the 	very 	nature 	of
the 	plastic 	arts.
While Le Corbusier found evidence 	of the 	underlying
primary 	forms 	in 	the 	pyramids, 	the 	Parthenon, 	the
Roman 	baths, 	the 	Pantheon, 	the 	Pont 	du 	Card,
Michelangelo, 	Mansart. 	etc.. 	he 	felt 	the 	architecture 	of
the 	recent 	past 	to 	be 	impoverished 	and 	lacking 	in
lasting 	value. 	It 	was 	in 	certain 	eiujiueering 	objects 	that
he 	sensed 	the 	presence 	of 	the 	harmony 	he 	desired 	-
grain 	silos, 	factories, 	ships, 	aeroplanes 	and 	cars 	- 	and
these 	were illustrated extensively 	in 	the book. 	Silos 	and
factories, 	for 	example, 	were 	praised 	for 	their 	clear 	and
distinct 	articulation of volumes and surfaces : 	ships and
aeroplanes 	for 	their 	rigorous 	expression 	of 	function
(fig. 	8. 5). 	It 	was 	obvious 	that 	all 	the 	objects 	he 	chose 	to
illustrate 	conformed 	with 	his 	Purist 	prejudices, 	but 	he
also 	believed 	them 	to 	be 	symptoms 	of 	the 	emerging
spirit 	of 	the 	age: 	in 	this, 	of 	course, 	he 	was 	certainly
reflecting 	knowledge 	of 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	specu-
lations 	on 	engineering 	aesthetics. 	The 	solution 	to 	the
problem 	of 	defining 	the 	architecture 	of 	'the 	new 	era'
seemed, 	then, 	to lie in 	the 	transformation of such 	images
into 	the 	symbolic 	forins 	of art. 	Purism 	pointed 	the 	way
here, 	and 	it was 	clear too that the 	resultant vocabulary
should 	also 	exhibit 	the 	Classical 	values 	the 	architect
had 	intuited 	in 	the 	past.
8.5 	Illustration 	of an
ocean 	liner from 	Vers 	une
architecture. 	1923.

-- 110 of 420 --

IjC 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	1 09
ii2t^-^^^:^ij^^^r^-'^^-^ • 	*--»
8.6 	[above) 	Facing pages
from 	Vers 	ime
architecture. 	1923. 	Creek
temples and
automobiles : 	on 	the 	left
a temple 	at 	Paestum 	and
aHumber of 	1907: 	on
the right, 	the 	Parthenon
and 	a 	Delageof 	192 1.
S.y 	{right) 	LeCorbusier.
the 	Maison Citrohan.
1922.
(Im 	run ol (he whok 	iliin^ Jiid in jtl ihc (laiilv 	Thus tvc ^ct
.!« 	simlv 	,.f M.ii,.-H 	|...;„„ 	|.„.i„.l 	„. „, 	l„„„, 	r„nr.;-...
what 	then .- 	Well 	it 	remains 	to 	use 	the 	car 	as 	a
challenge 	to 	our 	houses 	and 	our 	greatest buildings.
It 	is 	here 	that 	we 	come 	to 	a 	stop.
What 	then 	would 	the 	modern 	equivalents 	be 	to 	the
standard 	elements 	of the 	Classical 	system 	of the 	past?
Le Corbusier was 	to find this out. 	precisetyrby 	using the
car 	as 	a 	challenge 	to 	the 	house, 	and 	the 	resulting
prototype, 	the 	Maison 	Citrohan 	of 	1922 	(fig. 	8.7), 	was
to 	be 	a 	sort 	of 	Paestum 	or 	Humber 	to 	the 	later 	villas,
which 	were 	much 	more 	refined 	versions 	of 	the 	same
system. 	'Citrohan' 	was 	a 	deliberate 	pun 	on 	'Citroen',
and 	it 	is 	clear 	that 	Le 	Corbusier, 	like 	Gropius 	and 	Oud
in 	the 	same 	period, 	was 	intent 	on 	using 	mass-
production 	processes, 	like 	those 	which 	Ford 	had 	used
for 	cars, 	to 	solve 	the 	housing 	crisis 	of 	the 	post-war
years. 	His prototype was 	a 	white box on 	stilts with 	a 	fiat
roof, 	planar, 	rectangular 	windows 	of 	an 	industrial
kind, 	and 	a 	double-height 	living-room 	behind 	a 	huge
The equation 	of machine 	art 	and 	Classicism 	came 	to
a 	head 	towards the centre of the 	book 	where 	pictures of
one of the temples 	at 	Paestum 	( dated 	by 	Le Corbusier as
600-500 	BC) 	and 	the 	later 	Parthenon 	were 	placed 	on
opposing 	pages: 	with 	a 	Humber 	automobile 	of 	1907
confronting 	a 	Delage 	car 	of 	192 1 	in 	a 	similar 	fashion
underneath 	(fig. 	8.6). 	This 	brilliant 	use 	of 	the
photograph 	was 	supposed 	to 	reinforce 	the 	idea 	of
'standards' 	- 	such 	basic 	elements 	as 	columns, 	trig-
lyphs. 	etc.. 	in 	the 	temples: 	and 	wheels, 	light 	chassis,
etc.. 	in 	the 	cars 	- 	'type 	forms' 	which, 	once 	defined 	and
related 	as 	a 	system, 	might 	then 	evolve 	towards
perfection.
Let 	us 	display, 	then, 	the 	Parthenon 	and 	the 	motor
car 	so that 	it 	may 	be 	clear 	that 	it 	is 	a 	question 	of
two 	products 	of selection 	in 	different 	fields, 	one
which 	has 	reached 	its 	climax 	and 	the 	other 	which
is 	evolving. 	That 	enriches 	the 	automobile. 	And
studio 	window. 	The 	back 	parts 	of the 	house 	contained
the 	kitchen, 	bathroom 	and 	bedrooms 	in 	smaller
compartments and 	at 	the 	lowest 	level 	was 	a 	heating
plant: 	cars 	meanwhile 	could 	tuck 	into 	the 	space
created 	by 	the 	reinforced-concrete 	piles 	or 	pihlis.
Halfway 	up 	and 	on 	top 	were terraces. 	The 	building 	as 	a
whole 	was 	made 	of 	concrete 	- 	hence 	the 	large
uninterrupted 	spans 	of 	the 	interior 	- 	and 	much 	of 	it
would, 	in 	fact, 	have 	to 	have 	been 	constructed 	on 	site.
But 	the 	idea 	of 	the 	mass-production 	dwelling 	was 	as
important 	as 	the 	fact, 	and 	the 	Citrohan 	envisaged 	a
way 	of 	life 	freed 	of 	the 	unnecessary 	clutter 	of 	the
customary 	bourgeois 	dwelling 	of the 	time. 	In 	Vers 	ime
architecture 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	spoken 	of 	the 	new
dwelling 	as 	a 	'machine 	for 	living 	in' 	and 	by 	this 	he
meant 	a 	house 	whose 	functions 	had 	been 	examined
from 	the 	gnJund 	up 	and 	stripped 	to 	the 	essentials.
Healthy 	in 	mind 	and 	body, 	the 	ideal 	inhabitant 	would
no 	doubt 	have 	been 	sufl'used 	with 	'L'Esprit 	Nouveau'

-- 111 of 420 --

no 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
as 	he 	looked 	out 	past 	pure white 	walls 	to 	the 	'essential
joys' 	of light, 	space, 	and 	greenery. 	Of course, 	for 	all 	its
claims 	at 	universal 	relevance, 	the 	way 	of 	life 	sym-
bolized 	by 	the 	Citrohan 	was 	a 	projection 	of the rather
odd 	values 	of 	a 	monastic 	and 	reclusive 	artist 	of 	the
Parisian 	avant-garde.
The Citrohan 	was 	a conflation 	of earlier Le 	Corbusier
concerns: 	the 	mass-producible 	Dom-ino 	houses: 	the
Mediterranean 	cubic 	dwellings 	with 	whitewashed
surfaces 	he 	had 	seen 	on 	his 	travels; 	the 	ocean 	liners 	he
so 	admired 	for 	their 	'tenacity 	and 	discipline'. 	There
were 	lingering 	debts 	as 	well 	to 	the 	unornamented
forms 	of Adolf Loos 	and 	the 	flat-roofed 	concrete 	houses
iflustrated 	in 	Garnier's 	'Cite 	IndustrieUe'. 	Le 	Corbusier
had 	also 	been 	impressed 	by 	the 	studio 	houses 	built 	in
Paris 	in 	the 	early 	part 	of the 	century, 	with 	their 	large
areas 	of glazing: 	and 	the 	double-height 	room 	with 	a
balcony 	at 	the 	back 	was 	inspired 	by 	a 	similar
arrangement 	in 	a 	Paris 	cafe.
It 	was 	only 	in 	1925 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	managed 	to
find 	someone 	willing 	to 	carry 	out 	his 	ideas 	for 	mass-
production 	houses on 	a 	large scale, 	for 	it 	was 	then 	that
he 	persuaded 	an 	eccentric 	Bordeaux 	industrialist.
Henri 	Fruges. 	to 	build 	housing 	for 	his 	workers 	at
Pessac 	along 	the 	guidelines 	of 	the 	Citrohan.
Meanwhile 	the 	architect 	had 	to 	be 	content 	with
transforming 	his 	prototype 	as 	circumstances 	allowed.
Since 	his 	clients 	tended 	to 	come 	from 	that 	sector 	of
Parisian 	society 	which 	Wyndham 	Lewis 	aptly 	called
'upper-middle-class 	bohemia'. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	to
forgo 	his 	ambition 	of effecting 	a 	major 	transformation
of 	the 	modern 	environment 	and 	be 	content 	with
designing 	elegant 	demonstrations 	of 	his 	general
principles 	on 	small 	suburban 	lots 	around 	Paris. 	Thus
between 	1920 	and 	1 	924 	we 	find 	him 	building 	houses
or 	studios 	for 	his 	friend 	Ozenfant. 	for 	the 	sculptor
Lipchitz. 	and 	for 	the 	Swiss 	banker 	and 	collector 	of
paintings. 	Raoul 	La 	Roche.
Maison 	La 	Roche/Jeanneret 	was 	designed 	in 	1923
just 	as 	Le 	Corbusier's 	architectural 	ideas 	were
beginning 	to crystallize. 	It 	stands 	at the end 	of a 	cul-de-
sac 	in 	the 	i beme arrondissement 	and 	its 	L-shaped 	plan
fits 	into 	two 	sides 	of the 	oblong 	site. 	In 	fact 	two 	houses
are 	combined 	- 	one 	for 	La 	Roche, 	the 	other 	for 	Le
Corbusier's 	sister-in-law 	- 	and 	one 	of 	the 	major
problems 	of the commission 	was 	to 	unify 	the 	divergent
demands 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	relative, 	who 	was 	newly
married 	and 	wanted 	a 	compact 	house, 	with 	those 	of a
collector 	who 	wanted 	to 	use 	his 	dwelling 	to 	display 	his
superb 	Purist 	and 	Cubist 	works 	of 	art. 	The 	main
volumes 	of 	the 	house 	are 	the 	long 	oblong 	which
contains 	Jeanneret's 	dwelling 	and 	the 	private 	areas 	of
La 	Roche, 	and 	a 	curved 	element 	lifted 	free 	of 	the
ground on 	slender 	supports 	which 	contains 	a 	studio
(fig. 	8.8): 	between 	the 	two 	is 	La 	Roche's 	entrance 	hafl
and 	exhibition 	space. 	This 	is 	three 	storeys 	high 	and 	is
penetrated 	by 	overhanging 	balconies 	and 	a 	sort 	of
bridge 	running 	just 	inside 	the 	glass 	which 	provides 	a
variety 	of 	elevated 	viewpoints 	and 	calls 	to 	mind 	a
liner's 	deck 	iflustrated in 	Vers 	une 	architecture 	with 	the
caption:
Architects 	note: 	The 	value 	of a 	long 	gallery 	or
promenade 	- 	satisfying 	and 	interesting 	volume:
unity 	in 	materials; 	a 	fine 	grouping 	of the
constructional 	elements, 	sanely 	exhibited 	and
rationally 	assembled.
Windows 	are set flush 	with 	the 	facade 	plane so that 	the
effect 	is 	of 	a 	thin 	skin 	wrapped 	tautly 	around 	the
sequence 	of interior spaces. 	These 	have 	sparse 	surfaces
and 	uncluttered 	walls 	painted 	white, 	green 	or 	brown.
The 	overlapping 	of 	planes, 	and 	transparent 	areas 	of
glazing 	recall 	the 	analogous 	qualities 	of 	interpenetra-
tion 	in 	Purist 	pictures. 	But 	there 	is 	also 	a 	connection
with 	the 	subject-matter 	of 	Purism, 	for 	the 	fixtures 	of
the 	house 	- radiators, 	naked 	light 	bulbs, 	simple Thonet
chairs, 	door 	latches, 	metal 	windows 	- 	are 	obviously 	of
industrial 	extraction. 	Like 	the 	bottles 	and 	machine
parts in 	the 	pictures 	they 	are objet-types - objects which
'tend 	toward 	a 	type 	which 	is 	determined 	by 	the
evolution 	of 	forms 	between 	the 	ideal 	of 	maximum
utility, 	and 	the 	necessities 	of economic 	manufacture.'
Some 	rhetoric 	was 	involved 	here, 	as 	the 	main 	window
frame 	had 	to 	be 	specially 	made 	to 	look 	like 	a 	mass-
produced 	factory 	one.
The 	spaces 	of 	Maison 	La 	Roche 	have 	been 	ingeni-
ously 	linked 	in 	sequence 	to 	allow 	the 	gradual
exploration 	of 	the 	interior. 	Le 	Corbusier 	christened
such 	a 	route 	the 	promenade 	architecturak 	and 	criticized
the 	star 	shapes 	and 	axes 	of 	the 	plans 	of 	the 	Fxole 	des
Beaux-Arts because 	they 	were mere 	patterns on 	paper:
a 	good 	plan 	would 	'contain 	a 	great 	quantity 	of 	ideas'
and 	would 	project 	volumes 	into 	space 	in 	an 	ordered
hierarchy 	of 	a 	more 	subtle 	kind, 	taking 	into 	account
the 	site, 	the 	play 	of light, 	and 	the 	gradual 	revelation 	of
a 	building's 	form 	and 	idea 	over 	time. 	As 	one 	passes
through 	the 	triple 	volume 	of 	Maison 	La 	Roche 	one
begins 	to 	grasp 	Le 	Corbusier's 	intentions. 	The elements
slide 	by 	into 	new 	relationships, 	and 	interior 	and
exterior 	are 	temporarily 	fused: 	one 	glimpses 	the 	outer
white 	wall 	of the 	curved 	studio 	dappled 	with 	shadows,
juxtaposed 	to 	interior 	walls 	of 	analogous 	character.
The 	promenade 	then 	continues 	around 	into 	this
curved 	volume 	and 	up 	to 	the 	highest 	level 	of the 	house
by 	means 	of a 	curved 	ramp 	fitted 	into 	the 	profile 	of the
wall 	(fig. 	8.9). 	One 	doubles 	back, 	sees 	the 	intersecting
balconies 	down 	below, 	and 	emerges 	on 	the 	roof
terrace, 	which 	recalls 	immediately 	the 	deck 	of a 	ship: 	a
small 	garden 	set about with 	evergreens 	is created 	at the

-- 112 of 420 --

Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	1 	1 	i
8.8 	LeCorbusier.
Maison 	La
Roche/Jeanneret
Auteuil. 	Paris. 	1923.
view 	towards 	the 	studio
wing.
level 	of the 	surrounding 	roof-tops.
Much 	play 	is 	also 	made 	with 	the 	idea 	of a 	building 	as
an 	object 	poised 	in 	space, 	especially 	in 	the studio 	wing.
The 	curved 	surfaces 	in 	light 	contrast 	strongly 	with 	the
recess 	of shadow 	beneath 	and 	a 	single, 	cylindrical piloti
stands 	at 	the 	centre, 	set 	back 	under 	the 	slab. 	This 	is 	on
the 	axis 	of the 	long 	access 	road 	and 	is 	seen 	against 	the
background 	of 	an 	ivy-covered 	wall 	terminating 	the
site. 	The 	hovering 	quality 	of 	this 	volume 	recalls
Rietveld's 	Schroeder 	House 	of the 	same 	date, 	analysed
in 	the last chapter: the illusion of weightlessness was to
be 	one 	of 	the 	central 	formal 	characteristics 	of 	the
'International 	Style'.
It 	was 	typical 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	intellectual 	approach
that 	at 	the 	same 	time 	that 	he 	conceived 	the 	Citrohan.
he 	should 	have 	outlined 	plans 	for 	an 	entire 	modern
city. 	'The 	Contemporary 	City 	for 	Three 	Million
Inhabitants'. 	This 	was 	exhibited 	at 	the 	Salon
d'Automne 	in 	1922. 	The 	political 	and 	philosophical
ideas 	behind 	Le 	Corbusier's 	urbanism 	are 	exainined 	in

-- 113 of 420 --

112 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
more 	detail 	in 	Chapter 	12. 	Here 	it 	is 	enough 	to 	point
out 	that 	architecture 	and 	urbanisni 	were 	overlapping
concerns 	for 	him. 	propelled 	by 	a 	single 	vision 	of
technology 	as 	a 	progressive 	force 	which, 	if 	guided 	by
the 	right 	ideals, 	might 	reinstate 	a 	natural 	and
harmonic 	order. 	This 	Utopian 	vision, 	with 	its 	roots 	in
such 	nineteenth-century 	thinkers 	as 	Charles 	Fourier.
Henri 	Saint-Simon 	and 	Ebenezer 	Howard, 	was 	given 	a
body 	in 	the 	'Contemporary 	City', 	a 	city 	of skyscrapers
in 	a 	park, 	where 	techniques 	of 	modern 	construction,
automobiles 	and 	aeroplanes 	were 	brought 	together 	in
an 	ordered 	diagram, 	with 	nature 	and 	the 	machine
reconciled 	and 	harmonized. 	A 	later 	vision 	of the 	same
kind, 	the 	'Ville 	Voisin'. 	in 	which 	Le 	Corbusier's 	pro-
capitalist 	stance was dramatically 	revealed 	in 	a 	scheme
for 	inserting 	huge 	glass 	skyscrapers 	in 	the 	centre 	of
Paris, 	was 	exhibited 	at 	the 	Exposition 	des 	Arts
Decoratifsin 	192s 	in 	the 	Pavilion 	deL'EspritNouvcau.
The 	pavilion 	was 	in 	the 	form 	of an apartment 	from 	the
ideal 	city 	(which 	was 	in 	effect 	a 	rephrased 	Citrohan)
furnished 	with 	modern 	machine-age 	objects 	and
Purist 	works 	of 	art. 	It 	was 	as 	if the 	Utopian 	wished 	to
carry 	his 	vision 	of 	the 	millennium 	his 	poem 	to
modern 	life 	- 	into 	the 	smallest 	details 	of 	the 	private
interior 	and 	the 	largest 	setting 	of 	public 	life, 	simulta-
neously. 	As 	we 	shall 	see. 	the 	dictatorial 	implications 	of
Le Corbusier's paradise on 	earth only emerged later on.
The 	period 	between 	about 	1918 	and 	1923 	was
extraordinarily 	turbulent 	and 	creative 	for 	Le 	Cor-
busier, 	for 	it 	was 	then 	that 	he 	laid 	down 	the 	basic
themes 	of 	his 	life's 	work. 	By 	192 s. 	when 	he 	received
his 	next 	domestic 	commission 	in 	Paris, 	he 	was 	in 	far
greater control 	of his 	means 	of expression. 	The site 	was
once 	again 	cramped, 	being 	part 	of a 	row 	of houses, 	but
it 	did 	offer 	views 	towards 	the 	Bois 	de 	Boulogne 	nearby.
Only 	the 	main 	facade 	would 	be seen 	and 	much 	efl'ort
would 	obviously 	have 	to 	go 	into 	this 	single 	view. 	The
client 	was 	an American 	painter 	called 	Cook, 	who 	was
willing 	to 	let Le 	Corbusier 	experiment.
The 	facade 	as 	it 	stands 	today 	is 	almost 	square 	(fig.
8. 	to): 	so 	is 	the 	plan. 	Thus 	the 	form 	is 	almost 	a cube,
one 	of 	tho.sc 	ideal 	forms 	singled 	out 	in 	the 	aesthetic
speculations 	of 	the 	magazine 	L'Esprit 	Nauwcui. 	The
symmetry of this 	overall 	shape 	is 	reinforced 	by 	the 	strip
windows 	which 	run 	from 	one 	side 	to 	the 	other, 	and 	by
a 	single 	cylindrical 	piloti 	on 	the 	central 	axis. 	Within
this 	stable 	outline 	are 	a 	variety 	of 	asymmetrical
rhythms. 	The 	porter's 	curved 	cabin 	contrasts 	with 	the
rectangular 	surfaces, 	and 	the 	balcony 	at 	the 	top 	left
pulls 	away 	from 	the 	facade. 	The 	main 	relationships
and 	tensions 	of 	the 	design 	are 	enlivened 	by 	areas 	of
shadow 	and 	light, 	taut 	rectangles 	of glazing 	alongside
8.9 	Le 	Corbusier.
Maison 	La 	Roche. 	Paris.
1923. 	view 	of interior of
curved 	studio 	wing: 	note
ramp to 	left.

-- 114 of 420 --

8.IO 	LeCorbusier.
Maison 	Cook, 	Boulogne-
sur-Seine. 	Paris. 	1926.
stucco, 	and 	the 	thin 	lines 	of railings, 	edges 	and 	joints.
Pushes 	and 	pulls, 	laterally 	and 	in 	depth, 	are 	seen 	to
resolve 	around 	the 	pivotal 	element 	of the 	central 	piloti.
13ut 	this 	is 	to 	discuss 	maison 	Cook 	in 	mainly 	formal
terms. 	As 	one 	passes 	into 	the 	interior 	or 	examines 	a
section 	or 	plan, 	one 	becomes 	aware 	of 	the 	way 	the
functions 	of 	the 	house 	have 	been 	ingeniously 	slotted,
like the 	pieces of some 	three-dimensional 	jigsaw 	puzzle,
into 	the 	overall 	cubic 	shape. 	The 	traditional 	arrange-
ment 	is 	turned 	upside-down, 	as 	the 	bedrooms 	and
maid's 	room 	are 	on 	the 	first 	floor, 	and 	the 	living-room,
kitchen 	and dining-room 	are on 	the second. 	The 	living-
room 	is 	double-height 	and 	at 	its 	back 	is 	a 	stairway 	up
to 	the 	little 	library 	on 	top. 	adjacent 	to 	the 	roof terrace,
with 	long 	views 	towards 	the 	Bois 	de 	Boulogne. 	As 	one
passes 	up 	the 	stairs, 	which 	stand 	at 	the 	rear 	of 	the
building 	alongside 	the 	central 	axis, 	one 	is 	fed 	into 	a
variety 	of 	rooms 	at 	each 	level. 	The 	architect 	has
employed 	the 	concrete 	skeleton 	to 	sculpt 	a 	sequence 	of
compressed 	and 	expanding 	spaces 	of 	variable 	charac-
ter, 	proportion, 	lighting 	and 	view. 	The 	curved
partitions dramatize 	the 	'free 	plan', 	catch 	the 	light, 	and
stand 	like objects 	in 	the 	lucid space; 	inevitably 	they 	call
to 	mind 	the 	bottles 	and 	guitars 	of Purist 	pictures. 	Unity
and 	control 	are 	maintained 	by 	the 	rule 	of 	geometry
Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest for 	Ideal 	Form 	113
and 	proportion, 	and 	by 	the 	consistent 	dimensioning 	of
such 	elements 	as 	the 	strip 	windows.
But 	there 	is 	the 	clarity 	too 	of 	an 	artist 	who 	has
gained 	full 	control 	of his 	vocabulary. 	'Sources' 	(such 	as
the 	Farman 	Goliath 	aeroplane 	cockpit 	echoed 	in 	the
porter's 	little 	cabin 	underneath), 	have 	been 	totally
integrated 	and 	the 	style 	is 	now 	assured. 	Le 	Corbusier
seems 	to 	have 	recognized 	this 	as 	he 	later 	wrote:
Here 	are 	applied 	with 	great 	clarity 	the 	certainties
from 	discoveries 	to 	date: 	the pilotis. 	the roof garden,
the 	free 	plan, 	the 	free 	facade, 	the 	ribbon 	window
sliding 	sideways. 	Regulating 	lines 	are 	automatically
generated 	by 	simple 	architectural 	elements 	at 	a
human 	scale, 	which 	also 	controls 	the 	floor 	heights,
the 	window 	dimensions, 	doors 	and 	railings. 	The
classic 	plan 	is 	turned 	upside 	down : 	the 	underneath
of the 	house 	is 	free. 	The 	main 	reception 	room 	is
right 	on 	top 	of the 	house. 	You 	step 	directly 	on 	to 	the
roof garden 	from 	which 	you 	have 	a 	commanding
view 	of the 	Bois 	de Boulogne. 	One 	is 	in 	Paris 	no
longer: 	it 	is 	as 	if one 	were 	in 	the 	countryside.
The 	certainties 	to 	date' 	of 	pilotis. 	roof 	garden, 	free
plan, 	free 	facade, 	and 	ribbon 	windows 	had 	been

-- 115 of 420 --

114 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
christened 	the 	'Five 	Points 	of 	a 	New 	Architecture' 	by
the 	architect 	in 	1926 	(fig. 	8. 11). 	They 	were 	an
extension 	of 	the 	Dom-ino 	principles 	and 	were 	to
remain 	one 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	major 	devices 	for 	the 	rest
of 	his 	life. 	It 	was 	typical 	of 	him 	that 	he 	should 	have
endeavoured 	to 	create 	a 	generic 	solution, 	one 	which
transcended 	particular cases. 	Perhaps 	the 	choice 	of fivf
points 	is 	significant 	- 	as 	if he 	were 	trying 	to 	canonize 	a
modern 	equivalent 	to 	the 	Five 	Classical 	orders.
Certainly 	his 	system 	was 	a 	solution 	to 	the 	problem 	he
had 	set 	himself 	many 	years 	before : 	the 	creation 	of a
vocabulary 	based 	on 	reinforced 	concrete 	construction
and 	applicable 	to 	all 	the 	tasks 	of 	modern 	industrial
civilization.
It is worth examining the 	'five 	points' 	in 	the 	abstract.
The 	piloti 	was 	the 	central 	element 	from 	which 	the
others 	evolved: 	it 	lifted 	buildings 	off 	the 	ground
allowing 	landscape 	or 	traffic 	to 	pass 	underneath, 	and
was 	the 	basic 	device 	in 	both 	city 	planning 	and
architecture. 	The 	roof 	terrace 	also 	had 	such 	a 	double
identity, 	being 	one 	of the 	essential 	means 	by 	which 	the
architect 	intended 	to 	reintroduce 	nature 	into 	the 	city;
planting 	also 	supplied 	ways 	of 	insulating 	the 	flat
concrete 	roof 	With 	pilotis 	supporting 	the 	weight 	of 	a
building, 	its 	interior 	and 	exterior 	walls 	could 	pass
anywhere 	according to functional 	demand or aesthetic
intention, 	and 	the 	free 	plan 	allowed 	rooms 	of ditferent
sizes 	to 	be 	slotted 	into 	the 	skeleton 	and 	spaces 	to 	be
orchestrated 	in 	sequence. 	The 	free 	facade, 	meanwhile,
could 	be 	a 	total 	void 	running 	from 	slab 	to 	slab, 	a 	thin
membrane, 	or 	a 	window 	of any 	size. 	Theoretically 	any
sort 	of 	opening 	could 	be 	left, 	depending 	on 	the
demands 	of view, 	climate, 	privacy 	and 	composition. 	In
fact, 	through 	most 	of 	the 	twenties, 	Le 	Corbusier
preferred 	a 	horizontal 	strip 	window 	running 	the 	full
length 	of his 	buildings. 	Ostensibly 	this 	was 	because 	the
fenetre 	en 	longueur 	or 	'strip 	window' 	let 	in 	most 	light:
but 	it 	had 	as 	much 	to 	do 	with 	the 	feeling 	of 	repose 	of
horizontal 	bands 	in 	a 	facade, 	and 	the 	effects 	of
transparency 	and 	planarity 	that 	the 	strip 	window
allowed. 	Most 	of 	these 	ideas 	had 	existed 	discretely 	in
earlier 	architecture: 	Le 	Corbusier's 	innovation 	was 	to
put 	them 	all 	together 	in 	a 	single 	system 	with 	a 	broad
range 	of 	application 	- 	a 	system 	which 	worked 	on
formal, 	symbolic, 	and 	structural 	levels.
If 	one 	returns 	to 	Maison 	Cook 	it 	is 	evident 	that 	Le
Corbusier 	has 	not 	only 	employed 	the 	'five 	points', 	but
has 	also 	emphasized 	them 	rhetorically 	as 	a 	sort 	of
demonstration , 	The piloti 	is 	the 	centre 	of attention 	and
is 	set 	back 	from 	the 	facade 	plane, 	dramatizing 	the
separation 	of 	structure 	from 	external 	cladding. 	The
passage 	under 	the 	house 	is 	also 	emphasized 	by 	the
pedestrian 	path 	on 	one 	side 	and 	the car 	tracks 	on 	the
other, 	as 	if to 	imply a 	new form 	for the city as 	well 	as 	for
the 	building; 	moreover, 	a 	little 	planter 	is 	set 	under-
r 	-^ 	~ 	r 	-^
tn 	*» 	f=3 	•» 	-^
^n 	f^""n
I 	I 	I 	I
2
4

-- 116 of 420 --

Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest for Ideal 	Form 	115
8. 1 	1 	(/('/() 	LeCorbusier.
the 	'Five 	Points 	of a 	New
Architecure'. 	1426:
diagrams comparing the
potentials of reinforced
concrete 	and 	traditional
masonry 	systems of
construction.
S.i 2 	{below left) 	Le
Corbusier. 	four 	studies 	of
the 	potentials 	of the 	'Five
Points of a 	New
Architecture', 	(from 	top
to 	bottom): 	Maison 	La
Roche/Jeanneret 	1923.
Villa Stein 	1927. 	Villa 	at
Carthage 	1927, 	Villa
Savoye 	1929. 	Like
Wright. 	Le Corbusier
possessed 	a 	consistent
architectural 	system
which 	allowed 	great
variation 	with 	a 	few
standard elements.
8.13 	(right) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Villa 	Stein 	at
Garches. 	near 	Paris.
1926-7. 	front 	facade.
neath 	the 	overhang 	suggesting 	that 	nature 	too 	might
pass 	underneath. 	The 	roof 	garden 	is 	rendered 	visible
on 	top 	by 	means 	of penetrations, 	and 	the 	free 	facade 	is
accentuated 	by 	the 	windows 	running 	from 	one 	end 	to
the 	other. 	It 	is 	even 	possible 	to 	sense 	the 	character 	of
the 	free 	plan 	inside, 	through 	the 	curved 	shapes 	which
imply 	concave 	and 	convex 	objects 	within 	the 	'box'.
Having 	assured 	himself 	of 	the 	'five 	points' 	in 	the
design 	of 	Maison 	Cook. 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	on 	firm
ground 	to 	explore 	further 	possibilities 	of his 	system. 	In
a 	scheme 	for 	a 	house 	near 	Carthage 	in 	Tunisia 	in
1926. 	he 	let 	the 	skeleton 	predominate 	so 	that 	the
overhanging 	slabs created 	deeply 	shaded 	terraces 	open
to 	the sea 	breeze 	and 	the 	view: 	the 	interior 	functions
being 	enclosed 	in 	curved 	partitions 	which 	could 	be
seen 	from 	the 	outside 	(fig. 	8.12). 	In 	the 	following 	year,
in 	a 	design 	for 	the 	League 	of 	Nations 	Competition, 	he
showed 	how 	the 	system 	could 	be 	orchestrated 	at 	a
monumental 	scale 	to 	handle 	a 	variety 	of 	different
programme 	elements 	and 	express 	them 	separately.
And 	in 	another 	scheme 	for 	a 	villa 	in 	1926 	(the 	Villa
Meyer), 	he 	created 	a 	fantasy 	of 	roof-terrace 	spaces
linked 	as 	outdoor 	rooms 	through 	stairs 	and 	subtly
placed 	openings. 	In 	short, 	he 	accentuated 	first 	one
aspect, 	then 	another, 	of a 	vocabulary 	that 	was 	by 	now
mature.
Le 	Corbusier's 	next 	major opportunity 	to 	build 	came
in 	1926 	when 	he 	was 	asked 	by 	a 	relative 	of Gertrude
Stein 	to 	design 	a 	large 	villa 	at 	Garches, 	a 	few 	miles 	to
the 	west 	of 	Paris 	(fig. 	8.13). 	The 	site 	was 	a 	long 	and
narrow 	stretch of land 	approached 	from 	one 	end, 	with
room 	for 	a 	garden 	front 	and 	back. 	Here, 	at 	last, 	was 	the
chance 	to 	make 	a 	building 	as 	a 	full, 	free-standing
volume.
The 	first 	view 	of 	'Les 	Terrasses' 	(as 	the 	Villa 	Stein
was 	eventually 	called) 	is 	from 	the 	porter's 	lodge 	at 	the
gateway. 	Compared 	to 	Maison 	Cook 	it 	is 	extremely
grand 	in 	character. 	One 	approaches 	along 	a 	driveway
and 	is 	able 	to 	grasp, 	bit 	by 	bit, 	the 	complexities 	of 	the
facade 	articulation. 	Two 	strip 	windows 	run 	from 	one
side 	to 	the 	other 	surmounted 	by 	an 	almost 	top-heavy
area 	of 	wall 	punctured 	at 	its 	centre 	by 	an 	opening
which hints 	at 	the presence of a roof terrace, 	but which
also 	has 	the 	character 	of 	a 	benediction 	loggia. 	The
lowest 	level 	has 	a 	variety 	of 	openings 	cut 	into 	it: 	a
garage 	far 	to 	the 	left: 	a 	small 	entrance 	to 	the 	servants'
quarters 	under 	a 	tiny 	balcony 	(but 	shifted 	slightly 	off
the 	balcony's 	axis): 	a 	large 	area 	of 	industrial 	glazing
suggesting 	the 	presence 	of 	a 	hall: 	the 	main 	entrance
surmounted 	by 	a 	canopy: 	and. 	finally, 	at 	the 	right-
hand 	extremity, 	some more 	glazing 	with 	thin 	hori-
zontal 	bars. 	As 	at 	Maison 	Cook, 	various 	axes 	and 	sub-
axes 	are 	discernible. 	Rectangles 	of different 	sizes 	set 	up
rhythms 	across 	the 	fagade 	which 	are 	held 	in 	tense

-- 117 of 420 --

1 	1 6 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
equiiibrium 	within 	the 	simple 	geometrical 	outline.
There 	is 	no 	piloti 	in 	sight, 	but 	the 	way 	the 	windows
extend to the edges is enough 	to suggest 	that the fagade
is 	a 	non-weight-bearing 	skin.
If one enters 	by 	the 	main 	door one 	passes 	into 	a 	foyer
with 	a 	stair 	up 	immediately 	to 	the 	right. 	This 	brings
one 	to 	a 	sort 	of piano 	nobik 	which 	is 	set 	aside 	for 	the
most public 	and ceremonial functions. 	The grand salon
is 	situated 	here, 	and 	after 	the 	constricted 	hallway
beneath, 	and 	the 	narrow 	gangway 	at 	the top 	of 	the
stairs, 	the 	space 	expands 	dramatically. 	So 	does 	the
view : 	from 	the moment 	one enters, 	one sees 	the 	garden
and 	terrace. 	The 	Steins 	were 	collectors 	of works 	of art
and 	these 	have 	been 	placed 	strategically, 	like 	house-
hold 	gods, 	along 	the 	processional 	route 	through 	the
house. 	The 	character 	of the 	Villa 	Stein 	is 	honorific. 	Its
interior 	space 	is 	regularized 	and 	controlled 	by 	the 	grid
of 	the 	pilolis: 	they 	give 	the 	rooms 	'a 	constant 	scale, 	a
rhythm, 	a 	cadence 	of 	repose', 	to 	use 	the 	architect's
own 	words.
The 	lower 	level 	of 	Villa 	Stein 	is 	given 	over 	to 	the
servants' 	quarters, 	which 	are 	entered 	through 	the
smaller door seen 	in 	the 	first 	view. 	The kitchen, 	dining-
room 	and 	library, 	though, 	are 	clustered 	around 	the
salon 	on 	ihe piano 	nobile. 	The 	second 	tloor, 	meanwhile,
contains 	bedrooms, 	boudoirs 	and 	bathrooms, 	and 	its
plan 	is 	arranged 	quite 	differently 	from 	the 	floor 	below
it. 	Two 	of 	the 	rooms 	give 	on 	to 	an 	open-air 	deck
suspended 	above 	the 	main 	platform 	of the 	rear 	terrace
( the part of Vers 	ime architecture entitled 	The 	Manual of
the 	Dwelling' 	had 	made 	much 	of 	the 	idea 	of 	fresh 	air
and 	view 	for 	individual 	rooms), 	while 	the 	master
bedroom 	is 	entered 	along 	the 	main 	axis 	of 	the 	house.
The 	small 	hallway 	in 	front 	of it 	is 	formed by 	two 	equal-
sized 	curves 	making 	a 	kind 	of 	vestibule. 	The 	way 	that
curved 	partitions 	have 	been 	arranged 	within 	the
overall 	format 	is 	like 	a 	Purist 	composition, 	where
curves 	and 	rectangles 	slide, 	overlap, 	and 	harmonize
into 	a 	felt 	unity 	within 	a 	rectangular 	frame 	(fig. 	8.14).
At 	the 	top 	of the 	house 	are 	more 	bedrooms 	and two
roof 	terraces 	- 	one 	at 	the 	front, 	one 	at 	the 	back. 	A
storage 	space 	is 	set 	into 	a 	curved 	volume 	which 	recalls
immediately 	the 	funnel 	of 	a 	liner. 	Other 	nautical
allusions 	are 	found 	in 	the 	railings, 	the spiral 	stairs, 	and
the 	overall 	crispness 	of 	the 	forms. 	The 	caption 	under
one 	of the ship 	illustrations 	in 	the 	chapter 	'Eyes 	Which
Do 	Not 	See' 	in 	Vers 	line 	architecture 	reads: 	'An
architecture 	pure, 	neat, 	clear, 	clean 	and 	healthy.' 	It
might 	well 	be 	used 	to 	describe 	the 	Villa 	Stein.
The 	garden 	fac^ade 	of 	'Les 	Terrasses' 	(fig. 	8.16) 	is
more 	broken 	up 	than 	the 	main 	one, 	and 	more
horizontal 	in 	emphasis. 	The 	terrace 	breaks 	into 	the
closed 	box 	and 	sets 	the 	theme 	of 	stratified 	horizontal
planes 	sliding, 	receding 	or 	stepping 	back 	towards 	the
heart of the 	building. 	Here 	there is 	no doubt at all 	about
/^	^^' ^
y
8.14 	LeCorbusier, 	Villa
Stein 	at Garches, 	near
Paris, 	1926-7,
axonometric drawing.
8. 1
5
Le 	Corbusier, 	early
sketches of Villa 	Stein,
1926.
"^B^^^-^- 	^
\'
<%
4"^'

-- 118 of 420 --

Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form 	117
8.16 	Le Corbusier. 	Villa
Stein at Garches, 	near
Paris. 	1926-7. 	rear
garden 	facade.
the 	presence 	of a 	frame 	within 	- 	for 	the 	overhangs,
spatial 	penetrations 	and 	illusions 	of transparency 	rely
on 	the 	cantilevered 	slabs. 	The 	movement 	of 	these
hovering 	elements 	is 	contained 	between 	the 	flanking
side walls 	which 	are 	now 	perceived as 	thin 	planes 	(they
were 	seen 	as 	volumes 	in 	the 	front 	view). 	As 	in 	Maison
Cook, 	curved 	forms 	introduce 	a 	counterpoint 	across
space: 	the 	'funnel' 	on 	top 	rhymes 	with 	the 	cylinder
underneath 	the 	terrace 	stairs. 	In 	the 	same 	period 	that
the 	house 	was 	designed. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	paintings 	were
becoming 	more 	complex 	and 	ambiguous. 	The 	rigid
forms 	of 	early 	Purism 	were 	being 	replaced 	by 	a 	more
fluid 	and 	fluent 	visual 	language. 	The 	Villa 	Stein
confirms 	that 	the 	artist 	was 	capable 	of 	orchestrating
complex 	spatial 	ideas 	into 	a 	harmonious 	whole 	by
1927 	in 	his 	architecture 	as 	well.
But 	the 	house 	at 	Garches 	also 	indicates 	Le
Corbusier's 	ability 	to 	transform 	tradition. 	While 	it
fulfils 	his vision of a 	machine n 	babiter, 	its piano 	mibik, 	its
processional 	entrance 	and 	sequences, 	its 	proportions
and 	its 	noble 	mood 	echo 	the 	character 	of 	a
Renaissance 	villa. 	One 	historian 	has 	even 	pointed 	out
that 	the 	2:1:2:1:2 	proportional 	system 	which
regulates 	the 	fac^ade 	bays 	and 	the 	grid 	is 	the 	same 	as
the 	one 	used 	by 	Palladio 	at 	the 	Villa 	Malcontenta.
There is 	no direct evidence that 	the 	prototype 	was 	in 	Le
Corbusier's 	mind, 	but 	he 	certainly 	succeeded 	in
creating 	a 	modern 	villa 	with 	something 	of 	the
harmony 	and 	order 	of 	his 	Renaissance 	predecessor.
One 	wonders 	if 	the 	Steins, 	who 	spent 	some 	of 	their
summers 	in 	a 	villa 	near 	Florence, 	appreciated 	that
their 	new 	acquisition 	was 	in 	the 	Classical 	spirit 	as 	well
as 	in 	'L'Esprit 	Nouveau'.
By 	1927. 	at 	the 	age 	of 	40. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	thus
succeeded 	in 	producing 	a 	number of master-works 	in 	a
new 	style, 	but 	a 	style 	based 	on 	fundamental 	principles
abstracted 	from 	tradition, 	as 	well 	as 	on 	imaginative
responses 	to 	contemporary 	life. 	More 	than 	that, 	he
had. 	like 	Wright, 	established 	an 	architectural 	system
blending 	logical, 	structural, 	and 	intuitive 	rules 	in
which 	type 	elements 	were 	capable 	of 	apparently
endless 	combinations. 	Moreover, 	he 	had 	established 	a
number of modern 	prototypes 	applicable 	from 	the 	scale
of 	the 	window 	to 	the 	scale 	of 	the 	entire 	city. 	This
system 	of forms 	and 	beliefs 	would 	continue 	to 	nourish
his 	architecture 	but 	would 	undergo 	considerable
changes 	later 	in 	his 	life. 	However, 	his 	discoveries
between 	19 14 	and 	1927 	transcended 	his 	personal
situation, 	for 	they 	were 	solutions 	as 	well 	to 	the 	larger
problem 	of 	an 	authentic 	modern 	architectural 	lan-
guage. 	It 	is 	necessary now 	to 	place 	his 	breakthrough 	in
the broader 	context 	of Europe 	and 	the 	United 	States.

-- 119 of 420 --

g. 	Walter 	Gropius, 	German
Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus
The 	new 	times 	demand 	their 	own 	expression. 	Exactly 	stamped 	form 	devoid 	of
all 	accident, 	clear 	contrasts, 	the 	ordering 	of members, 	the 	arrangement 	of like
parts 	in 	series, 	unity 	of form 	and 	colour. 	. 	.
.
W. 	Gropius. 	19 1
3
While 	some 	of 	the 	crucial 	foundations 	for 	modern
architecture 	had 	been 	laid 	in 	Germany 	before 	the 	war.
the 	preparatory 	work 	had 	to 	wait 	until 	the 	mid- 1920s
to 	come 	to 	fruition. 	With 	the 	defeat 	of 	the 	German
armies 	in 	1918. 	and 	the 	collapse 	of 	the 	old 	imperial
order. 	Muthesius's 	dream 	of a 	unified, 	national 	Kiiltw
guided by 	an 	elite 	of artist 	technocrats 	was 	shattered.
Instead 	of competing 	in 	the 	market-place, 	the 	frightful
technical 	ingenuities 	of 	the 	great 	industrial 	nations
had 	ended 	up 	competing 	on 	the 	field 	of battle. 	The 	war
may 	have 	been 	'won' 	by 	the 	allied 	side, 	but 	the
bulwarks 	of 	an 	already 	sagging 	liberal 	Christian
civilization 	had 	been 	further 	eroded 	in 	the 	process. 	In
Germany 	the 	reaction 	to 	economic 	chaos 	was 	revol-
ution, 	and 	this 	brought 	with 	it 	a 	polarization 	of 	the
political extremes of left 	and 	right. 	In 	the arts, 	groups of
visionaries 	modelled 	their 	manifestos 	on 	those 	of 	the
radical 	workers' 	groups 	and 	hoped 	that 	political
revolution 	might 	be 	accompanied 	by 	a 	cultural 	one.
Gropius 	caught 	the 	ambivalent 	mood 	of 	the 	period 	-
oscillating 	between 	despair 	at 	an 	internal collapse 	and
hope 	in 	some 	radiant, 	new 	social 	edifice 	- 	when 	he
wrote 	in 	1919:
Today's 	artist 	lives 	in 	an 	era 	of dissolution 	without
guidance. 	He 	stands 	alone. 	The 	old 	forms 	are 	in
ruins, 	the 	benumbed 	world 	is 	shaken 	up, 	the 	old
human 	spirit 	is 	invalidated 	and 	in 	flux 	towards 	a
new 	form. 	We 	float 	in 	space 	and 	cannot 	perceive
the 	new 	order.
This 	was 	the 	perfect 	ground 	for 	the 	growth 	of
Utopianism 	tinged 	with 	an 	underlying 	angsl. 	Severe
economic 	inflation 	contributed 	to 	the 	mood 	by
minimizing 	the 	likelihood 	of actual 	construction. 	Thus
architects 	in 	Germany reverted to the creation 	of paper
projects 	in 	which 	they 	foresaw 	the 	image 	of 	a 	new
society. 	Bruno 	Taut, 	in 	the 	bizarre 	watercolours 	of his
Alpine 	Architektw. 	portrayed 	collective 	buildings 	of
glass 	facets, 	rising 	like 	crystals 	from 	glaciers 	and
mountain 	peaks 	(fig. 	9.1). 	These 	were 	meant 	to
embody 	an 	'apolitical 	socialism', 	an 	ideal 	realm 	for 	the
brotherhood 	of 	man, 	in 	which 	national 	boundaries
and 	individual 	greed 	would 	dissolve 	away, 	and 	in
which 	a 	'natural' 	society 	undisturbed 	by 	inherited
class 	divisions 	would 	emerge. 	In 	Die 	Stadtkrone 	the
architect 	even 	tried 	to 	embody 	the 	new 	collective
religion 	in 	a 	town 	plan 	with 	a 	symbolic 	centre 	in 	the
form 	of a cosmic 	world 	mountain 	or a stepped 	pyramid.
This 	'centre' 	was 	clearly 	supposed 	to 	make 	up 	for 	the
loss 	of 	centre 	of 	modern, 	alienated 	man. 	and 	to 	root
him 	to 	'deeper' 	meanings 	in 	an 	integrated 	society.
Following 	such 	pre-war 	visionaries 	as 	Paul 	Scheerbart
and 	Wassily 	Kandinsky, 	Taut 	thought 	it 	was 	the
business 	of 	the 	artist 	to 	reveal 	the 	form 	of 	this 	new
polity 	which 	was 	to 	rise 	from 	the 	ruins 	of 	European
civilization.
This 	tendency 	to 	believe 	that 	architectural 	forms
might 	themselves have 	redemptive potential recalls 	the
moralism 	of 	Pugin. 	who 	had 	imagined 	that 	good
Christian 	forms 	(i.e.. 	Gothic 	ones) 	would 	accelerate 	a
moral 	regeneration. 	The 	appeal 	of a 	similar 	idea 	in
circumstances 	where 	the 	creative 	individual 	felt 	cut 	off
from 	his 	surroundings, 	and 	without 	bearings, 	is

-- 120 of 420 --

i).! 	(above) 	Bruno Taut.
'Crystal 	Mountain'.
Alpine Architcktur. 	19 14.
9.2 	[right) 	Lyonei
Feininger. 	'Cathedral 	of
Socialism', 	from 	the
cover of the 	first
Bauhaus 	proclamation,
1919.
h.. 	%'U
hS-
H
K
Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	• 	119
eveiT 	artist.
Let 	us 	create 	a 	new 	guild 	of craftsmen, 	without
the 	class 	snobbery 	that 	tries 	to 	erect 	a 	haughty
barrier 	between 	artist 	and 	craftsman. 	Let 	us
conceive, 	consider 	and 	create 	together 	the 	new
building 	of the 	future that 	will 	bring 	all 	into 	one
single 	integrated 	creation: 	architecture, 	painting
and 	sculpture 	rising 	to 	heaven 	out 	of the 	hands 	of a
million 	craftsmen, 	the 	crystal 	symbol 	of the 	new
faith 	of the 	future.
Permeating 	Gropius's 	thinking 	at 	this 	stage 	was
adulation 	for 	the 	way 	in 	which 	Gothic 	cathedrals 	had
supposedly 	represented 	the 	deepest 	collective 	as-
pirations 	of the 	medieval 	Volk. 	This 	myth was 	joined 	to
another one 	in 	Gropius's mind: 	that 	the cathedrals 	had
been 	produced 	by 	bands 	of inspired 	craftsmen 	without
the 	interference 	of 	'self-conscious 	designers'. 	Turning
such 	beliefs 	around, 	he 	assumed 	that 	if 	a 	band 	of
craftsmen 	could 	somehow 	be 	initiated 	into 	the 	needs
and 	means 	of 	the 	modern 	era. 	then 	they 	might
combine 	to 	produce the 	authentic 	collective 	imagery 	of
the 	times. 	Correspondingly, 	the 	proclamation 	had 	on
its 	cover 	a 	woodcut 	by Lyonei 	Feininger 	representing
the 	'Cathedral 	of 	Socialism' 	(fig. 	9.2) 	- 	a 	jagged.
, 	--i>''
understandable. 	Even 	so. 	it 	comes 	as 	a 	shock 	to 	find
Walter 	Gropius 	indulging 	in 	fantasies 	of a 	similar 	tone
in 	the period 	around the 	founding 	of the 	Bauhaus, 	that
is. 	in 	19 1 9. 	After 	all. 	he 	had been 	one of the champions
of 	Muthesius's 	ideal 	of 	standardization: 	his 	position
had 	seemed 	to stress 	the 	notion 	of a 	broad 	co-operation
between 	the 	architect, 	the 	industrial 	process 	and 	the
values 	of a 	technocratic 	clientele.
The 	Bauhaus 	was 	formed 	by 	the 	fusion 	of 	two
existing 	institutions 	in 	Weimar: 	the 	old 	Academy 	of
Fine 	Arts 	and 	a 	Kunstgewerbeschule 	founded 	under
van 	de 	Velde 	in 	1903. 	This 	odd 	marriage 	had 	more
support 	from 	the 	state 	government 	than 	from 	the 	local
Weimar 	establishment, 	and 	was 	the 	first 	step 	towards
Gropius's 	eventual 	aim 	of a 	regeneration 	of 	German
visual 	culture 	through 	a 	fusion 	of Arts 	and 	Crafts. 	The
first 	Bauhaus 	proclamation 	was 	permeated 	with 	the
ideal 	of a 	new 	social 	and 	spiritual 	integration 	in 	which
artists 	and 	craftsmen 	would 	unite 	to 	create 	a 	sort 	of
collective 	symbolic 	building 	of the 	future:
The 	complete 	building 	is 	the 	ultimate 	aim 	of the
visual 	arts. 	. 	. 	. 	Architects, 	painters 	and 	sculptors
must 	recognize 	once 	more 	the 	nature 	of buildings
as 	composite 	entities. 	Only 	then 	will 	their 	works 	be
permeated 	with 	that 	architectonic 	feeling 	which
has 	become 	lost 	in 	the 	art 	of the 	salons.
A 	groundwork 	of craft 	discipline 	is 	essential 	to

-- 121 of 420 --

1 20 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
expressionist 	image, 	soaked 	in 	visionary 	sentiments,
clearly 	intended 	to 	be 	evocative 	rather 	than 	buildable.
and 	in 	its 	crystal-like 	shapes 	resembling 	Taut's
fantasies. 	Indeed, 	both 	Gropius 	and 	Taut 	were 	fully
aware 	of 	Scheerbart's 	pre-war 	praise 	of 	glass, 	and 	of
Adolf Behne's 	more 	recent 	proclamations 	in 	the 	same
vein
:
It 	is 	not 	the 	crazy 	caprice 	of a poet 	that 	glass
architecture 	will 	bring 	a 	new 	culture. 	It 	is 	a 	fact.
Gropius's 	expressed 	beliefs 	in 	the 	necessity 	for
reuniting 	aesthetic 	sensibility 	and 	utilitarian 	design
were 	in 	line 	with 	his 	experiences 	within 	the
Werkbund; 	but 	there 	was 	no 	mention 	in 	his 	proc-
lamation 	of the design 	of types 	for 	mass 	production. 	It
seemed 	as if he 	had 	returned 	to 	the roots of the 	Arts and
Crafts 	movement, 	to 	William 	Morris, 	and 	to 	the 	belief
in 	handicraft 	as 	the 	sole 	viable 	guarantee 	of 	design
quality. 	The 	earliest 	curriculum 	at 	the 	Bauhaus
mirrored 	this 	position: 	the 	student 	was 	regarded 	as 	a
sort of apprentice 	to 	an 	updated 	version 	of the 	medieval
9.3 	(/p/£) 	Student 	work
produced 	in 	the 	Vorkurs
under 	the 	tutelage 	of
Johannes 	Itten 	at 	the
Bauhaus. 	192 	5.
9.4 	(Mow) 	Walter
Gropius. 	Sommerfeld
House. 	Berlin. 	1921.

-- 122 of 420 --

Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus
guild 	and 	was 	expected 	to 	learn 	weaving 	and 	other
crafts 	which 	might 	eventually 	be 	useful 	in 	the
decoration 	or 	articulation 	of 	living 	spaces 	and
buildings. 	Parallel 	with 	these 	courses 	was 	the 	Form-
lehrc 	instruction 	in 	the 	basis 	of formal 	arrangement,
including composition 	and the study of colour, 	texture,
and 	expression: 	eventually 	this 	course 	would, 	in 	fact,
be 	taught 	best 	by 	painters 	of 	easel 	pictures, 	men 	like
Paul 	Klee. 	Wassily 	Kandinsky. 	Oskar 	Schlemmcr. 	and
Gerhard 	Marcks. 	However, 	preceding 	these 	middle
levels 	of 	the 	Bauhaus 	education, 	every 	student 	would
have 	to 	pass 	through 	the 	Vorkurs 	in 	which, 	under 	the
direction 	ofjohannes 	Itten 	(and. 	later. 	Josef Albers 	and
Laszlo 	Moholy-Nagy). 	he 	would 	be 	encouraged 	to
'unlearn' 	the 	habits 	and 	cliches 	of 	European
'academic' 	traditions, 	and 	to 	make 	a 	new 	beginning
through 	experimentation 	with 	natural 	materials 	and
abstract 	forms. 	Thus 	it 	was 	hoped 	that 	each 	student
would 	tap 	his 	deepest 	instinctive 	expression 	in 	the
definition 	of 	forms 	which 	would 	not 	have 	been
'imposed' 	by 	conventions. 	The 	ideology 	here 	was
primitivism 	of a 	pure 	type: 	the 	interior 	world 	of 	the
psyche 	was 	to 	reveal 	itself 	in 	all 	its 	naturalness : 	and
working 	together 	with 	the 	nature 	of 	materials 	was
supposed 	to 	generate 	authentic 	forms 	mirroring 	the
deepest 	collective 	beliefs.
Johannes 	Itten. 	the 	first 	teacher of the 	Vorkws, 	was 	a
Swiss 	painter 	who 	had 	imbibed 	the 	pre-war 	educa-
tional 	ideas of Adolf Hcilzel 	and 	Franz 	Cizek 	in 	Vienna,
and 	believed 	in 	the central 	role 	of form/feeling 	training
in 	education. 	Moreover, 	extending 	Symbolist 	ideas 	of
the 	pre-war 	generation 	(especially 	some 	of
Kandinsky's 	theories 	set 	forth 	in 	Conccrninii 	the
Spiritual 	in 	Art}, 	he 	held 	that 	there 	was 	an 	inner
connection 	between 	certain 	visual 	configurations 	and
certain 	states 	of mind. 	It 	is 	clear 	that 	Itten 	believed 	he
was 	conducting 	his 	students 	into 	a 	form 	of 	religious
initiation. 	He 	actually 	encouraged 	meditation, 	deep-
breathing 	exercises 	and 	physical 	training 	as 	aids 	to
mental 	relaxation 	and 	self-discovery 	in 	his 	classes.
Many 	students 	joined 	the 	Mazdaznan 	cult, 	which
involved 	fasting, 	a 	vegetarian 	diet, 	and 	various
spiritual 	disciplines. 	One 	pauses 	for 	a 	moment, 	to 	guess
how 	Muthesius. 	the 	Wcrkbund 	theorist, 	or 	Rathenau.
the pre-war client, 	might 	have 	reacted 	to 	this 	idea of an
education 	for 	the 	designers 	of the 	future!
The 	work 	produced 	under 	Itten 	in 	the 	earliest
sessions 	of the 	Vorkurs 	had 	a 	notably 	primitive 	flavour,
which 	perhaps 	mirrored 	a 	prevalent 	state 	of 	gloom 	at
the 	decline 	of the 	West, 	and 	a 	tendency 	to 	clutch 	on 	to
tribal 	and 	magical 	artifacts 	for 	guidance 	(fig. 	9.?).
While 	Itten 	insisted 	that 	these 	productions 	should 	not
be 	regarded 	as 	'finished 	works 	of 	art', 	they 	were
influenced 	by 	productions 	of 	the 	Zurich 	Dada 	avant-
garde, 	including 	Schwitters's 	rubbish 	constructions
and 	the 	fantastic 	disassembled 	machine-collages 	of
Max 	Ernst. 	The 	mood 	here 	was 	one 	of 	cultivated
despair 	underlined 	by 	a 	sense 	of 	absurdity 	at 	the
impact 	of a 	fully 	mechanized 	war. 	Moreover, 	like 	the
Dadaists, 	Itten's 	students 	were 	evidently 	interested 	in
African 	masks 	and 	fetishes. 	Altogether 	'Primitivism'
seems 	to 	have 	been 	a 	major 	strand 	in 	'Expressionist'
attitudes 	of both 	the 	pre- 	and 	post-war 	periods.
While 	the 	Bauhaus 	potters 	could 	at 	least 	sell 	their
wares, 	the 	majority 	of 	Bauhaus 	students 	had 	little
chance 	to 	contribute 	their 	designs 	to 	the 	'new
cathedral 	of the 	future' 	in 	a 	Germany 	rent 	by 	inflation
and 	poverty. 	However, 	in 	1920, 	Gropius 	received 	a
commission 	to 	design 	a 	house 	for 	Adolf Sommerfeld. 	a
timber 	merchant 	who 	had 	managed 	to 	acquire 	the
entire 	teak 	lining 	of a 	ship 	at 	a 	time 	when 	building
materials 	were 	extremely 	scarce. 	Gropius 	drew 	up 	his
design 	in 	1920 	and 	used 	the 	services 	of 	some 	of 	his
students 	in 	the 	ornamentation 	of the 	interiors 	and 	the
designs 	of some 	of the 	fixtures. 	The 	Sommerfeld 	House
(fig. 	9.4) 	is 	a 	sophisticated 	essay 	in 	procured 	lumvtc; 	it
combines 	aspects 	of 	Gropius's 	pre-war 	formal 	and
compositional 	approaches, 	with 	a 	medievalizing mood,
a 	vernacular image and elements which 	may well 	have
been 	influenced 	by 	Wright's 	ornamentation 	of Midway
Gardens. 	In 	retrospect, 	the 	building 	seems 	very 	far
from 	the 	machine-age 	architecture 	Gropius 	was 	to
create only 	a 	few 	years 	later, 	but the 	peculiarities 	of the
commission 	must 	be 	taken 	into 	account 	to 	balance 	too
exaggerated 	a 	claim 	for 	Gropius's 	so-called 	'Expres-
sionism' 	in 	the 	immediate 	post-war 	years.
'Expressionism' 	is. 	in 	any 	case, 	an 	imprecise 	term: 	it
is 	commonly 	used 	to 	group 	together 	a 	number 	of
diverse 	artists 	working 	in 	Holland 	and 	Germany
between 	roughly 	1 9 	1 o 	and 	1 925. 	and 	to describe 	a 	so-
called 	'anti-Rational' 	tendency 	in 	art 	which 	- 	so 	the
argument 	goes 	- 	manifests 	itself in 	works 	of complex,
jagged, 	or 	free-flowing 	form. 	The 	premiss 	here 	tends 	to
be 	an 	over-simple 	one 	whereby 	'rational' 	tendencies
are 	taken 	to 	manifest 	themselves 	in 	'opposite' 	stylistic
qualities 	like 	simplicity, 	rectangularity. 	and 	stasis. 	The
difficulty 	comes 	in 	assuming 	that 	the 	frenzied, 	the
emotive, 	and 	the 	bizarre 	must 	manifest 	themselves 	in 	a
particular 	style, 	and 	in 	ignoring 	the 	fact 	that 	most
works 	of art 	of any 	depth 	are 	characterized 	by 	tensions
between 	emotional 	expressiveness 	and 	formal 	control.
'Expressionism' 	then 	is 	a 	term 	which 	is 	all 	the 	more
slippery 	for 	the 	way 	it 	is 	sometimes 	employed 	to
describe 	attitudes 	of mind, 	sometimes 	forms. 	It 	is 	used
here 	in 	a 	spirit 	of 	caution 	and 	as 	a 	reluctant
continuation 	of a 	well-worn 	convention 	according 	to
which 	architecture 	by 	men 	like de 	Klerk 	and 	Kramer 	in
Holland, 	and 	Poelzig. 	Taut. 	Bartning. 	Mendelsohn,
and 	Gropius 	in 	Germany 	(in 	a 	particular 	phase 	of their
lives) 	are 	customarily 	called 	'Expressionists'.

-- 123 of 420 --

122 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
The 	simplistic 	nature 	of 	such 	characterizations 	is
revealed 	all 	the 	more 	when 	one 	confronts 	the 	major
talent. 	This 	is 	particularly 	true 	of 	Erich 	Mendelsohn,
whose 	formation 	took 	place 	before 	the 	war 	under 	the
impact 	of 	Art 	Nouveau. 	Mendelsohn 	was 	Jewish, 	and
recent 	attempts 	at 	linking 	his 	forms 	to 	the 	geometrical
symbolism 	of ancient 	Jewish 	mystical 	texts 	should 	not
be 	dismissed 	out 	of 	hand. 	Certainly 	he 	felt 	that 	it 	was
one 	of 	the 	functions 	of 	art 	to 	make 	a 	spiritual 	order
visible and to 	reveal 	the inner processes 	and 	rhythms of
nature. 	He 	absorbed 	the 	theory 	of empathy, 	according
to 	which 	the 	essential 	character of forms 	was 	perceived
through 	a 	translation, 	mimetically, 	of the 	tactile 	sense
into 	the 	forms 	of architecture. 	Some 	of these 	concerns
are 	already 	clear 	in 	a 	series 	of 	remarkable 	sketches
Mendelsohn 	drew 	while 	in 	the 	trenches 	during 	the
First 	World 	War 	(fig. 	9.5). 	These 	are 	of 	building 	types
like 	film 	studios, 	a 	car-body 	factory, 	and 	a 	crema-
torium. 	The 	forms 	are 	sensed 	in 	a 	state 	of 	extreme
tension 	( 'dynamism' 	was 	the 	word 	the 	artist preferred)
and 	the 	structural 	stresses 	are 	dramatized 	and
accentuated 	so 	that 	parts 	and 	whole 	merge 	together.
Mendelsohn 	criticized 	Behrens's 	architecture 	for 	its
additive 	'cardboard' 	quality 	and 	sought 	instead 	the
integration 	of 	all 	details 	into 	the 	rhythms 	of 	a
controlling 	image: 	at 	the 	same 	time 	he 	rejected 	the
more 	extreme 	creations 	of the 	'Wendingen' 	expressio-
nists 	(a 	Dutch 	group 	which 	delighted 	in 	sprawling 	and
eccentric 	plans) 	on 	the 	ground 	that 	they 	lacked
control. 	For 	Mendelsohn 	the 	tension 	of 	a 	work 	was
increased 	and 	enriched 	by 	a 	fusion 	of the 	organic 	with
a 	strong 	geometrical 	armature 	employing 	axes.
In 	1919 	Mendelsohn 	had 	a 	chance 	to 	build 	one 	of
his 	fantastic, 	biomorphic 	essays 	when 	he 	was 	asked 	to
design 	an 	observatory 	at 	Potsdam. 	The 	'Einstein
Tower' 	(fig. 	9.6) 	was 	a 	free-form, 	curved 	sculpture,
into 	which 	windows 	and 	other 	details 	were 	carved 	so
as 	to 	accentuate 	the 	overall 	dynamism. 	In 	fact, 	the
plan was 	a 	masterly example 	of axial 	arrangement 	and
functional 	hierarchy 	and 	the 	material 	was 	not 	at 	all
the 	single 	'plastic' 	sculptural 	one 	it 	appeared, but 	brick
cosmetically 	coated 	in 	plaster 	and 	cement. 	Evidently
the 	idi'n 	of the 	tower 	was 	related 	to 	Einsteinian 	themes
9.5 	(/e/t) 	Erich
Mendelsohn, 	sketch 	of
factories, 	f. 	191 	5.
9.6 	(below) 	Erich
Mendelsohn, 	Einstein
Tower. 	Potsdam.
1919-22.

-- 124 of 420 --

Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	123
. 	..>-\'
^liiiaftiii'TiiPt •?:;]„*
"sain 	SS"-"4SS?J"*
r 	sins: 	; 	HtJl "'
Pi 	• 	:l
H .y
9.7 	Ludwig 	Mies van
der Rohe,
Friedrichstrasse
Sltyscraper Competition,
glass sliyscraper project.
of matter 	and 	energy:
Since 	the 	recognition 	that 	the 	two 	conceptions
hitherto 	kept 	separable 	by 	science - 	Matter 	and
Energy 	- 	are 	only 	different 	conditions 	of the 	same
basic 	stuff, 	that 	nothing 	in 	the 	Universe 	is 	without
Relativity 	to 	the 	Cosmos, 	without 	concern 	with 	the
whole 	- 	since 	then, 	engineers 	have 	abandoned 	the
theory 	of dead 	material, 	and 	given 	themselves 	to
the 	dutiful 	service 	of Nature.
By 	the time 	he designed the Luckenwalde hat factory
of 	192^ 	Mendelsohn's 	style 	had 	become 	more
stereometrical 	and 	disciplined 	in 	its 	use 	of 	regular
geometries: 	and 	by 	the 	second 	half of the 	twenties, 	in
the 	numerous 	department 	stores, 	cinemas, 	and 	villas
he 	built 	in 	and 	around 	Berlin, 	his 	vocabulary 	had
resorted 	to 	many 	of 	the 	mechanistic 	analogies 	and
characteristic 	elements 	(e.g.. 	strip 	windows 	and
cantilevered 	curved 	stairs) 	of 	the 	International 	Style.
Nonetheless, 	the 	quality 	of 	an 	inner 	energy 	and
tension 	in 	his 	forms 	remained 	unmistakable.
Ludwig 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	was 	another 	German
architect 	to 	pass 	through 	an 	'Expressionist' 	phase
between 	the end 	of the 	war 	and 	the 	rectilinear 	abstract
style 	of 	his 	seminal 	works 	from 	192 	5 	onwards. 	As 	we
have 	seen, 	he 	was 	trained 	in 	the 	office 	of Peter 	Behrens
before 	the 	war. 	but 	this 	apprenticeship 	came 	after
experience 	in 	his 	father's 	stonemason's 	office, 	and
some 	time 	in 	the 	furniture 	business 	of Bruno 	Paul. 	He
early 	identified 	the 	characteristics 	he 	wished 	to
emulate 	in 	the 	neo-classical 	severity 	and 	geometrical
precision 	of 	Schinkel. 	and 	in 	the 	planarity 	and
directness 	in 	the 	use 	of 	materials 	of 	Berlage. 	By 	the
outbreak 	of the 	war. 	Mies 	had 	set 	up 	his 	own 	practice
and 	designed 	a 	number 	of 	buildings, 	including 	the
Kroller-Miiller 	Villa 	of 	191 	3. 	in 	a 	rectilinear, 	stripped
Classical 	style 	which 	laid 	considerable 	stress 	on 	values
of order, 	repose, 	symmetry, 	and 	discipline.
After 	the 	war 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	directed 	the
architectural 	section 	of one of the radical 	groups 	(in 	his
case the 	'Novembergruppe' ) 	which seemed to share the
visionary 	attitudes 	of 	Taut. 	Behne. 	and 	Gropius. 	His
entry 	to the 	Friedrichstrasse 	Skyscraper Competition 	of
1920 	might 	almost 	be 	read 	in 	Rationalist 	terms 	as 	an
attempt 	at 	stripping 	a 	tall 	framed 	building 	down 	to 	its
essential 	structure, 	which 	was 	then 	wrapped 	with 	a
glass 	curtain-wall 	as 	a 	'minimalist' 	solution 	- 	a 	sort 	of
ultimate 	destination 	of 	the 	tall 	steel-framed 	building.
However, 	this 	would 	be 	to 	miss 	half of 	the 	point. 	The
sharp 	forms, 	romantic 	silhouettes, 	and 	rich 	play 	of
reflecting 	and 	transparent 	surfaces 	seem 	to 	suggest 	a
crystal 	cathedral 	as 	well 	as 	an 	office 	building. 	The glass
tower 	reveals 	Utopian 	sentiments 	not 	unlike 	those 	of
Taut's 	glass 	visions, 	or 	I^e 	Corbusier's 	Cartesian 	towers
floating 	above 	the 	parks 	of 	the 	Ville 	Contemporaine.
The 	suggestion 	is 	almost 	made 	that 	the 	tall 	building 	is
an 	index 	of progress! vist 	fervour, 	an 	image 	to be central
to 	some 	vaguely 	defined 	new 	state. 	It 	is 	a 	sad 	irony 	of
ensuing 	history 	that 	the 	pure 	glass 	prism 	should 	have
started 	off as 	the symbol 	of a 	new 	faith 	and ended 	up as
the 	banal 	formula 	for 	the 	housing 	of 	big 	business 	and
bureaucracy.

-- 125 of 420 --

1 24 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
In 	his second 	Friedrichstrasse scheme, 	Mies 	modified
the 	plan 	to 	curved 	forms 	radiating 	from 	a 	circulation
core 	and 	described 	his 	experiments 	with 	glass 	and
transparency 	(fig. 	9.7):
At 	first 	glance 	the 	curved 	perimeter 	of the 	plan
seems 	arbitrary. 	But 	these 	curves 	were 	determined
by 	three 	factors: 	sufficient 	illumination 	of the
interior: 	the 	massing 	of the 	building 	from 	the 	street:
and 	lastly, 	the 	play 	of reflections.
Indeed, 	the 	fascination 	with 	glass recalls 	once 	again
Scheerbart's 	poetic 	dreams, 	if 	not 	the 	adulation 	of
lustrous, 	artificial, 	and 	floating 	materials 	in 	the
proclamations 	of 	Dc 	Stijl. 	Mies 	seems 	to 	have 	been
concerned 	with 	a 	redemption 	of 	sorts, 	through
technological 	means. 	The 	forms 	of 	his 	architecture
achieved 	the 	character 	of 	transcendental 	symbols. 	Le
Corbusier 	explained 	the 	nature 	of 	this 	'idealization'
succinctly;
Architectural 	abstraction 	has 	this 	about 	it 	which 	is
magnificently 	peculiar 	to 	itself, 	that 	while 	it 	is
rooted 	in 	hard 	fact 	it 	spiritualizes 	it 	, 	,
.
Mies 	Van 	der 	Rohe's 	project 	for 	a 	concrete 	office
block 	in 	1922 	(fig. 	9.8) 	indicates 	a 	slight 	change 	of
mood 	and 	form. 	Emphasis 	has 	now 	shifted 	to 	the
horizontal 	layering 	of 	space 	and 	the 	expression 	of
hovering 	planes, 	the 	building 	as a 	whole 	being 	formed
from 	cantilevered 	trays 	on 	piers 	with 	brackets. 	The
plan 	was 	a 	grid 	of 	structural 	posts 	with 	partitions
inserted 	between 	them, 	but 	the 	arrangement 	still
contained 	vestiges 	of 	his 	Classical 	approach 	in 	its
symmetry, 	stress 	of the 	central 	axis, 	and 	articulation 	of
a 	sort 	of 	'floating' 	cornice 	plane 	at 	the 	top 	(perhaps
influenced 	by 	Sullivan's 	similar 	treatment 	in 	the
Carson 	Pirie 	Scott 	Store 	of 	1905), 	Visual 	'corrections'
and 	tensions 	were 	also 	introduced 	by 	the 	way 	each
floor 	was 	made 	to 	step 	out 	a 	little 	further 	than 	the 	one
below 	it 	as 	one 	moved 	up 	the 	building: 	these 	might 	be
related 	to 	the 	architect's 	'expressionist' 	tendencies:
equally 	they 	might 	be 	seen 	as 	intelligent 	reinterpre-
tations of effects 	of Classical 	entasis. 	The 	concrete 	office
block 	was 	more 	geared 	to 	the 	actual 	technical
potentials 	of 	the 	time 	than 	the 	sublime 	glass 	sky-
scrapers 	had 	been. 	In 	1923 	Mies 	became 	a 	founding
member 	of 	the 	'G' 	group 	in 	Berlin, 	which 	declared 	its
opposition 	to 	'formalism' 	and 	its 	theoretical 	support 	for
forms 	closely 	related 	to 	practicality 	and 	construction.
He 	wrote 	of his 	building 	in 	these 	terms
:
... 	a 	house 	of work 	. 	. 	. 	of organization, 	of clarity, 	of
economy. 	Bright, 	wide 	workrooms, 	easy 	to 	oversee,
undivided 	except 	as 	the 	undertaking 	is 	divided. 	The
maximum 	etTect 	with 	the 	minimum 	expenditure 	of
means. 	The 	materials 	are 	concrete, 	iron, 	glass.
Evidently 	the 	dreamer 	was 	coming 	back 	to 	earth. 	It
should 	be 	mentioned 	that 	by 	1923 	the 	German
economy 	was 	showing 	marked 	signs 	of 	improvement
and 	that 	this 	made 	the 	adjustment 	of the 	avant-garde
to 	reality 	both 	desirable 	and 	tenable.
An 	artist's 	vocabulary 	takes 	time 	to 	mature 	and
there 	may 	be 	a 	pivotal 	work 	in 	which 	an 	underlying
concept 	is 	first 	revealed, 	but 	which 	may 	take 	years 	to
congeal 	with 	the 	artist's 	other 	discoveries. 	Mies 	van
der 	Rohe's 	brick 	villa 	design 	of 	192 	3 	(fig. 	9.9) 	seems 	to
have 	had 	this 	role 	in 	his 	evolution. 	The 	plan 	was
formed from 	walls 	laid 	out 	as 	planes, 	some 	of 	which
extended 	into 	the 	surroundings. 	The 	spaces 	between
were defined 	by 	a 	principle of overlapping, 	and 	without
recourse 	to 	a 	dominant 	axis. 	It 	was 	as 	if 	Mies 	had
drawn 	together certain 	qualities of the pre-war Kroller-
Miiller 	project, 	with 	the 	formal 	concepts 	of modern 	art,
for 	his 	idea 	seemed 	to 	be 	a 	fusion 	of 	stripped 	Classical
values, 	of the 	pin-wheel 	qualities 	of Wright, 	and 	of the
abstract 	paintings 	of 	Mondrian, 	van 	Doesburg, 	or
perhaps 	Lissitzky. 	Once 	again 	one 	finds 	the 	fruitful
translation 	of 	painting 	abstraction 	into 	architecture.
However, 	the 	volumes 	in 	this 	case 	were 	entirely 	earth-
bound, 	and 	it was to 	take 	Mies some years to find 	a 	way
of expressing 	such 	spatial 	ideas 	in 	a 	way 	that 	animated
the 	whole 	fabric 	in 	three 	dimensions. 	Throughout 	his
later 	career, 	he 	would 	oscillate 	continually 	between
symmetrical, 	axial, 	and 	crypto-Classical 	plans 	and
ones 	based 	on 	dynamic 	rotation 	and 	the 	centrifugal
splay 	of planes.
The 	period 	from 	1922 	to 	1923 	seems 	to 	have 	been 	a
crucial one 	in 	Germany 	(as in 	France) 	for the growth 	of
modern 	architecture 	and 	the 	emergence 	of 	the
International 	Style. 	For 	it 	was 	then 	too 	that 	a 	new
orientation 	began 	to 	emerge 	at 	the 	Bauhaus 	and 	in
Gropius's 	thinking 	and 	designing. 	In 	1922 	van
Doesburg 	visited 	Weimar 	and had 	a 	great 	impact 	on
i). 8 	[above) 	Ludwig 	Mies
van 	der 	Robe, 	concrete
office building project,
1922.
9.9 	(afcovf 	r/ij/it) 	Ludwig
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe. 	brick
villa 	project. 	1923. 	view
and 	plan.
q.io 	{right) 	Walter
Cropius. 	director's office
at 	the 	Weimar 	Bauhaus,
1923: 	the design clearly
reflects the impact of
Elementarist 	abstract
art.
9. 1 1 	(far right) 	Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy. 	Light-
Space 	Modulator.
1923-30. 	Steel, 	plastic
and 	wood, 	height S9i 	in-
(151 	cm.). 	Cambridge.
Mass.. 	Busch 	- 	Reisinger
Museum. 	Harvard
University, 	gift 	of Mrs.
Sibyl 	Moholy-Nagy.

-- 126 of 420 --

Walter 	Gropius. 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	• 	125
the 	school. 	From 	then 	on 	De 	Stijl-infiuenced 	forms
became 	the 	basis of a 	general 	language of design, 	and 	a
greater 	emphasis 	was 	again 	placed 	on 	reintegrating
form 	and 	industry. 	Itten 	realized 	his time 	had come and
resigned. 	The 	Vorkurs 	was 	handed 	over 	to 	Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy. 	whose 	sophisticated 	'Elementarist'
vocabulary 	of 	rectilinear 	machine 	abstraction 	was 	in
line 	with 	van 	Doesburg 	and 	with 	artistic 	educational
experiments 	in 	post-Revolutionary 	Russia 	(e.g., 	the
Vkhutemas 	School) 	(fig. 	9. 11). 	Gropius's 	own 	office
design 	of 	1923 	(fig. 	9.10) 	was 	blatantly 	a 	three-
dimensional 	translation 	of some 	of these 	ideas, 	as 	was
his 	Chicago 	Tribune 	skyscraper 	design 	of 	1922 	(to 	be
analysed 	in 	more 	detail 	in 	a 	later 	chapter). 	Gropius's
'style 	for 	the 	times', 	with 	which 	he 	sought 	to 	fulfil 	his
dream 	of a 	new 	communal 	art, 	seemed 	increasingly 	to
be 	reverting 	to 	the 	basic 	forms 	of 	circles, 	spheres,
rectangles, 	cubes, 	triangles 	and 	pyramids. 	While 	the
Bauhaus 	teachers 	may 	have 	denied 	strongly 	the
existence of a 	'Bauhaus style', 	the shared 	body 	of forms
and 	ideas 	derived 	from 	geometrical 	abstract 	art
epidemic 	within 	the 	Vorkurs 	from 	1923 	onwards,
insured 	that 	artists 	and 	craftsmen 	who 	later 	designed
ceramics, 	fabrics, 	furniture 	(fig. 	9.12), 	even 	buildings,
did 	so 	on 	the 	basis 	of a 	sort 	of shared 	visual 	grammar.

-- 127 of 420 --

126 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
In 	the 	year 	1923 	Gropius 	also 	published 	Idee 	und
Aufliau. 	a 	proclamation 	of Bauhaus 	philosophy, 	as 	the
leading 	article 	accompanying 	the 	Bauhaus 	exhibition
of that 	year. 	This 	was 	more 	sober 	and 	optimistic 	than
the 	Foundation 	Manifesto 	had 	been. 	Once 	again 	we
find 	Hegelian 	ideas 	concerning 	'the 	spirit 	of 	the 	age'
and 	the 	creation 	of forms 	appropriate 	to 	that 	spirit:
The 	dominant 	spirit 	of our 	epoch 	is 	already
recognizable 	although 	its 	form 	is 	not 	yet 	clearly
defined. 	The 	old 	dualistic 	world 	concept 	which
envisaged 	the 	ego 	in 	opposition 	to 	the 	universe 	is
rapidly 	losing 	ground. 	In 	its 	place 	is 	rising 	the 	idea
of a 	universality 	in 	which 	all 	opposing 	forces 	exist
in 	a 	state 	of absolute balance.
The 	book 	went on 	to 	outline 	the 	new 	orientation 	of
the 	Bauhaus
:
The 	Bauhaus 	believes 	the 	machine 	to 	be 	our
modern 	medium 	of design 	and 	seeks 	to 	come 	to
terms 	with 	it.
This 	was 	clearly 	a 	shift 	in 	emphasis 	from 	the 	1 9 1
9
attitudes, 	and 	it 	appears 	that 	'coming 	to 	terms' 	with
the 	machine 	included 	for Gropius 	a 	two-level 	response:
on 	the 	one 	hand 	students 	should 	learn 	about 	the
design 	of types 	for 	mass 	production, 	on 	the 	other 	they
should 	seek 	to 	design 	forms 	which 	crystallized 	the
values 	of 	a 	mechanized 	epoch. 	Gropius's 	answer 	of
how 	this 	might 	be 	done 	involved 	a 	curriculum 	divided
between 	Fonnlehre 	and 	Werklehre. 	The 	apprentice
would 	pass 	through 	a 	Vorkurs 	lasting 	six 	months, 	and
instruction 	in 	a 	particular 	craft 	lasting 	three 	years,
before 	being 	exposed 	to 	the 	master's 	programme 	in
which he would receive 	instruction 	in 	architecture 	and
the 	technology 	of 	mass 	production. 	For 	it 	was 	central
to 	Gropius's 	thesis - as 	it 	had 	been 	before the war - that
the brutality of tnere 	utilitarian 	design 	and 	the kitsch of
consumerism 	might 	both 	be 	avoided 	if 	the 	most
sensitive 	spirits 	could 	upgrade 	the 	basic 	formal
character 	of 	all 	the 	objects 	of 	their 	period 	by 	the
injection 	of 	feeling 	and 	sensitivity 	into 	utilitarian
objects. 	As 	before, 	the highest 	aim 	was 	held 	to 	be 	the
unity 	and 	synthesis 	of all 	the 	arts 	in 	the 	total 	work 	of
art: 	a 	building. 	This 	would 	not 	merely 	have 	other
works 	of 	art 	attached 	to 	it, 	but 	would 	synthesize 	the
basic 	values 	of 	painting, 	sculpture, 	and 	architecture
into 	an 	emotive 	structure 	which would 	symbolize 	the
culture 	of the 	times.
By 	now 	Gropius 	was 	increasingly 	clear 	what 	form
this 	architectural 	synthesis 	might 	take:
Architecture 	in 	the 	last 	few 	generations 	has 	become
weakly 	sentimental, 	aesthetic 	and 	decorative 	. 	.
,
this 	kind 	of architecture 	we 	disown. 	We 	aim 	to
create 	a 	clear, 	organic 	architecture 	whose 	inner
logic 	will 	be 	radiant 	and 	naked, 	unencumbered 	by
lying 	facings 	and 	trickery; 	we 	want 	an 	architecture
adapted 	to 	our 	world 	of machines, 	radios 	and 	fast
cars, 	. 	. 	. 	with 	the increasing 	strength 	of the 	new
materials 	- 	steel, 	concrete, 	glass 	- 	and 	with 	the 	new
audacity 	of engineering, 	the 	ponderousness 	of the
old 	methods 	of building 	is 	giving 	way 	to 	a 	new
lightness 	and 	airiness.
In 	some 	ways, 	of 	course, 	this 	was 	a 	hotchpotch 	of
ideas 	derived 	from 	Futurism, 	the 	Deutscher
Werkbund, 	and De 	StijI, 	What 	is 	interesting 	in 	this
context 	is 	the 	way 	the 	traumas 	of 	the 	war 	and 	the
ensuing 	few 	years 	caused 	Gropius 	to 	infuse 	a 	more
mystical 	approach 	than 	in 	his 	pre-war 	years 	and 	to
reject 	the 	framework 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	axiality 	in 	his
planning. 	Instead, 	he 	adopted 	a 	spatial 	conception
which 	clearly 	derived 	from 	van 	Doesburg, 	Rietveld,
Lissitzky, 	and 	Moholy-Nagy:
, 	. 	. 	the 	symmetrical 	relationships 	of the 	parts 	of the
9,12 	Bauhaus 	lamp
design, 	c. 	1923.

-- 128 of 420 --

Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism. 	;ind 	the 	Bauhaus 	127
building 	and 	their 	orientation 	towards 	a 	central
axis 	is 	being 	replaced 	by 	a 	new 	conception 	of
equilibrium 	which 	transmutes 	this 	dead 	symmetry
of similar 	parts 	into 	an 	asymmetrical 	but
rhythmical 	balance.
Until 	1925. 	Gropius 	had 	little 	chance 	to 	carry 	out
his 	new 	architectural 	ideas, 	apart 	from 	Bauhaus-
sponsored 	house 	prototype 	experiments. 	But 	in 	that
year 	right-wing 	criticism 	of the 	Bauhaus 	reached 	such
a 	pitch 	that 	he 	decided 	to 	move 	the 	school. 	The
accusations 	included 	cultural 	degeneracy', 	Bolshev-
ism', 	and 	a 	general 	foreignness, 	which 	some 	of 	the
good 	citizens 	of 	Weimar 	may 	have 	felt 	to 	be 	irrecon-
cilable 	with 	their 	genteel 	sense 	of a 	national 	cultural
tradition 	ornamented 	by 	Goethe 	and 	Classicism.
However, 	some 	of 	the 	charges 	were 	an 	eerie 	pre-
monition 	of 	savage 	criticisms 	which 	would 	return
with 	new 	force 	in 	the 	thirties, 	when 	they 	were 	backed
by 	the 	rising 	Nazi 	tide:
. 	. 	. 	what 	the 	Bauhaus 	offered 	in 	these 	first 	public
displays 	stands 	so 	far 	beyond 	the 	pale 	of any 	kind 	of
art 	that 	it 	can 	only 	be considered 	in 	pathological
terms 	. 	. 	. 	The 	clearly 	recognizable 	philosophical
attitude 	which 	is 	entirely 	devoted 	to 	negating
everything 	that 	exists 	causes 	the 	Bauhaus 	people 	to
lose 	all 	social 	connection, 	in 	the 	widest 	sense, 	with
the 	rest 	of the 	world. 	. 	. 	. 	The 	work 	of the 	Bauhaus
carries 	signs 	of the 	deepest 	spiritual 	isolation 	and
disintegration. 	The 	public 	therefore 	rightly 	objects
to 	the 	notion 	that 	in 	this 	manner 	young 	artists 	and
craftsmen 	in 	Thuringia 	who 	still 	have 	honest 	and
sober 	aspirations 	are 	simply 	going 	to 	be 	banned
from 	a 	thorough 	education 	if the 	Staatliche
Bauhaus 	continues 	to 	exist 	in 	its 	present 	form. 	A
small 	band 	of interested 	persons, 	who 	for 	the 	most
part 	are 	foreigners, 	should 	not 	be 	allowed 	to
suffocate 	the 	healthy 	mass 	of youthful 	German 	art
students 	like 	a 	layer of oil 	on 	clear 	water. 	Moreover,
this 	undertaking 	was 	only 	ostensibly 	based 	on
artistic 	endeavours. 	It 	was. 	in 	reality, 	intended 	to 	be
politically 	partisan 	from 	the 	beginning, 	for 	it
proclaimed 	itself the 	rallying 	point 	of the 	sky-
storming 	socialists 	who 	believed 	in 	the 	future 	and
who 	wanted 	to 	build 	a 	cathedral 	of socialism. 	Well,
the 	reality 	around 	us 	shows 	what 	this 	cathedral
looks 	like.
The 	Bauhaus 	in 	Weimar 	too, 	contributes 	a 	fitting
note 	with 	its 	'works 	of art' 	that 	are 	put 	together
with 	the 	ingredients 	of a 	junk 	pile 	. 	.
.
The 	mayor 	of 	Dessau, 	by 	contrast, 	showed 	con-
siderable 	sympathy 	for 	the 	ideals 	of the 	school. 	Within
a year 	a 	site 	had 	been 	chosen 	on 	flat 	land 	outside 	the
town 	on 	which 	Gropius 	was 	to 	design 	a 	new 	building
for 	his 	institution. 	This 	was 	an 	opportunity' 	for 	him 	to
create 	an exemplary 	modern 	building 	in 	which 	all 	the
arts 	would 	be 	synthesized, 	and 	the 	philosophy 	of 	the
school 	would 	be 	expressed.
The 	site 	was 	unconstricted 	and 	open; 	the
programme 	was 	large; 	so 	the 	solution 	would 	have 	to
break 	down 	the 	main 	volumes 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	they
could 	be 	experienced 	from 	any 	angle, 	but 	without 	loss
of 	overall 	coherence. 	Gropius 	expressed 	the 	separate
elements 	as 	rectangular 	volumes 	of 	varying 	size,
which 	were 	then 	linked 	by 	intermediary 	oblongs
containing 	corridors 	or 	smaller 	rooms. 	Thus 	the 	art
studios and 	the craft workshops 	were linked by 	a 	bridge
which 	crossed 	over 	a 	road 	traversing 	the 	site. 	The 	next
level 	of 	articulation 	involved 	the 	accentuation 	of
volumes and planes, 	verticals and 	horizontals, 	through
the 	composition 	of 	window 	surfaces: 	a 	set-piece
Bauhaus 	exercise 	in 	the 	heightened 	expression 	of
three-dimensional 	tensions 	in 	space, 	but 	one 	which
still 	had 	to 	take 	practicalities 	into 	account. 	Gropius
varied 	his 	fenestration 	to 	accentuate 	the 	largeness 	or
smallness 	of 	the 	spaces 	within, 	and 	to 	admit 	various
qualities 	of 	light 	according 	to 	function 	(figs. 	9.13,
9.14)-
Evidently. 	Gropius 	was 	given 	a 	large 	amount 	of plate
glass 	at 	the 	time 	he 	commenced 	design, 	but 	the 	'duty'
of 	including 	this 	clearly 	did 	not 	violate 	his 	general
aesthetic 	aims. 	The 	glazing 	far 	transcended 	its 	merely
formal 	or 	functional 	characteristics, 	becoming 	an
emblem 	of the machine 	age. 	At times 	the 	glass 	was 	laid
flush 	with 	the 	fagade, 	reinforcing 	the 	overall 	vol-
umetric 	character 	of 	a 	space 	enclosed 	by 	a 	skin: 	at
times 	it 	was 	recessed, 	accentuating 	the 	hovering white
horizontal 	floor planes: 	and 	all 	of these 	choices of detail
were 	to 	articulate 	the 	larger 	movements 	and 	themes 	of
the 	design. 	What 	is 	so 	striking 	about 	the 	Bauhaus
buildings 	in 	retrospect 	is 	the 	precision 	of 	the 	formal
thinking, 	and 	the 	fusion of Gropius's 	earlier 	ideas 	and
vocabulary. 	The 	experiences 	of the 	pre-war Faguswerk
and 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	years; 	the 	spiritual 	idealism
and 	Utopianism 	of the 	post-war period ; 	the 	search 	for a
language 	blending 	abstraction 	and 	mechanization 	-
all 	are 	here, 	but 	synthesized 	into 	a statement 	which
was 	paralleled 	in 	its 	assurance 	by 	perhaps 	only 	the
Schroeder 	House 	or 	Maison 	Cook 	at 	this 	stage 	in 	the
unfolding 	history 	of the 	modern 	movement.
Indeed, 	the 	Bauhaus 	solution 	was 	more 	than 	a
personal 	statement 	of 	assurance: 	it 	marked 	a 	major
step 	in 	the 	maturing 	system 	of 	forms 	many 	other
architects 	were 	beginning 	to 	adopt. 	And just 	as in, 	say,
the 	early 	phases 	of Gothic 	or 	Renaissance 	architecture
there 	was 	a 	gradual 	coalescence 	of sources 	into 	a 	new,
coherent 	system 	of expression, 	so, 	at 	the 	Bauhaus, 	the
International 	Style 	came 	of age. 	There 	were 	lessons

-- 129 of 420 --

128 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars

-- 130 of 420 --

Walter 	Gropius, 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	• 	129
9,15 	Marcel 	Breuer.
tubular steel 	armcliair.
c. 	1926. 	New 	York.
Museum 	of Modern 	Art,
gift of Herbert 	Bayer.
here 	for 	all 	who 	were 	trying 	to 	forge 	their 	own
vocabulary 	within 	the 	shared 	values 	of the 	period, 	and
soon 	after 	its 	completion, 	the 	building 	was 	published
worldwide. 	Among 	the 	photos 	were 	aerial 	ones 	which
gave 	it 	the 	appearance 	of 	a 	giant 	Elementarist
sculpture.
Gropius 	designed 	residences 	for 	the 	masters 	and 	for
himself close 	to 	the 	school, 	so 	that 	by the 	end 	of 	1 926 	a
new 	colony 	had 	grown 	up 	around 	Dessau 	which
seems, 	initially, 	to 	have 	been 	more 	tolerated 	than 	it
had 	been 	in 	Weimar. 	This 	was 	the 	Golden 	Age 	of 	the
Bauhaus. 	with 	Wassily 	Kandinsky 	and 	Paul 	Klee
teaching 	in 	the 	Fonnlehre. 	Laszlo 	Moholy-Nagy 	and
Marcel 	Breuer 	instructing 	in 	design. 	Oskar 	Schlemmer
producing 	his 	ballets, 	and 	the 	first 	apprentices
beginning to 	make their mark 	in 	the outside 	world. 	The
German 	public 	took 	a 	great 	interest 	in 	the 	school,
which 	was 	constantly 	under 	fire 	for 	its 	supposed
'decadent' 	and 	'subversive' 	tendencies. 	This 	interest
stemmed, 	in 	part, 	from 	the 	flood 	of 	articles 	and 	books
published 	by 	the 	Bauhaus 	staff, 	particularly 	the
Bauhaitsbiichtr. 	which 	presented 	the 	ideas 	of 	Klee.
Kandinsky. 	Moholy-Nagy, 	Gropius. 	and 	others 	in 	their
respective 	fields.
It 	is 	instructive 	to 	examine 	some 	of 	the 	artistic 	and
intellectual 	products 	of the 	later 	phase 	of the 	Bauhaus
as 	a 	means 	of gauging 	its 	change 	of direction 	since 	the
early 	Weimar 	years. 	In 	the 	factory 	workshops, 	for
example. 	Marcel 	Breuer 	and 	Mart 	Stam 	evolved
tubular 	steel 	chair 	designs 	(fig. 	9.15) 	as 	models 	for
standardized 	mass 	production; 	these 	had 	cantilevered
overhangs 	and 	an 	airy 	and 	lightweight 	appearance 	in
tune 	with 	Gropius's 	general 	ideal 	of 	finding 	forms
which 	'symbolized 	the 	modern 	world'. 	The 	contrast

-- 131 of 420 --

130 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
M^
was considerable with 	Breuer's 	1921 	designs 	for chairs
made 	of 	wood, 	with 	their 	exaggerated 	handicraft
character and their far dumpier form. 	Similar contrasts
can 	be 	made 	over 	the 	six 	years 	between 	1920 	and
1926 	with 	light 	fixtures, 	ashtrays, 	tapestries, 	and
other 	objects; 	indeed, 	it 	is 	also 	instructive 	to 	compare
the 	Bmihutte 	of 	the 	Sommerfeld 	House 	with 	'the
machine 	for 	teaching' 	of 	the 	Bauhaus 	buildings, 	for
this 	reveals 	a similar 	shift 	in 	emphasis 	and 	meaning.
Now 	that 	the 	Bauhaus 	was 	at 	last 	settled 	in 	its 	new
home, 	Gropius turned 	his 	attention 	increasingly 	to 	the
problems 	of 	standardization 	in 	architecture. 	This 	was
manifest 	in 	housing 	studies 	he 	instituted 	in 	the 	school,
which 	culminated 	in 	the 	rationalization 	of 	collective
apartment 	blocks, 	open 	to space, 	light, 	air. 	and 	view. 	In
1928 	he 	was 	employed 	by 	Siemens 	to 	build 	company
workers' 	housing 	outside 	Berlin 	(fig. 	9.17). 	After
1925. 	with 	the 	stabilization 	of 	the 	mark, 	cities 	like
Frankfurt 	and 	Stuttgart 	had 	already 	employed 	such
modern 	architects 	as 	Bruno 	Taut 	(who 	had 	sobered
since 	his 	Expressionist 	days) 	and 	Ernst 	May 	to 	design
large-scale, 	low-cost 	housing, 	and 	a 	variety 	of
standard 	models 	had 	been 	evolved. 	In 	principle, 	the
layouts 	frequently 	drew on 	English 	Garden 	City 	ideals,
but 	in 	form 	the 	houses 	were 	simple 	and 	cubic. 	This 	led
critics 	to 	perceive 	in 	them 	an 	anti-German 	sense, 	and
Gropius too was criticized for the supposed 	'unnatural',
'anti-human', 	and 	'mechanistic' 	character 	of 	his
architecture. 	Thus 	as 	the 	new 	architecture 	extended
beyond 	the 	scope 	of 	paper 	projects 	and 	private 	and
specialized 	commissions, 	it 	was 	increasingly 	likely 	to
be 	misunderstood, 	particularly 	when 	the 	'factory
aesthetic' 	invaded 	the 	precinct 	of the 	home. 	Especially
in 	the 	hands 	of the 	hardest-headed 	'Neue 	Sachlichkeit'
('new 	objectivity') 	planners 	in 	Berlin, 	who 	eschewed
formalism' 	and 	the 	pursuit 	of 	'higher 	spiritual
meanings', 	there 	was 	the 	constant 	danger 	that 	the
intended 	aesthetic 	effects 	of 	sobriety 	and 	controlled
repetition 	might 	be 	misread 	as 	blandness 	and 	lifeless-
ness. 	The 	collision 	between 	architects' 	norms 	and 	the
public's 	was 	often 	drastic.
Moreover, 	debates 	over the 	form 	of housing 	revealed
a 	variety 	of 	positions 	within 	German 	modern 	archi-
tecture, 	from 	the 	hard-headed 	attitudes 	of some 	of the
adherents 	of the 	'G' 	group 	in Berlin, 	who 	continued 	to
proclaim 	functionalist 	and 	rationalist 	ideals, 	to 	the
more 	'spiritual' 	aspirations 	of 	men 	like 	Gropius 	and
Mendelsohn, 	for whom 	formal 	poetics were essential 	to
architecture. 	Even 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe (who 	was 	in
reality 	closer 	to 	the 	latter camp 	than 	the 	former) 	could
9.16 	Heft) 	Weissen-
hofsiedlung, 	Stuttgart.
1927. 	general 	view.
9.17 	(above) 	Walter
Gropius. 	Siemensstadt
housing. 	Berlin, 	1928.

-- 132 of 420 --

be 	found 	parroling 	the 	attitudes 	of strict 	objectivity:
We 	reject 	all 	aesthetic 	speculation, 	all 	doctrine, 	all
formalism. 	We 	refuse 	to 	recognize 	problems 	of
form : 	we 	recognize 	only 	problems 	of building. 	Form
is 	not 	the 	aim 	of our 	work; 	only 	the 	result. 	Form 	by
itself does 	not 	exist. 	Form 	as 	an 	aim 	is 	formalism,
and 	that 	we 	reject.
In 	1425. 	Mies 	had 	been 	asked 	by 	the 	Deutscher
Werkbund 	to 	oversee 	the 	design 	of 	the 	first 	major
exhibition 	of the 	organization 	since 	19 14. 	This 	was 	to
be 	devoted 	to 	housing 	models, 	which 	were 	to 	be 	co-
ordinated 	in 	a 	single 	Siedliiiicf 	design 	(fig. 	9.16) 	on 	a
brow 	overlooking 	Stuttgart 	(see 	Chapter 	15 1. 	The
majority of the contributors were German, 	indeed 	were
from 	Berlin 	(e.g.. 	Mies 	himself. 	Gropius. 	Hilbersheimer.
Taut. 	Scharoun). 	but 	].P. 	Oud 	and 	Mart 	Stam 	were
invited 	froin 	Holland. 	V. 	Bourgeois 	from 	Belgium, 	and
Le 	Corbusier 	from 	France. 	Mies's 	overall 	site 	plan 	was
like 	an 	abstract 	sculpture 	of 	different 	sized 	blocks 	laid
out 	to echo 	the 	form 	of the 	terrain, 	with 	his 	own 	design
for 	a 	block 	of 	twenty-four 	apartments 	at 	the 	crown.
This 	was 	a 	simple 	geometrical 	volume 	with 	fixed
bathroom 	cores 	and 	ingenious 	interior 	planning. 	Le
Walter 	Gropius. 	German 	Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	131
Corbusier 	ended 	up 	designing 	two 	schemes 	- 	a 	much
accentuated 	'Citrohan' 	dwelling, 	and 	a 	larger 	version
on 	dramatically 	advertised 	pilotis. 	Meanwhile.
Scharoun's 	design 	at 	the 	other 	end 	of the 	site, 	with 	its
curved 	balcony 	forms 	and 	completely 	dififerent 	spatial
character, 	was 	a 	reminder 	of the 	variety 	of 	individual
inflections 	within 	the 	modern 	movement. 	Even 	so. 	the
overwhelming 	impression 	was 	of a 	general 	conformity
of expression, 	in 	which 	simple 	cubic 	volumes, 	stripped
planar 	shapes, 	open 	plans, 	and 	machine-age 	details
were 	the 	hallmarks. 	The 	extreme 	right 	in 	Germany
were 	quick 	to 	denounce 	the 	whole 	thing 	as 	further
evidence of an 	international communist 	plot, 	and 	there
were 	even 	caricatures 	of the 	Siedhinij 	in 	which 	camels
and 	Arabs 	were 	shown 	wandering 	around 	a 	sup-
posedly 	degenerate 	'kasbah'. 	But 	to 	the 	proponents
and 	supporters 	of 	International 	Modern 	architecture,
the 	exhibition 	transcended 	its 	fascinating 	lessons 	in
housing 	by 	exhibiting 	directly 	the 	character 	of 	what
was 	later 	(by 	Alfred 	Barr 	in 	1932) 	to 	be 	called 	'the
International 	Style'. 	In 	retrospect, 	1927 	appears 	to
have 	been 	a 	crucial 	year 	of 	self-realization 	on 	an
international 	front 	for 	the 	new 	architecture.
In 	1928. 	Gropius 	left 	the 	Bauhaus 	and handed 	over
the 	reins to 	Hannes 	Meyer. 	Meyer's 	philosophy 	differed
considerably 	from 	his 	predecessor's: 	he 	despised 	the
formalist camp 	for their bogus 	'humanism' 	and 	defined
architecture 	laconically 	as 	the 	result 	of 	the 	equation
'function 	x 	economies'. 	It 	might 	be 	thought 	that 	this
was 	a 	proclamation 	of 	the 	purest 	capitalist 	in-
strumentalism; 	in 	fact, 	it 	betokened 	a 	Socialist
Puritanism 	which 	(despite 	Meyer's 	protests 	to 	the
contrary) 	was 	expressed 	in 	an 	architectural 	style 	made
eloquent 	by 	its 	lack 	of 	pretensions 	and 	its 	direct
expression 	of 	functional 	volumes 	and 	the 	supposed
'ordinariness' 	of 	machine-produced 	components.
Meyer 	was 	far 	less 	squeamish 	about 	the 	radicalization
of the 	Bauhaus 	than 	Gropius 	had 	been; 	he 	encouraged
the 	design 	of 	cheap 	plywood 	furniture, 	and 	even
pointedly 	changed 	the 	name 	of 	the 	'architecture'
department 	to 	building'. 	This 	lent 	extra 	support 	to 	the
notion 	that 	the 	Bauhaus 	was 	indeed 	some 	sort 	of
Trojan 	horse 	of Bolshevism, 	and 	criticisms 	against 	the
school 	became 	vitriolic 	in 	the 	late 	twenties 	and 	early
thirties, 	especially 	when 	the 	Nazi 	party 	understood
how 	much 	political 	capital 	was 	to 	be 	made 	from
supporting 	aesthetic 	dogmas 	of 	a 	regionalist 	and
nationalist 	bent. 	Finally, 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	oversaw
the 	school 	in 	its 	last 	years 	up 	to 	its 	closure 	in 	1933.
But 	the 	Bauhaus 	idea 	did 	not 	die. 	When 	Gropius.
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	Moholy-Nagy, 	Breuer, 	and 	Albers
emigrated 	to 	the 	I 	nited States 	in 	the 	late 	thirties, 	they
took 	their 	ideas 	with 	them. 	However, 	this 	is 	already 	to
speak 	of a 	later 	stage 	of dissemination 	in 	the 	history 	of
the 	modern 	movement.

-- 133 of 420 --

lo. 	Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia
We 	are 	convinced 	that 	the 	new 	forms 	of Soviet 	architecture 	will 	be 	found 	not
by 	way 	of the 	imitation 	of the 	architectural 	forms 	of the 	past 	but 	on 	a 	basis 	of
critical 	thinking 	... 	by 	way 	of a 	profound 	understanding 	of living 	processes
and 	their 	translation 	into 	architectural 	form.
A. 	and 	V. 	Vesnin. 	1 	926
Wiiile 	the 	forms 	of modern 	architecture 	created 	during
the 	1920s 	cannot 	be 	understood 	apart 	from 	the 	social
ideals 	which 	gave 	rise 	to 	them, 	simplistic 	equations
between 	ideology 	and 	formal 	usage should 	be 	regarded
with 	suspicion. 	The 	German 	examples 	cited 	in 	the 	last
chapter serve 	to show, 	among other things 	a 	spectrum
of 	political 	attitudes 	within 	the 	modern 	movement
from 	the 	spiritualized 	'apolitical 	socialism' 	of 	Gropius
to 	the 	far 	more 	hard-headed, 	left-wing 	stance 	of
Hannes 	Meyer. 	Likewise, 	whatever 	Utopian 	yearnings
they 	may 	have 	shared, 	the 	versions 	of 	an 	ideal 	life
entertained 	by 	such 	artists 	as 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Gerrit
Rietveld. 	and 	Erich 	Mendelsohn 	varied 	considerably.
One 	should 	be 	cautious 	then 	of imputing 	to 	the 	whole
of modern 	architecture 	some 	monolithic 	ideology; 	and
even once 	it 	has 	become 	clear 	what 	a 	rich 	variety 	of
values 	was 	operative, 	there 	is 	no 	direct 	step 	from 	a 	set
of ideas 	to 	a 	set 	of forms.
These 	cautionary 	remarks 	seem 	pertinent 	to 	the
Soviet 	architecture 	of the 	twenties, 	since 	this 	emerged
in 	a 	post-Revolutionary 	atmosphere 	which 	en-
couraged 	dogmatic 	assertions 	about 	the 	supposed
'truth' 	of modern 	architecture 	to 	the 	new 	social 	order.
In 	fact 	the 	matter 	was 	by 	no 	means 	straightforward.
Creative 	individuals 	were 	faced 	with 	the 	awesome 	task
of formulating 	an 	architecture 	which 	was 	supposed 	to
'express' 	not 	so 	much 	the 	values 	of an 	existent 	order,
but one 	it 	was 	felt ought 	to emerge 	from 	the 	progressive
attitudes 	of 	the 	revolution. 	Here 	there 	were 	many
problems. 	To 	begin 	with, 	it 	was 	clear 	that 	earlier
national 	traditions 	could 	play 	little 	part 	as 	these 	were
tainted' 	with 	the 	values 	of 	the 	old 	regime 	or 	with 	a
narrow 	nationalism 	inappropriate 	to 	the 	clarion 	call 	of
a 	world 	revolution. 	Then 	it 	was 	uncertain 	what
functions 	should 	be 	catered 	for 	to 	help 	in 	the 	general
process 	of 	emancipation, 	and 	what 	images 	should 	be
employed 	in 	the 	definition 	of a 	supposedly 	'proletariat'
culture. 	Perhaps 	even 	more 	basic: 	it 	was 	not 	entirely
agreed 	whether 	architecture 	should 	follow 	or 	lead 	in
the 	definition 	of a 	new 	order. 	Reviewing 	the 	various
positions 	of 	the 	1920s, 	one 	finds 	a 	multiplicity 	of
reactions 	to 	these 	problems, 	all 	the 	way 	from 	those
who 	considered 	architecture 	a 	minor 	element 	in 	social
reform 	to 	those 	who 	felt, 	on 	the 	contrary, 	that 	artistic
endeavours 	should 	stand 	at 	the 	vanguard 	of change.
The 	turbulent 	artistic 	debates 	of 	the 	1920s 	can
scarcely 	be 	understood 	without 	some 	sense 	of 	the
nineteenth-century 	background 	in 	Russia. 	Here 	the
general 	rule 	was 	an 	eclecticism 	emulating 	European
trends 	in 	support 	of 	the 	somewhat 	effete 	tastes 	of 	the
aristocracy. 	Despite 	the 	attempts 	of 	Count 	Anatoly
Nikolaevich 	Demidov 	at 	launching 	a 	Slavic 	Revival,
the 	aping of monumental. 	Western 	European 	Classical
prototypes 	continued 	well 	beyond 	the 	turn 	of 	the
century: 	indeed, 	we 	shall 	see 	that 	this 	tradition 	was
later 	co-opted 	to 	state 	purposes 	under 	the 	dictatorship
of Stalin. 	The 	short 	burst 	of activity 	of the 	avant-garde
in 	the 	1920s 	was 	thus 	an 	interlude 	of a 	sort. 	However,
it 	was 	anticipated, 	in part, 	by 	the 	'Populist' 	movement
of the 	late 	nineteenth 	century, 	with 	its 	close 	attention
to 	the 	realities 	of 	the 	masses; 	by 	the 	activities 	of 	the
'Ropetskaia' 	group 	(who 	took 	folklore 	as 	their 	guide):
and. 	most 	important, 	by 	the 	Prolecult' 	movement
founded 	in 	lyof), 	which 	achieved 	an 	uneasy 	alliance

-- 134 of 420 --

10. 1 	El 	Lissitzky.
'Proun' 	(city), 	1920.
%
between 	workers' 	unions 	and 	the 	aspirations 	of 	the
avant-garde.
Thus 	an 	avant-garde 	culture 	of 	sorts 	had 	existed
within 	the 	old 	order, 	drawing 	heavily 	on 	influences
from 	Western 	Europe, 	particularly 	in 	painting 	and
sculpture. 	However, 	these 	are 	art 	forms 	which 	may 	be
created 	in 	private: 	in 	architecture 	there 	was 	little 	vital
deviation 	from 	the 	reactionary 	modes 	of 	the
nineteenth-century 	revivalists. 	It 	was 	not 	difficult 	for
the 	later 	generation 	to 	see 	this 	tired 	aestheticism 	as a
direct 	portrait 	of 	what 	they 	thought 	of 	as 	a 	defunct
social 	system. 	Whatever 	the 	requirements 	of 	pat-
ronage, 	no 	major 	talent 	seems 	have 	emerged, 	in 	any
case, 	during 	the 	few 	decades 	preceding 	the 	Revolution.
But 	the 	overthrow 	of the 	old 	order 	did 	not 	guarantee 	a
vital 	wave 	in 	the 	arts, 	though 	it 	may 	have 	encouraged
it. 	The 	period 	after 	1 9 1 	7 	was 	one 	of 	frenzied 	visual
experimentation 	in 	which 	ideas 	tended 	to 	exist 	more
on 	paper 	than 	anywhere 	else. 	This 	was 	natural 	given
the 	confused 	economic 	circumstances 	of 	the 	years 	up
until 	about 	1924. 	in 	which 	construction 	was 	all 	but
impossible. 	It 	was 	an atmosphere 	which, 	as 	in 	the same
period 	in 	Germany, 	encouraged 	a 	heady 	and 	impract-
ical 	Utopianism,
The 	need 	to 	destroy 	all 	links 	with 	the 	reactionary
past 	brought 	problems 	for 	the 	architect 	seeking 	a
visual 	language 	of 	expression 	appropriate 	to 	new
ideals. 	He 	could 	not 	create 	c.v 	niliilo 	even 	if he 	did 	have
'a 	profound 	understanding 	of 	living 	processes' 	(to
Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	133
paraphrase 	the 	Vesnin 	brothers). 	A 	vocabulary 	which
fitted 	the 	situation 	had 	to 	be 	created. 	But 	where 	could
the 	creator 	now 	turn 	for 	his 	forms.' 	Could 	contempor-
ary 	realities 	'generate' 	a 	vocabulary 	on 	their 	own, 	or
should 	the 	individual 	admit 	that 	he 	had 	to 	lay 	a
personal 	interpretation 	on 	events.' 	Should 	the 	indi-
vidual 	building 	be 	treated 	as 	a 	neutral 	solution 	to 	a
carefully 	analysed 	programme 	with 	the 	stress 	on
practicality.- 	Or 	should 	the 	artist 	seek 	metaphors 	and
images 	which 	distilled 	his 	excitement 	at 	the 	post-
revolutionary 	possibilities.' 	Perhaps 	he 	should 	attempt
to 	create 	provocative emblems which 	gave 	a 	hint of the
future 	state; 	or 	perhaps 	he 	should 	concentrate 	on 	the
design 	of 	non-unique 	prototypes 	for 	later 	mass
production 	in 	the 	service of the 	greater 	number. 	Such
questions 	and 	dilemmas 	as 	these 	underlay 	the 	debates
and 	formal explorations of the late 	1910s 	and 	the early
I 	g20s. 	Such 	'bibles' 	as the writings of Marx and 	Engels
supplied 	little 	guidance 	as 	these 	could 	be 	pulled 	in 	to
support 	a 	wide 	divergence 	of 	approaches: 	neither
writer 	had 	had 	more 	than 	a 	confused 	idea 	of the 	way
'art' 	had 	functioned 	in 	the 	cultures 	of the 	past.
The 	first 	crucial 	discussions 	which would 	have 	a
direct 	impact 	on 	architecture 	and 	town 	planning 	were
held 	in 	February 	19 	18 	when 	the 	Pan-Russian
executive 	committee 	abolished 	private 	property 	and
proclaimed 	the 	socialization 	of 	the 	soil. 	Artists 	found
an 	immediate outlet 	in 	the design 	of propaganda 	trains
and 	posters, 	and 	the 	daubing 	of 	walls 	with 	strident
visual 	statements. 	Art 	schools 	newly 	set 	up 	in 	Moscow
and 	the 	provinces 	overthrew 	the 	vestiges 	of 	Beaux-
Arts 	education, 	and 	introduced 	ideas 	of 	basic 	design
(derived 	from 	abstract 	art), 	and 	theories 	based 	on 	a
belief 	in 	a 	universal 	aesthetic 	language 	(already
present 	in 	Malevich's 	'Suprematism'). 	Constructivist
artists 	like Naum Gabo and 	Antoine 	Pevsner attempted
to create a scientific-technological sculpture from 	steel,
glass, 	and 	plastic, 	in 	which 	Cubist 	and 	Futurist
conceptions 	of 	sculpture 	were 	extended 	to 	basic
rhythms 	of 	space 	and 	form 	supposed 	to 	mimic 	the
structures 	of physics. 	Furious 	debates 	ensued 	concern-
ing 	the 	legacy 	of 	bourgeois 	'spiritual' 	aesthetics:
should 	the 	artist 	reintegrate 	with 	social 	functions 	by
concentrating 	on 	the 	design 	of utilitarian 	objects.' 	The
idealistic 	and 	the 	pragmatic 	were 	bridged 	by 	Lissitzky.
whose 	abstract 	'Prouns' 	were 	conceived 	as 	ideograms
with 	a 	Utopian 	content, 	but 	also 	as 	a 	basic 	form
language 	applicable 	to 	sculpture, 	furniture, 	typo-
graphy, 	or 	buildings 	(fig. 	10. 1). 	N. 	A. 	Ladovsky's
psycho-technical 	laboratory 	at 	the 	Vkhutemas 	school
encouraged 	free 	experimentation 	with 	basic 	geo-
metrical 	shapes 	to discover 	the 	rules 	of a 	new 	language
of 	composition 	which 	might, 	when 	economic 	recon-
struction 	allowed 	it. 	eventually 	pervade 	architectural
thinking 	and 	even 	the 	form 	of the 	city.

-- 135 of 420 --

134 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
A 	partial 	solution 	to 	the 	problem 	of 	originating 	a
contemporary 	architectural 	vocabulary 	without 	re-
ference 	to 	the 	institutions 	or 	images 	of 	Tsarist 	Russia
lay in 	the 	groundwork 	already done 	in 	Western 	Europe
towards 	the definition of modern 	architecture. 	Futurist
ideas 	were 	co-opted, 	shaved 	of 	their 	proto-Fascist
character, 	and mated 	with 	Marxist 	ideals 	in 	the 	quest
for 	suitable 	metaphors 	to 	express 	the 	supposed 	inner
dynamism 	of 	the 	revolutionary 	process. 	Machine
worship 	became 	a 	tenet 	of 	faith, 	as 	if 	mechanization
could 	be 	thought 	of 	as 	identical 	with 	the 	social 	and
historical 	path 	of 	progress. 	This 	was 	not. 	perhaps, 	a
curious choice of emphasis given 	the 	'backwardness' 	of
the 	Soviet 	Union 	in 	industrial 	terms, 	but 	for 	this 	same
reason 	it 	meant 	that 	an 	imagery 	was elaborated 	which
was 	quite 	foreign 	to 	the 	large 	majority 	who 	were
peasants. 	Besides, 	the 	activities 	of 	the 	avant-garde
were 	largely 	restricted 	to 	the 	cities, 	and 	had 	little 	to
give 	to 	evolving 	vernacular 	traditions.
Thus the avant-garde - a curious minority class of its
own 	- 	took 	on 	the 	task 	of 	formulating 	a 	visual
language 	supposed 	to 	be 	instinct 	with 	the 	aspirations
of 	Soviet 	society 	as 	a 	whole. 	Intrinsic 	to 	this 	position
was 	the 	belief 	that 	the 	artist 	must 	have 	some 	special
intuition 	of 	the 	deeper 	processes 	of 	society, 	which
would 	transcend 	mere 	populist 	expression. 	In 	the
Soviet 	Union 	an 	iconography 	was 	evolved 	which
blended 	the 	floating 	planes 	of 	abstract 	art 	with 	direct
quotations 	from 	the 	factory 	floor 	and 	the 	production
line 	(fig. 	lo. 	3). 	A 	rhetorical 	and 	highly 	demonstrative
machine 	fetishism 	seems 	often 	to 	have 	been 	the 	result.
in 	which 	the 	factory 	aesthetic, 	ships' 	hooters, 	and
elaborate 	splays 	of 	wires 	might 	be 	assembled 	into
dramatic 	architectural 	collages 	posing 	as 	theatrical
stage 	sets 	(e.g.. 	Meyerhold's 	stage 	designs 	of 	around
1920) 	or 	as 	entire 	buildings. 	For 	the 	time 	being, 	the
question 	of 	the 	possible 	irrelevance 	of 	all 	this 	fantasy
world 	to a 	country whose technology 	lagged far behind
Western 	Europe's, 	and 	whose 	intelligentsia, 	however
well 	intentioned, 	was 	divorced 	from 	the 	values 	of 	the
majority, 	was 	conveniently 	left 	aside.
Some 	sense 	of the 	new 	orientation 	in 	Russia 	is 	to 	be
gleaned 	from 	Tatlin's 	paper 	project 	for 	a 	Monument 	to
the 	Third 	International 	of 	1920 	(fig. 	10.2). 	Inside 	two
interlacing 	spirals 	of open 	structural 	lattice-work 	were
suspended 	three 	volumes 	- 	a 	cube, 	a 	pyramid, 	and 	a
cylinder 	- 	containing 	the 	various 	congress 	halls 	of the
state. 	Each 	of these 	chambers 	was 	designed 	to 	revolve
at 	a 	different 	speed 	- 	once 	a year, 	once 	a 	month, 	and
once 	a 	day 	- 	in 	accordance 	with 	the 	supposed cosmic
importance 	of 	the 	enclosed 	institutions, 	Tatlin 	inten-
ded 	that 	the 	monument 	should 	be over 	500 	metres 	tall
(even 	taller 	than 	the 	Eiffel 	Tower) 	and 	painted 	red, 	the
colour 	symbolizing 	the 	Revolution. 	The 	inspiration 	for
this 	romantic 	display 	of 	engineering 	seems 	to 	have

-- 136 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	135
10.2 	(/(/() 	Vladimir
Tallin. 	Monument 	to 	the
Third 	International,
project. 	1920.
10.3 	{below rkihl) 	El
Lissitzky. 	design 	for
Lenin's Tribune, 	early
1920s.
c
come 	from such 	diverse 	sources 	as 	oil 	derriciis. 	fair-
ground 	constructions, 	and 	Futurist 	images 	like
Boccioni's spiralling 	Bottle 	Utifolditic] 	in 	Spiue. 	However,
the 	transparent 	lattices 	and 	abstract 	sculptural 	forms
were 	more 	than 	a 	display 	of 	private 	virtuosity: 	the
spirals were 	intended as suitable expressions of the new
order. 	Nikolai 	Punin 	wrote 	of the inherently 	vital 	and
dynamic 	characteristics 	of the 	spiral:
The 	spiral 	is 	a 	line 	of liberation 	for 	humanity: 	with
one 	extremity 	resting 	on 	the 	ground, 	it 	flees 	the
earth 	with 	the 	other: 	and 	thereby 	becomes 	a
symbol 	of disinterestedness, 	and 	of the 	converse 	of
earthly 	pettiness.
In 	this 	case, 	though, 	the 	tilt 	of the 	main 	volumes 	was
contained 	within 	a 	double 	helix 	drawing 	gradually 	to 	a
resolution 	at 	the 	top. 	It 	may 	be 	that 	this 	was 	intended
to 	have 	the 	extra 	significance 	of 	an 	image 	of 	the
dialectical 	historical 	process, 	between 	thesis 	and
antithesis, 	with 	the eventual 	harmony 	of a synthesis. 	If
so, Tatlin's 	tower must 	be 	read 	as 	an emblem 	of Marxist
ideology, 	in 	which 	the 	actual 	movements 	of the 	parts.
^PO^'
and 	the 	sculptural 	dynamism 	of 	the 	armature,
symbolized 	the 	very 	idea 	of 	a 	revolutionary 	society
aspiring 	to 	the 	'highest 	state' 	of 	an 	egalitarian,
proletarian 	Utopia.
Much 	like 	Boullee's 	grandiose 	visions 	of 	the 	late
eighteenth 	century, 	Tatlin's 	tower 	was 	scarcely
buildablc 	at 	the 	time 	it 	was 	conceived; 	the 	model 	itself
was 	assembled 	from 	old 	cigar-box 	wood 	and 	tin 	cans.
But 	the 	power 	of the 	idea 	was 	still 	considerable. 	Had 	it
been 	built, 	it 	would 	have 	dwarfed 	all 	nearby 	buildings,
effectively 	challenging 	and 	overbearing 	the 	monu-
mental 	churches 	and 	palaces 	of 	the 	ancien 	regime.
Thus, 	in 	iconographic 	terms, 	it 	might 	be 	right 	to 	speak
of 	Tatlin's 	design 	as 	another 	attempt 	at 	realizing 	a
'Cathedral 	of 	Socialism', 	dedicated 	in 	this 	case 	to
nothing 	less than 	a 	new 	religion. 	The 	historian 	eager to
find 	parallels 	in 	other 	media 	may 	recognize 	similarities
of 	theme 	in 	Serge 	Eisenstein's 	slightly 	later 	film
Battleship 	Potemkin. 	in 	which 	the 	notion 	of 	salvation
through 	revolution 	was 	also 	played out 	with 	the 	help
of 	mechanistic 	images 	(e.g.. 	the 	battleship), 	and
through 	a 	scheme 	of 	alternating 	contrasts 	using
montage. 	What 	is so striking about each 	of these works
of 	art 	is 	the 	way 	in 	which 	revolutionary 	values 	were
sublimated 	in 	a 	manner 	far 	transcending 	banal 	realist
portrayal.
Although 	much 	of 	the 	small 	amount 	of 	building
done 	in 	the 	early 	lyios 	in 	Russia 	was 	conservative 	in
nature, 	there 	were 	gradual 	incursions 	of 	the 	avant-
garde, 	especially 	in 	the 	world 	of 	architectural 	com-
petitions. 	The 	competition 	for 	the 	Palace 	of 	Labour 	of
1923-24 	drew 	forth 	a 	rich 	variety 	of 	solutions. 	The
programme 	envisaged 	a 	colossal 	8.000-seat 	audi-
torium, 	another 	one 	for 	2.500. 	a 	meteorological
observatory, 	an 	astro-physical 	laboratory, 	a 	social
science 	museum, 	a 	museum 	of 	labour, 	a 	library, 	a
restaurant 	for 	6,000 	diners, 	and 	a 	myriad 	of 	offices.
The 	institution 	was 	a 	novel 	one 	and 	little 	help 	could 	be
found 	in 	consulting 	traditional 	types. 	The 	solution
produced 	by 	the 	Vesnin 	brothers 	(fig. 	10.4) 	made
much 	of 	the 	separate 	articulation 	of 	the 	different
functions 	in 	simple 	contrasting 	forms 	linked 	by
dramatic 	circulation 	bridges. 	The 	theatres 	and 	main
social 	spaces 	were 	contained 	in 	an 	oval 	zone, 	the
administrative 	areas 	in 	a 	rectangular 	tower. 	Re-
inforced-concrete 	construction 	was 	not 	simply 	em-
ployed but 	sculpturally 	heightened through 	the lattice-
work 	expression 	of 	the 	vertical 	and 	horizontal
members 	of 	the frame. 	A 	crude 	attempt 	was 	made 	to
express the 	dynamic 	interpenetration 	of 	volumes, 	as
well 	as 	a 	degree 	of 	axial 	formality 	appropriate 	to 	the
institutional 	character. 	The 	main 	forms 	were 	then
liberally dressed with 	the 	paraphernalia of radio masts,
taut 	wires, 	and ships' 	hooters : 	once 	again 	a 	communal
building 	was 	expressed, 	essentially, 	as 	a 	social 	engine.

-- 137 of 420 --

/
1 36 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
i
But 	like 	so 	many 	other 	projects 	of the 	period, 	this 	one
was 	not 	built.
The 	Vesnin 	brothers 	also 	designed 	a 	scheme 	for 	the
Pravda 	building 	in 	1924 	(fig. 	10.7). 	This 	exhibited 	a
new 	degree of formal control 	- a more successful 	fusion
of 	the 	devices 	of 	abstract 	art 	with 	the 	articulation 	of
function 	and 	mechanistic 	moving 	parts. 	The 	building
was 	envisaged 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	skyscraper 	kiosk 	and
succeeded 	in 	embodying 	the 	architects' 	excitement 	at
the 	notion 	of a 	modern 	communications 	centre. 	The
attached 	searchlight, 	the 	revolving 	billboards 	and 	the
moving 	lifts 	visible 	within 	glass 	cages 	all 	recalled 	the
Futurist 	notion 	of a 	building 	as 	a 	sort of machine, 	if not
precisely 	Sant' 	Elian 	images 	of 	a 	new 	architecture
made 	of 	light 	materials, 	with 	lifts 	snaking 	up 	and
down. 	But 	the 	rhetorical 	imagery 	was 	here 	submitted
to 	a 	rigorous 	geometrical 	and 	functional 	control, 	with
the 	floor 	slabs 	expressed 	as 	thin 	planes, 	and 	the 	roof
slab 	expressed 	as 	a 	thicker 	'cornice'. 	It 	is 	ironical 	that
such 	a 	celebration 	of modern 	technology 	should 	have
been 	conceived 	in 	a 	country 	where, 	well 	into 	the
i92()s, 	even 	reinforced-concrete 	buildings 	had 	to 	be
created 	by 	the 	crudest 	mass 	labour 	and 	handicraft
methods. The irony 	is doubled when 	one considers 	that

-- 138 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	137
10.4 	{above far 	left] 	The
Vesnin 	brothers. 	Palace
of Labour, 	competition
project. 	1923.
10. S 	{above 	left)
Konstantin 	Melnikov.
USSR 	pavilion.
Exposition 	des 	Arts
Decoratifs. 	Paris, 	192 s-
10.6 	ijar left) 	El
Lissitzky. 	'Cloud-hanger'
project. 	1926.
10.7 	(WO 	The
Vesnin 	brothers, 	Pravda
building, 	project. 	1924.
10.8 	[above) 	Konstantin
Melnikov. 	Rusakov
Workers' 	Club. 	Moscow.
1927-8.
in 	the 	United 	States, 	where 	the 	appropriate 	technology
was 	in 	existence, 	little 	attempt 	was 	made 	to 	celebrate
it. 	Thus 	the 	architect 	of 	the 	Soviet 	avant-garde 	found
himself trapped 	in 	a 	Utopian 	hall 	of mirrors, 	dreaming
up unbuildable schemes for a 	society of uncertain 	form.
One 	senses 	something 	of 	the 	same 	difficulty 	with
Lissitzky's 	extraordinary 	schemes 	for 	'cloud-hanger'
skyscrapers, 	cantilevered 	on 	giant 	piers 	over 	key
Moscow 	intersections 	(fig. 	10.6.).
The 	Exposition 	des 	Arts 	Decoratifs 	in 	Paris 	in 	1925
gave 	the 	Soviet 	Union 	the 	opportunity 	to 	design 	a
show-case 	of 	industrial 	goods; 	clearly 	the 	building
would 	also 	have 	to 	be 	a 	banner 	of Soviet 	ideology. 	The
architect 	chosen 	for the task 	was Konstantin 	Melnikov.
a 	member 	of 	the 	Association 	of 	New 	Architects
(ASNOVAl. 	a 	former 	teacher 	at 	the 	Vkhutemas 	school,
and 	an 	artist 	dedicated 	to 	the 	notion 	that 	a 	dynamic
sculptural 	expression, 	stirring 	the 	masses, 	was 	the
right 	style 	for 	the 	new 	order. 	His 	pavilion 	(fig. 	10.5)
was 	a 	masterly 	propaganda 	instrument. 	The 	plan 	was
traversed 	by 	a 	diagonal 	ascending 	way 	allowing 	views
on 	to 	the 	exhibits 	on 	either 	side, 	and 	effecting 	the
penetration 	of inner 	and 	outer 	spaces. 	The 	volumes 	of
the 	main 	pavilion 	were 	rhomboidal 	in 	form, 	rather
than 	simply 	rectangular, 	and 	the 	illusions 	of 	per-
spective that 	this 	produced 	added 	to 	the 	visual 	tension
of the 	design. 	The 	main 	building 	was 	demountable 	and
made 	of 	wood, 	but 	its 	imagcrif 	was 	a 	flagrant
celebration 	of 	the 	factory 	aesthetic. 	For 	those 	un-
tutored 	in 	the 	associational 	meanings 	of 	modern
architectural 	forms 	(presumably 	the 	majority 	of 	the
visitors) 	the 	identity 	and 	meaning 	of the 	building 	were
reinforced 	by 	a 	sort 	of pergola 	straddling 	the 	walkway,
made 	of 	interlacing 	girders 	and 	hammers 	and 	sickles.
The 	contrast 	between 	this 	deliberately 	humble, 	cut-to-
the-bone 	treatment 	and 	the 	chintzy, 	consumerist
kitsch 	of most 	of the 	other 	national 	pavilions 	can 	only
have 	added 	to 	the 	force 	of 	the 	messages. 	Only 	Le
Corbusier's 	'Pavilion 	de 	L'Esprit 	Nouveau', 	tucked 	to
one 	side 	of the 	exhibition 	site, 	was 	equal 	to 	this 	display
of 	probity. 	Nonetheless, 	both 	artists' 	designs 	were
curious 	microcosms 	of 	larger 	world 	views 	striving 	for
an 	actual 	social 	outlet; 	they 	stood 	like 	Utopian
fragments 	alongside 	the 	sophisticated 	but 	shallow
expressions 	of 	middle-class 	commercialized 	taste,
exotically 	drenched 	in 	the 	new 	possibilities 	of 	ex-
pression 	revealed 	by 	Art 	Deco.
Thus 	the 	period 	up 	to 	1425 	was 	one 	of 	tentative
paper 	experimentation, 	or 	of 	small-scale 	building
hypotheses, 	for 	the 	Soviet 	avant-garde. 	The 	second
half 	of 	the 	1920s 	- 	as 	in 	Germany 	- 	was 	a 	period 	of
realization. 	The 	modern 	architects 	took 	it 	upon
themselves 	to 	imagine 	new 	functions 	as well 	as 	new
forms. 	Indeed, 	Melnikov 	himself 	was 	among 	the 	first
architects 	to 	conceive 	'social 	condensers' 	- 	clubs 	or
public 	buildings 	containing 	theatres, 	communal
libraries, 	and 	lounges 	for 	the 	dissemination 	of 	ideas,
the 	celebration 	of 	public 	life, 	and 	a 	controlled 	form 	of
'leisure'. 	Again 	Melnikov 	could 	not 	conceive 	of 	such
functions 	in 	neutral 	formal 	terms; 	he 	sought 	to
translate 	the 	programmes 	into 	jagged 	sculptural
volumes. 	In 	his 	design 	for 	the 	Rusakov 	Workers' 	Club
in 	Moscow 	of 	1927-8 	(fig. 	10,8), 	the 	auditorium 	was
made 	to 	converge 	on 	the 	stage, 	and 	its 	rear 	extension
was 	made 	to 	overhang 	the 	back 	of 	the 	building. 	The
sharp 	intersections 	and 	contrasts 	of 	shape 	were
articulated 	in 	details. 	Melnikov. 	like 	other 	members 	of
the 	ASNOVA 	school, 	tended 	to 	believe 	there 	was 	an
underlying 	language 	of 	forms 	which 	could 	be 	relied
upon 	to elicit 	specific 	emotions 	in 	the spectator. 	He saw
it 	as 	the 	task 	of 	architecture 	to 	co-opt 	this 	universal
language 	of 	form 	in 	the 	service 	of 	the 	vital 	themes 	of
revolution.
This 	position 	was 	heavily 	attacked 	on 	the 	grounds

-- 139 of 420 --

138 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
that 	it 	was 	rooted 	in 	bogus, 	bourgeois, 	'idealistic'
aesthetics. 	A 	typical 	critique 	emerged 	in 	the 	theories 	of
the 	Association 	of 	Contemporary 	Architects 	(OSA) 	-
including 	men 	like 	M. 	Ginzburg. 	M. 	Barshch. 	V.
Vladimirov. 	A. 	and 	V. 	Vesnin 	- 	which 	pilloried
ASNOVA for its 	self-indulgence 	and 	lack 	of attention 	to
practicality. 	In 	a 	well-documented 	debate 	which 	took
place 	in 	1929. 	F. 	Yalovkin 	of 	the 	OSA 	criticized 	the
descendants 	of the 	'formalist 	camp':
The 	principal 	difference 	between 	the 	present
associations 	consists 	in 	their 	very 	aim. 	i.e. 	for 	the
constructivists 	(the 	OSA). 	the 	social 	role 	of
architecture 	is 	essentially 	as 	one 	of the 	instruments
for 	the 	building 	of socialism 	by 	means 	of the
collectivization 	of life, 	by 	means 	of the
rationalization 	of labour, 	by 	means 	of the 	utilization
of scientific 	data 	and 	so 	on. 	whereas 	for 	[the
formalists] 	the 	social 	role 	'acquires 	a 	special
significance' 	and 	the 	essence 	of this 	'special
significance' 	is 	that 	you 	make 	architecture 	an 	art.
not 	contemplative 	but 	'active', 	which 	'must 	become
a 	means' 	for 	the 	liberation 	of the 	masses, 	a 	powerful
lever 	in 	the 	building 	of socialism 	and 	a 	new
collectivist 	way 	of life, 	organizing 	the 	psyche 	and
actively 	educating 	the 	will 	and 	feeling 	of the 	masses
towards 	the 	struggle 	for 	communism. 	. 	. 	. 	Their
pathetic ejaculations 	about 	art 	are 	reminiscent 	of
antediluvian 	searchings 	for 	a 	god: 	for 	we 	believe
that 	what 	is 	needed 	is 	not 	the 	invention 	of an 	art 	. 	.
.
but 	work 	on 	the 	organization 	of architecture,
proceeding 	from 	the 	data 	of economics, 	science,
and 	technology. 	It 	is 	to 	this 	great 	work 	that 	we 	call
all 	the 	architects of the 	Soviet 	Union.
At 	the 	opposite 	end 	of 	the 	spectrum from 	formalist
tendencies were functionalist 	ones, 	according to 	which
sociology 	and 	technique 	would on 	their 	own 	dictate
the 	new 	forms. 	In 	this 	case 	the 	criticism 	could 	be
produced 	that 	the 	functionalist 	was 	imitating 	the
debasement 	of 	life 	implicit 	in 	Western 	industrializa-
tion. 	The 	OSA 	group 	managed 	in 	their 	ideology 	and
their 	architecture 	to 	steer 	carefully 	between 	these
extremes, 	despite 	their 	tendency 	to 	veer 	towards 	a
severe 	puritanism 	of expression. 	Such 	architects of the
group 	as 	Moisei 	Ginzburg 	turned 	their 	attention 	to
housing 	and 	to 	the 	creation 	of 	collectivist 	dwellings.
Inherent 	in 	his 	plans 	and 	in 	the 	various 	theoretical
researches of the OSA 	was 	the 	belief that 	the clear 	logic
of planning 	and 	the 	sanity 	of orderly 	forms 	could 	have
some 	limited 	moral 	effect 	on 	the 	gradually 	evolving
forms 	of society. 	A 	typical 	product of the 	group 	was 	the
Narkomfin 	apartment 	building 	built 	in 	Moscow 	in
1928 	(fig. 	10.9). 	The 	concept 	marked 	a 	transition
between 	the 	traditional 	apartment 	house 	containing
entirely 	private 	flats 	and 	a 	new 	type 	of 	communal
housing 	in 	which 	some 	areas 	were 	shared, 	and 	in
which 	a 	judicious 	balance 	was 	sought 	between 	the
individual, 	the 	family, 	and 	the 	larger 	social 	group. 	The
impact 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	formal 	vocabulary 	was
indisputable: 	the 	housing 	was 	contained 	in 	a 	long 	low
box 	lifted 	from 	the 	ground 	on 	stilts, 	and 	the feiietre 	en
longueur 	(strip 	window) 	was 	here 	used 	as 	a 	primary
device 	for 	articulating 	the 	whole. 	The 	OSA 	devoted
much 	time 	to 	housing 	studies, 	considering 	such
questions 	as 	the 	functional 	family 	cell, 	the 	minimum
standards 	commensurate 	with 	mass 	production, 	and
the 	meaning 	of different 	access 	spaces. 	The 	Narkomfin
building 	was 	a 	laboratory 	of their 	social 	researches. 	It
incorporated 	a 	variety 	of 	'F 	type', 	the 	minimum, 	one-
family 	units 	(fig. 	10.10), 	with 	larger 	'K 	type' 	units 	with
three 	rooms on two 	levels. 	The 	section 	of the 	building
as a 	whole 	was 	an 	ingenious 	invention 	using 	a 	three-
over-two 	arrangement. 	Thus 	living-rooms 	on 	one 	side
of 	the 	building 	could 	be 	ample 	in 	height 	and 	well 	lit.
while 	bedrooms 	and bathrooms could 	be smaller, 	more
economic 	in 	their 	use 	of 	space 	and 	contained 	on 	the
other 	side 	of 	the 	building. 	But 	this 	functional
arrangement 	had 	further 	properties: 	the 	3/2 	system
allowed 	access 	decks 	to 	be 	threaded 	along 	the 	entire
10.9 	(/e/() 	Moisei
Ginzburg 	and I. 	Milinis.
Narkomfin 	apartments.
Moscow. 	1928.
10.10 	Hop right) 	OSA
group, 	study of an 	'F
type' 	apartment, 	section.
1928.
10. II 	{centre 	right)
I. 	Nikolayev. 	student
dormitory. 	Moscow.
1929. 	model.
10.12 	{bottom 	right)
I. 	Nikolayev. 	student
dormitory. 	Moscow.
1929. 	residential slab.

-- 140 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	i 	59
"^
Living Room
^
^1
2 	[Corndof
=r Living Room
1	
.Living
I 	Room
-ir-~
c
Living
I 	Room 	I 	I 	^
length 	ot' 	tile 	building 	at 	every 	third 	level, 	and
apartments 	to 	be jigsawed 	together 	so 	that 	views 	and
light 	on 	both 	sides 	could 	be 	enjoyed. 	These 	'street-
decks' 	were 	more 	than 	mere 	functional 	access
corridors, 	however: 	they 	could 	be 	seen 	as 	symbolic
elements 	expressing 	communal 	aspirations: 	in 	the
Narkomfin 	building 	they 	were 	actually 	heated 	to
encourage 	interaction 	all 	through 	the 	year. 	The 	other
communal 	parts of 	the 	building, 	such 	as 	the 	canteen,
kitchen, 	gymnasium, 	library, 	and 	day 	nursery, 	were
contained 	in 	an 	earth-bound 	rectangular 	element
linked 	to 	the 	main 	oblong by 	a 	bridge. 	Le 	Corbusier's
idea 	of the 	roof terrace 	was 	here 	employed 	as 	a 	further
communal 	space 	for 	use 	in 	the 	summer 	months. 	It
would 	be 	preposterous 	to 	claim 	that 	Ginzburg 	and 	his
associates 	were 	not 	concerned 	with 	aesthetic 	matters
in 	such 	a 	crisp 	and 	well-proportioned 	formal 	state-
ment. 	But 	the 	contrast 	with 	the 	sculptural 	acrobatics
of ASNOVA 	architects 	is 	still 	obvious: 	the 	OSA 	sought
to 	generate 	the 	overall 	volumes 	of a 	building 	from 	a
stringent 	rationale 	taking 	into 	account 	living 	patterns,
circulation, 	cost, 	building 	procedure, 	etc. 	This 	'dia-
gram' 	was 	then 	translated 	into a 	restrained 	aesthetic
terminology 	which 	suggested 	social 	values 	of 	co-
operation 	and 	moral 	stability.
The 	pcirt'i 	employing 	a 	slab 	for 	private 	living 	with
attached 	communal 	elements 	in 	separate 	volumes 	was
much 	used 	for 	student 	hostels 	in 	Russia 	in 	the 	late
1920s 	(figs. 	10.11, 	10.12) 	and 	may 	have 	had 	a 	direct
influence 	on 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Pavilion 	Suisse 	in 	the 	Cite
Universitaire. 	Paris, 	of 	1930-31. 	Indeed, 	by 	1927
Soviet 	architecture 	was 	well 	known 	in 	European
publications, 	and 	there 	was 	a 	regular 	traffic 	of ideas 	to
and fro. 	The role of Russian 	abstract 	art at the 	Bauhaus
has 	already 	been 	mentioned, 	and 	was 	no 	doubt 	aided
by 	the 	impact 	of an 	exhibition 	of Soviet 	art 	(including
Lissitzky's 	'Proun 	room'), 	in 	Berlin 	in 	1922: 	but
influences 	clearly 	worked 	the 	other 	way 	too, 	and 	it 	is
scarcely 	an 	exaggeration 	to 	claim 	that 	without 	Le
Corbusier, 	Soviet 	architects 	of 	the 	late 	1920s 	would
have 	had 	far 	less 	idea 	than 	they 	did 	how 	to 	translate
their 	visions 	into 	forms 	and 	then 	into 	three-
dimensional realities. 	In 	1 92 7 Le Corbusier was invited
to 	design 	a 	major 	project 	in 	Moscow : 	the 	headquarters
of 	the 	central 	co-operatives 	known 	as 	the 	'Cen-
trosoyus'. 	The 	programme 	called 	for 	the 	combination
of 	office 	spaces 	with 	lecture 	halls, 	conference 	rooms
and 	large 	pubfic 	forums. 	The 	challenge 	this 	problem
posed 	to 	Le 	Corbusier's 	vocabulary 	was 	in 	some 	ways
analogous 	to 	the 	one 	posed 	by 	the 	League 	of 	Nations
competition 	of 	the 	same 	period. 	The 	architect 	had 	to
'stretch' 	an 	architectural 	system 	which 	had 	been
applied 	initially 	to 	the 	design 	of 	villas, 	and 	in 	the
process 	was 	forced 	to 	discover 	means 	for 	articulating
hierarchies 	of varied 	functions, 	and 	for 	breaking 	down

-- 141 of 420 --

140 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
10.13 	Le 	Corbusier.
Centrosoyus building,
Moscow, 	second 	project
model. 	1928.
the 	overall 	form 	into 	discrete 	parts 	v\liich 	still 	had,
somehow, 	to 	be 	integrated 	harmoniously. 	In 	both
schemes 	it 	was 	also 	necessary 	to 	respond 	to 	different
site 	conditions 	on 	each 	side. 	The 	design 	process 	of the
Centrosoyus 	shows 	the 	architect 	grappling 	with 	these
problems 	and 	evolving 	a 	scheme 	in 	which 	circulation
was 	a 	strong 	organizing 	principle, 	and 	primary 	and
secondary 	axes 	were 	used 	to 	define 	major 	routes 	and
emphases 	(fig. 	10. 1 3). 	The 	result 	relies 	strongly 	on 	the
increased 	spatial 	complexity 	manifest 	in 	his 	paintings
in 	the 	previous 	two or three 	years. 	The 	Purist 	language
was 	being 	forced 	to 	become 	more 	ambiguous 	and
multivalent. 	But 	the 	Centrosoyus 	seems 	to 	indicate 	too
that 	Le 	Corbusier 	wished 	to 	outdo 	the 	Constructivists
on 	their own 	ground 	by 	taking 	over 	from 	them 	devices
like 	the 	sculptural 	expression 	of circulation 	zones, 	and
the 	dynamic 	equilibrium 	of 	asymmetrical 	volumes
across 	space; 	indeed, 	he 	attempted 	to 	handle 	these
elements with 	greater 	control 	and 	conviction 	than 	in
the 	originals. 	The 	Centrosoyus 	also 	marked 	one 	of the
architect's 	first 	attempts 	at 	handling 	a 	fully 	glazed
facade with 	the help of a 	crude mechanical heating and
ventilating 	system, 	which 	was 	scarcely 	equal 	to 	the
climatic 	extremes 	of 	Moscow's 	summers 	and 	winters.
The 	bulbous 	forms 	of 	the 	auditoria 	and 	circulation
ramps 	were 	quickly 	absorbed 	into 	the 	general 	vocabu-
lary of modern 	architecture and devalued to 	the level of
official 	cliche 	in 	numerous 	ensuing 	state 	projects.
The 	dream 	of 	a 	sort 	of 	secular 	equivalent 	to 	a
cathedral 	- 	a 	coUectivist 	emblem 	signifying 	an
integrated 	culture 	- 	seems 	to 	have 	lain 	close 	to 	the
surface 	of 	Soviet 	architectural 	imagination 	through-
out 	the 	twenties. 	But 	there 	were 	few 	individual 	artists
equal 	to 	the 	imaginative 	challenge. 	One 	architect
whose 	work 	far 	transcends 	the 	bickering 	division
between 	formal 	expression 	and 	functional 	necessity
expressed 	in 	the 	OSA/ASNOVA 	debates 	was 	Ivan
Leonidov. 	Like 	Le 	Corbusier. 	whom 	he 	much 	admired,
he 	seems 	to 	have 	been 	able 	to 	forge 	a 	synthesis 	of
poetry 	and 	fact, 	of 	form 	and 	function, 	which 	at 	the
same 	time 	dug 	to 	deeper 	levels 	of 	aspiration 	than 	the
pantomime 	technocrats. 	This 	is clear in 	his proposal for
a 	Lenin 	Institute 	of 	1927 	(fig. 	10.14). 	The 	reading-
room 	is 	expressed 	as 	a 	glass 	sphere, 	a 	form 	which
perhaps 	conveys 	a 	universalizing 	intention 	and 	a
metaphor 	of 	enlightenment 	simultaneously. 	But 	this
world 	image 	is 	not 	earth-bound: 	it 	has 	almost 	the
character 	of 	a 	balloon 	which 	wishes 	to 	pull 	free 	of 	its
cables 	and 	rise 	into 	the 	air. 	The 	twin 	themes 	of visual
lightness 	and 	spatial 	hovering 	seem 	intimately 	con-
nected 	with 	a 	content 	of a 	metaphysical 	sort, 	as 	if the
architect 	was 	attempting 	to 	extract 	an 	almost 	sacral
meaning 	from 	the 	pantheon 	of 	Soviet 	heroes 	and
Marxist 	ideas. 	The 	other 	main 	element 	is 	the 	stack
tower, 	expressed 	as 	a 	slender 	skyscraper 	to 	which
delicate 	power 	lines 	and 	radial 	antennae 	are 	attached
in 	tension. 	The 	space 	between 	and around 	these 	two
forms 	is 	activated 	by 	the 	slender 	planes 	of 	horizontal
offices 	which 	intersect 	the 	round 	podium 	on which 	the
main 	sculptural 	objects 	are 	placed. 	Elements 	slide 	past
one another in 	the 	manner of a 	Lissitzky abstraction, 	or
even 	a 	'pin-wheel' 	Wrightian 	plan, 	and 	extend
towards 	the 	corners 	of 	the world. 	Leonidov's 	scheme
incorporates 	a 	full 	range 	of 	Constructivist 	com-

-- 142 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	141
10.14 	Ivan 	Leonidov.
Lenin 	Institute, 	project.
1927.

-- 143 of 420 --

142 	•
Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
positional 	devices 	and 	indicates 	the 	maturity 	of a 	style
phase, 	but 	a 	mere 	listing 	of 	elements 	scarcely 	does
credit 	to 	the 	power 	of 	the 	idea. 	Once 	again, 	one 	is 	left
guessing as 	to 	how 	the 	architect 	might 	have translated
this 	fantasy 	into 	material 	form.
Thus 	it 	can 	be 	seen 	that 	architects 	in 	the 	Soviet
Union 	applied 	their 	minds 	to 	the 	full 	range 	of 	social
functions 	in 	the 	1920s, 	including 	housing, 	social
clubs, 	theatres, 	offices, 	libraries, 	dams, 	factories, 	and
state 	institutions. 	But 	they 	also 	gave 	thought 	to 	the
ideal relationships 	between 	them 	all. 	to town 	planning,
and 	even 	to 	the 	spatial 	reorganization 	of 	the 	country-
side. 	Artistic 	imagination 	here attempted 	to work hand
in 	hand 	with 	economic 	reorganization 	at 	the 	largest
scale 	in 	the 	generation 	of 	a 	new 	visual 	and 	spatial
culture 	(fig. 	10.15). 	Of 	the 	various 	garden 	city
paradigms 	adopted 	from 	the 	West 	and 	transformed,
the 	linear 	city 	was 	perhaps 	most 	pertinent, 	because 	it
fused 	together 	the 	means 	of 	production 	(agricultural
and 	industrial) 	with 	networks 	of 	power 	and 	cir-
culation, 	allowed 	the 	interpenetration 	of 	nature 	and
the 	city, 	and 	encouraged 	the 	integration 	of 	rural 	and
industrial 	proletariats 	in 	spatially 	ordered 	surround-
ings. 	Social 	condensers 	and 	family 	dwellings 	could 	be
distributed 	evenly 	in 	parallel 	bands 	to 	the 	main 	routes,
and 	the 	linear, 	non-hierarchical 	character 	of 	such 	a
city 	form 	was 	felt 	to 	be 	particularly 	appropriate 	to 	the
egalitarian 	aspirations 	of 	the 	inhabitants 	(fig. 	10.16).
Thus 	the 	linear 	form 	was 	adopted 	in 	the 	design 	of 	the
new 	city 	of Magnitogorsk 	in 	the 	late 	1920s.
By 	the 	end 	of the 	1 920s. 	though, 	the 	various 	avant-
garde 	groups 	came 	under 	the 	increasingly 	close
scrutiny 	of 	central 	state 	control. 	The 	Politburo 	seems
to 	have 	sensed 	that 	traditional 	images 	of 	national
consolidation, 	including 	the 	readaptation 	of 	Classical
and 	eclectic 	monumentality 	in 	architecture, 	might
serve 	its 	purposes 	better 	than 	the 	imagery 	of 	modern
architecture. 	Meanwhile, 	the 	divergence 	between
avant-garde 	values 	and 	popular 	ones 	was 	becoming
increasingly 	clear. 	It 	is 	ironical 	that 	the 	products 	of the
Soviet 	modern 	movement 	should 	have 	been 	accused 	of
bourgeois 	formalism 	almost 	exactly 	at 	the 	same 	time
that 	the 	products 	of 	the 	German 	modern 	movement
were 	pilloried 	as 	'Bolshevist' 	and 	un-German.
Totalitarian 	manipulation 	of 	visual 	culture 	took
different 	forms, 	but 	the 	triple 	pressures 	of State 	control,
emphasis 	on 	regional 	values, 	and 	need 	for 	centralized
traditional 	images 	of State 	power 	have 	eerie 	similar-
ities 	in 	both 	Stalin's 	Russia 	and 	Hitler's 	Germany.
The 	drama 	in 	which 	the 	modern 	movement 	played
out 	its 	final 	act 	was 	the 	Palace 	of 	the 	Soviets
competition 	of 	1951. 	The 	programme 	called 	for 	a
colossal 	building 	incorporating 	two 	auditoria. 	press
galleries, 	meeting 	rooms, 	libraries, 	and 	a 	monumental
image 	equal 	to 	the 	progressivist 	technical 	and 	social
10.15 	(above) 	T.
Varentsov, 	urban 	project
for regional centre.
1927.
10.16 	(ic/t) 	B. 	Lavrov.
linear city 	proposal, 	mid-
1920S.
10.17 	(below) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Palace 	of the
Soviets. 	Moscow,
competition 	project
model. 	1931.

-- 144 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in 	Russia 	• 	143
10.18 	B. 	M. 	lofan.
Palace 	of the 	Soviets,
competition 	winner
(second 	version. 	19141.
aspirations 	of 	the 	Soviet 	State. 	Entries 	poured 	in 	from
all 	over 	the 	world 	and 	included 	inajor 	ideas 	from
Gropius. 	Mendelsohn. 	Perret. 	and 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Some
of 	the 	architects 	chose 	to 	pack 	the 	functions 	into 	a
single dynamic 	sculptural 	forin. 	while 	others separated
the 	volumes 	of 	the 	two 	main 	auditoria 	out 	and
arranged 	colossal 	machine-age 	sculptures 	against 	the
existing 	Moscow 	skyline. 	In 	principle, 	this 	was 	the
approach 	of Le 	Corbusier. 	whose 	entry 	must 	be 	ranked
as 	one 	of 	his 	masterpieces 	(fig. 	10.17). 	The 	two
auditoria 	were 	arranged 	on 	the 	same 	axis 	and 	were
direct 	sculptural 	expressions 	of 	the 	acoustically
optimized 	forms 	of 	the 	interior 	profiles. 	It 	was 	an 	idea
the 	architect 	had 	employed 	in 	his 	League 	of 	Nations
proposal 	three 	years 	earlier. 	Instead 	of 	resorting 	to
domes 	or 	other 	defunct 	iconography. 	Le 	Corbusier
invented 	a 	new 	symbolism 	with, 	clearly, 	some
prompting 	from 	Tallin 	and 	earlier 	fantasies 	of 	Con-
structivism. 	The 	roof 	of 	the 	main 	hall 	was 	suspended
on 	wires 	from 	a 	parabolic 	arch 	which 	would 	have
dominated 	the 	skyline 	of 	Moscow. 	The 	lower 	audi-
torium 	had 	a 	scarcely 	less 	dramatic 	structural
treatment; 	cantilevered 	flanges 	were 	splayed 	in 	plan 	to
create 	a 	focal 	concentration 	towards 	the 	space
between 	the 	two 	main 	volumes. 	Here 	there 	was 	an
open-air 	space 	- a 	sort 	of modern 	agora 	- 	linked 	to 	the
surrounding 	public 	space 	of 	the 	city 	by 	ramps 	and
walkways. 	Within 	were 	vast 	hypostyle 	halls 	of 	pilotis
where, 	presumably, 	the 	business 	of 	debate 	and
discussion 	would 	have 	continued 	between 	the 	main
sessions. 	Once 	again 	Le 	Corbusier 	demonstrated 	his
ability 	to 	probe 	the 	underlying 	meaning 	of 	a 	social
programme 	and 	to 	translate 	this 	into 	aesthetic 	forms.
But 	his 	palace was 	not 	to 	be. 	The 	model 	went 	back 	to
Paris, 	as 	Gropius's 	did 	to 	Berlin. 	Official 	taste 	inter-
vened 	and 	gave 	the 	prize 	to 	a 	Soviet 	entry 	by 	B. 	M.
lofan 	and 	I.V. 	Zholtovsky 	(fig. 	10.18). 	This 	was 	an
ostentatious 	and 	banal 	wedding 	cake 	building 	in 	the
form 	of a stepped 	mausoleum 	surmounted 	by a 	colossal
statue 	of 	Lenin, 	even 	larger 	than 	Manhattan's 	Statue
of Liberty 	(on 	which, 	curiously 	enough, 	it 	may 	have
been 	partly 	modelled). 	The 	supporting 	steel 	frame 	was
encased 	in 	massive, 	ill-proportioned 	cladding 	of stone,
and 	the 	imagery 	bordered 	on 	kitsch 	for 	all 	its
'acceptable' 	Realism. 	Evidently 	the 	dreamers 	of
modern 	visions 	had 	outstripped 	the 	aspirations 	of their
potential 	clientele 	and, 	in 	the 	process, 	had 	pointed 	to
severe 	problems 	of 	communication 	between 	the
perceptions 	of an 	avant-garde 	steeped 	in 	the 	devices 	of
abstraction, 	and 	the 	values 	of 	a 	mass 	culture 	as
envisioned 	by 	a 	centralized 	state. 	Indeed, 	in 	1932, 	the
remaining 	architects 	of 	the 	avant-garde 	were 	mar-
shalled 	under 	State control 	and either 	left 	architecture,
'
or 	else 	immersed 	themselves 	in 	the 	official 	but
apparently 	uninspiring 	doctrines 	of 	Realism, 	Mel-
nikov's 	project 	for 	a 	Ministry 	of 	Heavy 	Industry 	of
1934 	is 	a 	representative 	work 	of 	this 	phase 	of
compromise, 	with 	its 	grotesque 	statuary 	and 	heavy-
handed 	machine 	ornaments.
But 	as well 	as 	being 	representative of the 	problems 	of
state 	interference, 	this 	design 	may 	perhaps 	also 	be 	seen
as 	an 	epitaph 	to 	the 	avant-garde's 	premature 	attempt
at dreaming 	up the forms of a 	culture without sufficient
communal 	support. 	Despite 	their 	constant 	pro-
testations to 	the contrary, 	the 	Soviet 	modern 	architects
- 	in 	their 	rise 	and 	fall 	- 	had 	acknowledged 	schisms
typical 	of 	Western 	industrialized 	culture, 	between
history 	and 	modernity, 	the 	artist 	and 	'the 	people'. 	All
too 	often 	they 	had 	resorted 	to 	a 	secularized 	version 	of
Kandinsky's 	conception 	of 	the 	artist 	as 	a 	prophet 	of
new 	forms. 	'The 	Volk 	is 	not 	with 	us'. 	Klee 	had 	written
in 	his 	diaries ; 	the same 	was 	to 	prove 	true 	in 	a 	variety 	of
area 	of modern 	culture 	in 	the 	twenties.

-- 145 of 420 --

1 	1 	. 	Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb 	: 	America
between 	the 	Wars
The 	architects 	of this 	land 	and 	generation 	are 	now 	brought 	face 	to 	face 	with
something 	new 	under 	the 	sun 	- 	namely 	that 	evolution 	and 	integration 	of
social 	conditions, 	that 	special 	grouping 	of them, 	that 	results 	in 	a 	demand 	for
the 	erection 	of tall 	office 	buildings. 	. 	.
.
Problem 	: 	How 	shall 	we 	impart 	to 	this 	sterile 	pile, 	this 	crude, 	harsh, 	brutal
agglomeration, 	this 	stark, 	staring 	exclamation 	of eternal 	strife, 	the
graciousness 	of those 	higher 	forms 	of sensibility 	and 	culture 	that 	rest 	on 	the
lower 	and 	fiercer 	passions.' 	How 	shall 	we 	proclaim 	from 	the 	dizzy 	height 	of
this 	strange, 	weird 	modern 	housetop 	the 	peaceful 	evangel 	of sentiment, 	of
beauty, 	the 	cult 	of a 	higher 	life.?
L. 	Sullivan, 	1896
The 	decade 	between 	the 	end 	of 	the 	First 	World 	War
and 	the 	Wall 	Street 	crash 	of 	1 929 	was 	a 	boom 	period
for 	building 	investment 	in 	the 	United 	States. 	This 	was
mirrored 	directly 	in 	the 	profile 	of the 	large 	cities, 	in 	the
mushrooming 	of 	skyscrapers, 	the 	rapid 	growth 	of
highways, 	and 	the 	creation 	of 	suburban 	sprawl. 	The
resultant 	pressures 	on 	urban 	services 	were
overwhelming, 	but 	perceptions 	of 	this 	crisis 	of
mechanization 	were 	far 	from 	most 	architects' 	minds.
Intellectual forces 	were 	co-opted 	in 	an 	effort 	of laissez-
faire expansion 	whose 	motives 	and 	values 	went 	largely
unexplored. 	The anxiety-laden 	probings and 	apocalyp-
tic 	Utopianism 	of 	the 	European 	avant-garde 	had 	few
equivalents 	in 	the 	United 	States. 	Reformist 	yearnings
were 	reserved, 	on 	the 	whole, 	for anti-urban 	dreams, 	or
for the microcosm 	of the 	individual 	dwelling 	usually 	in
a 	context 	isolated 	from 	the 	city, 	where 	time-honoured
American 	themes 	concerning 	the 	individual's 	contem-
plation 	of the 	sublimities of nature 	could 	be 	played out
once 	again.
The 	search 	for 	alternative 	social 	and 	urbanistic
structures, 	which 	played 	such 	a 	central 	role 	in
European 	modern 	architecture, 	was 	foreign 	indeed 	to a
country 	in 	a 	conservative 	mood 	which 	could 	draw
upon 	the 	cosy 	mythology 	that 	any 	necessary 	revol-
utionary 	steps 	in 	the 	polity 	had 	occurred 	over 	a
century 	before. 	Moreover, 	in 	the 	visual 	arts 	there 	was
scarcely 	an 	equivalent 	to 	the 	avant-gardes 	of the 	main
metropolitan 	centres 	of 	France 	and 	Germany. 	The
Armory 	Show 	of 	191 	3 	had 	made 	Cubism 	and
Abstraction 	widely 	known 	in 	America, 	but 	these
movements 	had 	been 	regarded 	as 	suspect, 	foreign
imports by 	the 	majority. 	Even the activities of Stieglitz's
'291'. 	which 	cut 	through 	academic 	and 	sentimental
cliches 	to 	the 	imaginative 	potentials of the 	New 	World,
had 	little 	impact 	on 	architecture. 	Despite 	the 	Futurist
overtones 	and 	urban 	romanticism 	instinct 	in 	some 	of
Stieglitz's 	and 	Steichen's 	photographs, 	and 	in 	the 	work
of such 	painters 	as 	Charles 	Sheeler. 	Joseph 	Stella, 	and
Marsden 	Hartley, 	architects 	remained 	unmoved 	by 	the
technological 	wonders 	of 	their 	country. 	Engineering
continued 	to 	be seen 	as 	merely 	the 	material 	means 	for
supporting 	historically 	sanctioned 	combinations 	of
styles 	which 	were, 	so 	to 	say, 	stuck 	on. 	Hartley 	put 	the
matter 	succinctly:
I 	often 	wonder 	why 	it 	is 	that 	America 	. 	. 	. 	has 	not
the 	European 	courage 	as 	well 	as 	capacity 	for 	fresh
developments 	in 	cultural 	matters. 	. 	. 	. 	There 	is 	... 	an
obvious 	lethargy 	in 	the 	appreciation 	of creative
taste 	and 	a 	still 	lingering 	yet 	old 	fashioned 	faith 	in
the 	continual 	necessity 	for 	importation. 	America
has 	a 	great 	body 	of assimilators 	and 	out 	of this 	gift
for 	uncreative 	assimilation 	has 	come 	the 	type 	of art
we 	are 	supposed 	to 	accept 	as 	our own.
Cultural 	critics 	such 	as 	Lewis 	Mumford 	(e.g.. 	The
Brown 	Decades. 	1931) 	would 	write 	of 	a 	dreadful
regression 	from 	the 	probity 	and 	integrity 	they 	had
sensed 	in 	the 	architecture 	of 	Henry 	Hobson 	Rich-
ardson, 	John 	Wellborn 	Root, 	William 	Le 	Baron 	Jenney,
Louis 	Sullivan, 	and 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	three 	decades
earlier. 	It 	was 	customary 	in 	this 	connection 	to 	stress
the 	symbolic 	importance 	of 	the 	Columbia 	World

-- 146 of 420 --

1 1. 1 	Daniel 	Burnham,
plan 	of improvement 	for
Chicago. 	iyo9-
Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	145
1^m
ai
,^ar^is 	5?ia»ii&"'"
S'J^
, 	\
M • 	mi^j
S?"^^ 	J,-^"^ 	HI 	:"
pj;
Exposition 	of 	1893 	as 	the 	event 	signalling 	'the 	Fall
from 	Grace', 	for 	it 	was 	the 	giant 	Beaux-Arts 	Classical
'White 	City' 	which 	had 	set 	in 	motion 	a 	fashion 	for
pompous 	revival 	which 	Sullivan 	later 	bemoaned 	(in
bitter 	old 	age) 	as 	having 	set 	back 	the 	course 	of
American 	architecture 	by 	fifty 	years. 	Actually, 	this
was 	gross 	over-simplification: 	not 	only 	was 	Sullivan's
and 	Wright's 	best 	work 	produced 	after 	that 	date, 	but
the 	American 	Renaissance 	was 	not 	always 	superficial.
It 	is 	more 	to 	the 	point 	to 	recall 	that 	a 	variety 	of 	viable
parallel 	tendencies 	were operative up until 	about 	1 9 1
4
(including 	the 	extension 	of 	the 	Prairie 	School 	after
Wright), 	and 	to 	explain 	what 	needs 	of 	expression 	the
Classical 	Beaux- Arts 	fulfilled.
Here 	one 	necessarily 	oversimplifies: 	the 	American
Beaux-Arts 	supplied 	a 	set 	of 	recipes 	for 	civic 	in-
stitutions 	such 	as 	museums, 	metropolitan 	libraries,
opera 	houses, 	clubs, 	and 	university 	monuments. 	It
implied 	links 	with 	Classical 	civilization 	and 	made
available 	traditional 	imperial 	symbols 	to 	the 	in-
stitutions 	of the 	state 	in 	an 	era 	when 	the 	United 	States
was 	first 	sensing 	its 	role 	as 	a 	world 	power. 	In 	the
private 	sector 	of plutocratic 	patronage 	(Frick. 	Morgan,
Rockefeller, 	etc.) 	instant 	Classicism 	was 	a 	useful 	prop,
an 	embellishment 	lor 	'the 	age 	of elegance'. 	In 	the 	'City
Beautiful' 	movement 	images 	drawn 	from 	Imperial
Rome 	or 	Haussmann's 	Paris 	were 	brought 	in 	to
ennoble 	and 	tame 	the 	gridded. 	utilitarian, 	money-
making 	machine 	of 	the 	American 	metropolis. 	The
movement 	was 	well 	represented 	by 	Burnham 's 	vast
plans 	for 	Chicago 	of 	1 909 	(Fig. 	1 	1 . i 	). 	in 	which 	not 	a
skyscraper 	was 	to 	be 	seen 	(despite 	the 	fact 	that 	this
architect 	had 	done 	well 	from 	designing 	them). 	A
domed 	civic 	centre 	towered 	above 	the 	heart 	of the 	city.
The 	radial 	boulevards 	and 	parks 	were 	supposed 	to
supply 	open 	space 	and 	to 	free 	the 	traffic, 	but 	they 	were
also 	conceived 	in 	theatrical 	terms. 	Burnham's 	plan
was 	suffused 	with 	nostalgia 	for 	a 	pre-industrial
culture.
Something 	of 	this 	cult 	of 	instant 	beautification
lingered 	on 	into 	the 	twenties, 	but 	with 	less 	moral
concern 	for 	urban 	improvement. 	Educated 	taste 	still
stood 	between 	American 	imaginations 	and 	the 	raw
possibilities 	of indigenous 	technology. 	It 	was 	a 	curious

-- 147 of 420 --

I4f' 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
situation: 	on 	the 	one 	side 	American 	architects 	and
clients clambering for the 	instant 	sanction 	of European
culture: 	on 	the 	other 	a 	European 	avant-garde 	looking
romantically 	to 	America 	as 	the 	promised 	land 	of 	all
things 	modern. 	The 	matter 	was 	summed 	up 	by 	a
caption 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Vers 	une 	architecture, 	which
appeared 	under 	an 	illustration 	of 	a 	San 	Francisco
skyscraper 	encrusted 	with 	feebly 	executed
Renaissance ornament: 	'Let 	us 	listen 	to 	the 	counsels 	of
American 	engineers. 	But 	let 	us 	beware 	of 	American
architects.'
Economic 	expansion 	in 	the 	boom 	years 	relied
heavily 	on 	mass production, 	advertising, 	the 	deliberate
fostering 	of consumerist 	imagery, 	and 	such 	communi-
cations 	devices 	as 	the 	radio, 	telephone, 	and 	auto-
mobile. 	New 	corporations 	of 	unprecedented 	size
brought 	increasing 	specialization 	to 	labour 	and
required 	giant 	head 	offices 	in 	the 	city 	centres. 	They
needed 	tall 	buildings 	which 	could 	also 	project 	images
of 	themselves 	and 	their 	products. 	Many 	of 	the 	basic
structural 	and 	fireproofing 	problems 	of the 	skyscraper
had 	been 	solved 	by 	the 	previous 	two 	generations.
Emphasis 	now 	switched 	to 	stylistic 	clothing, 	to 	the
symbolic 	function 	of 	the 	building 	in 	the 	cityscape 	as
institutional 	and 	corporate 	image.
The 	skyscraper 	had 	emerged 	in 	the 	1870s 	in 	New
York 	and 	Chicago 	as 	a 	response 	to 	the 	storage,
merchandising, 	and 	managerial 	needs 	of 	railway 	and
steampower 	trade. 	Exploitation 	of land 	prices 	as 	well 	as
functional 	necessity 	had 	forced 	the 	building 	upwards;
steel wire, 	the elevator, 	and the steel frame 	had 	allowed
this 	to 	occur. 	The 	typical 	structural 	anatomy 	com-
bined 	a 	grid 	plan, 	partitioned spaces, 	and open 	facades,
and 	this 	could 	lead 	to 	various 	possible 	vocabularies.
Here 	was 	the 	core 	of an American 	dilemma 	which 	also
stood 	near 	the 	heart 	of 	the 	problem 	of 	a 	modern
architecture: 	should 	the 	creature 	be 	left 	alone 	as
function 	and 	finance 	suggested, 	a 	scarcely 	articulated
object of engineering.' 	Or 	should 	the 	native 	invention
be clothed 	in 	cultural 	dress 	imported 	from 	elsewhere
and 	given 	the 	veneer 	of 	civilization.' 	Louis 	Sullivan
attempted 	to 	find 	an 	answer 	by 	steering 	his 	way
between 	the 	utilitarian 	and 	the decorative, 	and 	(as 	was
shown 	in 	Chapter 	3) 	relied 	on 	Rationalist 	procedures
in 	analysing 	the 	task. 	In 	an 	essay 	entitled 	'The 	Tall
Office 	Building 	Artistically 	Considered' 	(1896). 	he
claimed 	that 	the 	skyscraper 	had 	an 	inherent 	shape
resulting 	from 	social 	demand. 	Junctional 	layout, 	and
constructional 	means, 	arguing 	that 	it 	was 	intrinsically
tripartite, 	with 	lower 	levels 	for 	entrance, 	showrooms,
and 	mezzanine 	offices, 	with 	middle 	levels 	to 	ac-
commodate 	the 	office 	space 	and 	with 	a 	top 	to 	contain
the 	machine 	rooms 	and 	the 	turn-around 	for 	the
elevators. 	In 	turn, 	he proposed 	that 	the 	'essence' 	of the
type 	lay in 	its 	aspiring vcrticality ; 	one notes the conceit
by 	which 	an 	artificial 	form 	was 	handled 	as 	if it 	had 	an
'intrinsic', 	organic 	nature 	striving 	for 	expression.
Few 	architects 	had 	the depth 	of synthesis of Sullivan,
and 	the 	general 	rule 	of 	skyscraper 	design 	in 	the 	late
1890s 	and 	the 	first 	two 	decades 	of 	the 	twentieth
century 	was 	eclectic 	experimentation 	which 	departed
from 	the 	ideal 	of 	an 	authentic 	modern 	style. 	History
was 	treated 	like 	a 	used-clothes 	store 	and 	raided 	for 	its
garments 	with 	little 	thought 	for 	their 	original 	purpose
and 	still 	less 	for 	the 	new 	body 	they 	were 	to 	clothe.
Between 	1900 	and 	1920. 	Manhattan 	was 	trans-
formed 	into 	an 	ersatz 	historical 	dreamscape 	where
Mayan 	temples 	stood 	only 	feet away 	from 	Gothic 	spires
and 	Classical 	mausolea. 	The 	New 	York 	zoning 	law 	of
1916. 	requiring 	set-backs 	to 	admit 	light 	and 	air 	to 	the
buildings 	and 	streets 	below, 	went 	further 	to 	encourage
a stepped 	pyramid 	form, 	often 	surmounting 	a 	shaft-like
tower 	standing 	on 	a 	broader 	pedestal: 	ziggurats 	and
Meso-American 	extravaganza 	wedded 	well 	with
shapes 	of this 	kind.
Such. 	then, 	was 	the 	history 	of 	the 	skyscraper 	in
outline, 	leading 	up 	to 	the 	Chicac]o 	Tribune 	competition
of 	1922. 	The 	newspaper 	wanted 	'one 	of 	the 	most
beautiful 	buildings 	in 	the 	world': 	the 	site 	stood 	just
north 	of 	the 	Chicago 	loop 	beyond 	the 	river, 	where
Michigan 	Avenue 	was cranked, 	allowing 	more breath-
ing 	space 	than 	was 	usual 	in 	the 	gridded 	city, 	and 	an
uncustomary 	long, 	diagonal 	view: 	the 	programme
required 	mainly 	office 	space. 	But 	these 	requirements
did 	little 	to 	determine 	a 	form 	beyond 	suggesting 	some
variation 	on 	a 	tower, 	probably 	with 	elevators 	towards
the 	centre 	and 	with 	a 	slender 	shaft rising 	high 	enough
to 	provide 	a 	striking 	image 	in 	contrast 	to 	the
surroundings. 	The 	notes 	sent 	to 	competition 	appli-
cants 	made 	much 	of 	the 	visual 	quality 	of 	the 	design:
here 	was 	a 	chance 	to 	concentrate 	on 	matters 	of 	form
and 	to 	provide 	a 	prototype 	for 	the 	'beautiflcation' 	of
American 	cities.
Competitions 	are 	a useful 	gauge 	of the 	true 	outlook
of a 	period 	because 	they 	give evidence 	of a 	wide 	variety
of 	different 	responses 	to 	the 	same 	constraints. 	In 	all
there 	were 	nearly 	three 	hundred 	entries 	to 	the 	Chicago
Tribune 	competition: 	they 	make 	it 	quite 	clear 	that 	in
1922 	there 	was 	no 	American 	- 	or 	worldwide 	-
consensus 	on 	style. 	A 	survey 	of the 	entries 	reads 	like 	a
lexicon 	of 	eclecticism 	and 	half-understood 	prototypes
with 	little 	evidence 	of 	subtle 	transformation 	from
precedent. 	Typical 	was 	a 	design 	modelled 	on 	Giotto's
campanile 	in 	Florence 	(fig. 	1 	1.2); 	in 	order 	to 	preserve
the 	recognizable 	proportions 	of 	the 	prototype 	yet 	still
fulfil 	the 	volumetric 	demands 	of 	the 	programme, 	the
architect 	found 	it 	necessary 	to 	tack 	a 	bulky 	appendage
to 	the 	rear. 	There 	were 	also 	many 	quasi-Classical
solutions 	employing 	a 	jumble 	of 	columns, 	pediments,
temple 	motifs, 	and 	domes. 	These 	ran 	up 	against 	the

-- 148 of 420 --

Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb: 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	147
ii.iikft) 	Entry 	to 	the
Chiccujo 	Trihww
competition. 	1922.
modelled 	on 	Giotto's
campanile 	in 	Florence 	-
(figs. 	1 	1. 2- 1 	1.6 	are 	from
ChuMio 	Trilninf
Coinpi'titkm. 	1922).
ri.? 	{ci'iiiiri 	Entry 	to
the 	Chiituio 	Tribune
competition. 	1922.
modelled 	on
Renaissance 	prototypes.
1 	1.4 	l;i((/ifl 	Adolf Loos.
CInciiiji' 	Trilninv
competition 	entry.
1922.
basic 	incompatibility of a 	skyscraper's dimensions 	with
the 	Classical 	orders; 	columns 	were 	either 	attached 	like
matchsticks 	with 	no 	genuine 	tectonic 	value 	in 	relation
to 	the 	underlying 	mass, 	or 	else 	blown up 	to 	a 	colossal
size to clothe some 	major 	portion 	of the tower, 	in 	which
case 	their 	girth 	tended 	to 	interfere 	with 	the 	clarity 	of
the 	overall 	forin 	(tig. 	1 	1 	. 	3); 	whatever 	their 	incongru-
ities 	of 	form, 	these 	solutions 	never 	gave 	adequate
visual 	expression 	to 	the 	facts 	of 	steel 	frame 	con-
struction 	within. 	Perhaps 	with 	tongue 	in 	cheek. 	Adolf
Loos 	proposed 	to 	solve 	the 	problem 	of 	incompatible
dimensions by 	making 	the 	einiic sluift 	of the 	skyscraper
into 	a 	Doric 	column 	(tig. 	i 	1.4). 	This 	took 	Sullivan's
suggestion 	of a 	tripartite 	form 	for 	the 	building 	type 	all
too 	literally. 	Other 	architects 	descended 	into 	pan-
tomime 	by 	pursuing 	the 	imagery 	of 	a 	trumped-up.
populist 	Americanism. 	One 	entry 	had 	its 	top 	fashioned
as 	an 	Indian 	with 	his tomahawk 	raised 	above 	his 	head.
The 	European 	entries 	were 	restrained, 	humourless,
and sincere by comparison, 	and 	provided 	an 	intriguing
cross-section 	through 	emergent 	modern 	architectural
tendencies. 	Bruno 	Taut's 	design, 	tapering 	gradually
towards 	the 	top. 	was 	an 	Expressionist 	hybrid 	combin-
ing 	the 	images 	of his 	pre-war 	Steel 	and 	Glass 	pavilions.
It 	issued 	from 	an 	utterly 	different 	ideological 	world
from 	the 	American 	designs, 	and 	was 	frank 	and
enthusiastic 	in 	its 	attitude 	to 	steel 	technology. 	Its 	true
cousins 	were 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	glass 	tower
'cathedrals', 	rather 	than 	the 	eclectic 	piles 	which 	were
its 	local 	competitors. 	Ludwig 	Hilbersheimer's 	design
was 	composed 	of 	stark, 	rectangular 	volumes, 	ar-
ticulated 	solely 	by 	the 	checkerboard 	pattern 	of 	the
frame: 	it 	embodied 	a 	strict. 	Rationalist 	outlook. 	A
Dutch 	entry 	(by 	Bijvoet 	and 	Duikerl 	was 	composition-
ally 	extravagant 	by 	contrast, 	with 	its 	extending
horizontal 	flanges 	and 	overlapping 	planes. 	Walter
Gropius's 	scheme 	(fig. 	11.5) 	also 	employed 	a 	vocabu-
lary 	based 	on 	the 	rectangular 	frame. 	The 	entrance was
indicated 	by 	a sort 	of portico, 	and 	the 	main 	divisions 	in
the 	design 	were 	articulated 	by 	slight 	changes 	in
rhythm 	and 	bay 	spacing, 	by 	recesses 	and 	balcony
planes 	of varying 	depth. 	The 	overall 	impression 	was 	of

-- 149 of 420 --

148 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
a 	tense 	interrelationship 	of 	asymmetrical 	parts, 	well
suited 	to 	the 	three-quarter 	view by 	which 	the 	building
would 	be 	most 	easily 	seen. 	Inside, 	the 	plan 	was 	open,
uncluttered, 	and well 	lit 	from 	all sides, 	while to 	the rear
his 	building's 	elevation 	aligned 	with 	the 	frame 	of 	the
pre-existing 	printing 	office. 	If 	the 	design 	showed
sensitivity 	to 	the 	earlier 	Chicago 	school 	(it 	used 	the
indigenous 	tripartite 	Chicago 	window), 	it 	also 	in-
corporated 	devices 	which 	were 	just 	then 	emerging 	at
the 	Bauhaus 	through 	the 	impact 	of 	van 	Doesburg,
Moholy-Nagy. 	and 	Constructivism. 	Gropius's 	scheme
was 	conceived 	as 	a 	mechanistic 	abstraction, 	cel-
ebrating 	the 	idea 	of 	a 	modern 	communications
building: 	its 	effects 	of lightness 	and 	transparency 	were
as 	hallmarks 	of the 	new 	architecture; 	in 	it, 	technolog-
ical 	facts 	were 	infused 	with 	idealistic 	sentiments.
Evidently 	the 	jury 	did 	not 	think 	so: 	to 	their eyes, 	it
probably 	looked 	more 	like 	engineering 	than 	archi-
^M?.
m%.^^^ 	^-^
tecture. 	They awarded first prize to a 	neo-Gothic design
by 	Raymond 	Hood 	and John 	Mead 	Howells 	(Fig. 	1 	1.6),
This 	succeeded, 	as 	adeptly 	as 	had 	Gropius, 	in 	solving
many 	of the 	basic 	problems 	of the 	site 	and 	the 	building
type. 	The 	primary 	emphasis 	was 	vertical, 	the 	shafts
were 	set 	back 	at 	the 	top 	to 	become 	a 	spikey 	crown 	in
which 	the 	machine 	rooms and 	a small 	museum 	were
placed. 	Secondary 	piers 	emphasized 	the 	tall 	middle
portion 	or 	shaft, 	while 	the 	lowest 	part, 	where 	the
entrance 	was 	situated, 	acted 	as a 	base 	and 	responded
in 	height 	to 	the 	pre-existing 	printing 	office 	to 	the 	rear.
While 	the 	frame 	holding 	Hood's 	design 	up 	was
disguised 	under 	stonework, 	the 	sense 	of 	a 	vertical
thrust 	was 	successfully 	articulated 	by 	the 	Gothic 	piers
in 	the facades : 	these did 	not confront the 	architect with
the 	same 	modular 	difficulties 	as 	Classical 	orders, 	for
piers 	could 	be 	stretched 	almost 	indefinitely. 	But 	Hood's
choice 	of Gothic 	may 	have 	had 	moral 	associations as
':rr 	ffrrrr 	-i
-'ri 	I'. 	'Ml 	ii'l
" 	r- 	1' 	-. 	i'	
"! 	'.[^ 	" 	• 	"^
'" 	'!' 	' 	•• 	f
ii.S 	(far left) 	Walter
Gropius. 	Chicago 	Tribune
competition 	entry.
1922.
11.6 	(left) 	Raymond
Hood 	and ]otin 	Mead
Howells, 	winning entry
to the 	Chicago 	Tribune
competition, 	1922.

-- 150 of 420 --

Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	• 	149
well. 	One 	of 	the 	presentation 	renderings 	showed 	the
Tribune 	building 	in 	perspective, 	riding 	high 	above 	the
smoke 	and 	smuts 	of 	the 	Chicago 	environment 	- 	a
white 	cathedral 	of enlightenment 	towering 	above 	base
concerns. 	Such 	evocations 	appealed 	to 	the 	newspaper
proprietors' 	sense 	of their 	own 	moral 	purpose. 	Hood's
and 	Howell's 	design 	brilliantly 	caught 	the 	right
nostalgic 	and 	slightly 	romantic 	mood. 	Sigfried 	Giedion
later 	had 	his 	revenge 	on 	behalf 	of 	Gropius 	by
publishing 	his 	compatriot's 	scheme 	alongside
Burnhamand 	Root's 	Reliance 	Building of 	1S93 	(as 	if to
say 	that 	the 	former 	was 	the 	next 	logical 	step 	from 	the
latter 	in 	the 	evolution 	of the 	'true' 	modern 	prism) 	and
by 	leaving 	Hood's 	design 	out 	of 	account 	altogether.
From 	the 	point 	of view 	of the 	European 	avant-garde, 	of
course, 	the 	jury's 	decision 	was 	merely 	evidence 	of
reactionary 	tendencies.
The 	scheme 	which 	came 	in 	second 	was 	more
I 	r.7 	{right} 	Raymond
Hood. 	American
Radiator 	building. 	New
York. 	1924. 	detail 	of top.
influential 	than 	any 	of 	the 	others 	in 	the 	inter-war
years. 	This 	was 	designed 	by 	the 	Finnish 	architect 	Eliel
Saarinen 	and 	was 	in 	no 	easily 	categorizable 	style 	with
its 	telescoping 	forms, 	slight 	set-backs, 	and 	vertical
linear 	articulations. Interestingly. 	Sullivan 	praised 	this
design, 	perhaps 	because 	he 	sensed 	in 	it 	an 	abstraction
of 	nature 	akin 	to 	his 	own 	earlier 	theories. 	The
following 	year 	Saarinen 	elaborated 	a 	proposal 	for 	the
urban 	redevelopment 	of the 	area 	close 	to 	the 	Chicago
Loop 	and 	the 	lakeshore. 	thus 	indicating 	his 	urbanistic
understanding 	of the 	tall 	building 	and 	a 	certain 	lunvete
with 	regard 	to 	the 	speculator's 	mentality, 	which 	was
scarcely 	likely 	to 	allow 	open 	space 	for 	leisure 	when 	the
same 	land 	could 	be 	exploited 	for 	profit. 	The 	forces
which 	brought 	tall 	buildings 	into 	being 	ignored 	the
character 	of civic 	space 	and 	tended 	to 	destroy 	not 	only
the 	street 	as 	a 	social 	realm, 	but 	the 	complex 	grain 	of
pre-existing 	historical 	and 	social 	relationships. 	To 	this
process 	of 	disruption, 	most 	architectural 	suggestions
were 	merely 	an 	affirmative 	veneer.
Two 	years 	after his 	success 	with 	the 	Chicago 	Tribune
building. 	Raymond 	Hood 	designed 	the 	American
Radiator 	building 	in 	New 	York 	(Fig. 	11.7). 	This
followed 	the 	pattern 	of 	his 	earlier 	building, 	but 	the
vocabulary 	was 	now 	less 	obviously 	revived, 	being
more 	abstract 	and 	relying 	upon 	(among 	other 	things)
the 	appearance 	of 	the 	company's 	radiator 	products.
With 	its 	black 	brick 	facing, 	gold 	tinials. 	and 	elegant
proportions, 	the 	building 	crystallized 	an 	American
machine-age 	fantasy 	more 	whimsical 	and 	ornate 	than
the 	glass 	and 	steel 	evocations 	of 	mechanization
produced 	in 	Europe. 	There 	was 	little 	sense 	in 	Hood's
one-off 	designs 	of 	a 	quest 	for 	type 	forms: 	quite 	the
contrary, 	the 	architect 	took 	a 	certain 	delight 	in 	posing
as 	a 	dilettante, 	for 	whom 	consistency 	of 	style 	and 	a
search 	for 	the 	authentic 	were 	tedious 	and 	grim
burdens 	for 	those 	unlucky 	enough 	not 	to 	have 	the
exuberant 	capitalist 	city 	as 	their 	playground. 	Even 	the
images 	of 	the 	modern 	movement 	could 	be 	reduced 	to
mere 	motifs, 	as 	is 	clear 	from 	Hood's 	design 	for 	the
McGraw-Hill 	building 	of 	1928-9 	with 	its 	'applique' 	of
strip 	windows 	and 	its 	plain 	volumetric 	forms 	(fig.
11.8). 	The 	silhouette 	as 	a 	whole 	resulted 	from 	a
judicious 	visual composition within 	the 	rules of the set-
back 	laws. 	The 	top 	was 	a 	streamlined 	invention, 	with
the 	dynamism 	and 	populist 	character 	of 	Raymond
Loewy's 	'Moderne' 	industrial 	designs, 	or of Fritz 	l^ang's
Expressionist 	city 	in 	the 	film 	Metropolis. 	In 	the 	slightly
later 	Daily 	News 	building. 	Hood 	adopted 	yet 	another
dress 	- 	one 	perhaps 	derived 	from 	Saarinen's 	Tribune
design 	- 	by 	stressing 	verticality 	to 	an 	extreme. 	The
lobby 	(along 	with 	the crown 	of the 	skyscraper, 	the 	area
most 	likely 	to 	attract 	public 	attention) 	was 	turned 	into
a 	middle-brow 	scenario 	on 	the 	theme 	of the 	Daily 	News
as 	a 	network 	of 	information 	spreading 	across 	the

-- 151 of 420 --

150 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
world. 	A 	giant, 	gloomily 	lit 	globe 	was sunk in 	a central
pit. 	while 	the 	gadgetry 	of 	thermometers, 	wind-speed
indicators, 	and 	clocks 	provided 	the 	precise 	hour 	in 	the
main 	cities 	of 	the 	world 	and 	gave 	the 	whole 	thing 	a
vaguely 	science 	fiction 	air. 	However 	one 	characterizes
this 	phase 	of American 	design 	- 	'Moderne'. 	'Art 	Deco'.
or 	'Jazz 	Modern' 	- 	it 	flew 	in 	the 	face 	of 	European
modern 	movement 	puritanism 	in 	its 	obsession 	with
ornament, 	axial 	composition, 	gaudy 	poiychromy. 	and
a 	sort 	ofconsumerist 	theatricality.
The 	swansong 	of the 	twenties 	in 	New 	York 	was 	the
Chrysler 	building, 	designed 	by 	William 	Van 	Alen
between 	1928 	and 	1930 	(fig. 	1 	1.9). 	In 	its 	celebration
of 	financial 	success, 	this 	captured 	perfectly 	the 	heady
atmosphere 	of pre-crash 	capitalism. 	It 	rose 	to 	850 	feet
and 	so 	was 	the 	tallest 	building 	in 	the 	world 	for 	a 	short
time 	(being 	outstripped 	by 	the 	Empire 	State 	building 	in
the 	early 	thirties). 	Light 	silver-grey 	in 	colour, 	it 	stood
on 	a 	base 	twenty 	storeys 	high. 	Above this 	was 	a 	middle
section 	shaft 	rising 	another 	560 	feet. 	Then 	this 	too
began 	to 	step 	inwards, 	tapering 	finally 	to 	a 	stainless
steel 	sunburst 	motif 	with 	scalloped 	windows 	sur-
• 	I 	•
< 	mt
• 	• 	•*
11
I 	MH 	?HHUUHH 	1
ill 	It 	I UH UN NH Hii
:t>ti;iii.tuti'iinHn
_,»ii 	• 	»"i 	mi-snii'
uu 	tH 	«i."
fill' 	I 	IHUHIIH
ll.i 	ItHH-tliaHliU
III 	lii 	III
^ 	M 	;« 	f« 	^
mounted 	by 	a 	spire. 	The 	lobby 	was 	conceived 	as 	a
dream 	world 	of 	revealed 	lighting 	effects, 	expensive
russet-coloured 	marbles 	and 	lustrous 	metals, 	and had
something 	of the 	feeling 	of a 	Hollywood 	stage 	set. 	Each
of 	the 	lifts 	was 	lined 	in 	a 	dilTerent 	wooden 	intarsia
design 	with 	ornamental 	motifs 	recalling 	the 	heraldry
of the 	main 	body 	of the 	building. 	The 	skin 	of the 	tower
was 	patterned 	with dark 	grey 	bricks 	against the 	silvery
surfaces, 	and 	the corners 	gave the impression 	of quoins
of 	increased 	mass. 	In 	the 	centre 	of 	each 	facade, 	the
windows 	were 	detailed 	to 	give 	a 	sense 	of vertical 	forces
rising 	the 	whole 	height 	of the 	shaft, 	and 	terminating 	at
a 	curved 	centrepiece; 	these 	mimicked 	the 	actual
movements 	of 	the 	elevators 	running 	up 	and 	down 	at
the 	core. 	The 	plan 	of the 	Chrysler 	building 	was 	based
on 	primary 	and 	secondary 	axes 	(Van 	Alen 	had 	been
Beaux-Arts 	trained), 	and 	the 	elaborate 	design 	of 	the
skin 	reflected 	his 	interest 	in 	a 	sort 	of 	new 	'wall'
1 	1 . 8 	( below
lftt\ 	Raymond 	Hood.
McGraw-Hill 	building.
New 	York. 	1428-9.
1 	1.9 	(/f/II 	William 	Van
Alen. 	Chrysler building.
New 	York, 	192S-30.

-- 152 of 420 --

Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	151
architecture 	as 	an 	appropriate 	treatment 	for 	the 	steel
frame. 	It 	seems 	that 	his 	ideas 	may 	have 	been 	modelled
in 	part 	on 	weaving, 	fabric, 	or 	basket-work 	designs
(Plate 	5).
However 	one 	categorizes 	the 	Chrysler 	building
stylistically 	('Art 	Deco' 	or 	perhaps 	even 	'Expression-
ist'), 	its 	forms 	were 	among 	the 	most 	elegant 	in 	the 	field
of 	skyscraper 	design 	to 	that 	date. 	But 	these 	ap-
pearances 	were 	also 	manifestations 	of a 	fantasy 	about
the 	client 	which 	in 	turn 	touched 	on 	broader 	social
meanings. 	At 	the 	corners 	on 	the 	fortieth 	floor, 	just
below 	the 	base 	of the 	main 	shaft, 	were 	four 	giant 	metal
Chrysler 	radiator 	caps 	with 	wings. 	Next 	to 	them 	a
frieze 	of 	abstracted 	car 	wheels 	with 	huge 	silver 	studs
for 	hub-caps 	encircled 	the 	building. 	The 	chevron 	logo
of Chrysler occurred 	in 	the 	brickwork 	at 	various 	levels:
on 	top. 	within 	the 	sunburst 	motif 	and 	beneath 	the
spire, 	there 	originally 	stood 	a 	glass 	case 	containing
Walter 	Chrysler's 	first 	set 	of 	tools 	(reportedly 	closed
on 	the 	day 	the 	Empire 	State 	surpassed 	the 	Chrysler
building 	in 	height). 	Around 	the 	base 	of 	the 	sunburst,
projecting 	like 	gargoyles 	towards 	the 	horizons, 	were
colossal 	American 	eagles. 	The compound 	message 	was
clear: 	it 	was 	a 	celebration 	of self-advancement 	within
the 	American 	economic 	system. 	Here 	was a 	'Cathedral
of Capitalism' 	in 	response 	to 	the 	various 	quasi-socialist
1 	1. 10 	Hugh 	Ferris,
idealized 	skyscraper 	from
Tlw 	Metropolis of
Tomorrow. 	1929.
paper 	project 	skyscrapers 	conceived 	in 	Europe 	earlier
in 	the 	decade.
While 	the 	American 	skyscraper 	designers 	of 	the
twenties 	succeeded 	in 	the 	limited 	task 	of 	dressing 	up
big 	business 	in 	attractive 	costume, 	they 	rarely
produced 	work 	of 	depth. 	Those 	'higher 	forms 	of
sensibility 	and 	culture' 	which 	Sullivan 	had 	attempted
to 	express 	(perhaps 	Quixotically) 	in 	his 	skyscraper
designs 	of 	the 	1890s 	were 	notably 	lacking. 	Shortly
before 	his 	death, 	Sullivan 	had 	despaired 	of 	the
possibility 	of 	an 	authentic 	American 	architecture 	in
the capitalist city, 	as 	he 	had 	watched the eclectic 	heaps
rise 	around 	him.
These 	buildings, as 	they 	increase 	in 	number, 	make
the 	city 	poorer 	morally 	and 	spiritually: 	They 	drag 	it
down 	and 	dov^n 	into 	the 	mire. 	This 	is 	not 	American
civilization: 	it 	is 	the rottenness 	of Gomorrah. 	This 	is
not 	Democracy 	- 	it 	is 	savagery. 	... 	So 	truly 	does
this 	architecture 	reflect 	the 	causes 	that 	have
brought 	it 	into 	being.
Sullivan's 	cry 	reflected 	a basic 	dilemma 	of the 	artist
architect 	designing 	in 	the 	commercial 	world: 	how
could 	the 	brute 	'causes' 	of 	finance 	be 	translated 	into
the 	lasting 	stuff of a 	profound 	aesthetic 	symbolism.' 	A
question 	of 	this 	kind 	lay 	near 	the 	heart 	of 	European
fascination 	with 	the 	tall 	building 	too. 	Le Corbusier 	was
also 	appalled 	by 	the 	facile 	treatment 	of 	Manhattan's
skyscrapers, 	and 	by 	their 	urban 	irresponsibility, 	but 	he
was 	nonetheless 	magnetized 	by 	the 	romanticism 	of the
resulting 	skyline 	and 	by 	the 	manifestation 	of financial
force, 	managerial 	organization, 	and 	technological
know-how 	which 	brought 	such 	buildings 	into 	being:
he 	described 	Manhattan 	as 	the 	workhouse 	of the 	new
era'. 	By 	contrast 	with 	the 	American 	skyscrapers 	of the
twenties, 	his 	idealized 	images 	of the taU 	building 	in 	the
Vifle 	Contemporaine 	(1922) 	(and 	in 	the 	later 	V'ille
Voisin 	of 	1925) 	were 	entirely 	glazed, 	regular 	in 	form,
and 	conceived 	not 	only 	as 	emblems 	of 	technological
power 	(they 	were 	to 	contain 	the 	Saint-Simonian 	elite
of his 	city), 	but 	also 	as 	urbanistic 	tools 	for releasing 	the
floor 	of the 	city 	for 	nature 	and 	circulation:
The 	skyscraper 	is 	a 	tool, 	A 	magnificent 	tool 	for 	the
concentration 	of population 	and 	for 	the
decongestion 	of the 	soil : 	a 	tool 	of classification, 	and
for 	interior 	efficiency: 	a 	prodigious 	force 	for 	the
improvement 	of working 	conditions 	and 	a 	creator
of economies; 	for 	these 	reasons 	it 	is 	also 	a 	dispenser
of richness.
Thus 	artists 	of 	the 	European 	avant-garde 	employed
images 	of 	Manhattan 	as 	triggers 	in 	the 	search 	for
Utopian 	alternatives 	to 	the 	European 	industrial 	city.

-- 153 of 420 --

152 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
1 1 . 1 1 	ileft) 	Raymond
Hood 	and 	team.
Rockefeller Center. 	New
York. 	1931-40.
1 	1. 1
2
{above
ri(]ht) 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	National 	Life
Insurance 	building
project. 	1424. 	section.
1 	1. 	1 	3 	(ri<f/i(l 	Frank
Lloyd 	Wright. 	Barnsdall
House. 	Los 	Angeles,
California, 	1920.

-- 154 of 420 --

Skyscraper 	and Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	153

-- 155 of 420 --

154 	Modern 	Architecture between 	the 	Wars
southern 	California, 	chief 	among 	them 	the Barnsdall
residence in 	Los Angeles 	(fig. 	1 	1 .
1 	3 ), 	for a 	client 	almost
as 	eccentric 	as 	himself. 	On 	first 	inspection 	the 	massive,
fortress-like 	forms 	with 	their 	sloping 	concrete 	walls,
inward-looking 	courts, 	ponds 	and 	flat 	roofs 	would
seem 	to suggest 	a 	strong 	break 	with 	the 	Prairie 	Houses.
However, 	if 	one 	consults 	the 	plan 	arrangement 	one
finds 	the 	usual 	organizational 	principles 	combining
axes 	and 	cross 	axes, 	effects 	of 	formality 	and 	in-
formality, 	and 	a 	unity 	of conception 	between 	interiors
and 	exteriors 	(see pp. 	102-3).
Even 	so. 	it 	would 	be 	foolish 	to 	underrate 	the
significance of the obvious changes. 	Wright's emphasis
on 	the 	enclosing 	wall, 	instead 	of 	the 	screen-window
with 	horizontal 	overhang 	of the 	Prairie 	House 	period,
must 	be seen 	in 	the context of a 	new 	mood, 	if not 	a 	new
ideological 	direction. 	The 	Californian 	buildings 	expres-
sed 	a 	remoteness 	from 	the 	outside 	world 	which 	may
well 	have 	been 	in 	tune with 	the 	outlook 	of 	his 	rather
aloof 	new 	patrons 	and 	the 	architect's 	own 	feelings 	of
isolation. 	Wright 	was 	now 	estranged 	from 	the 	tight-
knit 	suburban 	community 	of 	Oak 	Park 	which 	had
sustained 	him 	before 	the 	war. 	and 	it 	was 	in 	the
twenties 	that 	the 	version 	of the 	architect 	as 	an 	erratic,
aristocratic 	genius 	at 	odds 	with 	'mobocracy' 	gained
currency.
On 	its own, 	a 	psychological 	explanation 	for 	Wright's
change 	in 	style 	would 	be 	inadequate. 	Surely 	one
reason 	for 	the 	thick 	walls 	and 	inward-turning 	courts
was 	the 	climate 	of 	the 	south-west. 	Wright's 	regional
sensitivities 	required 	a 	new 	response, 	and 	he 	followed
some 	of 	the 	cues 	supplied 	by 	traditional 	adobe 	struc-
tures 	with 	their 	thick 	sloping 	walls 	and 	flat 	roofs.
In 	transforming 	this 	vernacular 	tradition 	he 	had 	the
useful 	intermediary 	of Irving 	Gill, 	who 	had 	already
evolved 	an 	ingenious 	concrete 	architecture 	for 	the
local 	conditions. 	However, 	one 	guesses 	that 	more 	was
at 	stake 	in 	Wright's 	broad 	vision, 	and 	that 	he 	may
have 	been 	dreaming 	in 	Pan-American 	terms: 	the
battered 	forms 	and 	fussy 	geometrical 	concrete 	block
patterns 	(with 	their 	abstractions 	of 	natural 	motifs)
reflected 	his 	fascination 	with 	Mayan 	prototypes. 	In 	A
Testament, 	he 	wrote:
I 	remember 	how. 	as 	a 	boy. 	primitive 	American
architecture 	- Toltec, 	Aztec. 	Mayan. 	Inca 	- 	stirred
my 	wonder, 	excited 	my 	wishful 	admiration. 	. 	.
.
Those 	great 	American 	abstractions 	were 	all 	earth-
architectures : 	gigantic 	masses 	of masonry 	raised 	up
on 	one 	great 	stone 	paved 	terrain 	. 	.
.
The 	Millard 	House 	in 	Pasadena 	(Fig. 	11. 15) 	was
treated 	as 	if 	it 	were 	a 	procured 	ruin, 	its 	textured
ornamental 	effects 	being 	incomplete 	without 	clamber-
ing 	foliage 	and 	weathering. 	The 	Ennis 	House, 	which
stood 	on 	a 	prominent 	site 	with 	long 	views, 	was
1 	i.i4(;f/t) 	Rudolf
Sciiindier,
Schindlcr /Chase House.
I,os 	Angeles. 	California.
1 4 2 1 . 	view from 	house
lo 	garden.
1 	1. 1 5 	(below) 	Frank
Lloyd 	Wright. 	Millard
House. 	Pasadena.
California. 	1921.

-- 156 of 420 --

skyscraper 	and 	Suburb : 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	155
1 	1. If) 	RudolfSchindlcr.
Lovell 	Beach 	House.
Newport 	Beach.
California. 	142^-4.
surrounded 	by 	almost 	ceremonial 	terraces; 	its 	domes-
tic 	scale 	was 	transcended 	with 	a 	grandiose, 	monu-
mental 	statement. 	Once 	again 	Wright 	indulged 	in 	the
idea 	of the 	beginnings 	of architecture 	in 	nature.
During 	the 	i^ios 	and 	14208 	two 	Austrian-born
architects 	who 	passed 	through 	VVri'^ht's 	atelier 	im-
bibed 	his 	principles 	while 	still 	preserving 	their 	own
artistic 	identities 	(a 	rare 	combination). 	The 	first 	was
RudolfSchindlcr. 	who 	came 	from 	Vienna 	in 	1914.
after 	grappling 	with 	the 	influence 	of Otto 	Wagner 	and
the 	Secession. 	Schindlcr 	had 	a 	strong 	intuitive 	grasp 	of
the 	tendencies 	towards 	abstract 	form 	already 	manifest
in 	pre-war 	Viennese 	architecture, 	and 	after 	a 	period
supervising 	Wright's 	California 	houses, 	set 	out 	on 	his
own. 	The 	Schindler 	House 	of 	142 1 	(fig. 	11.14) 	shows
how 	he 	reacted 	to 	the 	California 	setting, 	which 	it 	was
then 	still 	just 	possible 	to 	celebrate 	as a 	virgin 	land. 	He
responded 	to 	the 	landscape, 	the 	earth 	colours, 	the
trees, 	and 	the 	vast 	spaces, 	and 	attempted 	to 	translate
his 	grasp 	of 	these 	characteristics 	into 	an 	inward-
looking 	shelter 	of low-ceilinged 	spaces 	with 	the 	access
to 	densely 	overgrown 	inner 	courts. 	The 	house 	was
designetl 	for 	himself 	and 	his 	wife, 	and 	another 	newly
married 	couple, 	the 	Chases. 	Ingenious 	planjiing
allowed 	the 	creation of separate 	private 	spaces for each
individual. 	At 	the 	upper 	level 	low 	protruding 	sleeping
porches 	were 	added, 	used 	mostly 	in 	the 	summer
months. 	Schindler 	adopted 	Irving 	Gill's 	tilt 	concrete
technology 	and 	built 	the 	house 	from 	thin 	slabs, 	slightly
inward-sloping, 	with 	small 	window 	chinks 	left 	be-
tween 	them. 	The 	aesthetics of the 	interior 	were 	clearly
indebted 	to 	Japanese 	architecture, 	especially 	the 	con-
trived 	incompleteness 	of 	the 	tea-house. 	The 	garden
areas 	were 	reached 	principally 	through 	movable 	can-
vas 	screens 	- 	features 	which 	were 	inspired 	by 	a
temporary 	camp 	in 	which 	Schindler 	and 	his 	wife
stayed 	while 	the 	house 	was 	being 	designed. 	The 	sense
of 	a 	primeval 	shelter 	- 	a 	curious 	blend 	between 	cave
and 	tent 	- 	seems 	to 	have 	been 	deliberate, 	for 	Schindler
(like 	Wright) 	was 	much 	concerned 	with 	the 	basic
psychological 	need 	for 	protection 	and 	with 	a 	tactile
sense 	of space.
In 	1422 	Schindlcr 	was 	employed 	b\' 	Dr. 	Phillip
Lovell 	to 	design 	a 	weekend 	house 	at 	Newport 	Beach
(fig. 	11.16). 	This 	was 	to 	contain 	sleeping 	lofts, 	a
lounge, 	a 	temporary 	kitchen, 	and 	an 	area 	for 	the
storage 	of 	boat 	equipment 	and 	surfboards. 	Realizing
that 	beach 	clobber 	could 	be 	stored 	underneath 	and

-- 157 of 420 --

156 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
wishing 	to 	exploit 	the 	views 	to 	tlie 	ocean. 	Schindler
took 	his 	cue 	from 	the 	local 	seaside 	pier 	architecture
and 	raised 	the 	building 	on 	solid, 	flange-shaped 	stilts.
He 	chose 	concrete 	for 	its 	cheapness, 	its 	durability, 	and
its 	space-creating 	capacity 	(through 	the 	use 	of
cantilevers) 	to 	execute 	his 	idea. 	The 	upper 	portions 	of
the 	Lovell 	beach 	house 	were 	formed 	from 	interlocking
trays 	which 	gave 	a 	bold, 	horizontal 	overhang 	to 	the
main 	elevation 	and 	provided 	a 	lofty 	double-height
living 	space 	with 	a 	correspondingly 	large 	window 	to
the seaside. 	The sleeping 	lofts 	were 	placed 	on 	the 	upper
tray 	at 	the 	outer 	extremity: 	the 	same 	tray 	then
extended 	inwards to create 	a 	gallery 	looking down 	into
the 	living-room. 	The 	solution 	was 	unpretentious 	and
simple. 	There 	were 	obviously 	lingering 	debts 	to
Wright, 	but 	the 	house 	was 	still 	stamped 	with 	a
uniquely 	Schindlerian 	character. 	Moreover, 	the 	spatial
ideas 	behind 	the 	scheme 	and 	the 	reduction 	to 	simple
stripped 	volumes 	and 	hovering 	horizontals 	bore 	some
obvious 	similarities 	with 	European 	progressive 	work.
There 	is 	no 	evidence 	that 	Schindler 	knew 	of 	such
recent 	experiments: 	he 	seems 	rather 	to 	have 	come 	to
similar 	conclusions 	by 	his 	own 	route. 	His 	outlook 	lay
closer 	to 	Wright's 	organic 	philosophy 	than 	to 	the
mechanistic 	abstractions of the European 	avant-garde.
When 	he 	eventually 	saw 	pictures 	of 	the 	stark
architecture 	of the 	twenties 	created 	6.000 	miles 	away,
he 	spoke 	of the 	emptiness 	of spirit 	and 	lack of warmth
of 	buildings 	produced 	by 	men 	who 	had 	suffered
through 	the 	trenches. 	Schindler 	combined 	a 	sophisti-
cated 	ideal 	of 	the 	simple 	life 	with 	reverence 	for 	the
order 	of 	nature. 	In 	a 	sense, 	Dr. 	Lovell 	was 	the 	ideal
client 	for 	him. 	for 	he 	ran 	a 	'Physical 	Culture 	Center'
and 	saw 	himself as 	an 	intellectual 	progressive.
The 	other 	Viennese 	architect 	to 	come 	to 	California
via 	Wright's 	office 	was 	Richard 	Neutra, 	who 	worked
with 	Schindler 	until 	he 	secured 	some 	of 	his 	own
commissions. 	They 	made 	a 	joint 	entry 	to 	the 	League 	of
Nations 	competition 	in 	1927. 	and 	then 	Neutra
embarked 	on 	the 	design 	of 	another 	house 	for 	Lovell,
this 	time 	to 	stand 	on 	the 	side 	of a 	spur 	looking 	over 	a
lush 	valley 	in 	Los 	Angeles 	(Fig. 	11.17). 	The 	building
grew 	away 	from 	the 	hillside 	so 	that 	one 	entered 	at 	an
upper 	level 	and 	passed 	along 	a 	landing 	into 	the
airy 	upper 	part 	of 	a 	triple-volume 	stair 	well 	before
coming 	to 	the 	more 	private 	areas 	of 	the 	dwelling
1 1 .
1
7
{above
left) 	Richard 	Neutra.
Lovell 	House, 	Los
Angeles. 	California.
1927.

-- 158 of 420 --

1 1 . 1 8 	George 	Howe
and 	William 	Ixscaze.
Philadelphia 	Savings
Fund 	Society 	huilding,
Philadelphia, 	192(1-31.
perched 	over 	the 	landscape 	with 	superb 	views 	into 	the
valley. 	The 	different 	functions 	were 	expressed 	in
varying 	window 	sizes 	unified 	by 	floating 	white
horizontals 	in 	concrete 	set 	off 	against 	the 	steel
supports, 	window-frames 	and 	dark 	areas 	of 	shadow,
and 	detailed 	to 	give 	the 	maximum 	effects 	of 	lightness
and 	planarity. 	In 	places these bands ceased 	to 	have 	any
enclosing 	function, 	becoming 	instead 	the 	loose 	bound-
Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb: 	America 	between 	the 	Wars 	157
aries 	of exterior 	terraces, 	the 	overhangs 	of sun 	shades,
or 	the 	partial 	shelter 	of 	a 	swimming 	pool. 	The 	details
had 	a 	more 	precise 	and 	mechanistic 	character 	than
Schindler's: 	Neutra 	was 	well 	aware 	of recent 	work 	in
Europe, 	so 	was 	able 	to 	draw 	lessons 	from 	a 	broader
range 	of 	experiments 	(Plate 	6 1. 	Neutra 	had 	himself
contributed 	to 	transatlantic 	mythologies 	in 	a 	book
entitled 	Wk 	Baiit 	Amehka? (How 	does 	America 	RuUd?,
1927). 	Thus 	the 	Lovell 	House was an 	intriguing 	hybrid
of 	International 	Modern 	architecture, 	the 	organicism
of 	Wright, 	and 	Neutra's 	own 	vision 	of 	the 	healthy
and 	natural 	way 	of life. 	In 	the 	ensuing 	designs 	of both
Schindler 	(e.g., 	the 	Sachs 	Apartments 	1 	929, 	the 	Wolfe
House 	1928, 	the 	Oliver 	House 	1933) 	and 	Neutra 	(the
Kaufmann 	Desert 	House 	1946-7), 	one 	may 	ten-
tatively 	speak 	of a 	regionalist 	emphasis 	within 	modern
architecture.
A 	review 	of 	experimental 	tendencies 	in 	the 	United
States 	during 	the 	twenties 	would 	be 	incomplete
without 	the 	Philadelphia 	Savings 	Fund 	Society 	(PSFS)
skyscraper 	designed 	by 	George 	Howe 	and 	William
Lescaze 	between 	1926 	and 	1931 	(Fig. 	11. 18). 	Here
inherited 	typological 	thinking 	about 	the 	American
skyscraper 	and 	the 	emergent 	vocabulary 	of 	the
International 	Style 	came 	together 	in 	a 	way 	which
modified 	each. 	Howe 	had 	been 	trained 	in 	the 	Beaux-
Arts 	system 	while 	Lescaze 	had 	first-hand 	experience 	of
designing 	with 	the 	new 	forms 	in 	Europe. 	To 	trace 	the
sketches 	of 	the 	PSFS 	project 	I'rom 	the 	earliest 	in 	1926
( when 	Lescaze had 	not yet come 	into 	the 	picture) 	to 	the
latest 	in 	1930, 	is 	to 	gauge 	not 	only 	the 	vicissitudes 	of
an 	individual 	design 	process 	in 	which 	formal 	and
functional 	conflicts 	were 	gradually 	resolved, 	but 	also
the 	transition 	from 	one 	architectural 	style 	phase 	to
another. 	An 	axial, 	encrusted, 	eclectic 	skyscraper 	of the
kind 	all 	too 	familiar 	from 	the 	Chicago 	Tribune 	com-
petition 	gave 	way 	bit 	by 	bit 	to 	an 	asymmetrical,
machine-age 	design, 	in 	which 	structure, 	volume, 	and
differentiations 	of 	function 	were 	articulated 	in 	a
disciplined 	yet 	subtle 	way. 	Even 	within 	the 	strict
confines 	of 	the 	International 	Style, 	there 	were 	many
possible 	variations 	of 	treatment. 	For 	example, 	the
architects 	spent 	much 	time studying 	alternative 	ways
for 	reconcifing 	the 	structural 	verticals 	(which 	they
wished 	to 	'express 	honestly') 	with 	a 	horizontal 	planar
expression 	(which 	they 	felt 	to 	be 	associatively 	right 	for
a 	building 	of 	modern 	and 	efficient 	image). 	The
relationship 	of 	the 	large 	vertical 	volumes 	of 	the 	main
slab 	with 	the 	attached 	elevator 	zone 	to 	the 	rear, 	and
with 	the 	pedestal' 	of the 	banking 	area, 	also 	took 	a 	long
time 	to 	resolve.
The 	finished 	PSFS 	building 	(1932) 	was 	one 	of 	the
first 	skyscrapers 	actually 	to 	be 	built 	in 	the 	new 	style.
The 	design 	of 	the 	lower 	portion 	of 	the 	building
combined 	subway 	access, 	shops, 	and 	a 	raised 	level

-- 159 of 420 --

158 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
banking 	floor 	reached 	by 	escalator. 	These, 	the
honorific zones 	of the 	structure, 	were 	amplified 	in 	scale
and 	treated 	in 	dignified 	materials 	such 	as 	marble
veneers 	and 	chrome. 	The 	upper 	floors 	were 	well-lit
open 	plush 	offices which 	were 	also 	air-conditioned 	(the
mechanical 	services 	floor 	made 	a 	clear 	caesura 	in 	the
facade 	composition). 	The 	overall 	image 	conveyed
efficiency 	and 	crispness. 	This 	was 	not 	a 	question 	of
'stylism'. 	of 	packaging 	into 	pre-conceived 	forms, 	as 	it
had 	been 	with 	Raymond 	Hood's 	designs; 	nor 	was 	it
mere 	'functionalism'. 	The 	PSFS 	form 	was 	backed 	by 	a
rigorous 	architectural 	philosophy 	which, 	at 	its 	most
high-flown, 	embraced 	abstruse 	notions 	of 'space/time'
appropriate 	to 	modern 	life, 	but 	on 	a 	more 	down-to-
earth 	level 	manifested 	a 	deep 	concern 	for 	the 	touch-
stones 	of functional 	design. 	Howe 	wrote 	revealingly 	of
the 	PSFS:
Sound 	architecture 	must 	be 	able 	to 	bear 	the 	closest
analytical 	examination 	externally, 	internally,
structurally 	and 	mechanically, 	and 	the 	solution
of each 	problem 	which 	presents 	itself in 	the
development 	of a 	design 	must 	be not 	only 	possible,
but 	possible 	in 	a concise 	and 	orderly 	form 	as 	a
consequence 	of the 	organic 	foundation 	of the
original 	conception 	. 	.
.
Modern 	architecture 	originated 	not 	in 	a 	search
for 	a 	purely 	practical 	solution 	of modern 	problems
but 	in 	a 	dissatisfaction 	with 	the 	superficial,
inorganic 	beauty 	of superimposed 	traditional
architectural 	elements 	and 	ornament. 	As 	would
naturally 	be 	the 	case, 	the 	search 	for 	an 	organic
beauty 	led 	back 	to 	the 	very 	conception 	of design
and 	it 	was 	found 	that 	the 	beauty 	sought 	could 	be
found 	. 	. 	. 	only 	in 	an 	expression 	of the 	human,
structural 	and 	mechanical 	functions 	of archi-
tecture. 	Our 	purpose 	as 	artists, 	as 	opposed 	to 	mere
builders, 	in 	moulding 	these 	functions 	. 	. 	. 	has 	been
to 	achieve 	beauty. 	. 	.
.
The 	experimental 	works 	of 	modern 	architecture 	in
the 	United 	States 	were 	backed by 	a 	variety 	of ideologies
and. 	at 	their 	most 	successful, 	they 	were 	genuine
attempts 	at 	coming 	to 	terms 	with 	the 	problem 	of 	a
serious 	architectural 	culture. 	Curiously 	though, 	the
Museum 	of Modern 	Art 	show 	on 	modern 	architecture
of 	1932 	organized 	by 	Alfred 	Barr, 	Henry-Russell
Hitchcock, 	and 	Philip 	Johnson, 	which 	gave 	popular
currency 	to 	the 	term 	'International 	Style', 	was 	silent
on 	the 	social 	content 	of 	the 	new 	architecture.
Hitchcock 	and 	|ohnson's 	catalogue, 	The 	InlenuiUonal
Style: 	Architecture 	Since 	1922. 	attempted 	instead 	to
illustrate 	and 	define 	the 	basic 	visual 	motifs 	and 	modes
of 	expression 	irrespective 	of 	differences 	in 	function,
meaning, 	and 	belief. 	Perhaps 	influenced 	by 	historians
of 	Renaissance 	art 	like 	Heinrich 	Wolfflin. 	who 	had
tried 	to 	define 	the 	most 	characteristic 	general 	forms 	of
an 	earlier 	epoch, 	the 	authors 	outlined 	what 	they 	took
to 	be 	the 	main 	visual 	principles 	of the 	new 	style.
There 	is 	first 	of all 	a 	new 	conception 	of architecture
as 	volume, 	rather 	than 	as 	mass. 	Secondly,
regularity 	rather 	than 	axial 	symmetry 	serves 	as 	the
chief means 	of ordering 	design. 	These 	two
principles 	with 	a 	third 	proscribing 	arbitrary 	applied
decoration 	mark 	the 	productions 	of the
International 	Style.
It is ironical that this formafist emphasis should have
been 	made 	in 	the 	Depression 	years 	and 	just 	before 	the
launching 	of 	Roosevelt's 	New 	Deal, 	an atmosphere 	in
which 	stylistic 	niceties 	scarcely 	seemed 	relevant, 	but 	a
situation 	to 	which 	the 	ideological 	probings 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	might 	well 	have 	been 	appropriate.
In 	a 	sense, 	Hitchcock 	and 	Johnson 	did 	modern
architecture 	a 	severe 	disservice 	by 	dishing 	it 	up 	in 	the
way 	they 	did. 	Wright 	denounced 	the 	abstract 	box
architecture 	for 	its 	lack 	of 	an 	integrated 	view 	of 	man,
and 	its 	superficial 	formalism: 	Regionalists 	bemoaned
the 	importation 	of 	yet 	another 	cosmopolitan 	gloss;
Buckminster 	Fuller 	inveighed 	against 	the 	lack of a 	real
functionality, 	the 	superficial 	flirtation 	with 	tech-
nology : 	and 	in 	the field 	of civic design 	various branches
of 	Revivalism 	went 	virtually 	untouched. 	Apart 	from
some 	curious experiments 	by 	Kocher, 	Frey 	and 	Keck 	in
the 	mid-thirties, 	and 	the 	continuing 	(but 	little-known)
works 	of Schindler 	and 	Neutra 	on 	the 	West 	Coast, 	that
is 	about where the matter of 'the 	International 	Modern
Movement' 	in 	the United 	States was 	left 	until 	the end of
the thirties. 	Meanwhile, 	of course. 	Wright 	proceeded to
produce 	some 	of 	his 	most 	idiosyncratic 	and 	vital
creations 	in 	the 	same 	years.
Taking 	the period 	1 920-3 5 	in 	the 	United 	States as a
whole, 	it 	is 	clear 	that 	there 	were 	many 	parallel 	trends
in 	architecture, 	but 	that 	the 	innovators, 	as 	usual, 	were
atypical. 	The 	Beaux-Arts 	system 	of 	education 	con-
tinued 	virtually 	unchallenged 	in 	America; 	it 	was 	the
arrival 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe. 	Walter 	Cropius. 	and
Marcel 	Breuer 	towards 	the 	end 	of the 	thirties 	which 	set
the 	scene 	for 	the 	growth 	of 	a 	modern 	architectural
establishment 	after 	the 	Second 	World 	War. 	Paradoxi-
cally 	- 	as 	we 	shall 	see 	- 	the 	eventual 	'victory' 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	was 	to 	be 	rather 	hollow, 	as 	it 	was
soon 	debased 	into 	a 	commercialized 	fashion. 	The 	glass
towers 	envisaged 	on 	paper 	by 	the 	Utopian 	fantasists 	of
the 	twenties 	were 	destined 	to 	become 	the 	symbols 	of
the corporate status quo. 	while the 	idealism of the early
modern 	movement 	would 	be 	absorbed 	into 	the
mainstream 	of mass 	consumerist 	values.

-- 160 of 420 --

1 	2 	. 	The 	Ideal 	Community 	: 	Alternatives 	to
the 	Industrial 	City
Men 	who 	try 	to 	create 	a 	new 	architecture, 	a 	free 	architecture 	for 	a 	free
people, 	anticipate 	the 	creation 	of a 	new 	social 	order
K.Teige. 	1928
The 	searchi 	for 	new 	ways 	of 	life 	basic 	to 	so 	mucli
modern 	architecture 	of the 	twenties 	was 	also 	manifest
in 	idealistic 	blueprints 	for 	the 	replanning 	of 	the
industrial 	city. 	But 	whereas 	individual 	commissions
for 	villas, 	schools, 	factories, 	and 	university 	dormitories
allowed 	socially 	committed 	artists 	to 	realize 	fragments
of 	larger 	dreams 	in 	microcosm, 	the 	power 	to 	build
urban 	totalities 	was 	rarely 	granted. 	Avant-garde
visions of the city 	therefore 	usually 	remained 	on 	paper.
Even 	so, 	they 	were 	able 	gradually 	to 	intiltrate 	the
imaginations 	of 	later 	generations 	and 	hence 	to 	alter
the 	very 	concept 	and 	image 	of the 	modern 	town.
The 	numerous 	ideal 	city 	plans 	of the 	1 	420s 	suggest
an 	ambition 	to 	build 	the 	world 	anew, 	to 	start 	afresh,
to 	rid 	culture 	once 	and 	for 	all 	of 	the 	detritus 	of 	'dead
forms'. 	However, 	just 	as 	the 	new 	architecture 	often
had 	roots 	in 	history, 	so 	the 	new 	cities 	were 	usually
concoctions 	of existing 	urban 	elements reassembled 	in
new 	ways. 	The 	fact 	is 	that 	Utopias 	are 	historically
bound; 	they 	have 	ideological 	roots 	and 	formal
precedents ; 	and if one scratches beneath 	the rhetoric of
the 	'brave 	new 	world', 	one 	often 	finds 	a 	vein 	of
nostalgia 	running 	through 	the 	futurism.
The 	core 	problems 	that 	were 	addressed 	by 	such
urbanists 	as 	Gamier. 	Berlage, 	I^e 	Corbusier. 	Gropius.
May 	and 	Milyutin 	had 	a 	history 	inextricably linked 	to
the 	evolution 	of 	the 	industrial 	city 	in 	the 	nineteenth
century. 	Mechanization, 	new 	means of production 	and
transportation 	had 	then 	transformed 	the 	pre-existing
morphology 	of 	the 	city 	into 	an 	unrecognizable 	and
incoherent 	morass 	of 	institutions 	and 	infrastructures
of 	circulation 	catering 	to 	capitalist 	development.
Moreover, 	cities 	in 	industrialized 	regions 	of 	England
and 	France 	had 	grown 	with 	uncontrolled 	speed 	as 	the
peasantry 	had 	flocked 	to 	the 	urban 	areas 	for 	employ-
ment 	and 	had 	been 	housed 	in 	the 	most 	squalid
conditions. 	In 	the 	same 	period 	populations 	increased
drastically. 	The 	resulting 	slum 	landscapes 	of factories,
tenements, 	and 	grimy 	streets 	were 	without 	decent
communal 	or 	private 	amenities. 	They 	were 	described
by 	Engels 	in 	1845 	after 	a 	visit 	to 	Manchester: 	'a 	filth
and 	a 	disgusting 	grime 	the 	equal 	of which 	is 	not 	to 	be
found'.
But 	the 	disruptions 	of 	industrialization 	extended
well 	beyond 	the 	working-class 	slums 	into 	other 	areas
of the city. 	The combined 	forces of land speculation 	and
railway 	transport 	cut 	into 	the 	old 	fabric 	and 	destroyed
the 	existing 	hierarchy. 	The 	new 	middle 	classes
required 	homes 	remote 	from 	the 	dirt 	created 	by 	the
sources of their own 	wealth. 	Thus the 	fringes of the city
extended 	outwards, 	enveloping 	the 	countryside 	with
suburban 	lots 	and 	new 	patterns 	of roads. 	A 	recurrent
theme of reformers 	throughout 	the 	nineteenth 	century
and 	in 	the 	early 	twentieth 	was 	that 	a 	supposed
harmony 	between 	the 	social 	order 	and 	nature 	had
been 	lost 	and 	should 	be 	reclaimed.
There 	were 	many 	ways 	in 	which 	critiques 	of 	the
industrial 	city 	were 	framed. 	Marx 	and 	Engels 	argued
that 	the 	true 	roots of the evil 	lay 	in 	the 	rottenness of the
social 	order 	engendered 	by 	capitalism ; 	they 	therefore
advocated 	revolution 	as 	the 	prerequisite 	for 	a 	decent
political 	and 	architectural 	environment. 	Earlier 	in 	the
century. 	Utopian 	Socialists 	such 	as 	Henri 	Saint-Simon
and Charles 	Fourier had 	argued in 	favour of alternative

-- 161 of 420 --

i6o 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
social 	structures 	based 	on 	new 	forms 	of 	rule 	and 	co-
operation. 	Saint-Simon 	had 	advocated 	the 	overthrow
of 	the 	ruling 	classes 	and 	their 	replacement 	by
technocrats 	who 	would 	propel 	society 	along 	the
inevitable 	path 	of 	human 	progress. 	Fourier 	had
entertained 	a 	theory 	of passional 	attractions 	in 	human
nature 	whereby 	opposites 	would 	be resolved 	in 	a sort 	of
perfect 	balance 	of 	forces 	between 	individual 	desires
and 	social 	expectations. 	This 	dream 	of 	a 	natural
co-operation 	untrammelled 	by 	the 	irrelevancies 	of
previous 	social 	contracts 	was 	carried 	through 	in 	the
fantasy 	of 	an 	ideal 	collective 	palace: 	a 	'phalanstere'
(fig. 	1 2. 1 	). This was supposed to stand 	in 	a 	rural setting
and 	to 	contain 	all 	the 	functions 	necessary 	to 	support 	a
community 	of 	about 	i,8oo 	people, 	who 	would 	avoid
the dangers 	of the 	'division 	of labour' 	by 	spending 	their
days 	developing 	their 	talents 	and 	nurturing 	the
growth 	of 	whole, 	uncramped 	personalities. 	The
phalanstere' 	had 	an 	uncanny 	resemblance 	to 	a
Baroque 	palace, 	as 	if Fourier 	were 	making 	available 	to
the 	populace 	as 	a 	whole 	the 	enrichments 	and
potentials 	of 	the 	pre-revolutionary 	aristocracy. 	The
various 	quarters 	(including 	rooms, 	ballrooms, 	a
hostelry, 	a 	library 	and 	an 	observatory) 	were 	to 	be
linked 	by 	a 	long 	interior 	street 	to 	encourage 	chance
contacts 	and 	to 	embody 	the 	idea 	of 	an 	egalitarian
society.
There were other urban 	proposals 	for countering the
pressures of industrialism, 	which 	were less drastic 	than
either 	the 	revolutionary 	or 	the 	Utopian 	models 	and
relied 	more 	on 	the 	forces 	of the 	status 	quo. 	One 	thinks
in 	this 	connection 	of 	the 	numerous 	attempts 	at
designing 	decent 	workers' 	towns 	- 	from 	Bournville 	to
Pullman 	City 	- 	in 	which 	the 	philanthropic 	side 	of
capitalist 	ownership 	emerged. 	Or 	again, 	there 	were
Haussmann's 	remarkable 	plans 	for 	Paris 	involving 	the
cutting 	of 	new 	boulevards 	and 	the 	planting 	of 	parks:
these 	undoubtedly 	reflected 	mixed 	motives, 	as 	they
created 	more 	hygienic 	spaces 	while 	opening 	up 	routes
for 	commerce, 	military 	control, 	and 	vast 	axes 	linking
one 	part 	of 	the 	city's 	historical 	symbols 	of 	power
theatrically 	to 	another. 	In 	the 	United 	States 	soon 	after
mid-century, 	Frederick 	Law 	Olmsted 	outlined 	his
proposals 	for 	Central 	Park 	in 	New 	York, 	in 	which
nature 	was 	brought 	to 	the 	heart 	of 	the 	industrial
metropolis 	in 	an 	attempt 	at 	humanizing 	it. 	The 	park 	in
Olmsted's 	eyes 	was 	an 	ideal 	public 	realm 	celebrating
the 	inevitable 	drift 	of history 	towards 	an 	increasingly
democratic 	state.
In 	Europe 	a 	number of other paradigms were created
in 	the 	second 	half 	of 	the 	nineteenth 	century, 	which
were 	destined 	to 	influence 	twentieth-century 	ideas.
One 	of these 	emerged 	in 	the 	writings 	of Camillo 	Sitte, 	a
Viennese, 	who 	was 	opposed 	to 	the 	planning 	of 	grand
vistas 	and 	axes, 	and 	.sought 	a 	closer 	relationship
between 	irregularities 	of 	earlier 	city 	forms 	and 	the
layout 	of 	spaces 	and 	squares: 	he 	thus 	unknowingly
became 	the 	father-figure 	for 	many 	later 	movements
intent 	on 	maintaining 	the 	close-knit 	scale 	of 	the 	pre-
industrial 	city 	against 	the 	onslaughts 	of 	grand 	tabula
rasa 	plans 	of 	every 	stripe. 	Another 	tradition 	stemmed
from 	the 	ideas 	of 	the 	Spaniard, 	Arturo 	Soria 	y 	Mata,
who 	advocated 	an 	invention 	called 	the 	'linear 	city' 	for
ameliorating 	the 	crush 	of population 	on 	large 	centres,
for linking 	living 	and 	working 	areas 	to circulation, 	and
for 	making 	a 	more 	ordered 	relationship 	between
country 	and 	city. 	His town 	was 	to be laid 	out 	in 	parallel
bands 	along 	circulation 	routes, 	which 	might 	link 	up
pre-existing 	cities 	as 	far 	apart 	as 	Barcelona 	and
Moscow: 	we 	have 	already 	seen 	later 	transformations
of this 	idea 	in 	the 	Soviet 	Union.
Another model 	for dealing 	with 	over-population 	and
decentralization 	emerged 	just 	before 	the 	turn 	of 	the
century 	in 	the 	writings 	of 	the 	Englishman 	Ebenezer
Howard, 	particularly 	in 	a 	book 	entitled 	Tomorrow: 	A
Peaceful 	Path 	to 	Real 	Reform 	(1898). 	Howard 	was
disturbed 	by 	the 	disruption 	and 	waste 	he 	saw 	in
London 	and 	other 	industrial 	cities 	and 	argued 	in
— 	N 	2.—
12. 1 	Charles 	Fourier,
the 	'Phalanstere':
engraving f. 	1834.
N.B.
DifcGRfcM 	ONLY.
PlANCANNOTBEORIkWN
UNTIL 	SITE 	SCLECTCO
CAKDCN 	CITY 	AND 	RURAL 	BELT

-- 162 of 420 --

The 	Ideal 	Community : 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	1 6
1
12.2 	tleft) 	Ebenezer
Howard, 	diagram 	of the
Garden 	City 	principle
showing the 	main
elements 	and 	their
relationship 	(from
Garden 	Cities of
Tomorrow, 	1902).
12.3 	(right) 	Tony
Garnier. 	Cite
Industrielle. 	1901-17.
residential 	quarter (from
the 	Cite 	bulustrieUe.
1917).
favour 	of 	new 	communities 	of 	manageable 	size, 	in
which 	rural 	and 	urban 	worlds 	would 	be 	brought
together 	in 	a 	happy 	synthesis 	(fig. 	12.2). 	Essentially 	his
vision 	of 	focal 	communities 	was 	a 	variant 	on 	the
English 	village, 	but 	with 	additional 	amenities 	like
railways 	and 	small-scale 	industry. 	The 	unit 	was 	the
family 	in 	its 	individual 	home; 	these 	houses 	were 	to 	be
laid 	out 	along 	well-planted 	streets, 	converging 	gradu-
ally 	upon 	the 	broader 	communal 	green 	and 	civic
buildings 	towards 	the 	centre. 	Howard 	was 	much
influenced 	by 	that 	moral 	strain 	of 	socialist 	criticism
which 	descended 	from 	William 	Morris 	and 	John
Ruskin. 	He 	would 	have 	agreed 	with 	the 	latter 	when 	he
wrote 	in 	favour 	of; 	'clean 	streets 	with 	free 	countryside
all 	around; 	a 	belt 	of fine 	gardens 	and 	orchards, 	so that
from 	every 	point 	in 	the 	city 	one can 	reach 	the 	pure 	air.
the 	grass 	and 	the 	distant 	horizon.' 	However, 	Howard's
thinking also stemmed from 	a 	more drastically 	Utopian
tradition 	of 	'alternative 	communities' 	like 	the 	one
envisaged 	earlier 	in 	the 	century 	by 	Robert 	Owen.
Permeating 	the 	dream 	was 	a 	nostalgia 	for 	a 	pre-
industrial 	world, 	and 	when 	a 	version 	of 	the 	Garden
City 	idea 	was 	eventually 	carried 	out 	in 	reality 	at
Letchworth, 	it was 	appropriately 	complemented 	by 	the
Arts 	and 	Crafts 	imagery 	and 	ideals 	of 	Raymond
Unwin's 	architecture.
Garden 	City 	principles 	were 	taken over 	and 	trans-
formed 	by 	Tony 	Garnier 	in 	his 	proposals 	for 	a 	Cite
Industrielle, 	conceived 	between 	about 	1 90 1 	and 	1 9 1
7
when 	his 	ideas 	were 	published 	(fig. 	1 2. 	s). 	This 	scheme
was 	mentioned 	earlier 	in 	connection 	with 	reinforced
concrete, 	the 	material 	most 	widely 	employed 	in 	the
plan's 	design. 	It 	was 	Garnier's 	intention 	to 	lay 	out 	all
the 	problems 	and 	solutions 	of the 	'most 	general 	case' 	of
the 	industrial 	city. 	He 	proposed 	a 	medium-sized 	case 	of
about 	35.000 	inhabitants 	for 	which 	he 	attempted 	to
co-ordinate 	all 	the 	social, 	productive, 	and 	transport
functions. 	Zoning 	was 	employed 	to 	separate industry
from 	the 	home, 	and 	railways 	were 	used 	to link 	the 	two
with 	trade 	centres. 	The 	ideal 	site 	conveniently 	foresaw
terraces 	in 	the 	landscape 	which 	helped 	to 	articulate
the 	different 	zones, 	but 	the 	hierarchy 	of 	parts 	was
ordered 	and 	heightened by the use of axes 	(recalling his
Beaux-Arts 	training 	and 	his 	interest 	in 	ancient
Classical 	towns). 	There 	was 	a 	large 	civic 	area 	towards
the 	centre, 	but 	Garnier 	made 	no 	provision 	for 	religious
buildings. 	This 	no 	doubt 	mirrored 	his 	socialist
conviction 	that 	the 	new 	society 	would 	render 	such
palliatives' 	unnecessary. 	As in 	Howard's 	Utopia, 	small
family 	villas 	were 	laid 	out 	along 	side 	streets 	lined 	with
trees, 	protected 	from 	overcrowding, 	the 	noise 	and
smell 	of 	traffic, 	and 	industry. 	There 	were 	also 	some
apartment 	buildings 	on 	a 	larger 	scale, 	also 	flat-roofed
and 	rectangular. 	Walkways 	were 	provided 	alongside
each 	building, 	so 	allowing 	pedestrians 	to 	filter 	across
the 	city at 	any 	point 	and 	permitting 	a 	dense 	planting 	of
trees. 	Garnier 	claimed 	that 	'the 	land 	of 	the 	city, 	taken
overall, 	is 	like 	a big 	park, 	without 	any 	fences 	to 	delimit
the 	various 	sections.' 	Hygienic 	factors 	also 	played 	a
major 	part 	in his 	plan.

-- 163 of 420 --

i62 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
i<^ 	"
^ 	-1
v^m^^mfl•^s^^
Thus 	the 	Garden 	City 	was 	here 	rethought 	in 	ways
which 	faced 	up 	to 	the 	techniques, 	potentials, 	and
values 	of 	an 	industrial 	society. 	Garnier's 	imagery 	was
pervaded 	by 	a 	sober 	yet 	romantic 	aura 	of 	the
progressive 	potential 	of industrial 	technique 	to 	further
a 	programme 	of 	social 	emancipation. 	Class 	struggles
and 	oppositions 	of interest 	seemed 	to 	have no 	place 	in
this 	Arcadian 	dream 	of 	Grecian 	villas, 	places 	of co-
operation, 	and 	tree-lined 	avenues. 	The 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
imagery 	of Unwin's 	sound 	English 	working-men 	living
a healthy 	and moral 	life 	in 	a 	rural 	setting gave 	way 	to 	a
flat-topped 	architecture 	evocative 	of 	the 	larger 	or-
ganizations 	of 	the 	industrial 	state. 	But 	for 	all 	its
progressive 	mood, 	there 	was 	still 	a 	touch 	of nostalgia,
as 	Manfredo 	Tafuri 	has 	suggested 	by 	referring 	to 	the
Cite Industrielle 	as 	'a 	New 	Hellas'
:
For 	him 	the 	future 	was 	anchored 	in 	a 	past 	fondly
pictured 	as 	a 	Golden 	Age. 	as 	an 	ideal 	equilibrium 	to
be 	won 	again.
Owing 	to 	his 	connections 	with 	the 	Socialist 	Mayor 	of
Lyons. 	Edouard 	Herriot. 	Gamier 	was 	able 	to 	translate
part 	of this 	ideal 	city 	into 	reality: 	but 	something 	of the
dream-like 	character 	of the 	drawn 	version 	was 	lost.
Auuthci 	major 	work 	of 	urbanism 	which 	linked
nineteenth-century 	notions 	with 	the 	progressive
planners 	of 	the 	twenties 	was 	that 	undertaken 	by
Berlage for the extension of South 	Amsterdam 	between
1902 	and 	about 	1920 	(fig. 	12.41. 	Outside 	the
perimeter 	fortification 	walls, 	the 	growth 	of Amsterdam
throughout the nineteenth 	century 	had 	continued 	in 	a
pell-mell 	fashion. 	The 	influx 	of industry 	required 	a 	vast
provision 	of 	decent 	housing 	conceived 	on 	the 	scale 	of
neighbourhoods. 	Berlage 	brought 	order 	to 	the 	chaos
with 	the 	help 	of grand avenues 	defining major 	pieces 	of
massive 	and 	substantial 	character; 	these 	were 	in 	turn
penetrated 	by 	secondary 	systems 	of 	roads 	and 	quiet
squares 	containing 	shops, 	schools, 	and 	public 	in-
stitutions. 	The 	main 	unit of collective dwelling 	was 	the
perimeter 	block 	around 	large 	internal 	courts 	contain-
ing 	gardens. 	Many 	of 	these 	were 	laid 	out 	on 	sym-
metrical 	plans 	with 	massive 	central 	elements. 	The
buildings 	were 	finely detailed 	in 	dark brick, 	and 	arches,
windows, 	corners, 	etc. 	conspired to give the 	whole area
a 	unity 	of 	theme 	and 	sobriety 	of 	effect, 	offset 	by 	the
looser 	order 	of trees 	and 	pathways.
A 	similar 	basic 	pattern 	was 	adopted 	by 	the
'Expressionist' 	architects 	Piet 	Kramer 	and 	Michel 	de
Klerk 	in 	their 	various 	collective 	block 	designs 	in
12.4 	liibinv/f/n 	Hendrik
Petrus Berlage. 	aerial
view 	of the 	'New South'
area 	of Amsterdam
showing perimeter
blocks. 	1902-20.

-- 164 of 420 --

The 	Ideal 	Community: 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	163
12.5 	Michel 	dc 	Klorl<.
Eigen 	Haard 	housing,
Amsterdam, 	lyis-iy-
Amsterdam. 	Ue 	Klerks 	liigen 	Haard 	housing 	of 	1919
(fig. 	12.5) 	was 	also 	beyond 	the 	edge 	of 	the 	coherent
historical 	centre, 	and 	the 	architect 	attempted 	to
solidify 	the 	urban 	fabric 	by 	virtually 	monumentalizing
the 	housing 	problem 	and 	treating 	the 	perimeter 	as 	a
single 	sculptural 	unit. 	However, 	this 	was 	brilliantly
articulated 	by 	changes 	in 	rhythm, 	texture, 	scale, 	and
colour 	to 	hint 	at 	changes 	of 	Interior 	function 	and
disposition, 	and 	to 	respond 	to 	the 	varying 	pressures 	of
a 	triangular 	site. 	To 	one 	end. 	on 	the 	centre 	of 	the
baseline of the 	triangle, 	a 	gateway 	was cut 	through 	the
outer 	edge 	and 	a 	steeple 	used 	to 	mark 	its 	presence.

-- 165 of 420 --

1 64 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
Once 	again, 	the 	mood 	was 	a 	sober 	and 	solid 	one, 	as 	if
the 	architecture 	was 	seeking 	deliberately 	to 	counter
the 	uprootedness 	and 	flux 	of 	modern 	urban 	existence
with 	something 	reassuring 	and 	evocative 	of 	some
earlier 	guild 	co-operation. 	Speaking 	of 	his 	plans 	for
Amsterdam, 	Berlage 	had 	claimed 	he 	was 	instituting 	'a
sort 	of 	town-planning 	revival': 	de 	Klerk 	too, 	seems 	to
have sought 	a 	balance 	between 	an 	innovative 	solution
to 	new 	demands, 	and 	a 	feeling 	of continuity.
A 	polarity 	between 	promise 	in 	some 	hazy 	ideal
future 	and 	reminiscence 	of 	a 	more 	integrated 	past
seems 	to 	have 	been 	intrinsic to 	the 	urbanistic 	thought
processes 	of Le 	Corbusier. 	The 	'Contemporary 	City 	for
Three 	Million 	Inhabitants' 	of 	1922 	was 	mentioned
earlier 	in 	the 	context 	of 	the 	architect's 	pervasive
conception 	of 	the 	'machine 	age', 	and 	his 	search 	for 	a
harmony 	in 	modern 	culture. 	Like 	Gamier, 	Le 	Cor-
busier 	was 	content 	with 	nothing 	less 	than 	a 	total
theorem 	for 	all 	the 	processes of industrial society. 	It 	has
to 	be 	said 	that 	he over-simplified 	these drastically 	in 	his
plans.
The 	Contemporary 	City 	is 	known 	from 	a 	series 	of
drawings 	which 	Le 	Corbusier 	exhibited 	at 	the 	Salon
D'Automne 	in 	Paris 	in 	1 	922. 	The 	plan 	was 	based 	on 	a
regular 	geometry 	and 	was 	cut 	across 	by 	a 	main 	axis 	of
road 	circulation 	coming 	to 	a 	transportation 	centre 	laid
out on 	a 	number of levels, 	the topmost 	of which 	was 	an
airport. 	Around 	this centre, 	and conforming 	to 	the 	grid
of 	the 	city, 	were 	24 	glass 	skyscrapers 	600 	feet 	high.
These 	were 	supposed 	to 	contain 	'the 	brains' 	of 	the
-^v^
12.6 	Le Corbusier,
Contemporary 	City for
Tfiree 	Million
Inhabitants, 	1922, 	view
of skyscrapers 	and
transport 	intersection 	at
tlie core.

-- 166 of 420 --

y^ 	X i\^ 	' w V- 'j^ ;ji.^
'fJrJ,::;:':;:^-''> 	, 	,.
12.7 	LeCorbusier.
Contemporary 	City.
1922. 	the 	immcubles
villas.
society 	- 	the 	technocrats, 	the 	managers, 	and 	the
bankers. 	Most 	of the 	rest 	of the 	city 	was 	taken 	up 	with
high-density 	apartment 	buildings 	laid 	out 	regularly 	in
a park-like 	setting. 	The 	workers' 	suburbs 	and 	the 	main
industrial 	zone 	were 	placed 	some 	distance 	away, 	so
reinforcing 	the 	distinction 	between 	a 	managerial 	elite
and 	the 	lower 	orders. 	The 	whole 	was 	pervaded 	by 	a
spirit 	of 	almost 	obsessive 	rationality 	and 	discipline:
scarcely 	a 	curved 	line 	was 	to 	be 	seen.
The 	rationale 	for 	the 	plan 	was 	straightforward.
High-density 	living 	was 	to 	be 	combined 	with 	the
maximum 	of open 	space 	and 	fresh 	air 	through 	the 	use
of new 	techniques 	like 	steel 	and 	concrete 	construction
and 	with 	the 	help 	of the 	motor 	car. 	Mechanized 	traffic
was 	to 	be 	separated 	from 	the 	pedestrian 	by 	the 	use 	of
pilotis: 	indeed the 	entire green 	floor of the 	city 	was to be
kept 	free 	as 	the 	buildings 	too 	were 	lifted 	up. 	The
traditional 	street 	was 	demolished: 	Le 	Corbusier
associated 	it 	with 	the 	choking 	lumes 	and 	diseased
areas 	of 	nineteenth-century 	slums. 	Instead 	of 	the
grimy 	industrial 	city, 	a 	brave 	new 	world 	of 	light,
greenery, 	air. 	cleanliness, 	and 	efficiency 	was 	to 	arise.
Country 	and 	city 	were 	to 	be 	reintegrated 	so 	that 	the
city 	became 	a 	vast 	park. 	Le 	Corbusier 	saw 	technology
as a 	double-headed 	creature 	capable 	of good 	or 	ill: 	his
city 	plan 	was 	an 	attempt 	at 	co-opting and 	harmonizing
the 	forces 	and 	possibilities 	of 	industry 	in 	the 	service 	of
human 	betterment 	and 	emancipation.
There 	were 	a 	number 	of 	ideological 	components: 	it
seems 	clear 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	absorbed 	the 	ideas of
Saint-Simon, 	especially 	the 	conception 	of a 	benevolent
elite 	of 	technocrats 	who 	would 	act 	as 	the 	agents 	of 	a
progress for all. 	This vision of the state 	was embodied in
the 	skyscrapers 	at 	the 	city's 	core 	(fig. 	12.6) 	and 	in 	the
romanticization 	of 	technology 	implicit 	in 	both 	the
The 	Ideal 	Community : 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	165
grand 	treatment 	of 	the 	roads 	and 	the 	machine-age
tenor 	of 	the 	other 	buildings. 	Of 	course, 	the 	architect
could 	not 	locate a 	strict equivalent 	to a 	Saint-Simonian
elite 	in 	his 	own 	time, 	and 	his 	later 	Ville 	Voisin 	of 	1925
(in 	which 	he 	suggested 	the 	construction 	of a 	business
district 	of 	skyscrapers 	in 	the 	centre 	of 	Paris) 	was 	a
heavy-handed 	attempt 	at 	exciting 	the 	interest 	of big
business 	in 	his 	schemes. 	It 	was 	later 	in 	the 	twenties
that 	Le 	Corbusier 	began 	to 	realize 	some 	of 	the 	severe
problems 	of a 	capitalist 	economy, 	and 	began 	to shift 	his
political 	ground. 	Until 	then 	he 	maintained 	a 	romantic
conception 	of technocracy 	as a 	progressive 	force 	in 	its
own 	right. 	Once 	again 	we 	find 	an 	element 	of
determinism 	in 	this 	artist's 	outlook.
The 	actual 	images 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Ville 	Contem-
poraine 	also 	had 	a 	complex 	lineage. 	It 	was 	as 	if he 	had
assembled 	fragments 	of 	cities 	he 	liked 	over 	a 	single
regular 	plan. 	The 	technological 	aura 	of 	Manhattan
(known 	from 	photographs) 	was 	spliced 	together 	with
the 	roads 	and 	glass 	buildings 	of 	Sant'Elia's 	Citta
Nuova. 	The 	boulevards, 	grand 	avenues, 	and 	parks 	of
Paris 	were 	mated with 	a 	geometrical order 	reminiscent
of 	ideal 	city 	plans 	from 	the 	Renaissance. 	Howard's
Garden 	City 	and 	Garnier's 	Cite 	Industrielle 	were
rephrased 	on 	a 	far 	larger 	scale. 	The 	sensibility 	of
Purism 	was 	blended with 	memories 	of grand 	Classical
cities 	of the 	past. 	The 	whole 	was 	infused 	with 	that 	love
of 	the 	typical 	and 	the 	abstract 	that 	we 	have 	sensed 	in
Le 	Corbusier's 	architecture. 	It 	was 	as 	if 	he 	was 	not
content 	with 	merely 	defining 	the 	'standards' 	of a 	new
architecture, 	but also 	had 	to take 	on 	the question 	of the
typical 	elements 	of 	the 	town 	- 	indeed 	the 	society 	- 	of
the 	future. 	Was 	this 	simply 	a 	theoretical 	exercise 	or did
he 	seriously 	hope 	to 	build 	the 	whole 	thing.' 	Neither
point 	is 	certain, 	but 	clearly 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	not
squeamish 	about 	projecting 	his 	own 	vision 	of Utopia 	in
the 	belief that 	it 	was 	good 	for 	all. 	One 	guesses 	that 	if it
had 	been 	built, 	the 	Ville 	Contemporaine 	would 	have
possessed 	a 	crushing 	uniformity.
The residential buildings 	for Le Corbusier's elite 	were
of two 	types 	- 	set-backs 	(to 	re-emerge 	in 	the 	thirties 	as
the 	(7 	redent 	apartment 	houses 	of the 	Radiant 	City) 	and
perimeter 	blocks 	laid 	out 	around 	courtyards 	and 	called
immeiihks 	villas 	(fig. 	12.7). 	The 	latter 	were 	made 	up
from 	double-height 	units, 	each 	with 	a 	large 	garden
terrace, 	stacked 	up 	to 	a 	height 	equivalent 	to 	twelve
single 	stoi-eys. 	The 	interior 	of 	each 	double-height
maisonette was 	similar 	to 	that 	envisaged 	in 	the 	Maison
Citrohan. 	Evidently 	it 	was 	Le 	Corbusier's 	intention 	to
turn 	the 	powers 	of 	mass 	production 	to 	the 	solution 	of
the 	housing 	question 	at 	the 	widest 	scale. 	Communal
facifities 	such 	as 	restaurants, 	tennis 	courts, 	roof
terraces, 	and 	lawns 	were 	included. 	The 	atmosphere
was 	quite 	luxurious, 	like 	a 	middle-class 	hotel 	rather
than 	the 	communist 	collective 	condensers 	envisaged

-- 167 of 420 --

l66 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
in 	the 	Soviet 	Union 	later 	in 	the 	decade.
Like 	the 	city 	as 	a 	whole, 	the 	immciiblt's 	vilks 	drew
upon 	diverse 	sources 	which 	had 	captured 	Le
Corbusier's 	imagination 	during 	his 	travels. 	Most
notable 	was 	the 	monastery 	at 	Ema 	in 	Tuscany which
he 	had 	visited 	as 	a 	young 	man. 	This 	too 	was 	formed
around 	a 	courtyard 	and 	had 	individual 	cells 	of double
height 	with 	views 	over 	private 	gardens. 	It 	was 	an
organization 	which 	was 	to 	recur 	in 	many 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	architectural 	essays 	on 	collective 	living 	in
later 	life. 	The 	monastery 	was 	a 	type 	which 	fascinated
him 	because 	it 	seemed 	to 	embody 	an 	ideal 	balance
between 	public 	and 	private 	existence, 	and 	between 	the
built 	and 	the 	natural 	worlds.
Although 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	never 	to 	build 	a 	total
version 	of 	any 	of 	his 	ideal 	cities, 	their 	spirit 	still
informed much 	of his 	later production. 	This was true of
many 	other 	architects 	in 	the 	twenties 	as 	well, 	who
employed 	individual 	opportunities 	as 	experiments
towards 	the 	larger 	whole. 	In 	a 	sense, 	the 	housing
exhibition 	at 	the 	Weissenhofsiedlung 	in 	Stuttgart 	in
1927 	played 	this 	role 	tor 	the 	participants. 	But 	in 	the
Weimar 	Republic 	there 	were 	agencies 	which 	allowed
the 	construction 	of modern 	housing 	on 	a 	broad 	front.
Indeed 	the 	constitution 	of the 	new 	German 	republic 	of
19 1 9 	stressed 	State 	control 	over 	the 	use 	of land, 	one
intention 	being 	the 	provision 	of 	homes 	for 	all. 	In 	fact,
housing 	reforms 	could 	only 	become 	effective 	after
about 	1923 	with 	the 	temporary 	stabilization 	of 	the
economy. 	The 	results 	were 	seen 	most 	dramatically 	in
such 	cities 	as 	Breslau. 	Hamburg. 	Celle, 	Berlin, 	and
Frankfurt.
Frankfurt 	was 	a 	special 	case 	because 	there 	the 	aims
of 	the 	trade 	unions 	and 	the 	social 	democratic 	co-
operatives 	were 	most 	efl'ective 	in 	influencing 	policy.
The 	mayor 	of 	the 	city. 	Ludwig 	Landmann, 	had 	a
special 	interest 	in 	housing 	which 	he 	had 	expressed 	in 	a
book entitled 	Das Siedhmfisamt der Grosstadt in 	1 9 1 9. 	In
1925 	he 	invited 	the 	architect 	Ernst 	May 	to 	Frankfurt,
invested 	him 	with 	the 	powers 	of 	city 	architect 	and
supported 	him 	with 	official 	machinery 	to 	appropriate
land 	for 	modernization. 	May 	had 	already 	realized 	a

-- 168 of 420 --

The 	Ideal 	Community : 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	167
series 	of 	small 	agricultural 	communities 	in 	Silesia 	in
the 	early 	twenties 	which 	had 	reflected 	the 	obvious
influence 	of Howard's 	ideas: 	but 	his 	new 	task 	was 	on 	a
colossal 	scale 	by 	comparison. 	The 	numerous 	Sicdlun-
gen 	which 	he 	and 	his 	associates 	designed 	for 	Frankfurt
in 	the 	next 	five 	years 	were 	only 	loosely 	based 	on
Garden 	City 	principles, 	though 	much 	attention 	was
devoted 	to 	the 	natural 	setting, 	the 	creation 	of hygienic
living 	spaces, 	and 	proximity 	to 	the 	place 	of 	work.
Equally 	important 	was 	the 	commitment 	to 	industrial
mass 	production 	of 	rationally 	based 	housing 	proto-
types. 	May 	undertook the 	most detailed 	researches 	into
the 	logistics 	of 	use 	and 	production 	on 	all 	scales, 	from
the 	outside 	spaces 	to 	the 	individual 	dwellings 	and 	the
tiniest 	fixtures. 	From 	this 	emerged, 	for 	example, 	the
famous 	'Frankfurt 	kitchen', 	supposedly 	a 	compact 	and
exceptionally 	functional 	design. 	This 	spirit 	of 	analysis
seems 	to 	have 	thrilled 	committed 	modern 	architects
elsewhere 	in 	Europe, 	who 	felt 	that 	it 	was 	evidence 	of
the 	divergence 	of technology 	away 	from 	the 	rapacious
purposes 	of 	laissez-faire 	economics 	tov\'ards 	a 	socially
responsible 	aim. 	On 	the 	other 	hand, 	opponents 	were
quick 	to 	parody 	the 	'inhuman' 	and 	'scientific' 	invasion
of the 	home.
In 	layout 	and 	appearance 	the 	Siedluncien 	were 	also
far removed 	from 	the free-standing family houses of the
Garden 	City 	with 	their 	pitched 	roofs 	and 	rustic
overtones. 	A 	characteristic 	layout 	was 	a 	long, 	low
block 	between 	three 	and 	five 	storeys 	high, 	with 	access
ways and 	stairs between 	paired flats which 	were 	placed
on 	each 	floor. 	This 	led 	to 	an 	almost 	monotonous
repetition 	of standardized 	modules 	and 	constructional
elements, 	which 	the 	architects 	attempted 	to 	humanize
by judicious attention to proportion, 	scale, 	light, 	shade,
and 	detail. 	The 	tight 	budgets 	allowed 	no 	frills, 	but 	the
resulting 	asceticism 	was 	turned 	to 	good 	use 	as 	an
expression 	of co-operative 	discipline 	and 	moral 	rigour.
The 	planar 	white 	or 	coloured 	surfaces 	were 	enlivened
in 	any 	case 	by 	the 	play 	of shadows 	from 	trees 	and 	the
juxtaposition 	of lawns 	and 	planting.
Thus 	Garden 	City 	ideas 	and 	the 	abstract 	forms of the
new 	architecture 	came 	together 	in 	a 	compelling
imagery 	which 	was 	intended 	to 	display 	the 	values 	of
enlightened 	socialism. 	It 	seemed 	briefly 	as 	if 	the
Utopian 	aspirations 	of 	the 	avant-garde 	and 	the 	social
realities 	of 	the 	time 	were 	in 	step: 	the 	Romerstadt 	(fig.
12.81. 	the 	Bruchfeldstrasse. 	and 	the 	Praunheim
housing 	schemes 	were 	widely 	published 	and 	eagerly
upheld 	by 	left-wing 	champions 	as 	examples 	of 	what
could 	be 	achieved 	when 	modern 	architecture 	was
allowed 	its 	'true' 	destination: 	not 	the 	aggrandizement
of chic 	middle-class 	bohemia. 	but 	the 	emancipation 	of
12.8 	(/c/tl 	Ernst 	May.
Romerstadt 	Siedlung.
Frankl'urt. 	1926-8.
I2.9ln;i'ill 	BrunoTaut.
Britz-Siedlung. 	Berlin,
1 928. 	aerial 	view 	of
'horseshoe' 	housing.
jt.JfM^^

-- 169 of 420 --

i68 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
jiiiUii. 	Miiiiibdirm 	.riiimrti 	iijLi 	iimi 	:^
ini^niL^j^iiii^pipi	HL

-- 170 of 420 --

The 	Ideal 	Communitv ; 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	• 	169
i2.io(;<fn|.P.0iid.
housing 	cit 	the 	Hook 	of
Hollcitui, 	1424.
12.1 	1 	ibehnvkft) 	]. 	P.
Oud. 	housing 	at 	the
Hook 	ol' Holland. 	1424.
drawing.
^i.i2{ricjlil] 	]. 	P. 	Oud.
Kielhoek 	housing.
Rotterdam. 	1925.
12. 1 	^ 	{below rifjhl) 	|. 	P.
Oud. 	Kieflioek 	housing,
Rotterdam. 	1 42 s. 	aerial
view 	drawing.
:i^
\
ir^.:^^..^'
P^ :" 	^^

-- 171 of 420 --

1 70 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
the 	working 	class 	from 	bondage, 	the 	amelioration
of 	environmental 	conditions 	on 	a 	wide 	front, 	the
harmonization 	of 	mechanization 	and 	nature. 	How-
ever, 	the 	bubble 	soon 	burst 	at 	the 	end 	of 	the 	decade
when 	increases 	in 	the 	cost 	of 	materials 	led 	to 	a 	rapid
decrease 	in 	quality, 	when 	it 	became 	clear 	(as 	was 	the
case 	in 	Russia) 	that 	the 	imagery 	was 	by 	no 	means
necessarily 	shared 	or 	understood 	by 	the 	populace, 	and
when 	the 	forces 	of 	reaction 	turned 	violently 	on 	the
new 	architecture 	for 	its 	supposed 	communist
inspiration.
Although 	patronage 	in 	Berlin 	worked 	otherwise
than 	in 	Frankfurt, 	it 	too 	had 	its 	share 	of 	remarkable
housing 	schemes. 	Among 	the 	most 	notable, 	perhaps,
were 	those 	by 	Gropius 	for 	the 	Siemensstadt, 	and 	those
by 	Bruno 	Taut 	and 	Martin 	Wagner 	at 	the 	Britz-
Siedlung. 	Taut 	had 	by 	this 	time 	long 	abandoned 	the
Expressionist 	and 	quasi-sacral 	yearnings 	of 	the 	late
1 	9 1 OS. 	Instead he 	had 	adopted 	the 	manner of the 	'New
Objectivity' 	which 	he 	probably 	thought 	most 	approp-
riate 	to 	the 	stringent 	social 	programme 	implicit 	in 	the
new 	housing 	schemes. 	However, 	he 	was 	far 	from 	being
a 	mere 	'functionalist' 	in 	intention, 	and 	sought 	to
imbue 	the 	standardized 	and 	repetitive 	forms 	of 	his
designs 	with 	an 	aura 	of dignity 	and 	with 	a 	communal
spirit. 	The 	Britz 	plan 	was 	centred 	on 	a 	horseshoe-like
open 	space 	embraced 	by 	a 	strip 	of 	housing 	(fig. 	12.9).
From 	this 	focus, 	parallel 	oblongs 	were 	disposed 	with
layers 	of 	green 	space 	between. 	The 	image 	of 	the
freestanding 	'bourgeois' 	villa 	was 	deliberately 	rejected,
just 	as 	the 	unsanitary 	working-class 	tenements 	of the
nineteenth 	century 	were 	corrected. 	Thus 	the 	form
language 	was 	intended 	to 	convey 	a 	sort 	of 	purgative
intention. 	However, 	there 	was 	the 	perpetual 	danger
that 	repetition 	simply 	might 	degenerate 	into 	mere
banality 	when 	the 	probity 	of 	the 	socialist 	vision 	was
absent. 	This 	tended 	to 	happen 	in 	the 	many 	weak
derivatives 	of the 	classic 	Siedhmfjen.
It 	is 	possible 	that 	May, 	Wagner, 	Taut, 	and 	the 	rest
were 	influenced 	by 	the 	remarkable 	and 	slightly 	earlier
housing 	designs 	of 	J.P. 	Oud 	in 	Holland. 	As 	early 	as
19 	1 	8. 	at 	the 	age 	of 	28. 	Oud 	had 	been 	appointed 	the
chief 	architect 	of 	Rotterdam. 	His 	earliest 	designs 	in
this 	role were clearly 	modelled 	on 	Berlage's 	prototypes.
Only 	gradually 	did 	he 	manage 	to 	break 	away 	from
hackneyed 	plan 	arrangements 	and 	to 	synthesize 	De
Stijl 	discoveries 	with 	an 	architectural 	language 	that
had 	still 	to 	handle 	the 	requirements 	of 	workers'
habitation. 	The 	moment 	of 	crystallization 	seems 	to
have 	occurred 	in 	his 	designs 	for 	housing at 	the 	Hook 	of
Holland 	of 	1924 	(figs. 	12.10 	and 	11). 	Here 	sanitary
intentions 	were 	transcended 	by 	a 	remarkably
expressive 	formal 	design. 	The 	two 	identical 	blocks
contained 	two 	rows 	of 	superimposed 	dwellings, 	and
the extremities 	were rounded. 	The walls 	were plastered
and 	whitewashed, 	while 	the 	low 	base 	was 	made 	of
yellow 	brick, 	the 	doorsteps 	of 	red 	brick, 	and 	the
doorposts 	of 	grey 	concrete. 	Doors, 	lamps, 	pillars, 	and
other 	details 	were 	painted 	in 	blue, 	red. 	black, 	and
yellow, 	inevitably 	recalling 	the 	character 	of
Mondrian's 	paintings 	or 	some 	touches 	in 	the
Schroeder 	House 	by 	Rietveld. 	The 	asymmetrical
dynamism 	of 	De 	Stijl 	was 	not 	so 	easily 	translatable 	to
the 	larger 	scale, 	but 	in 	the 	Kiefhoek 	housing 	in
Rotterdam 	of 	1925 	Oud 	managed 	to 	slide 	the
surrounding 	spaces 	one 	into 	another 	(figs. 	12.12,
12.13). 	Again 	the 	houses 	were 	kept 	down 	to 	two
storeys. 	The 	thin, 	whitewashed 	boxes with 	their tight
and 	exquisite 	details 	stood 	out 	strongly 	against 	the 	red
brick 	surroundings, 	and 	were 	a 	dramatic 	departure
from 	the 	texture 	and 	weight 	of 	earlier 	Dutch 	housing
experiments 	in 	the 	'Expressionist' 	mode. 	The 	possible
problems 	of a 	clash 	with 	the 	immediate 	context 	were
scarcely 	noted 	at 	the 	time. 	However, 	it 	was 	a 	matter 	of
fact that 	these stark 	abstract prototypes, 	so emblematic
of the 	new 	order, 	did 	not 	blend 	in. 	Moreover. 	Oud 	had
the 	advantage 	of 	regularized 	street 	patterns 	and 	flat
terrains 	which 	wedded 	well 	with 	his 	style 	and
approach: 	there 	was 	no 	guarantee 	that 	the 	supposed
universal 	qualities 	of the 	designs 	would 	be 	transferable
to 	other 	conditions.
The 	dilemmas 	of 	social 	interpretation 	faced 	by
European 	avant-garde 	architects 	were 	not 	so 	far
removed 	from 	those 	faced 	by 	their 	counterparts 	in
Soviet 	Russia 	at 	the same time. 	The 	avant-garde 	was 	in
constant 	danger 	of projecting 	its 	own 	values 	on 	reality
and 	indulging 	in 	over-simple environmental 	determin-
ism 	of the 	kind 	which 	claimed 	that 	good 	architecture
must 	be 	good 	for 	all 	morally 	and 	socially. 	As 	was
shown 	in 	C^iapter 	i 	o. 	groups 	like 	the 	OSA 	researched
into 	living 	patterns 	and 	constructional 	techniques 	in
order 	to 	seek 	out 	prototypes 	for 	workers' 	housing 	and
to discover forms 	'expressive' 	of the new 	state of things.
This 	was 	only 	part 	of a 	larger 	vision 	of renewal, 	which
was 	more 	ambitiously 	registered 	in 	town 	plans. 	In 	his
book 	Russia: 	An 	Anhilectiire 	for 	World 	Revolution 	of
1930. 	El 	lissitzky 	presented 	a 	synopsis 	of avant-garde
tendencies 	over 	the 	previous 	decade, 	building type 	by
building 	type, 	and 	tended 	to 	imply 	that 	the 	clubs,
housing 	schemes, 	factories, 	etc.. 	were 	all 	basic
elements of some 	new 	urban 	order. 	In 	a 	section entitled
'The 	New 	City', 	he 	wrote:
Social 	evolution 	leads 	to 	the 	elimination 	of the 	old
dichotomy 	between 	city 	and 	country. 	The 	city
endeavours 	to 	draw 	nature 	right 	into 	its 	centre 	and
by 	means 	of industrialization 	to 	introduce 	a 	higher
level 	of culture 	into 	the 	country.
This 	was 	in 	the 	spirit 	of Marx's 	and 	Engels's 	original

-- 172 of 420 --

12.14 	Moisei 	Ginzburg.
'Occn 	Moscow' 	project.
OVERLEAF
12.15 	Karl 	Ehn. 	Karl
Marx 	Hof. 	Vienna. 	iy2
pleas 	for 	the 	demolition 	of 	the 	distinction 	between
urban 	and 	rural 	proletariats, 	and 	also 	seemed 	to 	echo
Lenin's plea 	for 'the fusion of industry 	and 	agriculture',
but 	even 	once 	the 	article 	of 	faith 	had 	been 	accepted,
there 	were 	a 	number 	of 	possible 	ways 	to 	translate 	the
idea 	into 	an 	urban 	plan.
There 	thus 	ensued 	a 	series 	of city-planning 	debates.
In 	the 	late 	twenties 	Zelenko 	and 	Sabsovich 	contrived
the 	theory 	of 	communal 	houses 	to 	be 	placed 	in 	new
residential 	and 	industrial 	centres 	every 	twenty-five
miles 	or 	so 	away 	from 	existing 	cities; 	these 	were
supposed to become 	nuclei 	of ideologically 	transformed
peasantries, 	and 	were 	vaguely 	reminiscent 	of Fourier's
'phalansteres'. 	This 	theorem 	was 	attacked 	by 	the
'disurbanists' 	(particularly 	Ginzburg 	and 	Barshch)
who 	caricatured 	the 	communal 	houses 	as 	rural
barracks 	and 	argued 	that 	industry 	and 	agriculture
should 	be 	dispersed 	throughout 	entire 	territories, 	so
dis.solving 	the 	old 	boundaries 	of 	city 	and 	country
altogether. 	The 	project 	for 	a 	'Green 	Moscow' 	proposed
in 	i92q-30(flg. 	12. i4)suggested 	that 	the 	heart 	of the
historical 	city 	should 	be 	preserved, 	for 	leisure 	and
cultural 	activities, 	while 	linear 	cities 	were 	created 	on 	a
radial 	pattern 	from 	the 	centre. 	These 	were 	to 	be 	made
up 	of 	movable 	wooden 	houses 	on 	stilts 	linked 	by
railways 	which would 	be 	free 	of charge. 	An 	even 	more
extreme 	and 	anarchical 	faction 	in 	the 	'disurbanist'
school 	argued 	for 	complete 	fragmentation 	and 	for 	the
avoidance 	of coherent 	formal 	structure 	altogether.
The 	case 	for 	the 	linear 	city 	was 	pursued 	most 	avidly
by 	N.A. 	Milyutin 	in 	a 	book 	entitled 	The 	Pivhinu 	of
Building 	Socialist 	Cities, 	in 	which 	he 	argued 	that
industry 	should 	be 	built 	in 	a 	linear 	manner 	with 	a
parallel 	residential 	strip 	separated 	from 	it 	by 	a 	green
belt 	a 	few 	hundred 	yards 	wide. 	The railways were 	to be
located 	away 	from 	the 	green 	belt 	on 	the 	far 	side 	of the
industry, 	while 	a 	main 	road 	gave 	access 	to 	the
residential 	zones. 	The 	linear 	form 	was 	recommended
The 	Ideal 	Community: 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial 	City 	t 	71
for 	its 	supposed 	ilexibility 	and 	because 	it 	avoided
centric 	images 	of power.
A 	review 	of 	collective 	housing 	proposals 	in 	the
twenties would 	be 	incomplete without some discussion
of Vienna. 	A 	census taken 	in 	1 	9 1 	7 	revealed that 	nearly
three-quarters 	of 	Viennese 	lodgings 	were 	unhygienic
and 	overcrowded. 	Under 	the 	Social 	Democrat 	Otto
Bauer, 	rents 	were 	controlled, 	private 	properties 	were
bought, 	and 	a 	programme 	for 	building 	5.000 	apart-
ments 	a 	year 	was 	set 	in 	progress. 	Architects 	like 	Josef
Frank 	and 	Adolf 	Loos 	responded 	to 	the 	crisis 	by
suggesting 	low-population-density, 	single-home 	sub-
urbs. 	However, 	the commune 	followed 	the 	lead of Peter
Uehrens 	in 	favour 	of 	colossal 	super-blocks 	with 	their
own 	collective 	facilities. 	The 	model 	selected 	became
known 	as 	the 	'Hof 	- 	a 	closed 	or 	semi-closed 	block 	of
extremely 	high 	density, 	to 	be 	built 	according 	to
traditional 	methods. 	The 	resulting 	enormous
structures 	became 	known 	as 	'workers' 	fortresses':
indeed, 	the 	Karl 	Marx 	Hof 	was 	the 	scene 	of 	a 	pitched
battle 	in 	1934 	between 	the 	forces 	of 	the 	left 	and 	the
extreme 	right.
This 	latter 	building 	was 	designed 	by 	Karl 	Ehn 	in
1927 	and 	stretched 	for 	more 	than 	half 	a 	mile 	(Fig.
1 	2. 	IS). 	It 	contained 	1.382 	apartments 	plus 	offices,
laundries, 	green 	spaces, 	a 	library, 	an 	out-patients
clinic, 	and 	green 	areas: 	it 	covered 	an 	area of more 	than
quarter 	of 	a 	square 	mile. 	The 	vast 	problems 	of 	scale
posed 	by 	handling 	a 	building 	of 	this 	size 	were
somewhat 	clumsily 	resolved 	by 	adopting 	a 	linear block
arrangement 	which 	was 	then 	articulated 	by 	broad
entrance 	arches 	with 	massive 	surmounting 	towers.
The 	whole 	had 	something 	of the 	character 	of a 	viaduct
or 	rampart 	wall: 	in 	fact, 	each 	of 	these 	historical
prototypes 	would 	recommend 	itself 	to 	later 	planners
who 	attempted 	to 	design 	Unites 	on 	this 	scale. 	The 	style
of 	the 	Karl 	Marx 	Hof 	was 	an 	ungainly 	descendant 	of
the 	Wagner 	School. 	One 	historian 	purported 	to 	see 	in
the 	building 	an 	example 	of 'the 	populist 	epical 	idiom'.
In 	1928 	the 	first 	meeting 	of 	the 	Congres 	Internat-
ionaux 	de 	L' Architecture 	Moderne 	took 	place 	at 	the
castle 	of Mme 	de 	Mandrot 	at 	La 	Sarraz 	near 	Lausanne,
and 	discussions 	among 	some 	of 	Europe's 	leading
modern 	architects 	turned 	to 	the 	interrelationships 	of
architecture 	and 	town 	planning. 	The 	final statement 	of
the 	meeting 	(at 	which 	Gropius 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	were
among 	the 	protagonists) 	argued 	that 	architecture
should 	be 	put 	'back 	in 	its 	true 	sphere 	which 	is
economic, 	sociological, 	and 	altogether 	at 	the 	service 	of
humanity.' 	It 	also 	stated 	that:
Town 	planning 	is 	the 	design 	of the 	different 	settings
for 	the 	development 	of material, 	emotional 	and
spiritual 	life 	in 	all 	its 	manifestations, 	individual 	and
collective, 	and 	it 	includes 	both 	town 	and 	country.

-- 173 of 420 --

1 72 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars

-- 174 of 420 --

The 	Ideal 	Community; 	Alternatives 	to 	the 	Industrial City 	• 	1 	73
The 	ensuing 	CIAM 	meeting 	took 	place 	at 	Frankfurt 	in
1929 	and 	discussion 	centred 	on 	the 	problem 	of 	the
'Existenzminimum' 	(the 	'minimum 	habitation'). 	In
1930. 	in 	Brussels, 	housing 	emerged 	once 	again 	when
debates 	on 	the 	relative 	value 	of 	middle 	or 	high-rise
planning 	occurred. 	Gropius 	presented 	his 	studies 	of
lighting 	angles and 	plot ratios, 	while others raised 	once
again 	the 	difficult 	problem 	of political 	implementation.
The 	fourth 	congress 	took 	place 	in 	1933 	on 	board 	ship
between 	Marseilles 	and 	Athens, 	and 	on 	this 	occasion
the 	general 	announcement 	(later 	called 	the 	Charter 	of
Athens) 	returned 	to 	the 	problem 	of 	the 	modern 	city
and 	to 	general 	town-planning 	principles
:
Today, 	most 	cities 	are 	in 	a 	state 	of total 	chaos.
These 	cities 	do 	not 	come 	anywhere 	near 	achieving
their 	aim. 	which 	is 	to 	satisfy 	the 	biological 	and
psychological 	needs 	of their 	inhabitants.
From 	the 	beginnings 	of the 	machine 	age 	this
situation 	bespeaks 	the 	proliferation 	of private
interests. 	. 	.
.
On 	a 	spiritual 	and 	material 	level, 	the 	city 	should
ensure 	individual 	freedom 	and 	the 	benefits 	of
collective 	action.
Reorganization 	within 	the 	urban 	pattern 	must 	be
regulated 	on 	the 	human 	scale 	only.
The 	key 	points 	in 	town 	planning 	lie 	in 	the 	four
functions: 	living, 	working, 	recreation 	(in 	free 	time),
circulation. 	. 	.
.
The 	basic 	nucleus 	of town 	planning 	is 	the 	living
cell 	(a 	dwelling) 	and 	its 	introduction 	into 	a 	group
constitutes 	a 	unit of habitation 	of suitable 	size.
Starting 	from 	this 	unit, 	the 	relations 	between
living 	place, 	place 	of work 	and 	place 	of recreation
can 	be 	worked 	out.
To 	solve 	this 	serious 	problem 	it 	is 	vital 	to 	utilize
the 	resources 	of modern 	technological 	progress.
Once 	again 	the 	avant-garde 	had 	to 	resort 	to 	a
theoretical 	blueprint 	in 	the 	description 	of 	the 	ideal
urban 	totality. 	This 	was 	bound 	to 	be 	the case 	in 	the
absence 	of 	state 	authorities 	sympathetic 	to 	the 	cause,
as 	the 	German 	architect; 	knew 	only 	too 	well.
Elsewhere 	in 	the 	same 	document 	it 	was 	admitted 	that
'private 	interest' 	should 	be 	subordinated 	to 	'public
interest', 	but 	it 	was 	by 	no 	means 	clear 	how 	this 	should
happen. 	In 	the 	event 	the 	modern 	urbanist/architect
was 	forced 	into 	the 	position 	of 	making 	piecemeal
demonstrations 	where 	unique 	aesthetic 	qualities
might 	well 	obscure 	the 	prototypical 	nature 	of 	the
experiment. 	The 	ideal 	city 	was 	bound 	to 	remain 	on
paper 	without 	a 	society 	and 	without 	a 	consensus 	in
favour 	of the 	values 	it 	represented.

-- 175 of 420 --

13- 	The 	International 	Style, 	the 	Individual
Talent, 	and 	the 	Myth 	of 	Functionalism
Styles, 	like 	languages, 	differ 	in 	the 	sequence 	of articulation 	and 	in 	the
number 	of questions 	they 	allow 	the 	artist 	to 	ask. 	. 	.
.
E. 	H. 	Gombrich. 	1 	960
By 	the 	beginning 	of the 	1930s, 	it 	was 	possible 	for 	the
discerning 	and 	selective 	eye 	to 	survey 	the 	productions
of 	the 	previous 	decade 	and 	to 	single 	out 	a 	new 	style.
From 	Moscow 	to 	Milan, 	from 	La 	Jolla 	to 	Japan,
buildings 	of different 	function, 	size, 	material, 	meaning,
and 	expressive 	power 	could 	be 	found 	which 	still 	had
obvious 	features 	in 	common. 	One 	could 	speak 	of 	the
shared 	characteristics 	in 	terms 	of recurrent 	motifs 	like
strip 	windows, 	flat 	roofs, 	grids 	of supports, 	cantilevered
horizontal 	planes, 	metal 	railings 	and 	curved 	partit-
ions: 	or. 	one 	could 	define 	the 	general 	qualities 	of 	the
style 	by 	more 	abstract 	features 	like 	the 	recurrent
tendency 	to 	use 	simple 	rectangular 	volumes 	ar-
ticulated 	by 	crisply 	cut 	openings, 	or 	to 	emphasize
hovering 	planes 	and 	interpenetrating 	spaces. 	Hitch-
cock 	and 	Johnson 	(as 	was 	shown 	in 	Chapter 	1 	1 	) 	went
still 	further 	by 	attempting 	to 	outline 	the 	main 	visual
principles 	of the 	new 	style 	(the 	stress 	on 	volume 	rather
than 	mass, 	regularity, 	the 	avoidance 	of 	ornament,
etc.). 	Moreover, 	they 	claimed 	for 	this 	new 	'Internat-
ional 	St\'le' 	a 	major 	historical 	significance.
Now 	that 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	emulate 	the 	great 	styles of
the 	past 	in 	their 	essence 	without 	imitating 	their
surface, 	the 	problem 	of establishing 	one 	dominant
style, 	which 	the 	nineteenth 	century 	set 	itself in
terms 	of alternative 	revivals, 	is 	coming 	to 	a 	solution
. 	. 	. 	There 	is 	now 	a 	single 	body 	of discipline 	fixed
enough 	to 	integrate 	contemporary 	style 	as a 	reality
and 	yet 	elastic 	enough 	to 	permit 	individual
interpretation 	and 	to 	encourage 	general 	growth.
The 	authors 	supported 	their 	case 	with 	a 	selection 	of
black-and-white 	photographs 	of buildings 	in 	places as
far 	apart 	as 	California 	and 	Czechoslovakia. 	This
method of presentation 	played 	down 	differences 	in 	size,
colour, 	and 	material. 	But 	the 	intellectual 	filters 	were
just 	as 	crucial as 	the photographic ones 	in 	establishing
a 	historical 	picture. 	Hitchcock 	and 	Johnson 	were
evidently 	determined 	to 	honour 	a 	genuine 	modern
st>'le 	and 	therefore 	were 	bound 	to 	ignore 	such 	oddities
as 	Wright 	or 	Expressionism 	which 	did 	not 	fit. 	Their
approach 	was 	strong 	on 	the 	general, 	the 	shared, 	and
the 	t\'pical. 	but 	weak 	on 	the 	personal, 	the 	practical,
and 	the 	particular.
To 	grasp 	what 	is 	meant 	by 	divergences 	of 	personal
style, 	one 	has 	only 	to 	think 	of two 	seminal 	buildings 	of
the 	1920s 	analysed 	earlier 	in 	this 	book: 	Le 	Corbusier's
.Maison 	Cook 	of 	1925-^1 	and 	Rietveld's 	Schroeder
House 	of 	I 	924. 	These 	have 	more 	in 	common 	with 	one
another 	than 	either 	of 	them 	has 	with. 	say. 	an 	Art
Nouveau 	or 	an 	Expressionist 	dwelling, 	so 	it 	is 	just 	to
group 	them 	together: 	but 	one 	is 	still 	struck 	by 	the
difference 	in 	spatial 	emphasis 	between 	Le 	Corbusier's
planar 	box 	with 	its 	jigsaw 	intrusions 	of 	pilotis 	and
partitions, 	and 	Rietveld's 	exploding 	planes 	which
overlap 	and 	extend 	into 	the 	surroundings 	(a 	contrast
which 	embodies 	some 	of 	the 	crucial 	differences
between 	Purism 	and 	De 	Stijl). 	Many 	finer 	visual
distinctions 	could 	no 	doubt 	be 	drawn 	between
Rietveld's 	and 	Le 	Corbusier's 	other 	works, 	in 	order 	to
characterize 	their 	personal 	styles. 	By 	degrees, 	one
might 	even 	dig 	into 	each 	artist's 	world 	of meaning: 	on

-- 176 of 420 --

The 	International 	Style and 	the Myth 	of Functionaiism 	• 	175
I 	3.1 	{above) 	Hans
Scharoun. 	house 	at
Weissenhofsiedlung.
Stuttgart. 	1927.
13.2 	{above
right I 	Ludwig 	Mies van
derRohe. 	apartment
building.
Weissenhofsiedlung.
Stuttgart. 	1927.
13.3 	{right) 	Le
Corbusier. exhibition
dwelling.
Weissenhofsiedlung.
Stuttgart. 	1927.
,:"}i^^l
siiifiniiT!
some 	levels 	it 	would 	be 	possible 	to 	discern 	shared
themes 	to 	do 	with 	the 	spiritualization 	of the 	machine,
but 	if 	one 	pursued 	the 	matter 	further 	one 	would 	find
contrasting 	private 	metaphors, 	sources 	of 	form, 	and
ideological 	positions. 	The 	preceding 	few 	chapters 	have
shown 	what 	a 	variety 	of 	social 	ideals 	was 	expressed
through 	analogous 	forms 	during 	the 	1 920s.
Perhaps 	1927 was 	the 	first 	year 	of 	maturity 	of the
new 	style, 	in 	which 	forms 	could 	be 	assumed, 	and
problems 	worked 	out 	on 	the 	basis 	of discoveries 	which
were 	then 	assured. 	It 	was 	the 	year 	of the 	\'illa 	Stein 	at
Garches. 	of 	the 	Bauhaus. 	of 	Golosov's 	Workers' 	Club
in 	Russia, 	of the 	League of Nations competition 	and the
Weissenhofsiedlung 	at 	Stuttgart. 	The 	former 	event
acted 	as 	a 	sharp 	reminder 	that 	the 	new 	forms 	had 	a
long 	way 	to go 	before they received official 	acceptance:
the 	latter, 	ostensibly 	an 	exhibition 	of 	housing 	ideas
sponsored 	by 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund. 	was 	an
affirmation 	that 	a 	shared 	language 	had 	at 	last 	been
achieved. 	Even 	so 	the 	individual 	items 	in 	this
contemporary 	museum 	of 	international 	architecture
exhibited 	considerable 	divergences 	of 	approach.
Scharouns 	house 	(fig. 	13. i) 	was 	composed 	of
overlapping 	curves 	and 	was 	quite 	'Expressionist' 	in
character 	compared 	with 	the stereometric 	discipline 	of
the 	other 	designs. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	larger 	building,
with 	its 	pilotis. 	its 	taut, 	hovering 	box. 	its 	expanses 	of
glazing, 	its 	nautical 	imagery, 	and 	its 	almost 	obsessive
demonstration 	of 	the 	'five 	points' 	(fig. 	13.3). 	diff'ered
from 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	far 	more 	contained, 	closed,
earthbound 	and 	planimetric 	block 	of 	flats 	(fig. 	13.2).

-- 177 of 420 --

1 76 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
1^.4 	{above} 	Johannes
A. 	Brinckmann.
Leendert 	C. 	van der
Vlugt. 	Mart 	Stam, 	Van
Nelle 	Factory, 	near
Rotterdam. 	1927-9.
r 	3.5 	(/('/() 	Bernard
Bijvoet and 	Johannes
Duilcer. 	Zonnestraal
Sanatorium, 	Hilversum.
1926-8.

-- 178 of 420 --

The 	International 	Style 	and 	the 	Myth 	ot'Functionalism 	• 	I 	"JJ
in 	which 	the 	windows 	were 	holes 	punched 	through
walls 	(rather than 	openings 	partially 	filled 	by 	cladding I
and 	the 	interiors 	were 	cellular 	in 	character, 	rather
than 	being 	based 	on 	the 	free 	plan.
In 	part such 	distinctions 	had 	to do with 	differences 	of
function, 	and 	from 	1925 	onwards 	the 	style 	which 	had
so 	often 	been 	pioneered 	in 	small 	villas 	had 	increasingly
to 	prove 	its 	worth 	in 	handling 	much 	larger 	and 	more
complex 	programmes. 	The 	Bauhaus 	buildings 	at
Dessau 	were one case 	where the architecture employed
variations 	in 	the 	system, 	to 	orchestrate 	a 	variety 	of
functions. 	Another 	case, 	on 	an 	even 	larger 	scale, 	was
the 	Van 	Nelle 	Factory 	outside 	Rotterdam 	by 	Johannes
Brinckmann. 	Leendert 	van 	der 	Vlugt 	and 	Mart 	Stam
(fig. 	13.4). 	The 	main 	production 	functions 	- 	tobacco,
coffee, 	and 	tea 	factories 	- 	were 	placed 	in 	free-plan
spaces 	entirely 	open 	to 	the 	edges 	to 	admit 	the
maximum 	of 	light 	and 	air. 	and 	placed 	end 	to 	end 	in 	a
stepping 	form, 	so 	that 	the 	separation 	was 	expressed,
while 	the 	form 	as 	a 	whole 	was 	unified 	by 	hovering
horizontal 	metallic 	bands 	floating 	a 	full 	V'o 	yards
without 	apparent 	support. 	This 	glazed 	fantasy 	was
linked 	laterally 	by 	dramatic 	conveyors 	and 	criss-cross
transparent 	bridges 	to 	the 	storage 	and 	transport
buildings 	along 	the 	parallel 	canal. 	The 	highest 	volume
was 	joined longitudinally 	by 	another 	glazed bridge 	to
the 	main 	office 	wing, 	curved 	to 	fit 	the 	profile 	of 	the
arrival 	street, 	and 	to 	provide 	a suitable 	accentuation 	of
its 	honorific 	meaning. 	The 	composition 	was 	topped 	by
a 	small 	semicircular 	glazed 	room, 	like 	some 	much
expanded 	precision 	piece 	from 	a 	glass 	machine: 	in 	this
a 	canteen 	was 	placed 	so 	that 	workers 	could 	come
together 	while 	the 	humming 	mechanical 	processes 	of
their 	joint 	endeavour 	continued 	below 	them. 	The
horizontal 	accent 	was 	relieved 	by 	verticals 	containing
lifts 	and 	vertical 	pipes, 	but 	detailed 	to 	give 	the 	sense 	of
the 	thinnest 	possible 	paper-like 	surfaces, 	rather 	than
any 	traditional 	sense 	of mass.
Despite 	the 	fact 	that 	these 	forms 	had 	the 	clearest
basis 	in 	functional 	decisions 	concerning 	the 	process 	of
manufacture, 	and 	despite 	the 	fact 	that 	they 	could 	be
related 	to 	the 	naked 	facts 	of 	concrete 	and 	steel
construction, 	the 	pragmatic 	was 	transcended,
idealized, 	given 	a 	poetic, 	expressive 	presence. 	We 	have
to 	deal 	with 	matters 	far 	deeper 	than 	style, 	matters 	of
which 	style 	is 	only 	an 	outward 	manifestation. 	These
hovering 	glazed 	strips 	and 	evocative 	details 	resulted
from 	a 	search 	for 	deeper 	symbolic 	meanings 	in 	the
mechanical 	process. 	One 	recalls 	Lissitzky's 	panegyric
to 	the 	Vesnin 	brothers' 	project 	for 	the 	Pravda 	building
of 	1924. 	'the 	building 	is 	characteristic of 	an 	age 	that
thirsts 	after 	glass, 	steel 	and 	concrete', 	and 	Le
Corbusier's 	reaction 	to 	the 	evocative 	transparency 	of
the 	Van 	Nelle 	Factory 	in 	which 	he 	sensed 	a 	social
vision 	of emancipation
:
The 	sheer 	fa(;ades 	of the 	building, 	bright 	glass 	and
grey 	metal, 	rise 	up 	. 	. 	. 	against 	the 	sky 	. 	.
.
Everything 	is 	open 	to 	the 	outside. 	And 	this 	is 	of
enormous 	significance 	to 	all 	those 	who 	are
working, 	on 	all 	eight 	floors 	in.sirfp 	. 	. 	. 	The 	Van 	Nelle
tobacco 	factory 	in 	Rotterdam, 	a 	creation 	of the
modern 	age. 	has 	removed 	all 	the 	former
connotations 	of despair 	from 	the 	word 	'proletarian'.
And 	this 	deflection 	of the 	egoistic 	property 	instinct
towards 	a 	feeling 	for 	collective 	action 	leads 	to 	a
most 	happy 	result: 	the 	phenomenon 	of personal
participation 	in 	every 	stage 	of the 	human
enterprise.
The 	programme 	of the 	Van 	Nelle 	virtually 	implied 	a
linear 	arrangement 	of oblong 	blocks: 	the 	Zonnestraal
Sanatorium 	at 	Hilversum 	(1926-8) 	by 	Johannes
Duiker 	and 	Bernard 	Bijvoet 	required 	a 	more 	dispersed
plan 	as 	its 	main 	functions 	were 	a 	medical 	complex, 	an
administrative 	block, 	and 	individual 	linear 	wards
requiring 	direct 	access 	to 	the 	outside 	(fig. 	13.5). 	The
principal 	purpose 	of 	the 	sanatorium 	was 	to 	cure eye
diseases 	contracted 	by 	members 	of 	the 	diamond
workers 	union, 	and 	the 	clinical 	forms 	of 	modern
architecture 	seemed 	weU 	suited 	to 	the 	ethos 	and 	the
social 	programme. 	The 	main 	volumes 	were 	disposed
on 	a 	sort 	of butterfly 	plan 	with 	the 	administration 	and
communal 	facilities 	at 	the 	head 	and 	the 	sprawling
wards 	in 	the 	wings. 	The 	individual 	functions 	were
differentiated 	by 	variations 	in 	form 	and 	fenestration.
Both 	the 	Van 	Nelle 	Factory 	and 	the 	Zonnestraal
Sanatorium 	were 	influenced 	in 	part 	by 	Elementarist
and 	Constructivist 	attitudes 	emanating 	ultimately
from 	the 	Soviet 	Union, 	yet 	in 	order 	to 	grasp 	how
different these 	buildings 	were 	from 	Russian 	work 	of the
same 	period, 	one 	has 	only 	to 	compare 	them 	to
Golosov's 	Workers' 	Club 	in 	Moscow 	of 	1927-8 	(fig.
13.6). 	Here 	the 	machine 	rhetoric 	of 	the 	great 	glass
cylinder 	containing 	the 	stairs 	was 	more 	overt 	and 	less
controlled 	than 	in 	the 	Van 	Nelle. 	Compared 	to the thin,
planar surfaces, 	the 	intersecting 	horizontal 	bands 	were
chunky, 	even 	massive 	in 	appearance. 	The 	architect
attempted 	to 	exploit 	violent 	contrasts 	of 	space 	and
form, 	and 	to 	clash 	together, 	almost 	brutally, 	the
different 	materials 	of 	his 	building, 	so 	as 	to 	dramatize
functional 	differences 	and 	to 	create 	emotive 	mechan-
istic 	symbols.
Compared 	to 	any 	of 	the 	aforementioned 	three
examples, 	Mendelsohn's 	Schocken 	department 	store 	at
Chemnitz 	of 	1928-30 	(fig. 	13.8) 	presents 	a 	suave,
unified 	and 	smooth 	appearance. 	The 	site 	was 	trian-
gular, 	and 	the 	interiors 	were 	opened 	up 	by 	a 	grid 	of
thin 	supports; 	stairs 	and 	lifts 	were 	shifted 	to 	the 	apices
of 	the 	triangle. 	The 	fa(;ade 	was 	a 	single 	broad 	curve,
with 	an 	almost 	uninterrupted 	shop 	window 	at 	the

-- 179 of 420 --

1 	78 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
base, 	and 	continuous 	strip 	windows 	at 	the 	upper
levels. 	No attempt was made to 	articulate the stairways
or the 	circulation, 	or 	to 	dramatize 	changes 	of volume
or 	material: 	rather 	there 	was 	a 	dynamic 	(jcstalt. 	a
simple 	yet 	living 	form 	subsuming 	all 	parts 	and 	details.
One 	is 	reminded, 	of 	course, 	of 	Mendelsohn's 	earlier
development, 	of 	the 	fusion 	of 	all 	the 	parts 	of 	his 	so-
called 	'Expressionist 	phase', 	of 	his 	method 	of 	conceiv-
ing 	buildings 	as 	totalities 	in 	small, 	dynamic 	sketches.
By 	contrast, 	the 	Van 	Nelle 	Factory 	belonged 	to 	a
different 	world 	- 	the 	world 	of 	Elementarist. 	rectan-
gular, 	abstract 	art; 	nonetheless 	the 	supcrficiaUties 	of
style 	were 	the 	same.
The 	hovering 	volumes 	and 	weightless 	illusions 	of
the 	International 	Style 	were 	related 	to 	the 	horizontal
layering 	of 	space 	suggested 	by 	concrete 	cantilever
construction: 	a 	building 	like 	the 	Van 	Nelle 	Factory 	did
at 	least 	require 	a 	predominantly 	horizontal 	treatment.
But 	the 	elements 	of 	the 	new 	style 	had 	sometimes 	to
cope 	with 	buildings 	of 	which 	the 	function 	implied 	a
primarily 	vertical 	emphasis. 	Such 	was 	the 	case 	with
the 	skyscraper, 	and 	the 	problem 	of maintaining 	unity
was 	severe. 	In 	the 	Chkiuio 	Tribune 	competition,
(iropius's 	entry 	employed 	a 	sophisticated 	combination
of rectangular 	frame, 	vertical 	panels, 	and 	cantilevered
horizontal 	planes 	to 	unify 	the 	form: 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	slightly 	earlier 	glass 	towers tended 	to 	adopt 	the
solution 	of total 	glazing 	(hardly 	realizable 	at 	the 	time),
while 	Le 	Corbusier's 	glass 	towers 	in 	the 	Ville 	Contem-
poraine 	expressed 	the 	floor 	slabs 	as 	thin 	lines 	(again,
the glazing 	solution 	was 	scarcely 	practical): 	Howe 	and
Lescaze's 	design 	for 	the 	PSFS 	skyscraper 	in 	Philadel-
phia 	(1926-32) 	skilfully 	blended 	vertical 	and 	horiz-
ontal 	articulations 	which 	were 	rooted 	in 	functional
differences.
Factories, 	skyscrapers, 	blocks 	of 	flats, 	department
stores, 	and 	workers' 	clubs 	were, 	at 	least, 	specifically
'modern' 	functions: 	on 	occasion 	though, 	the 	new
architecture 	had 	to 	handle 	more 	traditional 	tasks 	like
civic 	monuments 	and 	parliament 	buildings, 	where
questions 	of 	size, 	hierarchy, 	and 	symbolism 	were
crucial. 	The 	League 	of 	Nations 	competition 	of 	1927
offers 	an 	intriguing 	insight 	into 	the 	way 	a 	variety 	of
modern 	architects 	and 	'traditionalists' 	approached 	the
same 	'monumental' 	programme 	and 	site. 	The 	building
was 	to 	be 	a 	sort 	of world 	parliament, 	and 	to 	contain 	a
giant 	assembly, 	lobbies, 	a 	secretariat, 	and 	a 	multiplic-
ity 	of 	supporting 	bureaucratic 	functions: 	it 	was 	to
13.6 	Ueft) 	I. 	Colosov.
Zuyev 	Workers' 	Club.
Moscow. 	1927-8.
li.jiricjht] 	Lc
Corbusier. 	League of
Nations, 	Geneva,
competition 	project.
1927.
I 	3.8 	[below] 	[-.rich
Mendelsohn. 	Schocken
store. 	Chemnitz.
1928-30.
I 	3.9 	iln'tow rifiht]
Hannes 	Meyer. 	League
of Nations. 	Geneva,
competition 	projects.
1927.

-- 180 of 420 --

The 	Intc"riiali()ii;il 	Style 	and 	the 	Myth 	ol'Fuiictionalism 	1 	79
stand 	near 	Geneva 	on 	the 	lake 	side. 	The 	symbolic 	and
rhetorical 	aspects 	of 	the 	problem 	were 	pivotal, 	and
among 	the 	many 	entries 	were 	a 	number 	of half-baked
attempts 	at 	a 	global 	and 	holistic 	imagery 	in 	the 	form 	of
circular 	buildings, 	mandalas. 	and 	the 	like. 	Eventually,
a 	rather 	clumsy 	Beaux-Arts 	scheme 	was 	chosen
(designed 	by 	I'.-H. 	Nenotl. but 	only 	after 	a 	scandalous
interlude 	in 	which 	Le 	Corbusicr. 	who 	had 	appeared 	to
be 	the 	winner, 	was 	disqualified 	on 	the 	grounds 	he 	had
used 	the 	wrong 	sort 	of ink.
Ix' 	Corbusier's 	design 	(fig. 	13.7) 	was 	a 	masterly
composition 	in 	which 	a 	hierarchy 	was 	suggested
between 	the 	most 	important 	room, 	the 	assembly,
placed 	on 	a 	dominant 	axis, 	and 	the 	supporting
functions 	of the secretariat, 	disposed 	as 	uniform 	lateral
blocks 	looking 	over 	strips 	of landscape 	and 	the 	nearby
lake. 	The 	volume 	of 	the 	assembly 	was 	derived
primarily 	from 	acoustic considerations 	and 	was 	curved
in 	profile; 	it 	would 	have 	been 	reached 	gradually
through 	a 	grand 	entrance 	facing 	the 	lake, 	via 	a
sequence 	of 	spaces 	of 	strongly 	ceremonial 	character
linked 	on 	axis. 	Le 	Corbusier 	solved the 	problem 	of 	a
monumental 	entrance 	by 	using 	grandiose 	pilotis 	and
an 	attached 	sculptural 	group 	to 	suggest 	the 	character

-- 181 of 420 --

1 80 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
of 	a 	portico. 	The 	secretariat 	was 	treated 	in 	a 	more
neutral 	way. 	with 	long 	windows, 	balconies. 	andpi/oti.s.
allowing 	the 	passage 	of circulation 	beneath. 	This 	was
to 	be 	a 	communal 	machine 	for 	enlightened, 	well-
meaning 	functionaries 	whose 	life 	would 	be 	daily
nourished 	through 	contact 	with 	nature: 	evocative
classical 	overtones 	were 	implied 	in 	the 	dignified 	and
hieratic 	mood 	of 	the 	assembly 	chamber. 	It 	was 	a
modern 	palace 	for 	the 	world 	elite.
It is 	intriguing to compare 	Le Corbusier's design with
Hannes 	Meyer's 	entry 	in 	the 	same 	competition 	(tig.
13.9). 	Kenneth 	Frampton 	has 	characterized 	the
contrast 	as 	one 	between 	'the 	humanist 	and 	the
utilitarian' 	ideals. 	Meyer 	was 	suspicious 	of 	the 	poetic
Lltopianism 	of men 	like 	Le 	Corbusier. 	and 	of the 	elitist
values 	implicit 	in 	the 	programme. 	In 	his 	scheme, 	the
secretariat 	was 	the 	dominant 	element 	and 	was
contained 	in 	an 	open-frame 	tower, 	a 	celebration 	of
engineering 	recalling 	the 	architect's 	admiration 	for
Russian 	Constructivism. 	The 	deliberate 	accentuation
of 	the 	factory 	aesthetic 	and 	'found 	industrial' 	objects
was 	no doubt 	intended 	as 	a 	sort of proletarian 	imagery,
again 	following 	the 	'code' 	of the 	Russian 	avant-garde.
There 	was 	no 	hankering 	after 	what 	the 	architect 	might
have 	regarded 	as 	a 	specious 	traditionalism 	to 	bolster
the 	honorific 	character 	of 	the 	institution. 	Meyer 	even
played 	down 	the 	possible 	hierarchical 	characteristics
of his scheme 	by 	designing 	the 	whole on 	a 	standardized
and 	repetitive 	module. 	Even 	so. 	these 	images 	were
loaded 	with 	a 	social 	content 	of a 	kind 	that 	the 	'New
Objectivity' 	architects 	in 	Germany 	had 	striven 	to
express 	by 	an 	'honest' 	assessment 	of 	function 	and
technique: 	Meyer's 	scheme was 	a 	palace for the people.
The 	architect 	wrote 	revealingly 	of it:
If the 	intentions 	of the 	League 	of Nations 	are
sincere, 	then 	it 	cannot 	possibly 	cram 	such 	a 	novel
social 	organization 	into 	the 	strait-jacket 	of
traditional 	architecture. 	No 	pillared 	reception
rooms 	for 	weary 	monarchs 	but 	hygienic
workrooms 	for 	the 	busy 	representatives 	of their
people. 	No 	back 	corridors 	for 	backstairs 	diplomacy
but 	open 	glazed 	rooms 	for 	public 	negotiation 	of
honest 	men.
The 	contrast 	between 	Le 	Corbusier's 	and 	Meyer's
designs, 	and 	the 	ideologies 	they 	articulated, 	calls 	to
mind 	some of the debates 	between 	so-called 	'formalists'
and 	'functionalists' 	in 	Russia 	and 	Germany 	about 	the
same 	time. 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	later 	castigated 	for 	his
dangerous 	'lltopianism' 	and 	replied 	that 	he 	saw 	man's
deepest 	aspirations 	as 	transcending 	the 	mere 	cate-
gories 	of 	left 	and 	right. 	His 	design 	for 	the 	League 	of
Nations 	was 	a 	celebration 	of 	his 	belief 	in 	a 	rational,
enlightened 	humanity, 	possessing 	abstract 	principles
of justice 	and 	law. 	In 	his 	eyes 	an 	over-emphasis 	on 	the
utilitarian 	aspects 	of 	the 	problem 	would 	have 	been
inappropriate. 	He 	sought 	instead 	to 	embody 	some 	of
the 	higher 	ideals 	of 	the 	enclosed 	institution. 	The
comparison 	of the 	two 	schemes 	is 	so 	valuable 	because
it 	demonstrates 	different 	personal 	and 	ideological
emphases in 	buildings 	which 	it might 	still be 	possible to
group 	together 	under 	the 	same 	broad 	stylistic 	label.
The 	International 	Style 	had 	some 	adherents 	who
only 	partly 	understood 	the 	underlying 	principles, 	and
who adopted 	the 	forms 	as a 	new external 	dress. 	In 	such
cases, 	modern 	forms 	became 	a 	sort 	of 	packaging, 	a
cosmetic 	application, 	rather 	than 	the 	expression 	of
deeper 	meanings, 	or the 	disciplined 	result 	of attention
to 	the 	functional 	discipline 	suggested 	by 	a 	task. 	This
was 	one 	of 	the 	dangers 	of 	speaking 	of 	the 	new
architecture 	as a 	'style' 	at 	all: 	it 	suggested 	that 	a 	set 	of
visual 	formulae 	could 	be 	picked 	up 	and 	then 	applied.
Perhaps 	the 	work of the Dutch 	architect 	Willem 	Dudok
supplies 	an 	example 	of 	this 	competent 	'stylism' 	(fig.
13.10): 	or 	in 	France, 	that 	of 	Robert 	Mallet-Stevens.
Each 	was 	capable 	of 	making 	of 	modern 	reductivism 	a
sort 	of 	pleasing 	simplicity, 	which 	was 	nonetheless
lacking 	in 	the 	transcending 	visionary 	content 	of 	the
authentic 	modern 	movement.
Of course, 	to 	the 	die-hard 	functionalist, 	distinctions
like 	these 	were 	not 	relevant: 	so 	far 	as 	he 	was
concerned, 	all 	style 	was 	false 	imposition. 	In 	the 	late
1 920s 	the engineer-philosopher 	R. 	Buckminster Fuller
designed an 	aluminium 	house 	around 	a 	central mast of
mechanical 	services. 	He 	claimed 	that 	this 	'Dymaxion
House' 	(fig. 	1 3.1 	1 ) 	was 	far 	more 	tightly 	related 	to
functional 	and 	technological 	optimization 	than 	the
cosmetic 	productions 	of the 	modern 	movement, 	which
he 	rejected 	out 	of hand
:
The 	'International 	Style' 	. 	. 	. 	demonstrated 	fashion-
inoculation 	without 	necessary 	knowledge 	of the
scientific 	fundamentals 	of structural 	mechanics 	and
chemistry.
The 	International 	Style 	'simplification' 	then 	was
but 	superficial. 	It 	peeled 	off yesterday's 	exterior
embellishment 	and 	put 	on 	instead 	formalized
novelties of quasi-simplicity. 	permitted 	by 	the 	same
hidden 	structural 	elements 	of modern 	alloys 	that
had 	permitted 	the 	discarded 	Beaux- Arts
garmentation 	. 	. 	. 	The 	new 	International 	Stylist
hung 	'stark 	motif walls' 	of vast 	super-meticulous
brick 	assemblage, 	which 	had 	no 	tensile
cohesiveness within 	its 	own 	bonds, 	but 	was, 	in 	fact,
locked 	within 	hidden 	steel 	frames 	supported 	by 	steel
without 	visible 	means 	ofsuppoft. 	In 	many 	such
illusory 	ways 	did 	the 	'International 	Style' 	gain
dramatic 	sensory 	impingement 	on 	society 	as 	does 	a
trick 	man 	gain 	the 	attention 	of children 	. 	.
.

-- 182 of 420 --

The 	InterniitUmal 	SI vie 	iind 	the 	Mvtli 	of Functionalism 	i8i
13.10 	(flhovc) 	William
M. 	Dudok. 	Hilversum
Town 	Hall, 	1426-8.
I 	3.1 	1 	(rifl/iO 	Richard
Buckminster Fuller.
Dymaxion 	House. 	192s
Running 	through 	this 	assessment 	was 	a 	belief in 	the
'honest' 	use 	and 	assemblage 	of 	technique 	and 	func-
tion, 	without 	the 	'imposition' 	of symbolic 	or 	aesthetic
filters: 	and 	as a 	critique 	of the 	plumbing 	and 	structural
veracity 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Fuller's 	criticisms
may 	have 	had 	a 	point. 	But 	as 	architectural 	criticism,
his remarks 	were 	frankly 	beside the 	point. They 	remind
one 	that, 	for 	all 	the 	rhetoric 	used 	in 	the 	twenties
concerning 	the 	honest 	expression 	of 	function,
structure, 	and 	technology, 	the 	game 	had 	to 	go 	on 	once
removed, 	as 	it 	were, 	in 	the 	field 	of symbolic 	forms, 	if the
pragmatic 	was 	to 	be 	translated 	into 	art. 	One 	can 	go
further, 	and 	say 	that 	it 	was 	in 	the 	tension 	between
such 	apprehended 	facts 	as, 	say, 	an 	industrial 	window,
or 	a 	standardized 	reinforced-concrete 	support, 	and 	the
symbolic 	associations 	they 	evoked, 	that 	part 	of 	the
expressive 	power of the 	new 	architecture 	lay. 	Whether
or 	not 	the 	wash-basin 	in 	the Villa 	Savoye entrance was
good 	plumbing, 	it 	was 	a 	standard 	fixture 	whose
meaning 	was 	transformed 	by 	juxtaposition 	with
surrounding 	objet-types 	- 	the 	pilotis. 	the 	industrial
windows, 	etc. 	- 	whose external 	form 	mirrored 	a 	higher
ideal: 	modern 	architects 	sought 	a 	kind 	of 	poetry 	of

-- 183 of 420 --

i82 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
everyday 	facts 	transcended 	by 	ideas, 	h: 	the 	end, 	to
claim 	that 	structure 	was 	handled 	dishonestly', 	or that
the 	latest 	Kxtures 	were 	not 	included 	or 	designed 	by 	the
architects, 	would 	be 	a 	little 	like 	complaining 	of 	a
Renaissance 	architect 	that 	his 	avowed 	revival 	of 	a
particular 	ancient 	prototype 	was 	inexact'. 	The
architects of the 	machine 	age 	transformed 	the 	stuff of
industrial 	production 	into 	new 	forms 	and 	meanings,
but 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	the 	original 	'reality' 	of. 	say. 	a
glass 	brick 	or a 	nautical 	detail 	would 	be 	among 	the
layers 	of 	reference 	of 	the 	final 	form. 	William 	Jordy
described 	this 	'symbolic 	objectivity' 	rather 	well:
The 	goal 	of symbolic 	objectivity 	was 	to 	align
architecture 	with 	the 	pervasive 	factuality 	of
modern 	existence, 	with 	that 	'ineloquence' 	(to 	call
up 	Bernard 	Berenson's 	tag) 	which 	characterizes 	the
modern 	imagination. 	The 	aims 	of simplification 	and
purification 	at 	the 	core 	of the 	movement, 	providing
it 	with 	a 	morality 	of Calvinist 	austerity, 	actually
stemmed 	from 	a 	diffuse 	convention 	on 	the 	part 	of
many 	progressive 	designers 	and 	theorists 	during
the 	nineteenth 	century 	to 	the 	effect 	that
architecture 	should 	be 	'honest', 	'truthful', 	and
'real', 	especially 	with 	respect 	to 	the 	revelation 	of
functional 	programme 	and 	of materials 	and
structure. 	During 	the 	twenties 	this 	moralistic
heritage 	acquired 	an 	antiseptic 	cleanliness, 	and
irreducible 	bareness, 	which 	symbolically, 	if not
quite 	literally, 	accords 	with 	the 	morality 	of
objectivity 	. 	.
.
But 	the 	objection 	against 	taking 	'functionalist'
slogans 	at 	face 	value 	is 	even 	more 	fundamental. 	For
even 	those 	few 	architects 	of 	the 	1920s 	who 	saw
themselves 	as 	pursuing 	a 	purely 	functional 	archi-
tecture 	were 	still 	stuck 	with 	the 	fact 	that 	functions 	do
not. 	on 	their 	own. 	generate 	forms. 	Fa'cu 	the 	most
tightly 	defined 	set 	of requirements 	may 	be 	answered 	in
a 	variety 	of 	ways, 	and 	a 	priori 	images 	concerning 	the
eventual 	appearance 	of 	the 	building 	will 	enter 	the
design 	process 	at 	some 	point. 	Thus 	functions 	could
only 	be 	translated 	into 	the 	forms 	and 	spaces 	of
architecture 	through 	the screen 	of a 	style, 	and 	in 	this
case 	it 	was 	a 	style 	of 	symbolic forms 	which 	referred,
among 	other 	things, 	to 	the 	notion 	of functionality.
The 	typical 	formal 	aspects 	of the 	International 	Style
were 	stretched 	in 	new 	directions 	when 	atypical
materials 	were 	employed. 	An 	example 	of 	this 	was
Bernard 	Bijvoet's 	and 	Pierre 	Chareau's 	Maison 	de
Verre 	of 	1928-32 	(fig. 	13.12), 	a 	building 	combining
the 	functions 	of a 	medical 	clinic 	and 	a 	private 	house 	in
a 	quiet 	enclave 	off 	a 	Paris 	street. 	Here 	the 	pervasive
materials 	were 	glass 	brick 	and 	thin 	steel 	struts,
elegantly composed 	into a 	linear 	aesthetic 	recalling 	the
slender 	wooden 	frames 	and 	screens 	of 	traditional
Japanese 	construction. 	The 	interior 	plan 	was 	complex,
but 	the 	most 	impressive 	space 	was 	the 	three-storey
living-room/library 	with 	its 	slung 	galleries, 	its 	adjus-
table 	louvers, 	and 	its 	exposed 	bolts. 	It 	is 	possible 	that
the 	imagery 	was 	here 	inspired 	by such 	things 	as 	the
stacks 	at 	the 	Bibliotheque 	Nationale 	by 	Henri 	Lab-
rouste. 	or 	the 	companion 	ladders 	and 	engineering
rooms 	of 	ships. 	Whatever 	the 	precise 	sources, 	they
were 	here 	transformed 	into 	an 	iconography 	of
mechanization 	suitable 	to 	the 	theme 	of 	an 	elegant
machine 	a 	habiter.
Materials 	and 	their 	associations 	must 	be 	considered
part 	of 	the 	matrix 	of 	a 	style. 	The 	plaster 	walls 	and
planar 	surfaces so 	often 	employed 	in 	the 	1920s 	were
perhaps 	intended 	to 	convey 	a 	non-material 	quality, 	to
suggest 	the 	opposite 	of 	handicraft: 	the 	abstraction 	of
the 	machine. 	The 	sheen 	of 	glass, 	and 	thinness 	of
aluminium, 	were 	likewise 	evocative 	of 	aeroplanes 	or
mass-produced 	objects. 	A 	style 	may 	be considered 	a
complex 	of 	formal 	relationships 	in 	which 	certain
moods 	and 	meanings 	are 	most 	at 	home: 	it 	provides a
set 	of 	conventions, 	which, 	in 	the 	compelling 	and
profound 	work 	of art. 	come 	together 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that
the 	conventionality 	is 	forgotten. 	The 	pedant 	may 	insist
that 	abstract 	art and mechanism, 	that ocean 	liners 	and
Classical 	values, 	have 	no 	necessary 	connection, 	but
when 	he 	has 	experienced 	the 	Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches,
these 	doubts 	are 	dispelled 	by 	a 	poetic 	sense 	of
inevitability.
13.12 	{above) 	Pierre
Chareau 	and 	Bernard
Bijvoet. 	Maison de 	Verre.
Paris. 	1928-32.
H. 	n 	iubove 	right)
l.udwig 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe. 	Barcelona
Pavilion. 	1929. 	plan.
13.141113/111 	Ludwig
Mies 	van 	der Rohe.
Barcelona 	Pavilion.
1929.
OVERLEAF
13.15 	Ludwig 	Mies van
der 	Rohe, 	Barcelona
Pavilion. 	1929.

-- 184 of 420 --

The 	International 	Style 	and 	the 	Myth 	of Functionalism 	183
LLLi 	1 	iiiu j 	1 	1 	i 	i:.ii.i.tt: 	! 	: 	i 	U-Ittt

-- 185 of 420 --

1 84 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars

-- 186 of 420 --

The 	International 	Style 	and 	the 	Myth 	ot'1'unctionalism
11^
The 	era 	of monumental 	expositions 	that 	make
money 	is 	past. 	Today 	we 	judge 	an 	exposition 	by
what 	it 	accomplishes 	in 	the 	cultural 	field.
Economic, 	technical 	and 	cultural 	conditions
have 	changed 	radically. 	It 	is 	very 	important 	lor 	our
culture 	and 	our 	society, 	as 	well 	as 	for 	technology
and 	industry, 	to find 	good 	solutions. 	German
industry, 	and 	indeed, 	European 	industry 	as a 	whole
must 	understand 	and 	solve 	these 	specific 	tasks. 	The
path 	must 	lead 	from 	quantity 	towards 	quality, 	from
the 	extensive 	to 	the 	intensive.
Along 	this 	path 	industry 	and 	technology 	will 	join
with 	the 	forces 	of thought 	and 	culture.
Evidently 	the 	pavilion 	was 	supposed 	to 	have 	an
ambassadorial 	function 	and 	to reflect 	values 	not 	unlike
those 	which 	had 	informed 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund
before 	the 	First 	World 	War. 	One 	is 	not 	surprised 	to
discover 	that 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	design 	embodied 	a
deliberate 	synthesis 	of form 	and 	technique, 	of modern
and 	Classical 	values. 	As 	a 	demonstration 	of the 	power
of 	modern 	structural 	invention 	to 	create 	unpre-
cedented 	spatial 	effects, 	the 	building 	was 	a 	tour deforce.
The 	thin 	roof 	slab 	was 	poised 	delicately 	on 	eight
cruciform 	steel 	supports 	coated 	in 	chrome: 	a 	con-
ception 	recalling 	the 	Dom-ino 	skeleton, 	but 	only 	a
single 	storey 	in 	height. 	In 	this 	context 	the 	structural
frame 	was 	far 	from 	being 	a 	low-cost 	instrument 	of
standardization : 	it 	was 	clad 	in 	expensive 	materials 	-
marble 	and 	onyx 	veneers, 	semi-reflecting 	glass, 	sharp-
edged 	stainless 	steel. 	This 	simple 	trabeated 	and
symmetrical structure was 	placed to one end 	of a raised
podium 	and 	carefully 	composed 	to 	relate 	to 	two
rectangular 	pools, 	which 	added 	further 	to 	the 	sense 	of
luxury 	and 	the 	feeling 	of 	dematerialization 	through
reflections. 	A 	counterpoint 	was 	set 	in 	motion 	by
shifting 	the 	axis 	of 	the 	main 	pool 	off 	that 	of 	the
rectangular 	pavilion, 	and 	this 	visual 	movement 	was
carried 	through 	in 	the 	way 	vertical 	planar 	partitions
were 	set 	down, 	some 	within 	the 	covered 	space, 	others
extending 	into 	the surroundings, 	all 	of them 	independ-
ent 	of 	the 	grid 	of 	supports. 	Thus, 	while 	some 	of 	them
actually 	bore 	weight, 	the 	kleu 	expressed 	was 	of 	the
independence 	of wall 	planes 	from 	traditional 	support-
ing 	roles. 	Joints 	and 	details 	in 	the 	fabric 	were 	carefully
controlled 	so 	as 	not 	to 	disturb 	a 	taut, 	weightless
character 	in 	most 	of the 	surfaces.
The 	visual 	pushes 	and 	pulls 	engendered 	by 	the
irregular 	placement 	of 	the 	partitions 	corresponded
with 	the 	meandering path 	that 	the 	visitor took 	through
the 	interior. 	This 	was 	furnished 	with 	heavy 	leather
chairs 	supported 	by 	criss-cross 	stainless 	steel 	flanges
coated 	in 	chrome 	('Barcelona 	chairs'). 	Otherwise 	the
space 	was 	completely 	uncluttered, 	a 	demonstration,
perhaps, 	of a 	new 	way of life, 	supposed 	to 	have a special
appeal 	to 	the 	cultivated 	industrial 	elite. 	Recalling 	the
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	Pavilion 	of 	1 	9 	1 4. 	there 	was 	a
Classical 	contemporary 	female 	statue 	by 	one 	of 	the
Pavilion 	pools: 	it 	made 	an 	odd 	touch 	alongside 	the
rectangular 	rigours 	of Mies's 	machine-age fantasy, 	but
it 	was 	a 	further 	reminder 	that 	the 	building 	as 	a 	whole
was 	guided 	by 	a 	Classical 	sense.
In 	terms 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	evolving 	vocabu-
lary, 	the 	form 	of the 	PaviHon 	was 	a 	synthesis of the sort
of 	pivotal 	plan 	he 	had 	experimented 	with 	in 	the 	brick
villa 	of 	1923, 	with 	the 	hovering 	horizontal 	slabs 	and
grid 	structures 	he 	had 	envisaged 	in 	his 	office 	block
project 	of 	1922. 	In 	the 	intervening 	seven 	years 	he 	had
had 	the 	opportunity 	to 	test 	variations 	of 	his 	ideas 	- 	in
the 	Rosa 	Luxemburg 	monument 	of 	1924, 	in 	the
Weissenhof 	designs 	of 	1925-7, 	and 	in 	the 	superbly
proportioned 	Krefeld 	house 	of 	1927-8. 	The 	Barcelona
Pavilion 	accumulated 	all 	these discoveries 	into 	a 	single
statement, 	which 	did 	not, 	however, 	suffer 	from 	the
overburdening 	of 	ideas. 	In 	the 	mind 	of 	its 	creator,
perhaps, 	the 	Pavilion 	may 	have 	been 	the 	purest
embodiment 	of the 	Zeitgeist. 	For 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	the
most 	significant 	spiritual 	artifacts 	were 	those 	which
translated 	'the 	will 	of the 	epoch 	into 	space'.
But 	the 	Pavilion, 	like 	the 	Schroeder 	House, 	the
Bauhaus 	buildings 	or Le 	Corbusier's 	villas, 	was 	also 	an
elegant 	solution 	to 	broader, 	shared 	problems 	of
expression 	of the 	period. 	Historians 	have rightly 	drawn
attention 	to 	the 	similarity 	of 	the 	plan 	to 	Mondrian's
paintings: 	to 	the 	'factuality' 	of the 	materials 	employed
(relating 	Mies 	to 	the 	'New 	Objectivity'): 	to 	the
simplicity 	of the wall 	surfaces 	recalling 	Berlage's 	pleas
for 	well-proportioned 	surfaces 	unadorned 	from 	top 	to
bottom: 	to 	the 	novelty 	and 	richness 	of 	the 	space
conception 	with 	its 	floating 	planes 	and 	painterly
illusions 	and 	ambiguities. 	It is entirely 	understandable,
then, 	that 	Hitchcock 	and 	Johnson 	should 	have 	singled
out 	the 	building 	as 	an 	exemplar 	of 	the 	International
Style.
Yet 	the 	roots 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	master-work
seem 	to 	lie 	deeper 	than 	this 	in 	history. 	Attention 	has
already 	been 	drawn 	to 	the 	architect's 	early 	admiration
for 	Schinkel. 	manifest 	particularly 	in 	his 	neo-classical
designs 	of 	the 	pre-First 	World 	War 	years. 	It 	was 	the
reduction 	of 	form 	to 	the 	most 	expressive 	simple
geometries 	which 	most 	excited 	him 	about 	his 	great
Prussian 	predecessor. 	Surely 	one 	recognizes 	a similar
concentration 	on 	essentials 	of 	Classicism 	in 	the
Barcelona 	Pavilion, 	especially 	in 	its 	impeccable
proportions, 	its 	sense 	of repose, 	and 	its 	restatement 	in
abstract 	form 	of 	the 	elemental 	column 	and 	en-
tablature. 	In 	this 	way 	the 	simplifications 	of 	the
International 	Style 	were 	capable 	of 	blending 	an
imagery 	of 	contemporary 	concerns 	with 	a 	remini-
scence 	of architecture's 	most 	enduring 	values.

-- 187 of 420 --

14. 	The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's
Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy
To 	make 	a 	plan 	is 	to 	determine 	and 	tix 	ideas.
It 	is 	to 	have 	had 	ideas.
It 	is 	to 	so 	order 	these 	ideas 	that 	they 	become 	intelligible, 	capable 	of execution
and 	communicable.
... 	A 	plan 	is 	to 	some 	extent 	like 	an 	analytical 	contents 	table. 	In 	a 	form 	so
condensed 	that 	it 	seems 	as 	clear 	as 	a 	crystal 	and 	like 	a 	geometrical 	figure, 	it
contains 	an 	enormous 	quantity 	of ideas 	and 	the 	impulse 	of an 	intention.
LeCorbusier. 	1923
The 	last 	cliapter 	examined 	the 	validity 	of the 	notion
of the 	'International 	Style' 	and 	found 	it 	strong 	in 	some
respects, 	weak 	in 	others. 	It 	seems 	that 	the 	early
apologists 	of 	modern 	architecture 	were 	over-
preoccupied 	with 	defining 	a 	supra-historical 	identity
for 	the 	style 	and 	were 	not 	sufficiently 	attentive 	to
individual 	and 	personal 	intentions. 	There 	wns 	a
broadly 	shared 	language 	of expression 	in 	the 	1920s 	in
certain 	countries 	of 	Western 	Europe 	and 	part 	of 	the
United 	States, 	but 	this 	was 	only 	one 	of a 	number, 	and
the 	most 	interesting 	works 	conceived 	within 	it 	were 	so
individual 	as 	to 	remain 	uncategorizable.
Beyond 	even 	the 	individual 	architectural 	language
of 	the 	artist 	there 	is 	another 	level 	which 	has 	to 	be
grasped 	if the 	inner 	meaning 	of a 	new 	tradition 	is 	to 	be
understood. 	This 	lies 	in 	the 	special 	intellectual
chemistry 	of the 	classic 	work. 	Here 	one 	is 	interested 	in
the way 	the 	problems 	of a 	particular context 	have 	been
solved, 	and 	in 	the manner 	in 	which 	an 	individual 	work
of art 	extends 	both 	the 	personal 	themes of an 	artist 	and
the 	broader preoccupations 	of a 	period. 	In 	this 	case 	the
Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	of 	1928-9 	by 	Le 	Corbusier 	has
been 	singled 	out 	for 	monographic 	scrutiny. 	For, 	like
the 	Barcelona 	Pavilion, 	the 	Villa 	'contains 	an
enormous 	quantity 	of 	ideas' 	and 	splices 	together
concerns 	of 	its 	own 	time 	and 	perennial 	values 	of 	the
architectural 	art. 	To 	probe 	into 	its 	underlying 	mean-
ings 	is 	necessarily 	to 	enter 	still 	further 	Le 	Corbusier's
patterns 	of thinking 	in 	his 	early 	maturity.
Architecture 	embraces 	not 	just 	three 	dimensions,
but 	four. 	It 	is 	by 	its 	nature 	involved 	with 	time 	and
change. 	We 	grasp 	the 	form 	of 	a 	building 	gradually 	as
we 	move 	towards 	it 	and 	through 	it. 	comparing
scenographic 	incidents 	one 	with 	another, 	and 	in-
corporating 	them 	into 	a 	growing 	sense 	of 	the 	whole.
The 	same 	building 	seems 	ever 	different 	under 	chang-
ing 	conditions 	of 	weather 	and 	light, 	as 	values 	of
silhouette, 	shape, 	and 	depth 	are 	played 	down 	or
accentuated. 	These 	qualities 	of movement 	and change
lie 	near 	the 	heart 	of 	the 	Villa 	Savoye's 	conception.
Thus a description of the building is best conducted as a
sort 	of promenade.
The 	Villa 	Savoye 	(also 	known 	evocatively 	as 	'Les
Heures 	Claires' I 	stands 	about 	twenty 	miles 	north-west
of Paris 	on 	the 	outskirts 	of the 	small 	town 	of Poissy, 	on
a 	site 	bordered 	by 	trees 	on 	three 	sides, 	yet 	with 	a 	long
view 	beyond 	the 	fourth 	towards 	the 	softly 	rolling 	fields
and 	valleys of the 	lie 	de France. 	Perhaps 	one 	arrives 	by
car. 	in 	which 	case 	one 	leaves 	the 	road 	and 	passes 	by 	a
small 	white 	cubic 	gate 	lodge 	which 	guards 	the
entrance 	to 	the drive. 	The 	gravel 	way 	turns 	slowly 	into
the 	trees, 	its 	destination 	mysterious. 	Then 	one 	catches
the 	first 	view 	of 	the 	villa 	standing 	fifty 	yards 	away
towards 	the centre 	of a 	field.
The 	first 	impression 	is 	of 	a 	horizontal 	white 	box.
poised on 	pilotis. 	set off against the 	rustic surroundings,
the 	far 	panorama 	and 	the 	sky. 	The 	driveway 	passes
through 	the 	undercroft, 	circles 	the 	building 	beneath
the 	overhang, 	and 	re-emerges 	to 	return 	to 	the 	road 	on
the 	left-hand 	side. 	The 	main 	first-level 	box 	is 	sur-
mounted 	by curved 	volumes 	just 	visible 	to 	the 	rear. 	Bit
by 	bit 	one 	gathers 	that 	the 	villa 	is 	not 	as 	detached 	as 	it
first 	appeared. 	It 	Is 	sculpted 	and 	hollowed 	to 	allow 	the
surroundings 	to 	enter 	it, 	and 	its 	formal 	energies

-- 188 of 420 --

14-1 	I-e Corbusier. 	'Les
Heures Claires', 	the 	Villa
Savoye at 	Poissy.
192S-1). 	axonometric
sketch 	showing
relationship 	of roof
terrace to 	sun 	and 	the
processional 	character of
automobile 	approach.
14.2 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye. 	1928-9.
exterior view.
The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	ofl.c 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	187
emanate 	to 	the 	bordcr.s 	of the 	site 	(tigs. 	14. 	i. 	14.2).
The 	main 	fa(;ade' 	is 	somewhat 	blank 	and 	forbidding
and 	gives 	the 	impression 	(later 	to 	be 	disproved) 	of 	a
completely 	symmetrical 	building, 	rooted 	to 	the 	ground
in 	its 	middle 	part. 	The 	strong 	horizontal 	emphasis 	is
supplied 	by 	the 	overall 	shape, 	the 	single 	strip 	window
running 	from 	one 	end 	to 	the 	other 	of the 	(main) 	upper
level 	(tig. 	14. 	5), 	and 	the 	repeated 	horizontals 	of 	the
factory 	glazing 	at 	the 	lower 	level 	(hiding 	the 	mundane
functions 	of 	servants' 	and 	chauffeur's 	quarters). 	The
predominant 	verticals 	at 	this 	stage 	are 	the 	ranks 	of
cylindrical 	tnlotis 	receding 	on 	each 	side 	behind 	the
suggested 	facade 	plane; 	they 	supply 	an 	airy 	sense 	of
lightness.
The 	approach 	to 	the 	building 	has 	a curious quality 	of
ritual, 	as 	if one 	were 	being 	drawn 	without 	choice 	into
some 	Corbusian 	machine-age 	ceremony. 	The 	car
passes beneath 	the overhang as a forceful reminder of a
guiding 	point 	of 	the 	artist's 	doctrine. 	The 	entrance 	is

-- 189 of 420 --

1 88 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
14.3 	Le Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye, 	1928-9. 	view
towards entrance.
14.4 	Le Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye. 	1928-9.
interior view towards
entrance with 	wash
basin 	in 	hall 	in
foreground 	and 	ramp 	to
left.

-- 190 of 420 --

The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	• 	189
14. S 	Le Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye, 	1428-9. 	plans
and 	longitudinal 	section
oftinal 	scheme. 	1929:
[top 	riijlit) 	ground 	floor
plan: 	Uo;)) 	first 	floor
plan; 	[ccnlrc) 	roof level
plan: 	ibottoin]
longitudinal 	section.
,- 	> ~ sxssSS\-;:V
^"^^^^AiV.?^
u
found 	at 	the 	apex 	of a 	curve 	formed 	by 	the 	glazed 	lower
level. 	A 	chauffeur 	is 	assumed, 	and 	as 	one 	is 	put 	down
on 	the 	main 	axis, 	the car continues 	to 	follow 	the curve,
then 	to 	slide 	in 	diagonally 	beneath 	the 	rectangular
superstructure.
One 	passes 	through 	the 	main 	doors 	into 	the
vestibule, 	a 	space 	defined 	by curved 	glass 	surfaces 	to
either 	side. 	The 	main 	choices 	are 	clear. 	Straight 	ahead
a 	ramp passes 	along the 	main 	axis of the building 	to the
upper 	levels. 	To 	the 	left 	is 	a 	spiral 	stair 	linking 	the
servants' 	zone 	to 	the 	world 	above. 	Ahead 	and 	slightly
to 	the 	left 	is 	the 	hall 	leading 	to 	the chauffeur's quarters,
a 	wash-basin 	standing 	mysteriously 	in 	it 	(fig. 	14.4 1.
The 	surfaces 	are 	brittle 	and 	smooth, 	the 	atmosphere
clinical. 	The 	space 	is 	set 	about 	with 	the 	pure 	forms 	of
cylindrical 	pibtis. 	Those 	near 	the 	door 	are 	grouped 	to
form 	a 	sort of portico and - a 	subtle 	touch - one of them
is 	made square 	in 	plan 	to correspond to the corner of an
interior 	wall 	Hanking 	the 	other 	side 	of the 	base 	of the
ramp. 	Another 	refined 	detail 	catches 	the 	eye: 	the 	small
white 	tiles 	in 	the 	floor 	are 	laid 	out 	on 	the diagonal, 	and
effect 	a 	subtle 	link 	between 	the 	various 	curved 	and
rectangular 	geometries.
The 	ramp 	is 	the 	very 	spine 	of 	the 	idea: 	in 	plan 	it
stands 	on 	the 	axis 	and 	passes 	between 	the 	grid 	of pilotis
(not 	so 	regularly 	spaced 	as 	one 	might 	at 	first 	imagine):
in 	section 	it 	suggests 	a 	dynamic 	passage 	through 	the
horizontal 	floor 	slabs, 	bringing 	with 	it 	a 	gradual
expansion 	of space 	the 	higher 	one 	goes. 	The 	plan 	of the
building 	is 	square, 	one 	of 	the 	ideal 	shapes 	which 	the
architect 	so 	admired, 	and 	part 	of 	the 	richness 	of 	the
Villa 	Savoye 	comes 	from 	the 	dynamics 	of curved 	forms
within 	a 	stable 	perimeter 	(fig. 	14.S). 	The 	ramp 	guides
the 	promenade 	architecturale' 	and 	links 	the 	various

-- 191 of 420 --



-- 192 of 420 --

The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	• 	191
1 4. 6 	( left I 	Le Corbusier,
Villa 	Savoye. 	1928-9,
view 	from 	salon 	on
main, 	first-tloor 	level,
towards the roof terrace
and 	the 	ramp.
I4.7(rii(/i() 	Le
Corbusier. 	Villa 	Savoye.
1928-9. 	view 	up last 	leg
of ramp 	towards
solarium.
events: 	in 	turn 	it 	supplies 	an 	ennobling, 	almost
ceremonial 	character 	of ascent.
After turning 	back on 	its original 	direction, 	the ramp
emerges 	on 	the 	first 	floor, 	the 	main 	living 	level 	of 	the
house 	(as 	at 	Garches. 	a 	piano 	nobile) 	where 	the 	most
formal 	and 	most 	public 	spaces 	are 	situated. 	They 	stand
around 	the 	roof 	terrace, 	a 	sort 	of 	outdoor 	room
concealed 	from 	the 	exterior 	by 	a 	uniform 	strip 	window
without 	glass. 	This 	catches 	the 	sun 	at 	all 	times 	of 	the
day 	(it 	faces 	in 	a 	southerly 	direction) 	and 	helps 	to 	fill
the 	house 	with 	light. 	The 	biggest 	room 	is 	the salon 	(fig.
14.6) 	with 	large 	glazing 	giving 	straight 	on 	to 	the
terrace 	with 	a 	strip 	window 	facing 	the 	best 	view, 	that
of the 	distant 	hills, 	to 	the 	north-west. 	To 	the 	other 	two
sides of the 	roof terrace are the 	more 	'private' 	areas: 	the
kitchen 	(in 	the corner) 	with 	its 	own 	tiny 	terrace; 	the
guest 	bedroom: 	Madame 	Savoye's 	bedroom, 	boudoir.
and 	bathroom: 	and 	her 	son's 	bedroom 	and 	bathroom.
The 	Villa 	Savoye 	was 	not 	an 	all-the-year 	home, 	but 	a
sort 	of country 	retreat 	or 	summer 	weekend 	residence 	-
a 	villa 	in 	the 	ancient 	tradition, 	where 	the 	well-to-do
might 	retire 	and 	enjoy 	the 	greenery 	and 	fresh 	air 	of the
countryside. 	Among other curiosities on the 	main 	level
are 	the 	fireplace 	in 	the 	salon 	expressed 	as 	a 	free-
standing 	stack, 	and 	a 	blue-tiled 	recfining 	seat 	next 	to
the 	main 	bathroom, 	suggesting 	something 	of 	both
Madame Savoye's 	and 	Le 	Corbusier's 	obsessive 	interest
in 	cleanUness 	and 	athleticism.
I 	he 	related 	themes 	of health, 	fresh 	air. 	sunlight, 	and
intellectual 	clarity 	are 	reinforced 	as 	one 	continues 	up
the 	ramp to 	the topmost 	level, 	again 	making 	a 	return 	at
a 	middle 	level 	landing. 	The 	tloor 	of the 	ramp 	is 	finished
in 	paving 	laid 	on 	a 	diagonal 	to 	reinforce 	the 	sense 	of
movement, 	in 	contrast 	to 	the 	orthogonal 	details 	of
analogous 	flagstones 	on 	the 	main 	terrace. 	It 	is 	in 	these
upper regions that 	the artist's 	nautical 	fantasies 	are felt
most 	vividly, 	especially 	in 	the 	delicate 	tubular 	'ship's'
railings, 	and 	the 	curious 	stack 	containing 	the 	top 	of
spiral 	stair. 	This 	is 	a 	relative 	of 	other 	cylinders 	in 	the
composition; 	the spiral 	stair can 	be seen 	'peeling' 	away
below 	it 	behind 	liquidly 	dark 	and 	semi-transparent
areas 	of 	glazing. 	As 	at 	Garches, 	and 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's
paintings, 	the 	richness 	of 	the 	effect 	comes 	from 	the
harmony 	and 	similarity 	of 	basic 	geometrical 	forms,
from 	the 	control 	of 	proportion 	and 	ratio, 	and 	from
effects of illusion 	whereby objects are glimp.sed 	through
layers of glass 	or 	through 	windows 	cut 	clean 	through
the 	plainest 	of 	white 	surfaces. 	Ambiguity 	constantly
reinforces visual 	tension 	(Plate 	7).
The 	final 	slope 	of 	the 	ramp 	ascends 	towards 	the
solarium 	(fig. 	14.7) 	- 	seen 	first 	from 	the 	outside 	as 	a
hovering 	curved 	volume, 	but 	from 	this 	position, 	a 	thin
strip-like 	plane 	- with 	a 	small 	window 	cut clean 	into 	it.
It 	is 	this 	which 	now 	holds the 	attention, a 	rectangle 	of
blue 	sky 	and 	passing 	clouds, 	seen 	in 	an 	entirely
monochrome surround. 	As one draws 	level 	with 	it, 	one

-- 193 of 420 --

192 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
n^^
r~h
XJ
p" 	}J.
US83
has 	the 	breathtaking 	view 	of the 	distant 	valleys 	which
captured 	the 	attention 	in 	the 	very 	first 	approach. 	Then
the 	building 	was 	seen 	surrounded 	by 	the 	setting; 	now
the 	setting 	is 	framed 	by 	the 	building. 	The 	adequate
provision 	of 	greenery 	was 	a 	central 	part 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	machine-age 	mythology. 	At 	the 	Villa
Savoye 	nature 	is 	celebrated 	as 	dramatically 	as 	the 	idea
of the 	house 	as 	a 	machine 	a 	habiler 	or 	the 	processional
theme 	of 	the 	car, 	by 	means 	of 	carefully 	orchestrated
views 	of 	trees 	and 	grass. 	The 	vignettes 	of 	the 	exterior
have 	an 	almost 	super-real 	intensity, 	as 	if the 	artist 	has
clipped 	bits 	of 	the 	outside 	world 	and 	spliced 	them
together 	in 	a 	collage.
If 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	draws 	together 	a 	number 	of
earlier 	Le 	Corbusier 	themes, 	it 	also 	reveals 	the
continuation 	of earlier 	formal 	experiments. 	In 	Vers 	une
architecture 	he 	had 	referred 	to 	the 	idea of setting 	down
'standards' 	and 	then, 	through 	a 	gradual 	process 	of
experiment 	and 	refinement, 	'perfecting' 	them 	by
paring 	them 	down 	to 	their 	most 	essential 	character-
istics. 	He 	claimed 	that 	this 	had 	occurred 	between
Paestum 	and 	the 	Parthenon. 	In 	a 	sense 	one 	may 	see
the 	Villa 	Savoye 	as a 	culmination 	of a 	similar 	path 	of
refinement 	but 	telescoped 	into 	the 	single 	decade 	of the
1920s. 	The 	propositions 	of 	the 	Maison 	Citrohan, 	the
principles 	of the 	'five 	points 	of a 	new 	architecture', 	the
proposals of Vers 	une architecture, 	the suggestions of the
various 	intermediary 	schemes 	(e.g., 	Maison 	Cook, 	the
unrealized 	Maison 	Meyer, 	Villa 	Stein) 	were 	ennobled,
dignified, 	and 	simplified 	to 	an 	extreme 	degree. 	One 	is
bound 	to 	say 	that 	the 	Villa 	Savoye, 	like 	the 	Robie
House, 	like 	certain 	of 	Palladio's 	mature 	villas.
represents 	a 	high 	point 	of 	expression 	within 	a
vocabulary 	of type 	forms.
When 	the 	architect 	was 	first 	approached 	with 	the
commission 	in 	1 	928, 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	at 	last 	achieved
his 	synthesis: 	he 	was 	a 	mature 	architect 	of the highest
order. 	It 	is 	intriguing 	to 	speculate 	on 	his 	possible 	initial
responses 	to 	Madame 	Savoye's 	suggestions 	for 	a
country 	house 	and 	to 	a 	site 	which 	was 	not, 	for 	once,
hemmed 	in 	by 	other 	buildings. 	It 	is 	tempting 	to
speculate 	that 	he 	was 	intrigued 	by 	the 	possibility 	of
weaving 	his 	own 	fantasy 	of modern 	life 	around 	a 	sort
of 	ritualistic 	celebration 	of 	his 	client's 	high 	bourgeois
habits 	- 	the 	arrival 	by 	car, 	the 	'ablutions' 	in 	the
chauffeur's 	hall, 	the 	companion 	stair 	for 	the 	servants,
the 	ramp 	for 	the 	initiated 	or 	the 	well-to-do. 	One
guesses, 	too, 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	must 	have 	immediately
realized 	that 	this site 	gave 	him 	the 	possibility 	of making
a 	sculpture 	in 	the 	round 	- rather than 	a 	building with 	a
single 	fagade 	like 	Maison 	Cook, 	or a 	front 	and 	back 	like
the 	Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches.
Unfortunately, 	the 	evidence 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's
sketches for the 	Villa 	Savoye 	is 	incomplete, 	patchy, 	and
not 	firmly 	dated. 	It 	seems 	that 	there 	were 	about 	three
difl'erent 	schemes 	between 	October 	1928 	and 	April
1929. 	As 	was 	often 	the 	case 	in 	his 	design 	processes,
some 	ideas 	which 	emerged 	early 	were 	later 	discarded,
only 	to 	be 	picked 	up 	again 	and 	reincorporated 	into 	the
final 	project: 	for 	the 	earliest 	sketches 	are 	in 	fact 	quite
close 	to 	the 	finished 	building. 	Among 	the 	intermediary
explorations 	was 	one 	of 	an 	almost 	neo-classical
formality 	with 	a 	symmetrical 	box 	protruding 	behind
the 	screens 	of 	the 	fac^ade 	(fig. 	14. 9I; 	and 	another
14.8 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye, 	development
sketches 	on 	a 	single
sheet, 	late 	1928
(Fondation 	Le
Corbusier no. 	19583).
Note 	that 	part 	of the
curved 	upper level 	is
given 	to Madame
Savoye's 	quarters.

-- 194 of 420 --

The 	Image and 	Idea 	ol 	Lc 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	193
14.9 	Le Corbusier. 	Villa
Savoye. 	development
sketch: 	elevation 	of c.
November 	1428
(Fondation 	Le
Corbusier 	no. 	iqdgii).
(alluded 	to 	a 	moment 	ago) 	in 	which 	the 	top 	level 	was
made 	curved 	and 	habitable 	(fig. 	14.8). 	To 	follow 	these
drawings 	is 	to 	see a 	style 	in 	action. 	It 	is 	also 	to 	gauge
the 	conflicts 	between 	function 	and 	form, 	client 	and
architect. 	There 	were 	many 	programmatic 	problems
along 	the 	way, 	among 	them 	the 	difficulty 	of 	ac-
commodating 	the 	cars 	and 	their 	turning 	circle 	at 	the
lowest 	level, 	especially 	when, 	for 	a 	short 	phase, 	the
entire 	scheme 	was 	reduced 	in 	size. 	A 	synthesis 	had 	to
be 	sought 	which 	accommodated 	the 	'external' 	con-
straints 	of 	practicality 	and 	the 	architect's 	own 	ideal
intentions.
Although 	the 	villa 	must 	be 	understood 	as 	a 	relative
of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	earlier 	designs, 	it 	was 	not 	as 	if 	he
simply 	took 	pieces 	from 	old 	designs 	and 	stuck 	them
together. 	Rather, 	a 	vital 	new 	image 	was 	unearthed,
which 	articulated 	new 	possibilities 	of 	form 	and
meaning 	in 	an 	unprecedented 	synthesis. 	This 	is 	why 	it
is 	only 	of limited 	value 	to 	point 	out 	that 	the 	idea 	of the
automobile 	passing 	under 	the 	building 	was 	first 	made
clear 	- 	with 	all 	its 	urbanistic 	and 	architectural
implications 	- 	at 	Maison 	Cook: 	or 	that 	the 	ramp 	first
occurred 	as 	a 	principal 	feature 	in 	the 	studio 	wing 	of
Maison 	La 	Roche, 	for 	in 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	these 	devices
were employed 	in 	a 	vital 	new 	combination, 	A 	similar
observation 	can 	be 	made 	about 	the 	accent 	given 	the
'five 	points 	of a 	new 	architecture': 	the 	strip 	window
had 	never been 	used so potently 	to 	unify 	all 	four sides of
a 	design, 	and 	the 	pilotis 	- 	employed 	as a 	major 	device
on 	the 	interior of Garches, 	was 	here 	used 	as 	a 	dominant
feature 	of both 	interior 	and 	exterior 	design. 	At 	the 	end
of 	the 	1920s. 	Le 	Corbusier 	published 	a 	series 	of
sketches 	of 	his 	principal 	villa 	designs 	of 	the 	decade,
including 	La 	Roche. 	C.arches. 	the 	Villa 	Baizeau 	for
Carthage, 	and 	finally. 	Villa 	Savoye. 	In 	each 	case 	he
attached 	notes 	describing 	salient 	features 	such 	as 	the
pure 	formal 	character 	at 	Garches. 	or 	the 	internal 	and
external 	interpenetrations 	of 	the 	Carthage 	dwelling.
The 	Villa 	Savoye 	managed 	to 	synthesize 	qualities 	of all
the 	other 	three 	(fig. 	8.12).
But 	every 	time 	Le 	Corbusier 	re-used 	a 	form 	it 	had
many 	levels 	of practical and mythical significance in 	its
new 	context. 	An 	example 	of this 	at 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	is
the 	curved 	solarium 	on 	top 	of 	the 	building. 	In 	this
particular 	design 	the 	curve 	began 	its 	life 	as 	the 	shelter
for 	a 	small 	terrace 	and 	as 	the 	curved 	wall 	to 	the
boudoir 	of Madame 	Savoye 	(placed 	suggestively 	at 	the
culmination 	of 	the 	ramp 	procession 	in 	the 	earliest
scheme). 	Formally 	it 	defined 	a 	counterpoint 	with 	the
rectangular 	volumes 	beneath 	it: 	volumetrically 	it 	had
a 	shifting 	identity, 	at 	times 	appearing 	as 	a 	funnel
floating 	above 	the 	glazed 	zones 	below, 	at 	times 	an
uncurled 	screen. 	Within 	Le 	Corbusier's 	overall 	syntax
it 	was clearly 	a 	relative of numerous other curved 	'free-
plan' 	partitions 	which 	served 	to 	sculpt 	different
functions 	independently 	of 	perimeter 	walls 	or 	grids 	of
supports: 	here, 	though, 	the 	screen 	had 	a 	double
identity 	as a 	'partition' 	and 	a 	curved 	'exterior 	waU'. 	As
a 	plan 	shape 	the 	solarium 	curves 	had 	strong 	affinities
with 	the 	guitar 	outlines 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	earlier 	Purist
pictures, 	but 	it 	was 	not 	as 	if 	he 	traced 	out 	the
discoveries 	of 	his 	paintings 	on 	to 	his 	building 	plans:
rather, 	the 	same 	formal 	intelligence 	working 	in
different 	media 	achieved 	analogous 	results. 	The 	long
distant 	view 	of 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	has. 	understandably,
been 	compared 	with 	a Purist 	still 	life on 	a 	table 	top 	(the
solarium 	was 	originally 	rose 	in 	colour 	and 	would 	have
stood 	out 	strongly 	against 	the 	white 	rectangles
beneath), 	and 	the 	associations 	with 	ships' 	funnels or
machine 	parts 	are 	not 	hard 	to 	make. 	Yet 	all 	such
references' 	are 	held 	in 	check 	by 	a 	prodigious 	force 	of
intellectual 	abstraction, 	as 	if the 	curve 	were 	all of these
things 	at 	once.
Like 	any 	masterpiece, 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	evades 	facile
categorization. 	It 	is 	simple 	and 	complex, 	cerebral 	and
sensuous. 	Laden 	with 	ideas, 	it 	still 	expresses 	these
directly 	through 	shapes, 	volumes, 	and 	spaces 	'in 	a
certain 	relationship'. 	A 	'classic' 	moment 	of 	modern
architecture, 	it 	also 	has 	affinities 	with 	the 	great
architecture 	of the 	past. 	It 	was 	a 	central 	concern 	of Le
Corbusier's 	philosophy 	that 	a 	vision 	of 	contemporary
life 	be 	given 	expression 	in 	architectural 	forms 	of
enduring 	value, 	and 	in 	the 	Villa 	Savoye one 	recognizes
echoes 	of 	old 	Classical 	themes: 	repose, 	proportion,
clarity, 	a 	simple 	language 	of 	trabeation. 	Perhaps 	one
may 	even 	go 	so 	far 	as 	to 	suggest 	a 	reminiscence 	of the
Parthenon 	which 	had 	so 	obsessed 	Le 	Corbusier 	twenty
years 	before. 	Surely 	the 	mechanized 	procession
culminating 	in 	an 	entrance 	point 	at the 	opposite 	end 	of
the 	building 	suggests 	affinities 	with 	the 	ceremonial
route 	the 	artist 	had 	noted 	in 	the 	Acropolis. 	In 	its 	tense
mathematical 	relationships 	and 	tight 	contours, 	in 	its

-- 195 of 420 --

194 	' 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
radiating 	power 	to 	the 	setting, 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	also
invoked qualities 	Le Corbusier had 	admired 	in 	the great
Classical 	prototype. 	A 	caption 	from 	the 	chapter 	in 	Vers
line 	architecture 	called 	'Architecture 	Pure 	Creation 	of
the 	Mind' 	might 	apply 	to 	the 	ancient 	or the 	modern
building 	equally 	well 	(figs. 	14.10, 	14. 	11):
From 	what 	is 	emotion 	born.' 	From 	a 	certain
relationship 	between 	definite 	elements: 	cylinders,
an 	even 	floor, 	even 	walls. 	From 	a 	certain 	harmony
with 	the 	things 	that 	make 	up 	the 	site. 	From 	a
plastic 	system 	that 	spreads 	its 	effects 	over 	every 	part
of the 	composition. 	From 	a unity 	of idea 	that
reaches 	from 	the 	unity 	of materials 	used 	to 	the
unity 	of the 	general 	contour.
It 	is 	tempting 	to 	regard 	the 	piloti. 	that 	central
element 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	architectural 	language, 	so
resonant 	with 	meanings 	related 	to 	Purism, 	standardi-
zation, 	the 	definition 	of concrete, 	and 	the 	creation 	of a
new 	urbanism. 	as 	being 	a 	reinterpreted 	Classical
column 	as 	well. 	The 	cylinder 	was 	one 	of 	those
'absolutely 	beautiful' 	Platonic 	forms 	singled 	out 	for
special 	attention 	in 	Vers 	ime 	architecture: 	it 	was 	a
primary 	form 	capable 	of 	touching 	the 	mind 	at 	the
deepest 	levels. 	At 	the 	same 	time 	the 	piloti 	was
14.10 	Le 	Corbusier.
Villa 	Savoye. 	Poissy.
1928-9: 	certain
essentials of Classicism
re-thought in 	a 	modern
vocabulary.

-- 196 of 420 --

The 	Image and 	Idea 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy 	• 	195
14. II 	Ictinus 	and
Callicrates 	land,
according to 	Le
Corhusier. 	I'hidias), 	tlie
Parthenon. 	Acropolis.
Atliens. 	44X-432 	BC.
conceived 	as 	the correct expression 	for concrete 	and 	an
objet-tijpe 	in 	the 	class 	of 	supports: 	it 	embodied 	the
essential 	idea 	of 	the 	column, 	stripped 	of 	all 	accidental
or 	ornamental 	effects. 	Once 	again 	Idealism 	and
Rationalism 	were 	united 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	thought.
Thus 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	embodied 	a 	world 	view 	and
synthesized 	a 	number 	of 	strands 	of 	its 	creator's
philosophy. 	Its 	language 	was 	based 	on 	a 	modern
structural 	technique 	as 	Viollet-le-Duc 	had 	required,
and 	its 	imagery 	referred 	to 	modern 	engineering 	objects
which 	were 	regarded 	as 	symbols 	of 	contemporary
reality. 	Its 	idealization 	of a 	way 	of 	life 	addressed 	the
needs 	of machine-age 	society, 	positing 	a 	Utopian 	social
order, 	while 	its 	forms 	were 	intensified 	with 	the 	help 	of
proportional 	expertise 	and 	Purist 	painting. 	Its 	indiv-
idual elements - the piloti. 	the strip window, 	etc. 	- were
elevated, 	like 	the 	columns 	and 	triglyphs 	of 	a 	Greek
temple, 	to 	the 	level 	of 	timeless 	solutions; 	the 	ab-
straction 	of 	its 	forms 	implied 	a 	lofty 	and 	spiritual 	role
for 	architecture. 	Above 	all, 	though, 	the 	architectural
language 	of the 	Villa 	Savoye 	was 	the 	result 	of a 	radical
quest, 	a 	returning 	to 	roots, 	a 	rethinking 	of 	the
fundamentals 	of the 	art. 	That 	is 	why 	it 	is 	reasonable 	to
compare 	the 	building 	to 	that 	paradigm 	of 	simple
trabeaiion, 	Laugier's 	primitive 	hut. 	an 	architecture
supposedly 	reflecting 	natural 	law.

-- 197 of 420 --

15. 	Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1930s
The 	creative 	artist 	is 	by 	nature 	and 	by 	office 	the 	qualified 	leader 	in 	any
society, 	natural, 	native 	interpreter 	of the 	visible 	form 	of any 	social 	order 	in 	or
under 	which 	we 	choose 	to 	live.
F. 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	1935
By 	about 	1930 	modern 	architecture 	had 	become 	a
major 	force 	and 	public 	presence 	in 	the 	culture 	of 	the
West 	and 	its 	lessons 	were 	being 	adapted 	by 	countless
new 	followers. 	The 	creative 	pressure 	could 	not 	be 	kept
up 	indefinitely 	and 	in 	the 	early 	1930s 	the 	onus 	shifted
from 	the 	continuing 	revolution 	of 	forms 	to 	the
extension 	of 	recently 	discovered 	prototypes. 	This
tentative 	construction 	of 	a 	'tradition 	of 	the 	new' 	was
soon 	hampered 	by 	external 	circumstances 	such 	as 	the
repressive 	attitudes 	of 	totalitarian 	regimes; 	but 	there
were 	also 	internal 	difficulties 	related 	to 	the 	problem 	of
symbolic 	devaluation.
The 	prodigious 	authenticity 	of 	buildings 	like 	the
Villa 	Savoye 	was 	extremely 	hard 	to 	follow. 	The 	ideas
brought 	together 	in 	such 	a 	synthesis 	had 	been 	filtered
through 	the 	poetic 	intelligence 	of a 	single 	artist 	and
represented 	an 	irreducible 	pattern 	of myth. 	Repetition
of 	the 	same 	forms 	without 	sufficient 	transformation
into a 	new 	content 	could 	only 	result 	in 	pastiche. 	One 	is
bound 	to 	say 	that 	a 	valid 	extension 	of the 	principles 	of
modern 	design 	of the 	sort 	achieved 	by 	Aalto. 	Lubetkin
and 	Terragni 	in 	the 	1930s 	was 	more 	the 	exception
than 	the 	rule. 	It 	is 	striking 	how 	quickly 	there 	emerged
a 	sort of modern 	academicism, 	in 	which 	cliched 	usages
of pi/oti.s 	or 	whitewashed 	walls 	became 	the 	signs 	that
one 	was 	'up 	to 	date'.
Further 	complications 	were 	caused by 	the 	founda-
tion 	of 	numerous 	subsidiary 	branches 	of 	the 	modern
movement 	around 	the 	world. 	Czechoslovakia 	was
already 	involved 	during 	the 	1920s 	(one 	thinks 	of
Ludvik 	Kysela's 	elegant 	shop 	for 	Bata 	of 	1929) 	and 	so
was 	Japan 	(Antonin 	Raymond's 	house 	in 	Tokyo
already fused modern 	abstraction 	and local tradition in
1924). 	In 	Spain 	there 	were 	also 	hints 	of 	a 	modern
movement 	in 	the 	late 	1920s, 	and 	these 	were 	con-
solidated 	by 	Jose 	Luis 	Sert 	(a 	co-worker of Le 	Corbusier
who 	was 	desttned 	to 	become 	president 	of CI AM) 	until
the 	Civil 	War 	intervened. 	In 	South 	Africa 	Rex
Martienssen 	and 	the 	Transvaal 	group 	made 	an 	elegant
translation 	of Purism 	in 	the 	early 	thirties, 	and 	in 	Brazil
the 	activities 	of Lucio 	Costa 	ensured 	the 	foundation 	for
a 	future 	entente 	cordiale 	with 	European 	modernism.
Finally, 	of 	course, 	one 	must 	mention 	England. 	Italy
and 	Finland, 	all 	countries 	with 	isolated 	germs 	of
modern 	ideas 	in 	the 	1 920s destined 	to 	come 	to 	fruition
in 	the 	1930s. 	To 	understand 	these 	patterns 	of
dissemination 	properly 	it 	will 	be 	necessary 	to 	examine
some 	cases 	in detail (see 	Chapters 	16 	and 	17): 	for 	the
moment 	one 	may 	say 	that 	the 	reception 	of 	modern
forms 	was 	rarely 	smooth 	and 	usually 	accompanied 	by
debates 	concerning 	their 	appropriateness 	(or 	lack 	of it)
to 	national 	cultural 	traditions.
However, 	a 	distinction 	must 	be 	drawn 	between
countries 	which 	received 	modern 	architecture 	ready-
made 	from 	the 	outside, 	and 	countries 	which, 	while
they 	obviously 	relied 	on 	foreign 	stimulus, 	evolved
modern 	movements 	of 	their 	own 	in 	parallel 	with 	the
major 	developments 	of 	Western 	Europe. 	South 	Africa
offers 	an 	example 	of the 	first 	situation, 	Czechoslovakia
of 	the 	second. 	The 	Czech 	Devetsil 	group, 	founded 	in
1920. 	contained 	a 	number 	of architects of originality,
such 	as 	Karel Teige. 	Jaromir 	Krejcar 	and 	Josef Chochol.
who 	tentatively 	formulated 	the 	need 	for 	a 	new
architecture. 	They 	eventually 	publicized 	their 	radical

-- 198 of 420 --

ideas 	in 	magazines 	like 	Stavba 	and 	Stavitel. 	These
served 	as a 	forum 	for debates concerning the social role
of 	modern 	architecture 	and 	as 	sources 	of 	information
on 	developments 	east 	and 	west 	of Czechoslovakia. 	One
is 	not 	surprised 	to 	discover 	a 	rich 	blend 	of ideas 	from
both 	European 	and 	Soviet 	avant-garde 	sources. 	For
example. 	Teige's 	1929 	attack 	on 	Le 	Corbusier's
monumental 	scheme 	for 	the 	'Mondaneum' 	(to 	have
stood 	near Geneva 	but never built ) 	smacks of the sort of
anti-formalist 	bias 	of a 	Russian 	group 	like 	the 	OSA.
The 	variety 	of theoretical 	positions 	was 	matched 	by
a 	certain 	pluralism 	of 	vocabulary. 	The 	industrial
school 	at 	Mlada 	Boleslav 	by 	J. 	Kroha 	of 	1923-5 	shows
that 	the 	Czech 	modern 	movement 	was 	in 	stride 	with
the 	exploratory 	phase 	of 	modern 	architecture 	in
France, 	Germany 	and 	Holland. 	Otto 	Eisler's 	'Double
House' 	at 	Brno 	in 	1926 	employed 	some 	of 	the
constituent 	elements 	of the 	International 	Style 	on 	the
exterior 	(e.g., 	a 	flat 	roof, 	planar 	wall 	surfaces,
rectangular 	volumes) 	but 	its 	interior 	planning 	was
closed 	and 	compartmental 	by 	comparison 	with 	the
free-plan 	experiments 	of 	Le 	Corbusier. 	The 	Exhibition
of Contemporary 	Culture 	held 	in 	Brno in 	1 92S 	brought
together most 	advanced 	tendencies 	in 	Czech 	design. 	To
counter 	Teige's 	restrained 	puritanism 	there 	was 	the
somewhat 	extravagant 	Pavilion 	of The 	City 	of Brno 	by
B. 	Fuchs 	with 	its 	dramatic 	cantilevered 	spiral 	stair 	on
the exterior, 	its orange tiles 	and 	glass bricks, 	its obvious
celebration 	of 	material 	differences 	and 	structural
elements. 	Kroha's 	Fine 	Arts Pavilion 	was 	partly 	based
on 	Constructivist 	prototypes 	while 	Kysela's 	afore-
mentioned 	Bata 	Shap 	in 	Prague 	of 	the 	following 	year
made much 	play 	with 	transparent effects of full 	glazing
in 	the 	hovering 	overhangs 	of its 	street 	fa(,-ade.
It 	is 	a 	measure 	of the 	enlightened 	and 	adventurous
character of patronage 	in 	Brno 	that 	Mies 	Van 	der 	Robe
should 	have 	designed 	one 	of 	his 	finest 	works 	close 	to
the 	town. 	This 	was 	the 	Tugendhat 	House 	of 	1930. 	The
site stood 	above a 	slope 	and offered good 	views over the
landscape. 	The 	architect 	gave 	the 	building 	a 	closed
character to 	the 	street side, 	where 	the most 	private 	and
the 	smallest 	rooms 	were 	placed. 	But 	on 	the 	garden 	side
he 	opened 	the 	building 	up 	as 	a 	series 	of 	free-flowing
spaces 	articulated 	by 	slender 	stainless 	steel 	supports.
He 	also 	supplied 	a 	long 	window 	from 	floor 	to 	ceiling
running 	the 	entire 	length 	of 	the 	rear 	facade. 	Thus
something 	of 	the 	honorific 	character 	of 	the 	Barcelona
Pavilion 	was 	brought 	into a 	domestic 	context.
The 	situation 	in 	South 	Africa 	in 	the 	twenties 	was
altogether 	different 	and 	was 	obviously 	influenced 	by
the 	considerable 	geographical 	distance 	from 	in-
novatory 	centres 	and 	by 	cultural 	dependence 	on
England, 	which 	was 	without 	a 	modern 	movement
until 	the 	thirties. 	In 	reaction 	against 	a 	rather 	glib 	High
Victorianism 	which 	had 	infected 	South 	African 	design
Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1 9 	?os 	• 	197
in 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	century, 	Herbert 	Baker 	had
evolved 	a 	viable 	synthesis 	of 	the 	Cape 	tradition, 	the
English 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	and 	the 	Mediterranean
vernacular 	in 	the 	years 	prior 	to 	the 	First 	World 	War.
But 	by 	the 	mid- 1920s 	South 	African 	architecture 	was
tired 	and 	in 	need 	of 	new 	life. 	In 	1925 	Stanley 	Furner
began 	teaching at the University of Witwatersrand 	and
publishing 	avant-garde 	developments 	from 	Europe.
His 	most 	gifted 	student. 	Rex 	Martienssen, 	travelled 	to
Holland 	and 	to 	France, 	where 	he 	visited 	Le 	Corbusier.
Martienssen. 	who 	early 	developed 	an 	enthusiasm
for 	Greek 	architecture 	and 	culture, 	understood 	the
Classical 	underpinnings 	of 	Purism, 	and 	in 	the 	early
1930s 	in 	partnership 	with 	John 	Fassler 	and 	Bernard
Cooke 	designed 	a 	number 	of buildings 	of high 	quality,
among 	them 	the 	Peterhouse 	flats 	and 	funeral 	home 	in
Johannesburg 	(1934-5), 	This 	reflected 	a 	variety 	of
influences 	from 	Europe, 	most 	notably 	Gropius 	and 	Le
Corbusier, 	but 	the 	building 	had 	a 	logic 	and 	a 	power 	of
its 	own 	arising 	from 	the 	ingenious 	combination 	of
varying 	functional 	demands 	on 	a 	urban 	site 	and 	from
the 	tight 	control 	of 	proportions. 	The 	composition 	was
crowned 	by 	a 	large 	curved 	solarium 	recalling 	the 	Villa
Savoye. 	while 	the 	strong 	South 	African 	sunlight
ensured 	dramatic 	contracts 	of 	light 	and 	shade 	in 	the
apertures cut through 	taut and 	planar wall surfaces. 	In
the 	same 	year 	the 	partnership 	designed 	a 	number 	of
luxury 	suburban 	residences 	- 	most 	notably 	the 	Stern
House 	- 	in 	which 	they 	took 	maximum 	advantage 	of
the 	South 	African 	climate 	in 	the 	provision 	of 	a 	roof
terrace 	and 	patios 	shaded 	by 	overhangs. 	In 	this 	case
the 	composition 	maximized 	the 	interplay 	between
voids 	and 	solids, 	planes 	and 	volumes, 	in 	an 	evocation
of 	the 	healthy 	open-air 	life 	which 	had 	definite
Mediterranean 	overtones. 	Another partnership 	to 	play
a 	major 	role 	in 	the 	foundation 	of 	a 	South 	African
modern 	movement 	was 	that 	of 	Hanson, 	Tomkin 	and
Finkelstein. 	But 	their 	work 	rarely 	achieved 	the 	same
pitch 	as 	Martienssen's. 	whose unusual 	intellectual gifts
ensured 	a 	firm 	basis 	of 	principle 	in 	his 	activities 	as 	a
creator 	and 	an 	educator. 	Martienssen 	was 	one 	of the
few 	inheritors 	of 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	the 	modern
movement 	to 	realize 	that 	good 	modern 	architecture
could 	embody 	a 	continuity 	of artistic 	fundamentals 	as
well 	as 	a revolution 	in 	technology, 	social 	attitudes 	and
forms.
If 	the 	modern 	movement 	was 	passing 	into 	foreign
hands, 	the 	originators 	still 	had 	the 	problem 	of deciding
what 	to 	do 	next. 	The 	careers 	of 	German 	and 	Soviet
architects 	were 	severely 	disrupted 	by 	political 	events,
while 	the 	activities 	of 	Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	were
frustrated 	by 	economic 	depression. 	Nonetheless 	the
1930s 	was 	an 	inventive 	period 	for 	both 	men,
characterized 	by 	a 	disparity 	between 	their 	grand
societal visions 	and their 	limited 	opportunities 	to 	build.

-- 199 of 420 --



-- 200 of 420 --

I S.I 	Ueft) 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	'Falling 	Water',
the 	Bear 	Run.
Pennsylvania. 	19^6.
15.
2
(riij/iO 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	'Falling 	Water'.
I4?(i. 	detail 	showing
How of space 	between
Interior 	and exterior and
steps down 	to 	water.
15.3 	{below) 	Frank
Lloyd 	Wright. 	'Falling
Water'. 	1936, 	elevation.
t:
r. 	. 	i
-Jjfejt
^
Neither 	artist 	compromised 	his 	idealistic 	stance 	in 	the
face of 	difficulties, 	but 	the 	moral 	determinism 	of 	each
was 	partially 	undermined. 	By 	the 	end 	of the 	1930s 	it
was 	obvious 	that 	their 	sweeping 	statements 	of 	social
and urbanistic 	doctrine 	were capable of only 	piecemeal
demonstration.
As 	was 	shown 	earlier 	(see 	Chapter 	1 	1 	), 	the 	twenties
was 	a 	difficult 	time 	for 	Wright, 	who 	was 	by 	then
already 	in 	his 	late 	fifties. 	Dogged 	by 	personal 	and
financial 	problems 	and 	a 	general 	indifference 	to 	his
architectural 	ideals, 	he 	adopted 	the 	quirks 	of 	the
misunderstood 	eccentric. 	In 	the 	thirties 	much 	of 	this
changed 	as 	his 	life 	achieved 	a 	new 	stability 	with
Wright 	and 	LeCorbusier 	in 	the 	1930s 	199
Olgivanna 	(his 	third 	wife), 	and 	as 	he 	solved 	his
financial 	problems 	with 	the 	help 	of 	the 	Taliesin
foundation - 	a 	sort 	of 	rural 	retreat 	and 	architectural
school 	in 	which 	young 	men 	helped 	about the 	farm 	and
the 	estate 	while 	learning 	the 	basics 	of 	Wright's
'organic' 	philosophy. 	It 	is 	arguable 	too 	that 	the
intellectual 	atmosphere 	of 	the 	New 	Deal 	provided 	a
richer soil 	than 	had 	the 	boom 	period 	of the 	twenties 	for
Wright's 	reformist 	tendencies. 	In 	the 	thirties 	he
devoted 	much 	attention 	to 	the 	design 	of cheap, 	single
family 	dwellings 	(e.g., 	the 	Usonian 	houses) 	and 	to 	the
projection 	of a 	sort 	of decentralized 	Utopia 	- 	'Broadacre
City' 	- 	in 	order 	to 	give 	American 	life 	a 	coherent 	social
form 	in 	a 	period 	of 	crisis. 	But 	it 	was 	in 	two 	individual
masterpieces 	of 	marginal 	social 	relevance 	that 	he
revealed 	to 	the 	world 	at 	large 	that 	he 	was 	far 	from
spent 	as a 	formal 	inventor 	of the highest 	order.
The 	first 	of 	these 	was 	a 	country 	retreat 	known 	as
'Falling 	Water' 	for 	the 	Pittsburgh 	millionaire 	Kdgar 	J.
Kaufmann. 	This 	was 	placed 	above 	a 	waterfall 	in 	a 	deep
ravine 	in 	Pennsylvania 	known 	as 	'the 	Bear 	Run' 	(fig.
15.1l. 	The 	building 	was 	formed 	from 	cantilevered
concrete 	trays 	rooted 	to 	a 	core 	embedded 	in 	the
boulders. 	Its 	horizontal 	layers 	soared 	free 	of 	apparent
support 	over 	the 	cascades 	and 	pools 	of 	the 	stream.
Walls 	were 	avoided 	almost entirely, 	the 	sense of shelter
being 	provided 	by 	the 	overhangs 	and 	by 	screen-Uke
windows 	detailed 	to 	enhance 	the 	vertical 	and 	horiz-
ontal 	rhythms. 	The 	chimney 	core 	was 	made 	from 	local
stone 	laid 	rough, 	in 	contrast 	to 	the 	smooth 	finish 	of the
concrete 	balconies. 	A 	major 	part 	of 	the 	interior 	space
was 	given 	over 	to 	a 	large 	living-room, 	suitable 	to 	the
function 	of 	a 	weekend 	house. 	The 	effects 	of 	dappled
light, 	surrounding 	foliage 	and 	tumbling 	water, 	and 	the
feeling 	of 	horizontal 	expansion 	in 	all 	directions 	from
the 	interiors, 	gave 	an 	exact 	image 	of 	Wright's 	well-
known 	maxims 	concerning 	integration 	of architecture
and 	nature 	(fig. 	i 	5.2). 	This 	conception 	was 	carried
through 	the 	entire 	formal 	ensemble 	which 	was
controlled, 	but 	never 	rigid. 	There 	was 	the 	sense 	of 	a
vital, 	ever-changing 	order 	as 	elements 	and 	context
shifted 	into 	new 	relationships. 	The 	spaces 	around 	the
waterfall 	and 	the screens 	of 	the 	trees 	were 	all 	drawn
into 	the 	composition: 	nature 	and 	art 	were 	made 	to
complement one 	another. This 	is 	how 	Kaufmann's 	son
(who 	was 	responsible 	for 	introducing 	his 	father 	to
Wright's 	work) 	assessed 	the 	house 	years 	later:
When 	Wright 	came 	to 	the 	site 	he 	appreciated 	the
powerful 	sound 	of the 	falls, 	the 	vitality 	of the 	young
forest, 	the 	dramatic 	rock 	ledges 	and 	boulders; 	these
were 	elements 	to 	be 	interwoven 	with 	the 	serenely
soaring 	spaces 	of his 	structure. 	But 	Wright's 	insight
penetrated 	more 	deeply. 	He 	understood 	that 	people
were 	creatures 	of nature, 	hence 	an 	architecture

-- 201 of 420 --

200 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
which 	conformed 	to 	nature 	would 	conform 	to 	what
was 	basic 	in 	people. 	For 	example, 	although 	all 	of
Falling 	Water 	is 	opened 	by 	broad 	bands 	of
windows, 	people 	inside 	are 	sheltered 	as 	in 	a 	deep
cave, 	secure 	in 	the sense 	of the 	hill 	behind 	them.
Their 	attention 	is 	directed 	toward 	the 	outside 	by
low 	ceilings: 	no 	lordly 	hall 	sets 	the 	tone 	but.
instead, 	the 	luminous 	textures 	of the 	woodland
rhythmically 	enframed. 	The 	materials 	of the
structure 	blend 	with 	the 	colorings 	of the 	rocks 	and
trees, 	while 	occasional 	accents 	are 	provided 	by
bright 	furnishings, 	like 	the 	wildflowers 	or 	birds
outside. 	The 	paths 	within 	the 	house, 	stairs 	and
passages, 	meander 	without 	formality 	or 	urgency.
. 	. 	. 	Sociability 	and 	privacy 	are 	both 	available, 	as 	are
the 	comforts 	of home 	and 	the 	adventures 	of the
seasons. 	So 	people 	are 	cossetted 	into 	relaxing, 	into
exploring 	the 	enjoyment 	of life 	refreshed 	in 	nature.
Visitors 	too. 	in 	due 	measure 	experience 	Wright's
architecture 	as 	an 	expansion 	of living.
A 	superficial 	reading 	of 	Wright's 	achievement 	at
Falling 	Water 	might 	point 	to 	the 	white 	horizontals 	and
claim 	that 	he 	was 	here 	being 	influenced 	by 	the
simplifications 	of the 	'International 	Style'. 	This 	would
be 	to 	faU 	into 	the 	sort 	of 	facile 	stylistic 	categorization
warned 	against 	earlier 	in 	this 	book. 	For 	not 	only 	were
the 	forms 	of 	the 	house 	rooted 	in 	Wright's 	earlier
principles 	and 	discoveries 	(e.g., 	the stratified 	landscape
terraces of Taliesin, 	the formal 	arrangements 	and 	trays
of 	the 	prairie 	houses, 	the 	pervasive 	fascination 	with
natural 	forms): 	they 	were 	also 	infused 	with 	meanings
and 	associations 	which 	put 	him 	at 	odds 	with 	the
philosophical 	and 	compositional 	tendencies 	of 	the
European 	modern 	movement 	(fig. 	15.3). 	Once 	again
we 	have 	to 	deal 	with 	a 	contrast 	between 	an 	American
romanticism 	- 	a 	democratic 	ideal 	concerning 	the
primacy 	of 	the 	free 	life 	lived 	in 	nature 	- 	and 	the 	very
different 	values 	implied 	by 	the 	various 	philosophies 	of
the 	European 	avant-garde. 	Wright 	attempted 	to
distance 	himself 	from 	the 	modern 	movement 	in 	a
display 	of scorn:
Human 	houses 	should 	not 	be 	like 	boxes 	blazing 	in
the 	sun, 	nor 	should 	we 	outrage 	the 	Machine 	by
trying 	to 	make 	dwelling 	places 	too 	complementary
to 	machinery. 	Any 	building 	for 	humane 	purposes
should 	be 	an 	elemental, 	sympathetic 	feature 	of the
ground, 	complementary 	to 	its 	nature 	environment
. 	. 	. 	But 	most 	'modernistic' 	houses 	manage 	to 	look
as 	though 	cut 	from 	cardboard 	with 	scissors 	. 	.
.
glued 	together 	in 	box-like 	forms 	- 	in 	a 	childish
attempt 	to 	make 	buildings 	resemble 	steamships,
flying 	machines 	or 	locomotives 	... 	So 	far 	I 	see 	in
most 	of the 	cardboard houses 	of the 	'modernistic'
movement small 	evidence 	that 	their 	designers 	have
mastered 	either 	the 	machinery 	or 	the 	mechanical
processes 	which 	build 	the 	house. 	. 	. 	. 	Of late 	they 	are
the 	superficial. 	New 	'Surface-and-Mass' 	Aesthetic
falsely 	claiming 	French 	Painting 	as 	a 	Parent.
Opposed 	to 	this 	box 	architecture. 	Wright 	placed 	his
own 	organic 	ideal 	with 	its 	emphasis 	on 	the 	inner
vitality 	of 	expression, 	on 	the 	fusion 	of 	structure,
function, 	and 	idea, 	and 	on 	the 	inspiration 	of 	natural
forms. 	At 	Falling 	Water 	he 	may 	even 	have 	adopted 	the
subtle position 	of a 	corrective to the 	'box 	architecture' 	of
the International 	Style 	and a demonstration 	of the way
simple forms 	might create a 	vital, 	life-enhancing space.
In a 	talk 	to 	the 	Taliesin 	Feflowship 	Wright 	claimed:
. 	. 	. 	now 	you 	are 	released 	by 	way 	of glass 	and 	the
cantilever 	and 	the 	sense 	of space 	which 	becomes
operative. 	Now 	you 	are 	related 	to 	the 	landscape. 	. 	.
.
You 	are 	as 	much 	part 	of it 	as 	the 	trees, 	the 	flowers,
the 	ground. 	. 	. 	. 	You 	are 	now 	free 	to 	become 	a
natural 	feature 	of your 	environment 	and 	that, 	I
believe, 	was 	intended 	by 	your 	maker.
To 	this 	outlook, 	the 	various 	organic 	analogies 	in
Wright's 	forms 	were 	the 	formal 	equivalent. 	At 	Falling
Water 	two 	natural 	elements 	seem 	to 	be 	interwoven 	in
a 	fabric 	of 	imaginative 	abstraction: 	the 	rock 	strata
bordering 	the site, 	and 	the 	trees 	with 	their 	hierarchy 	of
supports, 	circulation, 	and 	texture. 	A 	few 	years 	before
designing 	the 	house 	Wright had 	eulogized 	'the 	rock
ledges 	of a 	stone-quarry'
:
There 	is 	suggestion 	in 	the 	strata 	and 	character 	in
the 	formations. 	. 	. 	. 	For 	in 	the 	stony 	bone-work 	of
the 	Earth, 	the 	principles 	that 	shaped 	stone 	as 	it 	lies,
or 	as 	it 	rises 	and 	remains 	to 	be 	sculptured 	by 	winds
and 	tide 	- 	there 	sleep 	forms 	and 	styles 	enough 	for
all 	the 	ages 	of man.
The 	tree 	on 	the 	other 	hand 	was 	a 	pervasive
metaphor 	in 	Wright's 	thinking 	from 	his 	earliest 	years.
The 	stunning 	synthesis 	of 	Falling 	Water 	is 	tribute 	to
the 	depth 	of 	his 	earlier 	reflections 	as 	much 	as 	it 	is 	a a
sign 	of 	his 	continuing 	vitality 	as 	an 	inventor. 	Like 	the
Villa 	Savoye. 	the 	building 	'contains 	a 	great 	quantity 	of
ideas', 	but 	compressed 	into 	a 	simple 	guiding 	image; 	it
too 	relied 	on 	years 	of 	experimentation 	with 	an
architectural 	system 	based 	on 	principles, 	and 	on 	a
philosophy 	of life 	(Plate 	8).
The other major 	tour deforce also designed by 	Wright
in 	1936 	was 	the 	Administration 	Center 	of 	Johnson
Wax 	in 	Racine, 	Wisconsin 	(fig. 	15.4). 	The 	site 	and
programme 	could 	scarcely 	have 	been 	more 	different:
the 	building 	had 	to 	stand 	on 	a 	flat 	lot 	in 	a 	somewhat

-- 202 of 420 --

Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1 9 30S 	201
I5.4(rig/it) 	Franli 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Johnson 	Wax
Adminstration 	Center,
Racine. 	Wisconsin.
1936.
15.5 	(below) 	Frank
IJoyd 	Wright. 	Johnson
Wax. 	Racine. 	Wisconsin.
1 9 U"). 	interior view 	of
mushroom 	supports.
ugly 	urban 	setting; 	it 	was 	to 	contain 	offices 	and 	work
spaces. 	However, 	unhke 	the 	managers 	of 	the 	giant,
impersonal 	corporations 	then 	beginning 	to 	dominate
American 	life, 	the 	Johnsons 	wished 	their 	organization
to 	maintain 	the 	character 	of a 	sort 	of extended 	family
under 	a 	beneficent 	patriarchy. 	Wright 	grasped 	this
character 	and 	mood 	at 	once 	in 	the 	course 	of design. 	He
attempted 	to 	form 	an 	inward-looking 	community
which would 	foster 	togetherness 	while 	mirroring 	the
hierarchy 	of the 	firm. 	The 	administration 	building 	was
therefore 	designed 	as 	a 	large 	window-less 	rectangle
covered 	in 	brick, 	lit 	from 	above, 	with 	trays 	suspended
inwards 	from 	its 	edges 	looking 	into 	a 	hypostyle 	hall
two storeys 	high 	to 	the core. 	This 	grand 	but 	well-scaled
space 	was 	articulated 	by 	a 	grid 	of 	slender 	mushroom
supports 	in 	concrete 	(fig. 	iS-S): 	it 	was 	intended 	to
contain 	the 	main 	working-places 	of 	the 	secretaries.
The 	management 	was 	to 	be 	situated 	in 	the 	upper 	levels
of 	the 	rectangle 	off 	the 	trays. 	Wright 	called 	the 	two
wings 	on 	top 	of the 	building 	a 	penthouse' 	because 	the
executive 	offices 	and 	the 	private 	office 	of the President
were 	to 	be 	situated 	there: 	again, 	Wright 	interpreted,
'idealized' 	and gave form to an institutional framework.

-- 203 of 420 --

202 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
The 	exteriors 	of 	the 	Johnson 	Wax 	building 	had
curved 	corners 	and 	a 	streamlined 	character 	not 	unlike
certain 	'Moderne' 	designs 	by 	Raymond 	Loewy 	in 	the
early 	thirties. 	Perhaps 	these 	touches 	reflected 	a
deliberate 	attempt 	on 	Wright's 	part 	at 	designing 	in 	a
populist' 	mode. 	The 	streamlined 	quality 	was 	cont-
inued 	on 	the 	interior 	in 	the 	horizontal 	attenuation 	of
trays 	and 	parapets, 	and 	in 	the extraordinary 	glass 	tube
details 	Wright 	designed 	for 	the 	integrated 	lighting
system. 	But 	the 	mood 	of 	the 	interior 	space 	far
transcended 	such 	glossy 	surface 	eflfects: 	it 	communi-
cated 	stability 	and 	formality, 	yet 	without 	being
overbearing. 	After 	the 	closed 	character 	of the 	exterior,
the 	glazed 	ceilings 	and 	tubes 	of 	the 	interiors 	glowed
with 	warmth 	and 	light. 	The 	grid 	of the 	supports 	in 	no
way 	summoned 	up 	the 	bleak 	repetitiveness 	of 	the
banal 	grids 	pervasive 	in 	much 	commercial 	office 	space
design: 	each 	support 	was 	elegant 	and 	delicate:
together the rows of tapering shapes, 	their circular tops
floating 	like 	lily-pads 	on 	a 	translucent 	surface, 	created
a 	sort 	of underwater 	world. 	Wright 	despised 	the 	values
represented 	by 	most 	commercial 	architecture 	-
profiteering, 	brashness, 	the 	uniformity 	of the 	hive: 	he
sought 	instead 	to 	mould 	rich 	spaces 	in 	which 	life,
work, 	and 	art 	would 	enhance 	one 	another. 	The 	proof
of 	the 	building's 	success 	lay 	in 	the 	way 	employees
chose 	to 	linger 	in 	it 	after 	work, 	as 	if 	it 	were 	an 	oasis
against 	the 	chaos 	and 	economic 	depression 	in 	the
world outside. The polished glass and metal surfaces, de-
liberately chosen with Johnson's wax products in 	mind,
were 	lavishly 	cared 	for 	and 	kept 	continually 	spick.
Like 	Falling 	Water, 	the 	Johnson 	Wax 	building 	was
superficially 	different 	from 	Wright's 	earlier 	archi-
tecture. 	On 	a 	deeper 	level, 	though, 	its 	organization 	was
also 	rooted 	in 	his 	earlier 	experiments. 	The 	pedigree 	of
the Johnson 	Wax 	included 	the 	Larkin 	Building 	of 	1 904
(also 	an 	inward-looking, 	symmetrical 	'Cathedral 	of
Work'): 	the 	Unity 	Temple 	(where 	two 	major 	volumes
on 	axis 	with 	one 	another 	were 	also 	entered 	through
the 	slot 	between 	them, 	and 	in 	which 	Wright 	also 	used
slung 	balconies 	and 	filtered 	overhead 	lighting): 	The
Tokyo 	Imperial 	Hotel 	(in 	which 	he 	first 	extensively
experimented 	with 	mushroom 	supports 	in 	the
earthquake-proof 	foundations); 	and 	a 	project 	for 	the
Capital 	Jourua! 	building 	in 	Salem, 	Oregon, 	of 	1931,
where 	a 	hypostyle 	of similar 	supports 	was 	envisaged.
Perhaps 	Wright's 	image 	of 	the 	columnated 	hall 	owed
something 	to 	ancient 	Egyptian 	hypostyles, 	just 	as 	his
naturally 	inspired 	columns 	may 	have 	been 	indebted 	to
papyrus 	or 	lotus 	supports 	in 	the 	same 	prototypes. 	The
architect 	had 	to 	prove 	to 	his 	nervous 	clients 	that 	his
slender columns could 	support 	the 	anticipated 	loads 	by
building 	a 	mock-up 	and 	piling 	heavy 	weights 	on 	to 	it.
This 	experiment 	only 	went 	to 	confirm 	the 	integration
of 	Wright's 	practical 	engineering 	knowledge 	with 	his
intuitive 	structural 	sense 	(fig. 	i 	5.6).
In 	the 	1940s 	the 	Johnson 	Wax 	organization 	chose
to 	expand and 	build a 	laboratory 	tower 	which 	Wright
was 	also 	commissioned 	to 	design. 	He 	adapted 	and
fused 	the mushroom 	support 	idea 	with 	the 	needs 	of the
programme, 	by 	placing 	the 	services 	in 	the 	core 	and 	the
laboratories 	on 	cantilevered 	trays 	with 	intervening
overhangs 	of 	lesser 	width. 	The 	result 	was 	an 	elegant,
round-cornered 	vertical 	box 	wrapped 	in 	deflecting
glass 	(to 	handle 	the 	sun's 	rays) 	in 	which 	the 	main 	floor
slabs 	registered 	on 	the 	exterior 	as 	horizontal 	bands.
The 	alternate 	floors 	were 	smaller 	in 	extent, 	and 	set
back 	from 	the 	fai;ade, 	so that 	the 	laboratories 	on 	the
interior 	had 	all-round 	views 	and 	were 	split-levelled,
allowing 	a 	division 	between 	messy 	laboratory 	work
and 	study. 	Once 	again 	Wright 	exhibited 	an 	attitude
quite 	at 	odds 	with 	the 	grid/box 	formula 	for 	the 	tall
building.
Another 	major 	achievement 	of Wright's 	resurgence
in 	the 	thirties 	was 	the 	design 	of 	a 	low-cost 	house
prototype 	called 	the 	'llsonian' 	home. 	This 	word 	was
drawn 	from 	Samuel 	Butler's 	term 	for 	the 	United 	States
in 	his 	Utopian 	novel 	Erewhon of 	1 872. 	Wright designed
a 	kit 	of 	parts 	including 	a 	concrete-slab 	foundation
floated 	on 	a 	drained 	bed 	of 	cinders 	and 	sand, 	into
which 	radiating 	hot-water 	pipes 	were 	inserted. 	The
roof 	was 	a 	simple 	insulated 	slab 	containing 	a
ventilation 	system 	and 	was 	made 	to 	overhang 	the
edges 	of 	the 	dwelling 	to 	throw 	water 	clear, 	to 	give 	a
sense 	of shelter, 	to 	protect 	from 	glare 	and 	to 	provide 	a
15.6 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright, 	Johnson 	Wax.
1956. 	the 	mushroom
supports 	under
construction.

-- 204 of 420 --

15-7 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright 	visiting 	the
Johnson 	Wax 	Building 	in
his 	late 	years.
horizontal 	related 	to 	the 	earth 	plane. 	The 	walls 	were
prefabricated 	from 	three 	layers 	of board 	and 	two of tar-
paper. 	But 	there 	was 	more 	to 	the 	Usonian 	idea 	than 	a
clever 	labour- 	and 	money-saving 	assembly. 	The
drawing 	room 	was 	abolished 	in 	favour 	of 	an 	alcove
with 	a 	table 	in 	it, 	a 	space 	blending 	kitchen 	and 	living
areas 	together. 	This 	was 	a 	response, 	clearly, 	to 	the
servantless 	clients 	who 	would 	be 	expected 	to 	buy
Usonian 	houses, 	and 	a 	reflection 	of the 	rejection of pre-
First 	World 	War 	formalities 	in 	American 	life 	generally.
It 	was 	no 	accident 	that 	Wright's 	formula 	should 	have
been 	adopted 	so 	rapidly 	by 	building 	contractors 	and
cheap 	home 	catalogues. 	For 	its 	free-plan 	interiors 	and
exterior 	patios 	captured 	precisely 	the 	ethos 	of 	an
emergent 	middle-class 	suburban 	existence. 	In
Wright's 	hands, 	of 	course, 	the 	Usonian 	houses 	were
judiciously 	proportioned 	and 	detailed, 	the 	standard
plans 	being 	varied 	to 	blend 	with 	unique 	sites: 	the
insensitive 	imitators 	were 	all 	too 	often 	clumsy 	'ranch-
style' 	shoe-boxes, 	laid 	out 	in 	jerry-built 	monotony 	on
the 	boom 	tracts 	of the 	1950s.
In 	i<-)30 	Wright 	was 	63 	and 	in 	difficulties; 	at 	the
same 	time, 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	45 	and 	on 	the 	crest 	of a
wave 	of 	success. 	The 	1920s 	had 	witnessed 	his 	rapid
emergence 	from 	obscurity 	to 	a 	position 	at 	the
vanguard 	of the 	European 	modern 	movement. 	By 	the
time 	he 	received 	the 	commission 	for 	the 	Villa 	Savoye
he 	had 	become 	an 	international 	figure, 	invited 	to
design 	buildings 	as 	far 	afield 	as 	Moscow 	and 	North
Africa. 	One 	gathers 	from 	stray 	remarks 	in 	his 	writings
Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1 9 30s 	• 	203
that 	he 	thought 	of 	himself 	as 	some 	kind 	of 	messiah
destined 	to 	supply 	the 	forms 	of 	a 	new 	machine-age
civilization. 	Although 	the 	thirties 	was 	far 	sparer 	in
actual 	commissions 	than 	the 	twenties 	had 	been, 	this
did 	nothing 	to 	diminish 	the 	architect's 	sense of a 	world
mission. 	On 	the 	contrary, 	the 	scope 	of 	his 	thinking
continued 	to 	broaden, 	particularly 	with 	regard 	to 	the
design 	of 	cities. 	In 	this 	period 	he 	delivered 	plans 	for
places 	as 	varied 	as 	Algiers, 	Rio 	de 	Janeiro, 	and 	New
York, 	and 	formulated 	the 	universal 	principles 	of 	the
cite-type 	for 	modern 	regeneration : 	the 	'Ville 	Radieuse'
(•Radiant 	City 'I.
The 	Villa 	Savoye 	had 	been 	a 	masterpiece, 	but 	it 	left
its 	creator 	with 	the 	problem 	of avoiding 	self-imitation;
he 	had 	to 	decide 	which 	aspects 	of 	his 	architectural
system 	to 	extend 	and 	which 	to 	leave 	behind. 	Naturally
this 	process 	of 	retrospection 	and 	selection 	was 	not
entirely 	rational 	and did 	not occur independently of the
tasks 	and 	opportunities 	the 	early 	thirties 	offered. 	It 	so
happened 	that 	many 	of his 	commissions 	in 	this 	period
were 	for 	large 	and 	complex 	buildings 	to 	which 	the
typology of the villas 	was 	inadequate. 	Le Corbusier 	had
therefore 	to 	stretch 	his 	system 	and 	to 	turn 	instead 	to
the 	lessons 	of 	his 	earlier 	grand 	schemes 	- 	the
Centrosoyus. 	the 	League 	of Nations, 	and, 	of course, 	his
ideal 	urban 	projects. 	Thus 	in 	the 	Palace 	of 	the 	Soviets
competition 	entry 	of 	1 93 1 	(analysed 	in 	Chapter 	10) 	he
gave 	discrete 	expression 	to 	different 	functional 	vol-
umes 	which 	were 	then 	linked 	in 	hierarchy 	by 	axes 	and
flanges 	of 	circulation. 	In 	the 	Maison 	de 	Refuge 	of
1930-31 	-a 	hostel 	for 	the 	down-and-outs 	of Paris 	- a
similar 	strategy 	of 	separation 	was 	employed. 	The
entrance 	zone, 	containing 	the 	porter's 	lodge, 	the
reception, 	etc., 	was 	expressed 	as 	a 	sequence 	of 	free-
standing 	volumes 	including 	a 	white 	cylinder, 	which
stood 	out 	dramatically 	against 	the 	dark 	and 	sleek
backdrop 	of 	the 	fully 	glazed 	main 	facade. 	The 	strip
window 	was 	no 	longer 	employed: 	nor 	was 	its 	essential
complement 	in 	his 	earlier 	vocabulary, 	the 	white-
washed 	planar 	wall. 	Instead 	Le 	Corbusier 	resorted 	to
glass 	brick 	or 	the 	full 	floor-to-ceiling 	'pan 	de 	verre'
(pane 	of 	glass'). 	There 	were 	probably 	a 	number 	of
interrelated 	reasons 	for 	this 	change. 	Perhaps 	he 	was
discovering 	that 	layers 	of 	strip 	windows 	did 	not
harmonize 	well 	with 	the 	larger 	fai^ade 	surfaces 	he 	was
forced 	to 	articulate; 	perhaps 	he 	regarded 	full 	glazing 	as
a 	more 	honest 	expression 	of 	the 	free 	fagade: 	perhaps
this 	treatment 	had 	associations 	appropriate 	to 	the
image 	of 	a 	collective 	machint' 	ii 	habitcr. 	Whatever 	the
motivations, 	the 	new 	solution 	brought 	its 	own
problems: 	lack 	of 	privacy, 	leaks, 	heat 	loss, 	and 	heat
gain.
In 	the 	late 	twenties 	there 	were 	gradual 	shifts 	in 	the
emphasis 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	painting 	vocabulary. 	The
human 	figure 	began 	to 	replace 	still 	lifes 	and 	machine

-- 205 of 420 --

204 	Modem 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
parts. 	Biomorphic 	abstractions, 	influenced 	no doubt 	by
the 	contemporary 	paintings 	of 	Picasso 	and 	Miro,
became 	more 	frequent. 	The 	handling 	was 	looser, 	less
controlled 	and 	precise 	than 	in 	the 	earlier 	Purist 	works.
In 	architecture 	these 	changes 	perhaps 	had 	an 	equiva-
lent in 	a 	greater 	sense 	of texture 	and 	a 	more 	direct 	use
of materials. 	Formal 	analogies 	with 	pebbles 	and 	shells
began 	to 	replace 	the 	machine 	abstractions 	of 	the
twenties. 	In 	the 	Maison 	Errazuris, 	designed 	for 	Chile 	in
I9.33. 	pilotis 	and 	slabs 	were 	redone 	using 	logs 	and
rustic 	details. 	The 	Petite 	Maison 	de 	Weekend 	(built 	in
1935 	as 	a 	hide-away 	for 	a 	wealthy 	client 	in 	the
outskirts of Paris) was 	a 	sort of neolithic 	cave, 	with 	low
vaults, 	turf on 	the roof and 	a deliberate juxtaposition 	of
glass 	bricks 	with 	husky 	natural 	materials 	(fig. 	15.11).
This 	building 	laid 	the 	basis 	for 	the 	sophisticated
peasantism 	of Le Corbusier's architecture of the 	i 	9 50s.
A 	transitional 	work 	standing 	between 	the 	villas 	of
the twenties 	and 	this later primitivism 	was 	the 	Pavilion
(].{]. 	•> 	.- 	c 	I

-- 206 of 420 --

Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	inthei930s 	•	
20s
I5.8(;p/n 	Le Corbusier.
Pavilion 	Suisse.
19 	30-31. 	early 	project,
showing 	view 	under
steel pilotis. 	later
replaced 	by 	robust
concrete 	supports.
(Fondation 	Le
Corbusier. 	no. 	i 	s. 	804).
I 	s.q 	{below left) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Pavilion
Suisse. 	Cite
Universitaire. 	Paris.
1930-31. 	view 	of north
fai,"ade showing curved
approach 	dri\'eway 	and
rubble wall 	at 	ground
level.
IS- 10 	{right) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Pavilion
Suisse. 	Paris. 	1430-31.
view 	of glazed 	south
fai;ade 	containing
student 	rooms.
1 5. 1 1 	{below) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Petite 	Maison
de 	Weekend, 	near 	Paris.
193s. 	axonometric
drawing.
-^-^^^
Suisse 	of 	1930-31. 	This 	was 	a 	dormitory 	for 	Swiss
students 	at 	the 	Cite 	Universitaire 	in 	Paris, 	and 	the
problem 	involved 	combining 	single 	rooms 	for 	the
students 	with 	communal 	facilities 	like 	a 	sitting-room, 	a
hall, 	a 	breakfast-room 	and 	a 	small 	library: 	a 	porter's
lodge 	and 	a 	director's 	apartment 	also 	had 	to 	be
incorporated. 	The 	site 	was 	an 	ambiguous 	one 	in 	that 	it
stood 	at 	the 	perimeter 	of 	the 	Cite 	Universitaire 	with
good 	views 	to 	the 	south 	over 	open 	green 	spaces
(destined 	to 	become 	sports 	fields) 	and 	with 	an 	access
road 	approaching 	it 	from 	the 	main 	part 	of the 	campus.
There 	was, 	in 	other 	words, 	no obvious 	front' 	or 	'back'
:
the 	solution 	adopted 	would 	have 	to 	address 	both 	sides
simultaneously.
Le Corbusier's response to these constraints emerged
gradually 	through 	a 	series 	of 	four 	schemes 	between
early 	1930 	and 	1 931. 	In 	all 	cases, 	he 	placed 	the
student 	rooms 	in 	a 	steel-frame 	box 	lifted 	off the 	ground
on 	stanchions. 	Initially 	these supports 	were 	in 	the form
of 	slender 	T 	beams 	in 	steel 	Ifig. 	iS-8), 	but 	later 	they
were 	fashioned 	as 	robust 	concrete 	pilotis 	of 	subtle
curvilinear 	shape 	resembling, 	in 	plan, 	dumb-bells 	or
dogbones. 	The 	space 	underneath 	the 	box 	was 	given
over 	to 	relaxation 	and 	also 	created 	a 	transitional
portico 	for 	the entrance 	through 	which 	the 	greenery 	of
the 	surroundings 	could 	be 	glimpsed. 	The 	individual
rooms 	of 	the 	students 	were 	expressed 	as 	cells 	in 	the
rectangular 	fa(;ade 	and 	were 	made 	to 	face 	south 	Ifig.
15.10). 	Access 	was 	from 	the 	rear 	by 	corridors 	which
were 	then 	linked 	to 	ancillary 	volumes 	containing 	the
stairs, 	a 	lift, 	and 	the 	communal 	zones. 	In 	the 	earliest
schemes 	these 	attached 	forms 	were 	rectangular 	and
also 	poised 	on 	stilts; 	later, 	they 	were 	brought 	down 	to
the 	ground 	and 	curved 	to 	respond 	to 	the 	turning 	circle
at 	the 	end 	of 	the 	roadway, 	and 	to 	differentiate 	their
function. 	Once 	again 	Le 	Corbusier 	articulated 	dif-
ferences 	between 	public 	and 	private 	areas 	in 	a 	design.
The 	range 	of 	materials 	was 	much 	wider 	than
hitherto 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	work. 	Not 	only 	were 	the
pilotis 	organic 	in 	shape, 	in 	contrast 	to 	the 	Purist
cylinders 	of 	the 	villas; 	they 	were 	also 	left 	in 	bare
concrete, 	without 	paint 	or 	covering 	of any 	kind. 	Stone
veneers, 	steel, 	and 	glass 	were 	adeptly 	handled 	in 	the
main 	box, 	while 	glass 	bricks 	were 	situated 	in 	the 	stair-
tower, 	and rubble-facing was 	used 	on the lower curved
wall 	(flg. 	15.9). 	Amber 	tiles, 	different 	grades 	of
concrete 	floor, 	and 	various 	interior 	paint-finishes
enhanced 	the 	main 	divisions 	in 	the 	design. 	Perhaps 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	sensed 	the 	problems 	of 	upkeep 	in 	his
earlier 	stucco 	facades. 	Certainly 	the 	Pavilion 	Suisse
finishes 	were 	better 	suited 	to 	weathering 	than 	those 	of
the 	villas. 	Again, 	though, 	the 	texture 	corresponded
with 	shifts 	of emphasis 	in 	the 	artist's 	formal 	ideas.
It 	is 	important 	to 	recognize 	the 	continuities 	in 	the
Pavilion Suisse as well as 	the 	changes. 	The 	structural

-- 207 of 420 --

2o6 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
principle 	of 	the 	building 	was 	still 	based 	on 	the 	'Hve
points', 	even 	if the 	strip 	window 	was 	now 	blended 	with
the 	fully 	glazed 	facade. 	There was 	a 	roof terrace 	on 	top
and 	a 	free 	plan 	in 	the 	communal 	areas, 	while 	the 	main
pi/tiUs. 	despite 	their 	change 	in 	shape, 	were 	still
celebrated 	as 	the 	prominent 	elements 	of 	support. 	Had
smaller, 	more 	stick-like 	pilotis 	been 	employed, 	they
might 	have 	given 	an 	insubstantial 	feeling 	to 	the
structure, 	just 	as 	Michelangelo 	had 	discovered, 	in 	his
largest schemes, 	that the Classical 	orders needed 	major
modification, 	so 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	discovering 	that 	a
change 	in 	size 	required 	more 	than 	a 	change 	in
dimension 	in 	the 	central 	element 	of 	his 	architectural
system. 	The 	pilotis 	were 	therefore 	given 	a 	subtly
modelled 	form 	which 	supplied simultaneously 	a 	stocky
support 	for 	actual 	and 	visual 	stability, 	and 	a 	suitably
attenuated 	and 	elegant 	profile 	to 	be 	seen 	close 	to. 	In
fact 	it 	is 	by 	no 	means 	clear 	that 	pilotis 	were 	the 	best
solution 	in 	this 	case, 	as 	the 	site 	stood 	over 	a 	disused
quarry, 	thus 	necessitating 	piles 	sixty 	feet deep. 	It 	seems
that 	Le 	Corbusier 	adhered 	to 	points 	of principle 	at 	the
expense 	of 	common 	sense. 	A 	partial 	clue 	to 	his
motivation 	in 	sticking 	so 	rigorously 	to 	his 	'solution-
type' 	for 	structure 	is 	to 	be 	found 	in 	the 	pictures 	in 	the
Ociivrc complete, 	where 	much 	was 	made 	of the 	way 	the
undercrofts 	could 	be 	employed 	for 	circulation 	and 	for
social 	activity. 	In 	one 	of 	the 	captions 	Le 	Corbusier
referred 	to 	a 	certain 	'M. 	Maurin', 	a 	physicist 	'used 	to
working 	in 	the 	laboratory', 	and 	quoted 	from 	a 	letter
that 	this 	estimable 	gentleman 	of science 	was 	supposed
to 	have 	written 	to 	him
:
'I 	have 	seen 	the 	Pavilion 	Suisse. 	Don't 	you 	think
that 	the 	pilotis 	you 	have 	used 	could 	serve 	to 	bring
the definitive 	solution 	to 	the 	passage 	of circulation
of a 	large 	town.' 	M. 	Maurin, 	physicist, 	used 	to
working 	in 	a 	laboratory, 	discovered 	spontaneously
the 	rudiments 	of an 	urbanistic 	and 	architectural
doctrine 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	expressed 	for 	ten
years, 	without 	exhausting, 	in 	all 	his 	works 	and
writings.
moreover, 	they 	were 	lifted 	up on 	pilotis. 	so 	allowing
uninterrupted 	parklands 	to 	pass 	beneath. 	The 	'es-
sential 	joys' 	of 	space, 	light 	and 	greenery 	were 	made
available 	to 	all 	as 	an 	antidote 	to 	the 	choked, 	airless
slums 	created 	by 	nineteenth-century 	industrialization.
The 	Pavilion 	Suisse 	was 	a 	fragment 	of 	this 	larger
Utopia, 	both 	a 	demonstration 	and 	an 	experiment. 	Le
Corbusier 	himself 	hinted 	at 	this 	dual 	role 	when 	he
wrote 	in 	1934:
15.12 	Le Corbusier. 	the
(i 	redfiit 	collective
dwellings of the 	Ville
Radieuse. 	c. 	1930.
In 	other 	words, 	the 	local 	problem 	of 	the 	student
dormitory 	was 	exploited 	to 	make 	a 	more 	general 	point
of urbanistic 	and 	coUcctivist 	doctrine. 	The 	true 	cousins
of the 	Pavilion Suisse 	were the social 	condensers 	which
Le 	Corbusier 	saw 	and 	admired 	in 	the 	Soviet 	Union, 	in
the 	late 	twenties, 	and 	the 	housing 	schemes 	from 	his
own 	ideal 	city, 	the 	'Ville 	Radieuse', 	which 	the architect
was 	elaborating 	at 	the 	same 	time. 	These 	collective
habitations 	were 	laid 	out 	in 	long 	strips 	11 	redent 	(i.e..
stepping 	back 	and 	forth 	in 	indentations) 	and had 	roof
terraces 	with 	running 	tracks 	(fig. 	15.12). 	Like 	the
Pavilion 	Suisse, 	they 	were glazed 	to the southward 	side
and 	looked 	out 	over 	playing-fields 	and 	parks;
So 	what 	have 	we 	done 	in 	these 	years 	1929-34.'
First 	of all 	a 	few 	buildings, 	then 	many 	large-scale
urbanistic 	studies. 	These 	buildings 	have 	played 	the
role 	of laboratories. 	We 	wanted 	each 	element 	of
construction 	during 	that 	period 	to 	be 	the
experimental 	proof which would 	allow 	us 	to 	take
the 	necessary 	urbanistic 	initiatives.
Le 	Corbusier 	embodied 	his 	vision 	of 	an 	ideal 	society
in his 	city 	plans. 	Underpinning 	all 	his 	urban 	initiatives
was 	a 	na'i've 	faith 	in 	the 	power 	of 	a 	well-ordered
environment 	to 	reunite 	man. 	nature, 	and 	the 	machine
in 	an 	unalienated 	harmony. 	Mechanization 	was 	.seen

-- 208 of 420 --

Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1 930s 	• 	207
m..
^%i;Wi-W^- 	^
' 	'- 	- 	r 	; 	f
r r 	r-
II
Rtr
I 	S- 1 	^ 	I^e 	Corhusier, 	the
Ville 	Radieusc, 	c. 	1930.
overall 	plan.
as 	essentially 	two-sided: 	it 	caused 	disruption 	and
decay, 	it 	undermined 	society 	and 	brought 	it 	to 	the edge
of 	revolution: 	but 	it 	also 	provided 	the 	means 	for
realizing 	a 	new 	order 	whose 	constitution 	the 	Utopian
artist 	imagined 	he 	could 	himself form.
After 	his 	failure 	to 	sell 	the 	concepts 	of 	the 	Ville
Contemporaine 	in 	the 	rehashed 	version 	of 	the 	Ville
Voisin 	of 	1925. 	Le 	Corbusier 	began 	to 	lose 	his 	earlier
confidence 	in 	the 	powers 	of 	big 	business 	and 	cen-
tralized 	technocracy 	to 	bring 	his 	ideal 	to 	the 	plane 	of
reality. 	His 	experiences 	in 	Moscow 	in 	the 	late 	twenties
did 	little 	to 	encourage 	a 	swing 	towards 	the 	left 	either,
although 	he 	appears 	to 	have 	admired 	the 	housing
experiments 	of 	the 	OSA 	group 	and 	the 	linear 	city
theories 	of Milyutin 	(see 	Chapter 	12). 	At 	the same 	time
Le Corbusier's confidence in 	the power of democracy 	to
counter 	chaos 	continued 	to 	dwindle. 	It 	was 	in 	the 	late
twenties, 	then, 	that 	he 	was 	attracted 	to 	the 	ideas 	of
'Syndicalism', 	which 	grew 	out 	of 	the 	trade 	union
movement 	of 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	century 	and 	which
proposed a 	'pyramid of natural 	hierarchies' 	from 	a 	base
on 	the 	shop 	floor, 	through 	a 	middle 	level 	of elected
managers 	to an 	apex 	in 	a 	regional 	council. 	A 	hierarchy
of 	representative 	administrators 	was 	thus 	used 	to
replace 	the 	old 	state. 	Le 	Corbusier 	hoped 	(na'ively ) 	that
this 	would 	be 	a 	more 	effective 	and 	a 	more 	represen-
tative 	method 	of 	government 	than 	that 	provided
within 	democracies 	with 	their 	perennial 	oscillation
between 	right 	and 	left. 	Naturally 	the 	system 	he
envisaged 	gave 	a 	special 	place 	to 	planners 	and
architects 	who 	were 	effectively 	situated 	near 	the 	top 	of
the 	pyramid: 	it 	was 	their 	business 	to 	give 	form 	to 	the
new 	society.
Such 	ideas 	as 	these 	were 	ripe 	when 	Le 	Corbusier 	put
together 	a 	new 	version 	of 	his 	ideal 	city, 	the 	Ville
Radieuse. 	in 	the 	late 	twenties 	and 	early 	thirties. 	As 	in
the 	Ville 	Contemporaine 	the 	main 	building 	types 	were
skyscrapers 	and 	apartment 	houses, 	but 	the 	former
were 	now 	grouped 	at 	the 	head 	of 	the 	city 	while 	the
latter 	(the 	ones 	resembling 	the 	Pavilion 	Suisse) 	were
laid 	out 	in 	long 	strips 	a 	redent. 	thus 	creating 	semi-
courts 	and 	harbours 	along 	their 	length 	(tig. 	15.12).
There 	was 	no 	longer 	a 	division 	between 	the 	elite 	and
the 	working 	class 	as 	there 	had 	been 	in 	the 	Ville
Contemporaine: 	everyone 	lived 	in 	the 	Unites, 	which
combined 	individual 	rationalized 	apartments 	and
communal 	functions 	like 	gymnasia 	and 	child-care
centres. Typically 	the a 	redent 	apartment 	houses were 	a
conflation 	of 	a 	great 	variety 	of 	earlier 	collectivist
images. 	There 	were 	echoes 	of 	Eugene 	Henard's
'Boulevards a 	redans' 	of 	1903 	and memories of Charles
Fourier's 	early 	nineteenth-century 	Utopian 	commun-
ity 	idea, 	the 	'phalanstere': 	this 	latter 	scheme 	shared
with 	Le 	Corbusier's 	the 	common 	prototype 	of 	the
Baroque 	palace 	(e.g.. 	Versailles) 	with 	its 	stepped 	plan
and 	linear 	form. 	The 	concept 	of 	the 	continuous 	roof
terrace 	for 	leisure 	activities 	may 	in 	turn 	have 	been
stimulated 	by 	the 	public 	decks 	of 	ocean 	liners: 	in 	the
book 	La 	Ville 	radieuse 	(1933) 	Le 	Corbusier 	wrote
tellingly 	of 	the 	good 	life 	lived 	in 	the 	open 	air 	and
sunlight 	surveying 	'a 	sea 	of verdure'.
The 	Ville 	Radieuse 	as a 	whole 	was 	highly centralized
and 	densely 	populated, 	yet 	most 	of 	its 	surface 	was
given 	over 	to 	zones 	of 	leisure 	- 	parks, 	playing-fields,
etc. 	(fig. 	5.13). 	Following 	his 	earlier 	principles. 	Le
Corbusier 	also 	created 	broad 	roads 	to 	facilitate 	the
rapid 	passage 	of traffic 	to 	and 	from 	the countryside 	and
from 	place 	to 	place 	within 	the 	city: 	pedestrians 	were
able 	to 	circulate 	on 	separate 	levels: 	and 	the 	traditional
'corridor-street' 	was 	completely 	destroyed. 	Once 	again
this 	'ideal' 	order 	was 	expressed, 	as 	in 	Renaissance
Utopian 	plans, 	through 	symmetry, 	clear 	geometry,
and 	symbolic 	analogies. 	For 	the 	form 	of 	the 	Ville
Radieuse 	had 	a 	spine, 	a 	heart, 	and 	a 	head, 	and 	thus
incorporated 	a 	sort 	of 	ideal 	twentieth-century 	man 	-

-- 209 of 420 --

2o8 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
perfectly 	functioning 	and 	in 	a 	harmonious 	balance
with 	nature. 	This 	hierarchical 	order 	was 	spliced
together 	with 	some 	of 	the 	ideas 	for 	zoning 	and
extendability 	which 	the 	architect 	had 	seen 	in 	Russian
linear 	city 	proposals.
Le 	Corbusier 	was 	never 	given 	the 	opportunity 	to
build 	his 	ideal 	city 	in 	toto. 	but 	throughout 	the 	thirties
he 	worked 	hard 	at 	spreading 	his 	urban 	gospel 	and 	at
persuading 	various 	authorities 	to 	follow 	his 	way. 	In
1933 	the 	Congres 	Internationaux 	de 	L' Architecture
Moderne 	met 	off Athens 	on 	the 	SS 	Patras 	to 	discuss 	the
state 	of the 	modern 	city. 	Against 	the 	superb 	landscape
background 	of the 	Peloponnese. 	the 	modern 	architects
of Europe 	drew 	up 	the 	blueprints 	for 	what 	they 	hoped
would 	be 	an 	enlightened 	new 	civilization 	coming 	to
terms 	with 	mechanization. 	Le 	Corbusier. 	of 	course,
was 	adopted 	as 	the 	unofficial 	pope, 	and 	the 	'Charter 	of
Athens' 	was 	really 	a 	restatement 	of the 	V'ille 	Radieuse
philosophy 	but 	without 	the 	poetry. 	At 	this 	point 	the
guiding 	principles 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	urbanism 	were
dangerously 	separated 	from 	a 	particular 	personal
vision 	and 	rendered 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	catechism. 	Reyner
Banham 	has 	summed 	up 	the 	situation 	succinctly:
The 	Mediterranean 	cruise 	was 	clearly 	a 	welcome
relief from 	the 	worsening 	situation 	of Europe 	and 	in
this 	brief respite 	from 	reality 	the 	delegates 	produced
the 	most 	Olympian, 	rhetorical 	and 	ultimately
destructive 	document 	to 	come 	out 	of CIAM. 	. 	. 	. 	The
hundred 	and 	eleven 	propositions 	that 	comprise 	the
charter consist 	in 	part of statements 	about 	the
conditions 	of towns, 	and 	in 	part 	of proposals 	for 	the
rectification 	of those 	conditions, 	grouped 	under five
main 	headings: 	Dwellings, 	Recreation. 	Work,
Transportation, 	and 	Historic 	Buildings. 	. 	. 	. 	this
persuasive 	generality 	which 	gives 	the 	Athens
Charter 	its 	air 	of universal 	applicability 	conceals 	a
very 	narrow 	conception 	of both 	architecture 	and
town 	planning 	and 	committed 	CIAM 	unequivocally
to : 	( a ) 	rigid 	functional 	zoning 	of city 	plans, 	with
green 	belts 	between 	the areas reserved 	to 	ditferent
functions, 	and 	(b| 	a 	single 	type 	of urban 	housing,
expressed 	in 	the 	words 	of the 	Charter 	as 	'high,
widely-spaced 	apartment 	blocks 	wherever 	the
necessity 	of housing 	high 	density 	of population
exists.' 	At 	a 	distance 	of thirty 	years 	we 	recognize
this 	as 	merely 	the 	expression 	of an 	aesthetic
preference, 	but 	at 	the 	time 	it 	had 	the 	power 	of a
Mosaic 	commandment 	and 	effectively 	paralyzed
research 	into 	other 	forms 	of housing.
While 	Le 	Corbusier's 	followers 	seemed 	bent 	on
calcifying 	his 	urban 	doctrines, 	he 	was. 	in 	fact, 	reacting
with 	considerable 	flexibility 	in 	his 	proposals 	for
particular 	sites. 	Among 	the 	most 	spectacular 	of 	his
many 	unrealized 	schemes 	was 	the 	sequence 	of 	plans
for Algiers between 	1 9 3 1 	and 	1940. 	The core idea 	was
for 	a 	sort 	of 	curved 	concrete-skeleton 	viaduct 	with 	a
motorway 	running 	along 	the 	top 	of 	it 	(fig. 	15.14).
various difl'erent 	kinds of housing 	plugged 	into 	it. 	and 	a
pedestrian 	street 	passing 	at 	the 	middle 	level. 	To 	one
end 	was 	a 	zone 	of curved 	apartment 	buildings 	of high
density, 	set 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	they 	did 	not 	threaten
the 	integrity 	of 	the 	old 	Arab 	medina: 	in 	turn 	these
created 	a 	sculpted 	enclave 	on 	the 	scale 	of 	the 	nearby
mountains 	and 	sea. 	The 	principal 	building 	of 	the
scheme 	was 	a 	tall 	skyscraper 	close 	to 	the 	port 	to 	head
the 	entire 	administration 	of 	the 	colony. 	This 	went
through 	a 	series 	of 	metamorphoses 	from 	a 	glazed 	box
to 	a 	highly 	monumental, 	textured 	object 	furnished
with 	brise-soleil 	(sun 	breakers) 	in 	the 	form 	of extending
slabs, 	balconies, 	and 	overhangs. 	Of course, 	this 	was 	a
complete 	turn 	about 	from 	the 	Maison 	de 	Refuge 	and
the 	Pavilion 	Suisse. 	Despite 	the 	provision 	of 	mechan-
ical 	heating 	and 	ventilation 	in 	the 	former, 	the 	south-
facing 	glass 	fagade 	had 	functioned 	as a 	greenhouse 	in
the 	summer 	and 	the 	architect 	had 	been 	forced 	to
invent 	a 	new 	functional 	element, 	an 	attached 	crate 	or
sunshade. 	Partly 	inspired 	by 	North 	African 	precedents,
partly 	out 	of 	a 	desire 	to 	integrate 	the 	brise-soleil 	with
the 	body 	of 	a 	building 	structure, 	Le 	Corbusier
succeeded 	in 	the 	latest 	of 	his 	Algiers 	skyscrapers 	in
using 	his 	new 	element 	as 	a 	major 	means 	of 	formal
articulation. 	The 	combined 	/)nsc-so/('i//balcony 	was 	to
prove 	particularly 	useful 	to 	him 	in 	his 	monumental
designs 	after 	the 	war.
The 	Algiers 	plan 	as 	a 	whole 	resulted 	from 	a 	cross-
breeding 	of 	general 	principles 	and 	local 	traditions. 	Le
Corbusier 	was 	deeply 	impressed 	by 	the 	waterside
viaducts 	of Algiers 	with 	houses 	built 	into 	their 	arches,
and 	this 	may 	have 	triggered 	his 	megastructural 	image.
Moreover, 	he 	studied 	the 	unity 	of 	architecture,
urbanism. 	and 	landscape 	in 	the 	kasbah 	and 	in 	the
mud-built 	fortified 	villages 	of 	the 	Mzab 	in 	the 	central
area 	of Algeria. 	His 	sketchbooks 	from 	this 	period 	are
also 	full 	of women 	whose 	curves 	transform 	gradually
into 	the 	contours 	of 	landscapes: 	perhaps 	partly 	with
tongue 	in 	cheek. 	Le 	Corbusier 	later 	claimed 	that 	he
discovered 	the 	beauty 	of 	the 	female 	form 	'for 	the 	first
time' 	during 	his 	stay 	in 	North 	Africa. 	Within 	his 	own
typology, 	the 	viaduct/housing 	was. 	of 	course, 	a
variant 	on 	the 	a 	redent 	houses 	and 	the 	motorways 	of
the 	Ville 	Radieuse. 	but 	the 	image 	of cars 	racing 	along
the 	top 	was 	perhaps 	brought 	to 	fruition 	by 	knowledge
of G. 	Matte Trucco's 	famous 	test 	track on 	the roof of the
Fiat 	factory 	in 	Turin. 	Thus 	there 	was 	a 	deliberate
blending 	of 	general 	and 	particular, 	of 	preconceived
notions 	and 	unique 	geographical 	responses. 	One
guesses 	that 	the 	adolescent 	jeanneret's 	dream 	of 	a
renaissance 	of 	Mediterranean 	culture 	mav 	have

-- 210 of 420 --

Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the 	1 9 30s 	209
15.14 	Le 	Corbusier.
Plan 	'Obus' 	for 	Algiers.
c. 	1952. 	view of curved
viaduct.
surfaced 	in 	the 	Algiers 	scheme. 	For 	all 	its 	blatant
colonialism, 	the 	project 	was 	far 	less 	destructive 	of 	the
Arab 	quarter than 	had 	been the 	disastrous 	nineteenth-
century 	incursions.
The 	thirties 	was 	thus 	a 	period 	of 	epic 	thinking 	for
Le 	Corbusier 	when 	he 	acted 	as 	'a 	historical 	world
individual'. 	In 	1935 	he 	visited 	the 	United 	States 	and
criticized 	Manhattan, 	saying 	that 	the skyscrapers 	were
too small 	and 	too closetogether: 	of course, 	his essential
purpose 	was 	to 	preach 	the 	Ville 	Radieuse 	in 	the 	hope
that 	the 	American 	authorities 	might 	turn 	the 	most
powerful 	technology 	in 	the 	world 	over 	to 	his 	plans.
Again 	he 	was 	disappointed, 	pouring 	his 	dreams 	and
regrets 	into 	the 	book 	When 	the 	Cathedrals 	were 	White
(1937), 	in 	which 	he 	condemned 	the 	wastefulness 	of
American 	suburbs 	and 	the 	irrationality 	of 	skyscraper
forms. 	These 	he 	intended 	to 	replace 	with 	a 	new
variant, 	the 	Cartesian 	skyscraper', 	a 	vast 	vertical
building for living 	and 	for working, 	which 	ensured that
the 	city 	with 	a 	park 	at 	its 	centre 	(Manhattan) 	would
become 	a 	park 	with 	a 	city 	in 	it 	(the 	Ville 	Radieuse). 	Le
Corbusier 	even 	went 	so 	far 	as 	to 	hope 	that 	Mussolini
might 	build 	his 	ideal 	dream 	and 	as 	late 	as 	194 1 	was
evidently 	attempting 	to 	persuade 	the 	Vichy 	govern-
ment 	to 	listen 	to 	his 	ideas 	(without 	success). 	Certainly
this 	was 	a 	case 	of 	opportunism: 	equally 	it 	must 	be
pointed 	out 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	believed 	the 	good 	his 	city
plans 	would 	do 	would 	more 	than 	justify 	any 	double-
dealing 	necessary 	to 	bring 	them 	into 	being.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright's 	Broadacre 	City 	(1936) 	was
also 	the 	fruit 	of many 	years' 	reflection 	on 	the 	meaning
of 	life 	and 	the 	problems 	of 	reconciling 	an 	ideal 	state
with 	individual 	liberty 	in 	a 	mechanized 	society. 	On 	first
inspection 	it 	might seem 	odd 	that 	his 	scheme should 	be

-- 211 of 420 --

210 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
called 	a 	'city' 	at 	all 	since 	it 	was 	the 	opposite 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	ideal: 	it 	was 	the 	epitome 	of a 	decentralized
community 	in 	which 	the 	individual 	family 	home 	and
holding 	were 	to 	be 	the 	basic 	units, 	and 	in 	which 	the
only 	tall 	buildings 	were 	miles 	apart, 	separated 	by 	vast
tracts 	of 	countryside. 	Wright 	argued 	that 	the 	tele-
phone 	and 	the 	automobile 	were 	making 	the 	cen-
tralized 	city 	obsolete, 	and 	that 	mechanization, 	para-
doxically, 	was 	allowing 	the 	return 	of 	Americans 	to
their 	true 	destiny: 	a 	society 	of free 	individuals 	living 	in
a rural 	democracy. 	As 	in 	most 	of Wright's 	ideas, 	there
was 	about 	this 	a 	curious 	blend 	of the 	progressive 	and
the 	conservative. 	Broadacre 	City 	was 	supposed 	to
release 	people 	from 	the 	tyranny 	of centralized 	capital-
ism - of 'rent' 	(a 	word 	Wright used 	to describe 	all 	forms
of 	alienation 	and 	exploitation) 	- 	to 	deliver 	them 	from
the 	evil 	ways 	of the 	city 	and 	to 	return 	them 	to 	a 	purer
and 	more 	natural 	state, 	where 	they 	would 	be 	self-
reliant 	rural 	proprietors 	on 	the 	Jeffersonian 	model. 	In
this 	way 	individual 	dignity 	would, 	he 	hoped, 	be
restored; 	like 	Le 	Corbusier, 	Wright 	thought 	of 	himself
as a 	prophet, 	able 	(in 	his case) 	to 	intuit 	'the 	plastic 	form
of a 	genuine 	democracy'.
Broadacre 	City 	was 	laid 	out 	to 	conform 	with 	the
Midwestern 	grid 	(fig. 	15.15). 	and 	divided 	up 	into 	sites
of 	an 	acre 	or 	more 	in 	which 	individual 	'Usonian'
houses 	were 	sited. 	Once 	again 	great 	emphasis 	was
placed 	on 	the 	single 	family 	as 	the 	central 	bond 	of 	the
community. 	However, 	there 	were 	also 	co-operative
markets, 	theatres 	and 	'community 	centers' 	dotted
about 	among 	the 	fields. 	The 	tall 	towers 	standing 	here
and 	there 	were 	complex 	in 	texture 	and 	shape; 	they
broke with 	the 	countryside 	grid 	and 	acted 	as 	beacons
across the 	landscape; 	they 	were 	similar 	in 	appearance
to his 	St. 	Marks 	Tower 	project 	of 	1 	929. 	To 	one 	side 	of
the model which 	Wright 	and 	his Taliesin 	associates 	put
together 	in 	1935-6. 	there 	was 	even 	a 	cathedral 	of 	no
fixed 	denomination. 	However, 	like 	Le 	Corbusier.
Wright 	tended 	to 	think 	that 	the 	realization 	of 	his
Utopia 	would 	make 	traditional 	religion 	obsolete. 	There
were also schools 	and 	places 	he 	called 	'Design 	Centers'.
These 	were 	no 	doubt 	modelled 	on 	his 	earliest 	Froebel
experiences 	and on 	Taliesin. 	as 	they 	were 	supposed 	to
provide 	an 	initiation 	into 	the 	spiritual 	values 	in 	nature
through 	a 	training 	in 	the 	perception 	of form. 	The 	aim
was 	to 	produce 	the 	well-rounded 	citizens 	of the 	future.
Eye 	and 	hand, 	body 	and 	what 	we 	call 	mind 	thus
becoming 	more 	and 	more 	senstive 	to 	nature 	. 	.
.
The 	thirties 	was 	therefore 	a 	decade 	in 	which 	both 	Le
Corbusier 	and 	Wright 	succeeded 	in 	transforming
earlier 	themes, 	enriching 	them 	and 	extending 	them,
and 	in 	producing 	buildings 	of 	high 	quality. 	Both 	men
were also preoccupied 	with 	the entire 	range 	of building
types 	from 	habitation 	to 	places 	of 	work 	to 	places 	of
leisure, 	contemplation, 	and 	creation. 	Both 	tended 	to
see 	the 	artist 	as 	a 	philosopher 	king 	who 	might 	intuit
the 	forms 	of 	an 	ideal 	society; 	and. 	despite 	the 	obvious
contrasts 	in 	their urban 	models 	and 	their 	sources, 	both
planners 	were 	preoccupied 	with 	similar 	questions;
how 	to 	overcome 	the 	schisms 	within 	the 	division 	of
labour, 	how 	to 	reintegrate 	man 	and 	nature, 	how 	to
employ the 	machine 	yet 	maintain 	a 	sense 	of wholeness
socially 	and 	visually. 	Each 	had 	as 	little 	success 	as 	the
other 	in 	persuading 	any 	influential 	authority 	to 	adopt
his 	larger 	ideas; 	each 	had 	to 	be 	content 	with 	realizing
his 	Utopia 	in 	fragmentary 	experiments; 	and 	as 	the
decade 	wore 	on. 	it 	became 	clear 	that 	the 	disjunctions
within 	modern 	European 	and 	American 	society 	were
far 	too 	deep 	to 	be 	healed 	by 	soothing 	architectural
palliatives. 	The 	era 	of justice 	and 	harmony 	seemed 	less
and 	less 	likely 	to 	dawn. 	The 	dusty 	model 	of 	Broadacre
City 	and 	the 	splendid 	drawings 	of 	the 	Ville 	Radieuse
remained 	the 	property 	of their 	creators; 	two 	individu-
alist 	artist 	thinkers 	who 	optimistically, 	but 	mistakenly,
imagined 	that 	architectural 	form 	could 	fashion 	a 	new.
integrated 	civilization.
15.15 	Frank Lloyd
Wright. 	Broadacre City.
1936. 	plan 	of part 	of the
city 	showing 	typical 	grid
of circulation 	(from
When 	Democracy 	Builds,
iq4S).

-- 212 of 420 --

1 	6. 	Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of 	the
Modern 	Movement
I 	am 	convinced 	that 	art. 	since 	it 	forms 	the 	most 	uncorrupted, 	the 	most
immediate 	reflection 	of the 	people's 	soul, 	exercises 	unconsciously 	by 	far 	the
greatest 	direct 	influence 	upon 	the 	masses 	of the 	people.
A. 	Hitler, 	1935
Througfiout 	history 	monumental 	architecture 	has
been 	employed 	to 	embody 	the 	values 	of 	dominant
ideologies 	and 	groups, 	and 	as 	an 	instrument 	of 	state
propaganda. 	The 	totalitarian 	regimes 	that 	came 	to
power 	between 	the 	wars 	(first 	in 	Ualy. 	a 	little 	later 	in
Russia 	and 	Ciermany). 	each 	devoted 	considerable
attention 	to 	the 	ways 	in 	which 	buildings 	and 	urban
plans might 	be 	used 	to 	legitimize 	their 	position 	at 	home
and 	abroad, 	and 	to 	convey 	their 	beliefs 	through
symbolism 	and 	association. 	A 	persistent 	theme 	in 	ail
three 	countries 	was 	the 	reinforcement 	of nationalist
sentiments 	by 	appeal 	to 	earlier 	national 	architectural
traditions. 	Allied 	to 	this 	was 	a 	nostalgia 	for 	supposedly
indigenous 	virtues 	which 	were 	to 	be 	reclaimed 	from
the 	onslaughts 	of 	modern 	fragmentation. 	It 	was
necessary 	for 	totalitarian 	regimes 	to 	foster 	the
impression 	that 	their 	right 	to 	rule was embedded 	in 	the
deepest 	aspirations 	of 	the 	people. State 	patronage 	had
therefore 	to 	steer 	a careful 	way 	between 	evocations 	of
past 	imperial 	power 	and 	suggestions 	of 	populist
support. 	The 	pretence 	had 	to 	be 	maintained 	that
official 	taste 	was 	a 	conduit, 	so 	to 	speak, 	for 	broader
communal 	impulses.
In 	these 	circumstances 	modern 	architecture 	seemed
at best 	irrelevant, 	at 	worst 	a 	dangerous 	threat 	in 	need
of 	extinction. 	It 	could, 	after 	all, 	be 	portrayed 	as 	an
internationalist 	novelty 	created 	by 	a 	fringe 	avant-
garde 	working 	independently 	of 	dominant 	values: 	it
could 	be 	claimed 	too 	that 	it 	lacked 	rhetorical 	devices
capable 	of conveying 	simple 	messages 	to 	the 	majority.
Modern 	architecture 	was 	also 	open 	to 	the 	charge 	that
it 	was 	'foreign', 	that 	it 	had 	not 	grown 	from 	national
cultural 	roots 	and 	craft 	traditions: 	in 	Germany 	it 	was
frequently 	portrayed 	as 	an 	oriental 	import 	or 	(still
worse! ) 	as 	the 	thin 	edge 	of a 	Bolshevist 	plot 	originating
in 	the 	East. 	In 	Russia, 	simultaneously, 	one 	might 	well
find 	it 	being treated 	as a 	commodity 	from 	the West, 	as 	a
last 	fragment 	of 	decaying 	European 	civilization. 	In
these 	sweeping 	condemnations 	one 	has, 	of 	course, 	to
bear 	in 	mind 	the 	distinction 	between 	intended 	and
received 	meanings. 	The 	true 	symbolic 	and 	ideological
texture 	of 	modern 	architecture 	was 	far 	more 	refined
than 	blunt 	and 	imperceptive 	criticisms 	of 	this 	kind
allowed. 	Moreover, 	it 	was 	not 	always 	rejected 	out 	of
hand: 	the 	Nazis 	(for 	example) 	were 	quite 	happy 	to
claim 	the 	structural 	economy 	and 	technological
imagery 	of 	modern 	architecture 	when 	it 	suited 	them
(e.g.. 	in 	certain 	utilitarian 	buildings 	for 	the 	Luftwaffe),
while 	in 	Italy, 	the 	'progressive' 	character 	of 	modern
design 	- 	if 	expressed 	with 	suitably 	Latin 	emphasis 	-
could 	be 	acceptable 	to 	the 	regime. 	Again 	one 	has 	to
guard 	against 	over-simple 	polarities: 	there 	was 	no
clear-cut 	totalitarian 	critical 	position, 	nor 	a 	single
accepted 	style.
In 	Germany 	political 	debates 	over 	the 	new 	archi-
tecture 	had 	continued 	throughout 	the 	twenties.
Socialist 	support 	of large 	housing 	schemes 	had 	tended
to 	give 	the 	Hat-roofed 	Sicdlwuien. 	and 	the 	architects
who 	had 	designed 	them, 	the 	automatic 	stigma 	of
Communism. 	It 	makes 	litrie 	difference 	that 	only 	some
modern 	architects 	were 	adherents 	of Marxism, 	or 	that
a 	great 	variety 	of 	expression 	for 	socialist 	ideals 	was
possible: 	right-wing 	critics 	were 	suspicious 	of the 	new
architecture 	and 	determined 	to 	tar 	it 	all 	with 	the 	same

-- 213 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
brush. 	The 	tone 	of 	one 	brand 	of 	criticism 	already
prevalent 	in 	the 	late 	twenties 	is 	well 	caught 	by 	the
following:
According 	to 	the 	leaders 	of the 	Bauhaus 	- 	rooms
must 	look 	like 	studios, 	like 	operating 	theatres: 	all
warmth 	is 	banned 	from 	them. 	Therefore 	no 	wood:
rugs 	and 	upholstery 	are 	sins 	against 	the 	holy 	ghost
of 'Sachlichkeit'. 	Glass 	instead, 	all 	kinds 	of metal 	or
artificial 	stone - 	these 	are the 	stylish 	materials! 	The
new 	man 	is 	no 	longer 	a 	man. 	he 	is 	a 	'geometrical
animal'. 	He 	needs 	no 	dwelling, 	no 	home, 	only 	a
'dwelling 	machine'. 	This 	man 	is 	not 	an 	individual,
not 	a 	personality, 	but 	a 	collective 	entity, 	a 	piece 	of
mass 	man. 	And 	therefore 	they 	build 	'housing
developments', 	apartment 	blocks 	of desolate
uniformity, 	in 	which 	everything 	is 	standardized.
These 	are 	tenements, 	built 	not 	as 	a 	necessity, 	as 	in
the 	rapidly 	growing 	cities 	during 	the 	second 	half of
the 	nineteenth 	century, 	but 	as 	a 	matter 	of principle.
They 	want 	to 	kill 	personality 	in 	men. 	they 	want
collectivism, 	for 	the 	highest 	goal 	of these 	architects
is 	Marxism. 	Communism.
In 	this 	version 	we 	find 	modern 	architecture 	por-
trayed 	as 	something 	rootless, 	materialistic, 	un-
comfortable, 	inhuman. 	Communist, 	and 	anti-German.
Another 	style 	of 	criticism 	concentrated 	on 	the
supposed 	impracticality 	of 	modern 	buildings, 	their
leaking 	flat 	roofs, 	the 	peeling 	of 	their 	white 	plaster
surfaces, 	the 	rusting 	of 	their 	windows, 	the 	ignorance
manifest 	in 	them 	of 	time-worn 	methods 	for 	handling
extremes 	of climate. 	Then 	again 	there 	were 	the 	racist
arguments. 	These 	emphasized 	the 	way 	the 	new
architecture 	was 	lifted 	free 	of 	the 	soil 	and 	its 	lack 	of
nourishment 	from 	local 	and 	regional 	vernacular
sources. 	The 	most 	extreme 	slurs 	were 	reserved 	for 	the
distortions 	of modern 	painting, 	which 	were 	compared
to 	deformed 	and 	'inferior' 	races; 	with 	architecture 	this
distasteful 	haranguing 	had 	a 	less 	easy 	target, 	nonethe-
less 	the 	flat 	roof was 	singled 	out 	as 	flagrant 	evidence 	of
'un-German-ness'. 	In 	one 	hysterical 	outburst 	this
constituent 	feature 	of 	the 	new 	architecture 	was
branded 	as 	'oriental, 	Jewish 	and 	Bolshevik' 	simulta-
neously. 	The 	soap-box 	oratory 	could 	often 	become
extremely 	confused: 	while 	one 	criticism 	might 	try 	to
link 	modern 	architecture 	to 	an 	international 	Socialist
conspiracy, 	another 	might 	latch 	on 	to 	the 	industrial
imagery 	and 	interpret 	it 	as 	an 	expression 	of:
. 	. 	. 	the 	unclean 	collaboration 	of certain 	branches 	of
great 	industry, 	dominated 	by 	jews, 	with 	the
Marxist 	parties.
Finally 	modern 	architecture 	could 	be 	rejected 	on 	the
grounds 	that 	it 	was 	simply 	ugly 	and 	therefore 	not
ennobling 	of German 	culture.
The 	trigger 	springs 	were 	thus 	already 	set 	when 	the
Nazis 	came 	to 	power 	in 	1 9 	V3- 	h 	has 	to 	be 	emphasized
that 	there 	was 	no 	single 	monolithic 	Nazi 	doctrine
concerning 	either 	the 	criticism 	or 	the 	creation 	of
architecture, 	that 	even 	official 	opinions 	often 	diverged,
and 	that 	these 	odd 	mixtures 	of opinions 	had 	been 	lying
around 	for 	some 	time. 	One 	does 	note, 	however, 	a
preponderance 	of 	the 	racist 	style 	of 	argument 	com-
bined 	with 	a 	fairly 	sound 	general 	assessment 	that
modern 	architectural 	imagery would 	not 	be 	suitable 	to
grand 	civic 	monumentality 	or 	to 	regionalist, 	volkisch
expression. 	Moreover, 	there 	was 	another feature 	of the
modern 	movement 	which 	made 	it 	unsuitable. 	The
Reich 	needed 	to 	assert 	the 	hierarchy 	of building 	types
as 	visual 	evidence 	of 	the 	hierarchy 	of 	power: 	an
architectural 	system 	that 	tended 	to 	blur 	distinctions
between 	building 	types 	was 	not 	ideally 	suited 	to 	this
sort 	of symbolic 	differentiation.
It 	is 	interesting 	therefore 	to 	see 	how 	modern
architects fared 	in 	Germany 	in 	the 	thirties. 	The 	fact 	is
that 	most 	of 	them 	were 	outlawed, 	unpopular, 	or
simply 	decided 	to 	leave. 	The 	Bauhaus 	was 	eventually
closed 	in 	1455. 	and 	its 	staff scattered 	in 	all 	directions,
many 	of them 	to 	seek refuge 	in 	England 	and 	the 	United
States. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	was 	an 	outstanding
exception, 	as 	he 	did 	not 	leave 	Germany 	until 	1937: 	he
was 	even 	a 	joint 	winner 	in 	the 	competition 	for 	the 	new
Reichsbank 	for 	Berlin 	in 	1933. 	His 	scheme 	was
distinguished 	by 	its 	severe 	monumentality. 	achieved
through 	the 	simplest 	means 	of 	clear 	proportions,
symmetry, 	and 	a sort of grim 	elegance. 	Here 	was 	a case
where 	technology 	and 	the 	monumental 	sense 	came
together 	in 	a 	formula 	which 	appealed 	to 	conservative
elements. 	But 	the 	project 	was 	not 	built, 	and 	the
monumentality 	generally 	favoured 	later 	in 	the 	thirties
made 	more 	obvious 	use 	of the 	past.
It 	is 	central 	to 	the 	story 	that 	Hitler 	was 	himself 	a
frustrated 	architect 	and 	perhaps 	saw 	statecraft 	itself as
a 	kind 	of monumental 	design. 	As 	an 	adolescent 	he 	had
dreamed 	of redesigning 	Ijnz. 	Towards 	the end 	of his 	life
it 	became 	his 	ambition 	to 	leave 	behind 	a 	new 	imperial
Berlin, 	testifying 	to 	the 	world 	domination 	of the 	Reich,
just 	as 	he 	sensed 	that 	the 	great 	buildings 	of 	the 	past
bore 	witness 	to 	a 	coherence 	of belief, 	so 	he 	hoped 	that
the 	new 	bonds 	of 	German 	unity 	might, 	almost
automatically, 	find 	expression 	in 	great 	communal
projects 	and 	a 	healthy 	vernacular 	rooted 	In 	native
blood 	and 	soil. 	On 	this 	point 	it 	might 	be 	said 	that 	his
thinking 	partially 	paralleled 	Gropius's. 	Wright's, 	and
Le 	Corbusier's, 	since 	he 	too 	expected 	the 	individual
artist 	to 	grasp 	the 	whole 	inner 	feeling 	of 	an 	epoch
and 	then 	to 	give 	it 	form. 	He 	played 	down 	the 	actual
pluralism of modern 	life, 	in 	a 	monomaniacal 	belief that

-- 214 of 420 --

Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern 	Movement 	21^
lis. I 	Uibove) 	Albert
Speer. 	Zeppelinl'eld.
Nuremberg. 	1936.
ih.Hbelow) 	Gerdy
Troost. 	House 	of
German 	Art.
Prinzrcgentenstrasse.
Munich. 	1934-6.

-- 215 of 420 --

214 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
he 	had 	risen 	to 	power 	by 	some 	inherent 	force 	of 	the
whole 	Volk. 	His 	National 	Socialist 	beliefs 	led 	him 	to
distrust 	previous 	German 	elites 	- 	including, 	let 	it 	be
said 	- 	that 	elite 	of 	perception, 	the 	avant-garde. 	His
patronage 	was 	ideally 	suited 	for 	the 	production 	of 	a
bathetic, 	banal, 	instant 	culture 	of 	little 	lasting 	depth:
and 	that 	is 	what 	most 	Nazi 	architecture 	usually
became.
There 	was 	the 	further 	problem 	of representation 	- a
problem 	that 	the 	other 	dictatorial 	regimes 	shared:
What 	should 	their 	architecture 	look 	like.: 	What
appearance 	should 	a 	specifically 	Nazi 	building 	have.-
Half-baked 	art 	history 	was 	dragged 	in 	to 	suggest 	that
Gothic 	architecture 	one 	minute. 	Classical 	architecture
the 	next, 	lay 	closest 	to 	the 	reconsolidated 	national
genius 	of 	the 	German 	people. 	Even 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	could 	be 	made 	acceptable 	on 	occasion, 	so 	long
as 	it 	was 	restricted 	to 	'lower' 	buildings 	in 	the
hierarchy: 	factories, 	office 	buildings, 	and 	the 	like. 	It 	is
never 	very 	precise, 	then, 	to speak 	of one 	essential 	Nazi
architecture' 	in 	the 	1930s.
As 	soon 	as 	he 	came 	to 	power. 	Hitler 	chose 	Gerdy
Troost 	as 	his 	main 	architectural 	adviser. 	Troost 	had
been 	a 	member 	of 	the 	Nazi 	party 	since 	1924 	and 	his
love 	for 	simplified 	but 	traditional 	Classicism 	made 	him
the 	ideal 	man 	to 	express 	the 	Fiihrer's 	aspirations
towards 	a 	monumental 	'community' 	architecture,
extolling 	the 	discipline, 	order, 	and 	strength 	of the 	new
state. 	Both 	patron 	and 	architect 	shared 	a 	love 	of
Schinkel 	and 	an 	intuition 	for 	a 	supposed 	link 	between
Greek 	and 	Teutonic 	culture. 	It 	was 	no 	anomaly, 	then,
that 	the 	House 	of 	German 	Art 	in 	the 	Prinzreg-
entenstrasse 	(1934-6) 	should 	have 	had 	a 	stripped
Doric 	order, 	a 	low 	horizontal attic, 	and sharp 	but clean
lines 	(fig. 	16.2).
In 	1934 	Troost 	died 	and 	his 	place 	was 	taken 	by 	a
young 	man 	named 	Albert 	Speer. 	Speer 	became 	the
stage 	designer, 	as 	it 	were, 	for 	Nazi 	pageantry, 	by
providing 	an 	instant 	monumentality 	of 	quick 	effect
and 	mainly 	rhetorical 	emphasis. 	He 	drew 	on 	whatever
sources 	seemed 	most 	suitable 	for 	evoking 	an
overwhelming 	scale 	- 	Egyptian. 	Babylonian. 	Classical,
neo-classical 	- 	and 	pared 	down 	inherited 	forms 	into 	a
vocabulary 	of 	stripped 	surfaces, 	stone 	veneers, 	and
regimental 	repetition. 	His 	design 	for 	the 	'Zeppelinfeld'
arena 	at 	Nuremburg 	of 	1936 	is 	a 	good 	example 	of this
species 	of monumentality 	(fig. 	1 6. i 	). 	It 	was 	one 	of the
settings 	for 	the 	colossal 	Nazi 	rallies 	and 	so 	was 	a
collective 	Volk 	building 	in 	the 	full 	sense. 	In 	the 	same
year 	Speer 	had 	the 	stunning 	idea 	(perhaps 	suggested
by 	certain 	festivalia 	used 	in 	the 	French 	Revolution! 	of
pointing 	a 	thousand 	searchlights 	into 	the 	air 	during 	a
night 	event. 	Slender 	shafts 	of 	light 	rose 	miles 	into 	the
sky 	and 	the 	idea 	was 	christened 	'the 	Cathedral 	of ice'.
A 	similar 	bombast 	and 	militarism 	inspired 	the 	vast
^tg^^g^r^^

-- 216 of 420 --

Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern 	Movement 	JiS
1 6. s 	Karl Vesser. 	Nazi
Youth 	hostel, 	llrfeld.
c. 	I9?S-
if>.^ 	{above left) 	Albert
Speer and 	Adolf Hitler,
plan 	for Berlin.
1937-411-
1(1.4 (Ic/O 	Albert 	Speer.
New 	Chancellery. 	Berlin.
i93*<. 	view 	of long hall.
Olympic 	Stadium 	and attached 	buildings outside 	Berlin
in 	1936. 	These 	had 	the 	extra 	propaganda 	function 	of
impressing 	the 	world 	with 	refound 	Clerman 	might.
Nazi 	monuments 	were 	a 	little 	like 	Hitler's 	oratory:
forceful, 	repetitive but 	ultimately 	banal. 	They tended 	to
deaden 	opposition 	with 	statements 	of 	overwhelming
conformity 	and 	force.
Speer pandered 	to 	Hitler's 	fantasies 	and 	became, 	in 	a
sense, 	the 	Fiihrer's 	own 	architectural 	interpreter. 	In
1937. 	the 	inner 	circle 	of 	the 	Reich 	decided 	that 	the
Chancellery 	building 	in 	Berlin 	must 	be 	rebuilt 	on 	a
scale 	commensurate 	with 	the 	increasingly 	imperial
stature 	of 	the 	leader. 	Speer 	produced 	a 	suitable
scenario 	at 	top 	speed. 	Hitler's 	personal 	salon 	and 	office
were 	placed 	off 	an 	overbearing 	marble 	corridor 	(fig.
16.4) 	almost 	as 	long 	as 	the 	Galeric 	des 	Glaces 	at
Versailles. 	It was reached 	through 	a 	sequence of formal
spaces 	- 	a 	courtyard 	of 	honour, 	a 	vestibule, 	a 	mosaic
room, 	a 	round 	hall 	- 	while 	at 	the 	other 	end 	of 	the
building 	was 	the 	Cabinet 	conference 	room. 	Admittedly
the 	plan 	was 	a 	quite 	elegant 	and 	ornamental
composition 	pulling 	together 	various 	antique 	inodels:
but 	when 	built, 	the 	stripped 	Classical 	forms 	had 	a 	dull
and 	drab 	quality. 	Stone 	was 	imported 	from 	all 	parts 	of
Germany 	for 	this 	project 	and 	the 	buildings 	were
erected in 	less than 	eighteen 	months. 	Nazi 	insignia 	and
emblems were embossed on 	walls and 	furniture, 	to give
added 	impact 	to 	the 	heavy-handed 	and 	obvious
messages 	of 	the 	architecture 	with 	its 	overwhelming
scale, 	its 	polished, 	rich 	materials, 	its 	pompous 	axial
regimentation, 	and 	its 	disciplined 	repetition. 	The
psychological 	game 	was 	clear: 	the 	visiting 	statesman
or 	ambassador 	was 	to 	see 	that 	the 	New 	Reich 	had
become 	a 	patron 	of the 	monumental 	arts, 	and 	was 	to
be placed 	at 	an 	instant 	disadvantage 	by 	a 	two 	hundred
yard 	walk 	over 	polished 	floors, 	past 	swastika 	flags 	and
impeccably designed 	uniforms, 	before he 	wheeled 	on 	to
the 	cross-axis, 	presumably 	to 	see 	the 	Fiihrer 	waiting
behind 	his 	desk 	in 	a 	room 	of grandiose 	proportions. 	It
was 	in 	the bunker next 	to this building that Hitler came
to his 	end 	in 	1 	945 	while 	Russian 	shells 	demolished 	all
this 	Nazi 	handiwork.
Speer's 	and 	Hitler's 	megalomania 	did 	not 	stop 	there.
In 	1937 	they 	launched 	plans 	for 	the 	reordering 	of
Berlin, 	employing 	long 	avenues, 	axes, 	and 	a 	stage
scenery 	drawn 	from 	Paris. 	Ancient 	Rome 	and 	Wash-
ington 	(tig. 	16.3). 	The 	focal 	point 	was 	to 	be 	a
centralized 	domical 	monument 	larger 	than 	any 	dome
yet 	built 	and 	known 	simply 	as 	the 	'Great 	Hall'. 	This
was 	to 	be 	a 	pantheon 	of 	sorts 	containing 	images 	and
inscriptions 	dedicated 	to 	the 	heroes 	and 	heroic 	aims
of 	Nazism. 	It 	was 	to 	stand 	facing 	a 	boulevard, 	at 	the
other 	end 	of 	which 	would 	be 	a 	triumphal 	arch 	in
honour 	of 	Hitler. 	Had 	it 	been 	built, 	the 	Hall 	could
have 	contained 	St. 	Peter's 	in 	Rome 	in 	its 	vaulted
interior 	space. 	This 	sublime 	scale 	recalls 	those 	fantasy
schemes 	for 	pure 	geometrical 	cenotaphs 	and 	cath-
edrals 	painted 	by 	E. L. 	BouUee 	towards 	the 	end 	of 	the
eighteenth 	century. 	Indeed, 	neo-classical 	images 	of
funeral 	pyres 	influenced 	the 	extraordinary 	war
memorials 	envisaged 	by 	Wilhelm 	Kreis 	to 	stand 	as
grim 	beacons 	of 	Nazi 	superiority 	on 	the 	conquered
lands 	of 	'inferior 	races'. 	But 	such 	Nazi 	emblems 	had
about 	them 	a 	quality 	of 	empty 	gesture 	for 	all 	their
vastness: 	they 	were 	a 	classic 	case 	6f 	what 	Giedion
called 	the 	devaluation 	of symbols'.
In 	parallel 	with 	civic 	monuments, 	domestic 	and
rural 	projects 	were 	also 	sponsored 	by 	the Nazis 	in 	the
thirties. 	The 	recurrent 	themes 	of athletic 	prowess 	and
rustic 	purity 	were 	nurtured 	in 	numerous 	deliberately
'regionalist' 	buildings. 	The 	long-standing 	suspicion 	of
urban 	centres 	as 	infamous 	breeding 	grounds 	of
uprootedness". 	'cosmopolitanism', 	and 	other 	anti-
nationalist 	sins, 	could 	here 	find 	an 	outlet. 	It 	was 	noted
earlier 	that 	the 	flat 	roof 	particularly 	excited 	the
hostility 	of 	certain 	right-wing 	critics 	as 	evidence 	of
alien 	influence: 	as 	a 	corollary, 	the 	type, 	shape, 	and
materials 	of hip 	roofs 	were 	regarded 	as 	primary 	signals
of a 	building's allegiance to the vernacular traditions of
a 	particular 	region. 	Karl 	Vesser's 	design 	for 	a 	Nazi
youth 	hostel 	at 	IJrfeld 	(fig. 	16.5) 	employed 	the
overhanging 	eaves 	and 	balconies 	of the 	local 	Bavarian
village 	houses 	and 	stood 	on 	a 	stone 	base 	of 	a 	vaguely
martial 	character: 	Goring's 	hunting 	lodge 	was 	a
theatrical 	evocation 	of 	Teutonic 	memories 	quite 	at
odds 	with 	the 	'brave 	new 	world' 	and 	machine 	imagery
of 	the 	new 	architecture. 	Nazi 	regionalism 	was 	not 	a
genuine 	vernacular 	but 	a 	sophisticated 	and 	procured
Arts 	and 	Crafts 	rusticity 	catering 	to 	the 	overflow 	towns
and 	suburbs. 	The 	imagery 	was 	supposed 	to 	suggest 	the

-- 217 of 420 --

2 1 6 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
conservation 	of the 	homeland 	and 	the 	local 	commun-
ity 	as 	opposed 	to 	the 	'disturbances' 	of 	the 	modern
metropolis 	and 	festering 	discontents 	brought 	on 	by
rapid 	industrialization 	and 	(of 	course) 	by 	'dangerous'
foreign 	ideas. 	This 	Heimaistil 	was 	to 	foster 	open,
healthy 	social 	relationships 	and 	conformity 	to 	the
prevalent 	state 	doctrines. 	Even 	telephone 	buildings
and 	utilitarian 	structures 	could 	be 	fitted 	up 	with 	an
appropriate thatched 	overhang to 	preserve the sense 	of
regional 	continuity.
Although 	Nazi 	power was 	based 	in 	a large degree on
rapid 	mechanization, 	on 	the 	creation 	of 	efficient
factories, 	autobahns. 	and 	munitions 	industries, 	the
'factory 	aesthetic' 	had 	no 	place 	in 	the 	domestic 	sphere.
Its 	intrusion 	into 	housing 	was 	seen 	not 	only 	as a 	break
with 	decorum, 	but 	also 	as 	a 	sinister 	dislocation 	of
family 	integrity 	by 	hostile 	and 	materialistic 	forces. 	It 	is
instructive in 	this connection 	that 	Hitler made much 	of
the 	fact 	that 	only 	handicrafts 	were employed 	in 	the
construction 	of 	one 	of 	his 	residences. 	This 	is 	all 	the
more 	ironical 	given 	the 	stress 	that 	the 	majority 	of
modern 	movement 	architects 	had 	placed 	on 	the
supposed 	'spirituality' 	of 	their 	simple 	abstract 	forms.
They 	too 	had 	sought 	to 	transcend 	materialism.
However, 	modern 	doctrines 	did 	have 	their 	uses 	in
the 	design 	of buildings 	of more 	humble 	and 	utilitarian
function 	where 	qualities 	of 	discipline, 	clarity 	of
structure, 	and 	clear 	lighting 	could 	also 	have 	moral
overtones. 	Here 	it 	has 	to 	be 	admitted 	that 	the
nationalist 	streak 	in 	previous 	Deutscher 	Werkbund
theorizing 	permitted 	some 	cross-breeding 	of 	ideas. 	H.
Rimpl's 	design 	for 	a 	Heinkel 	factory 	of 	1936 	is 	a 	good
example 	of 	this 	clear-cut 	rationalism. 	In 	fact, 	RimpI
had 	been 	a 	student 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe. 	and 	the
design 	anticipated 	something 	of the 	character of Mies's
later 	buildings 	for 	the 	campus 	at 	Illinois 	Institute 	of
Technology 	in 	Chicago. 	German 	engineers 	took 	an
interest 	in 	aesthetic 	and 	even 	ideological 	matters. 	A
supreme emblem 	of National Socialist industrial 	design
was. 	of 	course, 	the 	famous 	'Volkswagen' 	automobile;
during 	the 	war 	the 	concrete 	fortresses 	and 	bunkers 	of
the 	'Atlantic 	Wall' 	had 	a 	stunning 	aesthetic 	clarity
despite 	their 	grim 	function.
At 	the 	Paris 	International 	exhibition 	of 	1937 	the
German 	pavilion 	stood 	opposite 	the 	Russian 	one 	(figs.
16.6. 	16.7). 	To 	the 	unpractised 	eye 	it 	might 	have 	been
difficult to 	tell 	the difference since 	both 	states employed
a 	combination 	of 	gross 	realism 	and 	stark 	monument-
ality 	as their official 	ambassadorial 	style, 	Speer's design
stressed 	the 	vertical 	and 	was 	modelled 	on 	a 	stripped
neo-classical 	tribune 	of some 	kind. 	It 	was 	surmounted
by 	a 	stern 	eagle, 	lofan's 	Soviet 	design 	opposite 	was
as.sembled 	from 	stepped 	masses 	of vaguely 	streamlined
character 	(not 	unlike 	some 	of New 	York's 	skyscrapers
of Ihe 	late 	twenties) 	and 	was 	topped by 	the 	enormous
^
#'
lunging 	figures 	of a 	man 	and 	a 	woman 	supposed, 	no
doubt, 	to 	reflect 	the 	energy 	and 	populism 	of the 	Soviet
state. 	Both 	nations' 	design 	policies 	had 	clearly 	altered
since 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	Barcelona 	Pavilion 	of 	1929
or 	since 	the 	Paris 	Exposition 	des 	Arts 	Decoratifs 	of
1925, 	when 	Melnikov 	had 	been 	allowed 	by 	his
sponsors 	to 	create 	his 	daring 	evocation 	of 	the 	factory
aesthetic, 	proclaiming the 	values 	of a 	forward-looking,
supposedly 	egalitarian 	society.
As 	has 	been 	shown 	in 	Chapter 	10. 	the 	intervening
event 	of the 	Palace 	of the 	Soviets 	competition 	of 	1931
had 	already 	offered 	clear 	signals 	of 	changing 	official
taste 	in 	the 	Soviet 	Union, 	and 	implied 	too. 	in 	its
outcome, 	that 	the 	messages 	of 	modern 	architecture
were 	suspected 	of 	being 	too 	arcane 	for 	the 	general
public. 	In 	the early 	thirties 	'Realism' 	in 	the arts 	became
1(1.6 	.-Mbcrt 	Speer.
German 	Pavilion. 	Paris
Exhibition. 	1957.

-- 218 of 420 --

i6.7 	B. 	M. 	lofan. 	Soviet
Pavilion, 	Paris
Fxhibition, 	iq^7.
the 	official 	line. 	In 	painting 	this 	tended 	to 	mean 	that
abstraction 	should 	be 	avoided 	on 	the 	grounds 	that 	it
might 	become 	a self-indulgent 	filter 	between 	the 	artist,
'reality', 	and 	the 	public: 	the 	worst 	term 	of censure 	was
'formalism'. 	The 	'reality' 	upon 	which 	artists 	were
supposed 	to 	concentrate 	was 	largely 	preselected, 	and
involved 	proletarian 	subjects 	of 	daily 	life 	or 	heroic
deeds 	in 	the 	service of the 	state. 	The 	'appropriate' 	style
in 	painting 	was 	a 	descendant 	of 	nineteenth-century
'realists' 	such 	as 	Courbet.
How 	could 	such 	arguments 	be 	transposed 	to
architecture.- 	One 	way 	was 	through 	the 	decoration 	of
buildings 	with 	suitable 	sculptures, 	paintings, 	and
reliefs. 	Another 	was through 	the 	use of an 	easily 	legible
monumentality employing devices 	of allusion, 	axiality,
and 	grandiose 	scale. 	A 	shift 	in 	emphasis 	towards 	the
Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern 	Movement 	217
aggrandizement 	of the 	central 	state 	and 	its 	official 	folk
heroes 	seems 	to 	have 	accounted 	for 	lofan's 	victory 	in
the 	Palace 	of the 	Soviets 	competition 	with 	its 	statue 	of
Lenin 	on 	top 	and 	(in 	the 	later 	version ) 	its 	wedding cake
mausoleum 	mawkishly 	clad 	in 	Classical 	elements. 	The
aerodynamic 	forms 	of 	the 	1937 	Soviet 	Pavilion 	in
Paris 	clearly 	issued 	from 	the 	same 	family: 	so 	did 	the
kitsch 	decorations 	of 	the 	Moscow 	subways: 	so,
eventually, did 	the 	plans for the university on 	the Lenin
hills, 	approached 	from 	the 	centre 	of the 	city 	by 	way 	of
an 	axial 	road 	starting 	in 	Red 	Square 	and 	running 	for
twenty 	miles. 	In 	1941 	the 	Marx-Engels 	Institute 	in
Tiflis 	was 	designed 	by 	A. 	V. 	Schoussev 	with 	giant
Corinthian 	columns 	in 	its 	facade. 	The grand 	manner of
the 	Tsar 	had 	returned 	with 	a 	vengeance, 	but 	without
its earlier 	tasteful 	sense of ornament. 	Parallels 	between
Marxist 	and 	Greek 	democratic 	ideals 	of statehood 	were
subsumed 	by 	the 	slogan 	'columns 	for 	the 	people', 	but
imperialist 	overtones 	were 	obvious. 	Indeed 	there 	was
some 	convergence 	between 	Nazi 	and 	Soviet 	positions
:
in 	each 	case 	the 	avant-garde 	was 	regarded 	with
suspicion, 	while 	continuity 	was 	sought 	with 	pre-
revolutionary 	modes. 	Older 	members 	of 	the 	archi-
tectural 	profession 	who 	had seemed 	outmoded 	even
came 	back 	into 	action: 	a 	thin 	traditionalism
triumphed.
There 	were 	also 	some 	points 	of 	similarity 	in 	the
attitudes 	towards 	housing 	and 	city-planning. 	As 	in
Germany, 	the 	pitched 	roof 	was 	recommended 	for
climatic 	reasons 	and 	because 	it 	was 	supposed 	to 	be
closer 	to 	'popular' 	aspirations. 	Those 	avant-garde
planners 	who 	had 	left 	Germany 	for 	Russia 	in 	the 	late
twenties 	to 	build 	the 	architecture 	of 	the 	world
revolution 	for 	the 	new 	society 	(e.g.. 	Ernst 	May) 	were
stranded, 	by 	the 	mid-thirties, 	between 	two 	tides 	of
reaction. 	But the writing 	had 	been on 	the wall 	for some
time, 	as 	this 	official 	Soviet 	pronouncement 	of 	1930
makes 	clear:
It 	is 	iiTipossible 	suddenly 	to 	overcome 	obstacles 	that
are 	centuries 	old, 	the 	fruit 	of the 	cultural 	and
economic 	backwardness 	of society. 	Yet 	this 	is 	the
system 	implicit 	in 	these 	unrealizable 	and 	Utopian
plans 	for 	the 	reconstruction, 	at 	State expense, 	of
new 	cities 	based 	on 	the 	total 	collectivization 	of
living, 	including 	collective 	provisioning, 	collective
care 	of children, 	the 	prohibition 	of private 	kitchens.
The 	hasty 	realization 	of such 	schemes. 	Utopian 	and
doctrinaire, 	which 	take 	no 	account 	of the 	material
resources 	of our 	country 	and 	of the 	limits 	within
which 	the 	people, 	with 	their 	set 	habits 	and
preferences, 	can 	be 	prepared 	for 	them, 	could 	easily
result 	in 	considerable 	losses 	and 	could 	also 	discredit
the 	basic 	principles 	of the 	Socialist 	reconstruction 	of
society.

-- 219 of 420 --

2 1 8 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
The 	situation 	in 	Italy 	in 	the 	same 	decade 	was 	every
bit 	as 	complex. 	Mussolini 	felt 	no 	constitutional
restraint 	on 	his 	imperial 	ambitions 	and 	had 	the
convenience 	of 	ancient 	Rome 	as 	his 	stage-set 	and
plaything. 	Like 	Hitler, 	he 	took 	a 	direct 	interest 	in
planning 	affairs. 	By 	1925 	a 	new 	plan 	for 	the
renovation 	of 	Rome 	had 	been 	set 	in 	motion. 	Straight 	-
streets 	were 	to 	be 	cut 	through 	the 	patchwork 	urban
fabric 	to 	link 	up 	key 	monuments 	of 	the 	distant 	past
with ones 	which 	Mussolini 	himself 	intended 	to 	build
with 	Piacentini 	as 	his 	architectural 	aide. 	The 	blend
of theatricality, 	functionalism. 	and 	propaganda 	of this
scheme 	recalled 	Haussmann's 	plans 	for 	Paris 	or 	the
Baroque 	planning 	projects 	of 	the 	popes. 	Major
historical 	monuments 	like 	the 	Colosseum 	were 	to 	be
shorn 	of their 	encumberments 	(dislodged 	people 	being
forcibly 	rehoused), 	so 	facilitating 	the 	flow 	of traffic 	and
the perception of Rome's 	great 	past. 	The 	urban 	scene 	of
the 	'New 	Rome' 	- centre 	of the 	'Mediterranean 	Dream'
- 	would 	glisten 	with 	automobiles 	alongside 	the 	ruins
and 	combine 	the 	efficiency 	and 	speed 	of 	a 	modern
metropolis 	with 	ancient 	imperial 	memories 	(Marinetti
the 	Futurist 	was 	a 	friend 	of the 	Duce).
Mussolini 	himself 	soon 	realized 	the 	power 	of
traditional 	cultural 	images 	in 	his 	projection 	of a 	new
nationalist 	spirit. 	He 	affected 	a 	pedigree 	in 	Roman
history 	and 	staged 	elaborate 	political 	events 	in 	the
Campidoglio 	and 	the 	Palazzo 	Venezia. 	He 	identified
with 	Augustus 	(although 	he 	ended 	up 	hanging 	from 	a
lamppost 	before 	he 	could 	leave 	the 	'Third 	Rome' 	a 	city
of 	marble). 	In 	line 	with 	this 	search 	for 	parallels 	in
antiquity, 	a 	design 	was 	drawn 	up 	in 	the 	thirties 	for 	the
Piazza 	Augusteo 	by 	V. 	Ballio-Morpugo 	next 	to 	the
Tiber 	(fig. 	16.10). 	The 	Ara 	Pacis 	was 	enclosed 	in 	a
glazed 	building opposite 	the 	Mausoleum 	of 	Augustus
and juxtaposed 	with 	new stripped 	Classical 	buildings of
indescribable 	dullness 	bearing 	an 	iconography 	con-
cerning 	the 	fruits 	of a 	peaceful 	existence 	brought 	by
Fascism. 	The 	imagery 	suggested 	the 	basis 	in 	Roman
tradition 	of a 	synthesis 	of peasant 	and 	soldierly 	virtues.
It 	was 	a 	trumped-up 	mythology 	which 	suffered 	all 	the
more 	from 	the 	lack 	of aesthetic 	conviction 	with 	which
it 	was 	expressed.
Modern 	architecture 	took hold 	later 	in 	Italy 	than 	in
Germany. 	Holland, 	and 	France, 	and 	encountered 	less
hostility 	from 	State 	taste 	than 	it 	did 	in 	Nazi 	Germany.
In 	part 	this 	was 	due 	to 	the 	fact 	that 	Fascism 	was
already 	well 	established 	when 	the 	Italian 	modern
movement 	got 	under 	way, 	and 	so 	there 	was 	no
automatic 	identification 	with 	a 	previous, 	suspect
Socialist 	ideology 	as 	was 	the 	case 	in 	Germany. 	Then 	it
is 	one 	of 	the 	intriguing 	features 	of 	the 	modern
movement 	in 	Italy 	that 	it 	minimized 	'functionalist' 	and
'machine-age' 	polemics, 	playing up instead 	an 	abstract
acstheticism 	deliberately 	evocative 	of Classical 	preced-
!j|'««Hllllli
i 	1 	1 	1 	II
'"IIB^lllllll
iiiii
ents. 	This 	was 	constantly 	in 	danger 	of 	degenerating
into 	a 	suave 	formalism 	(fig. 	16.8). 	or. 	still 	worse, 	a
stripped 	monumentality 	in 	which 	vast 	areas 	of
travertine, 	with 	the 	consistency 	of linoleum, 	conjured
up 	an 	instant 	skin-deep 	traditionalism. 	At 	its 	best, 	the
consciousness 	of history 	opened 	up 	new 	dimensions 	of
meaning 	for 	the 	modern 	tradition 	in 	which 	the
concrete 	frame 	(the 	piloti. 	the 	stripped 	support, 	the
plain 	opening) 	and 	elemental 	characteristics 	of 	the
Classical system 	were 	mutually 	reinforcing 	at a 	deeper.
more 	abstract 	level. 	It 	may 	not 	have 	been 	mere
diplomacy, 	then, 	when 	the 	'Gruppo 	7' 	(a 	group 	with
modern 	leanings 	who 	launched 	themselves 	in 	1926)
claimed 	that 	they 	did 	not 	advocate 	a 	break 	with
tradition
;
16.8 	((op) 	M. 	Piacentini
and 	associates.
University of Rome.
Senate 	building. 	193s.
i6.q 	G. 	Matte Trucco.
Fiat 	factory, 	Turin.
192^

-- 220 of 420 --

Totalitarian 	Critiques 	ofthe 	Modem 	Movement 	219
16.10 	V. 	Ballio-
Morpugo. 	clearance
around 	the 	Mausoleum
of Augustus, 	Rome,
1937-
In 	Italy 	there 	is 	such 	a 	pronounced 	Classical
substratum, 	and 	the 	spirit 	of tradition 	- 	not 	the
forms 	it 	takes, 	which 	is 	something 	quite 	different 	-
is 	so 	deep 	that, 	obviously 	and 	almost 	mechanically,
the 	new 	architecture 	could 	not 	fail 	to 	retain 	a
typical 	national 	character.
The 	members 	of the 	group 	were 	L. 	Figini, 	G. 	Frette, 	S.
Larco, 	G. 	Pollini, 	C.E. 	Rava, 	G. 	Terragni, 	and 	U,
Castagnola 	(the 	last 	being 	later 	replaced 	by 	A. 	Libera);
they 	declared 	their 	intention 	of founding 	an 	'Architet-
tura 	Razionale'.
The 	new 	architecture 	. 	. 	. 	must 	be 	the 	result 	of a
close 	adherence 	to 	logic 	and 	rationality 	. 	. 	. 	We 	do
not 	claim 	to 	create 	a 	stijle. 	but 	from 	the 	constant
application 	of rationality, 	the 	perfect
correspondence 	of the 	building 	to 	its 	aims 	. 	. 	. 	style
must 	inevitably 	result.
At 	an 	exhibition 	in 	1928 	the 	Group 	nonetheless
showed 	their 	adherence 	to 	aspects 	of 	pre-existing
modern 	forms 	from 	abroad. 	Figini 	and 	PoUini's 	scheme
for 	a 	'Casa 	di 	Dopolavoro' 	(a 	workers' 	club) 	had
notable 	Constructivist 	affinities, 	while 	Terragni's
Officino 	produzione 	di 	Gaz' 	(Gas 	Company 	Headquar-
ters) 	was 	an 	elegant 	fusion 	of 	Purism 	and 	industrial
forms. 	Even 	though 	Sant' 	Hlia's 	'Citta 	Nuova' 	sketches
of 	1912-14 	and 	such 	remarkable 	industrial 	buildings
as G. 	Matte 	Trucco's 	Fiat 	Factory 	of 	1923 	with 	its 	test
track 	on 	the 	roof preceded 	the 	1928 	exhibition, 	it 	was
not 	until 	after 	this 	date 	that 	it 	was 	possible 	to 	speak 	of
anything 	like 	a 	consolidated 	modern 	movement 	in
Italy 	(tig. 	1 	6.9). 	Not 	surprisingly 	it 	was 	in 	the 	northern
cities 	- 	Milan 	and 	Turin 	in 	particular 	that 	modern
architecture 	took 	root, 	for 	here 	a 	technocratic
patronage 	sensed some reflection 	of its own 	aspirations
in 	the 	new 	forms. 	Figini 	and 	PoUini's 	'Casa 	di
Klettricita' 	of 	1930 	at 	Monza 	is 	an 	excellent 	example 	of
the 	tasteful, 	almost 	over-elegant 	modernism 	of 	this
period; 	meanwhile 	Figini's 	own 	house 	of 	1934 	was 	a
taut 	adaptation 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	vocabulary.
Michelucci's 	design 	for 	Florence 	railway 	station
(1954-f'' 	was 	evidence 	of 	the 	intrusion 	of 	modern
architecture 	into the 	tield 	of major 	public 	commissions,
while 	between 	1934 	and 	1937 	the 	enlightened
patronage 	of 	Adriano 	Olivetti 	(director 	of the 	business
machines 	company) 	allowed 	the 	creation 	of 	an 	entire
centre 	at 	Ivrca 	in 	which 	industrial 	buildings, 	products
and 	housing 	were 	conceived 	as 	an 	integrated 	form.
In 	retrospect 	the 	outstanding 	architectural 	figure 	of
the 	thirties 	in 	Italy 	was 	Giuseppe 	Terragni. 	Born 	in

-- 221 of 420 --

220 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
,,.jlp= 	J
"III
I 	i
ip'nia
1904. 	he 	soon 	outstripped 	the 	academicism 	of 	his
education 	and 	by 	the 	mid-twenties 	was 	aware 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	then 	crystallizing 	in 	Northern
Europe. 	Terragni 	admired 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	particular.
His 	understanding 	of the 	French/Swiss 	architect, 	who
was 	a 	generation 	older 	than 	himself, 	went 	far 	deeper
than 	that of most 	Italian 	modernists 	who 	imbibed 	the
technological 	imagery 	and 	the 	purity 	of form, 	but 	did
not 	always 	grasp 	the 	deeper 	principles 	of organization
and 	the 	links 	with 	tradition. 	Terragni 	was 	a 	tradition-
alist 	in 	about 	the 	same 	way 	Le 	Corbusier 	was: 	he
believed 	that 	'essential' 	architectural 	values 	could 	be
rethought, 	and 	successfully 	incorporated 	into 	a
modern 	mode 	of expression. 	More 	precisely 	than 	that.
Terragni 	was 	at 	heart 	a 	Classicist 	and 	was 	able 	to
perceive 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	buildings 	and 	writings
qualities 	of 	proportion, 	abstraction, 	and 	urbane
reference 	that 	the 	cruder 	Italian 	modernists 	missed.
This 	combination 	of 	aptitudes 	and 	circumstances
made 	Terragni 	uniquely 	endowed 	to 	forge 	a 	bond
between 	the 	progressivist 	and 	traditionalist 	aspects 	of
Fascist 	mythology, 	and 	to 	give 	to 	these 	patterns 	of
1 6. 1 1 	(above) 	Giuseppe
Terragni. 	Casadel
Fascio. 	Como. 	1934.
16. i2(/f/0 	Giuseppe
Terragni. 	Casa 	del
Fascio. 	Coma, 	1934.
plan.
^-,>;:pasypv^^^^^^-

-- 222 of 420 --

Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern 	Movement 	221
I ft. 1 	3 	C'jiuseppe
Terragni, 	Casa 	del
Fascio. 	Como. 	1934,
detail 	of frame 	at 	top of
building.
thought 	and 	feeling 	a form. 	This 	is 	already 	evident 	in
the 	Casa 	del 	Fascio 	(the 	local 	headquarters 	of 	the
Fascist 	party) 	of 	1934 	in 	Como 	(fig. 	16.11) 	which
stands 	across 	from 	the 	traditional 	urban 	institutions
facing 	on 	to a 	piazza. 	The 	fai^ade 	is 	a 	taut 	linear 	design,
in 	which 	architectural 	effect 	is 	created 	by 	crisp
contrasts 	of thin 	planes 	and 	voids. 	Frame 	and 	walls 	are
juxtaposed 	in 	a 	manner 	which 	suggests 	that 	the
architect 	has 	rigorously 	redefined 	the 	fundamental
meanings 	of 	such 	perennial 	elements 	as 	'support',
'opening' 	or 	'enclosure'. 	However, 	the 	iconography 	of
this 	frame 	facade, 	with 	its 	subtle 	net 	of 	layered 	space,
has 	less 	to 	do 	with 	the 	technological 	'objectivity' 	of
much 	architecture 	of 	the 	twenties, 	than 	it 	has 	to 	do
with 	a 	sort 	of abstracted, 	Latin 	mode 	(fig. 	16.13). 	This
is 	a 	Classical 	fai^ade 	with 	a 	portico 	rethought 	to 	give 	a
suitably 	open 	image 	to 	a 	modem 	institution 	in 	an
urban 	setting. 	Terragni 	wrote 	of his 	own 	building:
Here 	is 	the 	Mussolinian 	concept 	that 	Fascism 	is 	a
glass 	house 	into 	which 	everyone 	can 	peer 	giving
rise 	to 	the 	architectural 	interpretation 	that 	is 	the
complement 	of that 	metaphor: 	no 	encumbrance,
no 	barrier, 	no 	obstacle, 	between 	the 	political
hierarchy 	and 	the 	people.
.
The 	vital 	and 	creative 	tension 	between 	the 	modern
and 	the 	Classical 	extends 	from 	the 	overall 	arrange-
ment 	of the 	plan 	(fig. 	16.12I 	to 	the 	image 	of the 	fa(;ade.
to 	the 	choice 	of 	materials 	and 	to 	the 	character 	of
proportions 	(square 	in 	plan 	with 	the 	facade 	height
equal 	to 	half 	one 	side). 	The 	inner 	atrium, 	a 	space 	for
public assembly 	linked easily 	with 	the 	piazza 	outside, 	is
disposed 	in 	a 	manner which 	loosely recalls 	the cortile of
a 	cinquecento palazzo. 	while 	the 	building 	is 	clothed 	in 	a
finely 	cut 	marble 	which 	avoids 	mechanistic 	reference
and 	suggests 	an 	honorific 	character, 	yet 	is 	detailed 	in
such 	a 	way 	that 	the 	banal 	massiveness 	of 	so 	much
Fascist 	neo-classicism 	is 	avoided. 	The 	Casa 	del 	Fascio.
the 	contemporary 	High 	Point 	I 	flats 	in 	London 	by
Lubetkin. 	and 	Aalto's 	near 	contemporary 	Sanatorium
at 	Paimio 	were 	clear 	evidence 	of the 	way 	an 	authentic
modern 	tradition 	was 	forming 	up 	in 	the 	early 	thirties,
in 	which 	seminal 	ideas 	of the 	modern 	movement 	were
being 	blended 	with 	new 	impulses 	and 	metaphors. 	The
same 	period, 	of 	course, 	witnessed 	the 	rapid 	devalua-
tion 	of white 	forms 	and 	flat roofs 	into mannered cliches
and 	banal 	formulae. 	Terragni's 	own 	creative 	en-
deavours 	were 	nourished 	increasingly 	by 	intellectual
ruminations 	on 	history 	and 	on 	the 	beginnings 	of
architecture 	in 	archetypical 	institutions. 	The 	ever
more 	complex 	levels 	of 	his 	imagery 	found 	an 	outlet
eventually 	in 	a 	curious 	scheme, 	never 	built, 	for 	a
monument 	to 	Dante, 	to 	stand 	in 	the 	Roman 	Forum,
and 	to 	be 	an 	emblem 	of 	the 	continuity 	of 	Italianate
culture, 	the unity 	of the 	new 	empire, 	and 	its 	parallels
with 	earlier 	ones.
The 	'Danteum' 	(as 	it 	was 	to 	be 	called) 	was 	to 	include
a 	Dante 	study 	centre 	and 	was 	to 	stand 	on 	a 	site 	next 	to
the 	Basilica 	ofMaxentius 	(fig. 	1 6.1 	5). 	The 	scheme 	was
commissioned 	in 	1938 	by 	Rino 	Valdameri, 	Director 	of
the 	Brera 	in 	Milan, 	and 	an 	early 	version 	was 	approved
by 	Mussolini, 	but 	both 	the 	patron 	and 	the 	architect
were killed 	in the war. 	In essence the scheme was a sort
of 	analogue 	to 	Dante's 	Divine 	Comedy 	and 	was
arranged 	around 	an 	ascending 	processional 	route
which 	linked 	rectangular 	compartments 	of 	different
mood 	and 	articulation, 	representing 	the 	inferno,
purgatory, 	and 	paradise 	(fig. 	16,14), 	the 	last 	being 	a
space 	open 	to 	the 	sky 	with 	a 	grid of glass 	columns 	in 	it.
The 	basic 	formal 	elements 	were 	walls 	and 	cylindrical
columns 	disposed 	in 	proportional 	relationships 	keyed
into 	both 	the 	dolden 	Section, 	the 	dimensions 	of 	the
nearby 	Basilica 	ofMaxentius, 	and 	an 	abstruse 	numer-
ological 	symbolism 	of 	Terragni's 	own, 	which 	he
befieved to be consonant with 	Dante's thought. 	But the
grids 	and 	hypostyles 	of 	columns 	were 	aUied 	to 	the
architect's 	notions 	of the 	beginnings 	of architecture 	as
well, 	and 	incorporated 	what 	he 	felt 	to 	be 	archetypical
forms 	(e.g.. 	cylinders, 	rectangles), 	archetypical 	re-
lationships 	(e.g., 	rows, 	grids), 	basic 	types 	(e.g.. 	free-
standing 	columns, 	porticoes, 	hypostyles). 	and 	funda-
mental 	institutional 	types 	(e.g.. 	temple, 	palace).
Indeed, 	the 	building 	blended 	together, 	subtly 	and
beautifully, 	sources 	derived 	from 	Egyptian 	temple
design 	with 	the 	vocabulary 	of 	modern 	architecture,
with the abstraction of modern 	painting, 	with 	the basic
elements 	of 	the 	neighbouring 	Roman 	buildings. 	The
Danteum 	was 	intended 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	microcosm 	of 	the
Duce's 	empire, 	its 	triumph, 	its 	cultural 	achievement,
and 	its 	divine sanction, 	which 	supposedly 	linked 	the
era 	of Fascism 	with 	other 	great 	eras 	in 	Italy's 	history.

-- 223 of 420 --

222 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
I f>. 1 4 	( left ) 	Giuseppe
Terragni. 	Danteum.
1958. 	perspective of
Paradiso'.
ifi.is 	l/'flou'l 	Giuseppe
Terragni. 	Danteum
project, 	for Roman
Forum. 	1938.
li' 	A 	IV 	T 	I? 	f 	''U
This 	was 	a 	case, 	clearly, 	where 	modern 	devices 	of
abstraction 	were 	employed 	not 	to 	escape 	the 	past,
but 	to 	enter 	it 	more 	fully 	on 	a 	number 	of 	levels
simultaneously.
Thus, 	despite 	the 	fact 	that 	it 	was 	never 	built, 	the
Danteum 	project 	must 	rank 	as 	one 	of 	the 	most 	subtle
and 	complex 	ideas 	to 	be 	conceived 	within 	the 	tradition
of 	the 	modern 	movement. 	Moreover, 	its 	intellectual
strategy 	was 	a 	demonstration 	of 	one 	possible 	way 	of
fusing the 	ancient 	and 	the 	modern 	without 	ending 	in 	a
betrayal 	of 	both. 	After 	inspecting 	Terragni's 	work,
especially 	his 	extraordinary 	scheme 	for 	the 	Palazzo
della 	Civilta 	Italiana. 	in 	which 	frame 	and 	screen
became 	beautiful 	surrogates 	for 	Classical 	rhetorical
elements, 	one 	is 	left 	guessing 	whether 	this 	architect,
had 	he 	been 	a 	German, 	would 	have 	surmounted 	the
strictures 	of ideological 	prejudice 	and 	created 	a similar
rich 	mix 	of 	meanings 	under 	Nazi 	patronage. 	By
contrast. 	Speer's 	architecture 	was 	banal 	and 	obvious:
but 	was 	this 	due 	to 	its 	trumped-up 	content 	or 	to 	the
artist's 	lesser 	talents.' 	One 	thing 	is 	clear; 	the 	totali-
tarian 	critiques 	of 	modern 	architecture 	bit 	deep 	and
revealed 	problems 	and 	rifts 	between 	avant-garde
culture 	and 	some 	of 	the 	traditional, 	preservationist.
wm%
and 	institutional 	functions 	of architecture. 	In 	turn, 	the
repression 	of 	the 	modern 	movement 	at 	such 	an 	early
stage of its development 	in 	Germany 	forced 	some of the
protagonists 	to 	emigrate 	and 	take 	their 	forms 	with
them 	to 	foreign 	soils.

-- 224 of 420 --

1 	7. 	The 	Spread 	of 	Modern 	Architecture 	to
England 	and 	Scandinavia
. 	. 	. 	one 	might 	see 	the 	history 	of architecture 	in 	our 	century 	as a 	flowing
stream, 	at 	tirst 	slow 	moving, 	broad 	and 	tree, 	and 	varied 	by 	many 	eddies 	and
side 	currents 	before 	i 	920. 	but 	then 	confined 	in 	the 	twenties 	to 	a 	narrower
channel, 	so 	that 	for 	a 	while 	it 	rushed 	forward 	at 	almost 	revolutionary 	speed.
By 	the 	early 	thirties 	the 	stream 	was 	certainly 	beginning 	to 	widen 	and
meander 	again.
H. 	R.Hitchcock, 	1965
It 	is 	perhaps 	in 	the 	nature of major creative 	revolutions
that 	the 	period 	of peak 	creation 	be 	followed 	by 	a 	phase
in 	which 	the 	implications 	of 	recent 	innovations 	are
gradually 	absorbed 	and 	explored. 	This 	had 	already
begun 	to 	happen 	to 	the 	modern 	movement 	in 	the
thirties, 	when 	a 	'second 	generation' 	of 	modern
architects 	- 	men 	like 	Terragni, 	Aalto, 	and 	Lubetkin 	-
began to make 	their impact. 	They were all 	born close to
the turn 	of the century 	and so 	were 	old 	enough 	to 	have
been 	brought 	up 	in 	the 	twilight 	of 	fin-de-siede
tendencies, 	yet 	young 	enough 	to 	have 	experienced 	the
promise 	of 	the 	new 	architecture 	with 	full 	force. 	Like
any 	immediate 	inheritors of 	a 	new 	faith 	they 	had 	the
problem 	of 	absorbing 	and 	transforming 	novel 	ideas
without 	resorting 	to 	slavish 	imitation 	or 	skin-deep
dogmatism. 	Problems 	of 	transmission 	were 	com-
plicated 	in 	the 	thirties 	by 	the 	political 	climate 	and 	the
emigration 	of 	forms 	to 	foreign 	soils. 	Moreover, 	the
'masters' 	were 	not 	standing 	idle 	and 	a 	young 	architect
might 	be 	on 	the 	point 	of 	mastering 	certain 	lessons 	of
the 	Villa 	Savoye 	only 	to 	be 	confronted 	by 	the 	Petite
Maison 	de 	Weekend 	or 	the 	invention 	of the 	hrise-soleil.
With 	this 	tendency 	towards 	a 	slight 	time-lag, 	it 	is
scarcely 	surprising 	that 	many 	of 	the 	key 	break-
throughs 	in 	the 	works 	of 	Wright, 	Aalto, 	and 	Le
Corbusier 	of 	the 	thirties 	should 	have 	waited 	for 	the
post-war 	years 	to 	exert 	their 	broader 	influence.
While 	modern 	architecture 	was 	reaching 	its 	peak 	in
the 	late 	twenties 	in 	France. 	Germany. 	Holland, 	and
Russia, 	it 	was 	exerting 	only 	the 	slightest 	influence 	in
Scandinavia 	and 	England. 	But 	by 	the 	mid-thirties 	the
situation 	had 	almost 	reversed, 	and 	these 	were 	among
the most 	active centres 	of modern 	experimentation 	left.
In 	part 	this 	phenomenon 	was 	traceable 	to 	the 	influx 	of
immigrants 	from 	countries 	where 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	had 	been repressed : 	equally 	it was due to 	happy
coincidences 	of 	talent, 	and 	to 	national 	cultural
situations 	which 	virtually 	demanded 	a 	rejection 	of
tired 	forms 	and 	an 	inoculation 	of new 	creative 	energy.
However, 	the 	predisposing 	causes 	in 	England 	and
Scandinavia 	contrasted 	sharply.
England, 	of 	course, 	had 	played 	a 	major 	role 	in
fostering 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	values 	at 	the 	turn 	of 	the
century. 	W. 	R. 	Lethaby 	and 	his 	faction 	might 	almost
have 	brought 	a 	vital 	English 	architecture 	to 	full 	flower
had 	their 	views 	not 	gone 	out 	of fashion 	to 	be 	replaced
by 	a 	scholarly 	Beaux-Arts 	revival 	supported, 	on 	the
whole, 	by 	architectural 	mediocrities. 	Even 	Mackintosh
had 	been 	better 	understood 	in 	Vienna 	than 	in 	London.
In 	England 	a 	cluster 	of 	predisposing 	factors, 	which
seem 	in 	retrospect 	to 	have 	been 	crucial 	in 	channelling
the 	direction 	of the 	new 	architecture 	on 	the 	continent,
was 	missing. 	Apart 	from 	the 	short-lived 	impact 	of
Wyndham 	Lewis's 	Vorticism. 	there 	was 	no 	Cubist
revolution 	in 	the 	arts. 	The 	activities 	of 	the 	Design 	and
Industries 	Association 	were 	scarcely 	the 	equivalent 	of
the 	idealistic 	obsession 	with 	injecting 	'good 	form' 	into
industrial 	products 	of the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund. 	There
was 	a 	lack 	of 	progressive 	clientele 	and 	talent: 	and 	a
general 	complacency 	after 	wartime 	victory 	made
fantasies 	of a 	'brave 	new 	world' 	or 	a 	mechanized 	social
Utopia 	seem 	neither 	relevant 	nor 	necessary. 	The
intellectual 	radicals 	of 	the 	time 	had 	an 	almost
pathological 	distaste 	for 	mechanization: 	English

-- 225 of 420 --

y-^^

-- 226 of 420 --

TheSpreadof Modern 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	• 	225
1 7.
1
ikft) 	Berthiold
Lubetiiin 	and 	Tecton,
Higii 	Point 	I. 	Higiigate.
London, 	1933-5. view
from 	the garden.
17.2 	{above) 	Berthold
Lubetliin 	and 	Tecton.
Penguin 	Pool. 	London
Zoo. 	1933.
17.3 	Berthold 	Lubetkin
and Tecton. 	High 	Point
I. 	Highgate. 	London.
193 	3-S. 	plan 	of ground
floor.
reformers 	wcic 	either 	pragmatic, 	or 	medievalizing. 	or
concerned 	with 	more 	fundamental 	ills 	than 	bad
architecture 	- 	if 	they 	were 	not 	of the 	precious 	'art 	for
art's 	sake' 	variety. 	Nothing 	could 	have 	been 	further
from 	the 	English 	situation 	and 	temper 	than 	the
abstract 	social 	ideology 	of De 	Stijl 	or 	the 	Bauhaus, 	the
machine 	fetishism of Futurism, 	or 	the 	total 	solutions 	of
Le 	Corbusier's 	Ville 	Contemporaine.
The 	period 	between 	19 10 	and 	1930 	in 	England 	has
been 	characterized 	variously 	as 	the 	'Regency 	revival',
'the 	playboy 	era', 	or 	the 	phase 	of 'ancestor 	worship' 	in
design. 	Standing 	clear of the 	prevalent 	mediocrity 	was
of 	course 	Lutyens. 	but 	he, 	for 	all 	his 	unique 	and
uncategorizable 	quality, 	stood 	at 	the 	end 	of a 	tradition
rather 	than 	at 	the 	beginning 	of a 	new 	one. 	There 	were
a 	few 	'modern' 	experiments 	in 	the 	late 	twenties, 	like
Behrens's 	design 	for 	a 	house 	for 	J. 	Basset-Lowke 	of
1926 	at 	Northampton 	and 	Tait's 	designs 	for 	the
Crittall 	window 	manufacturers' 	workers' 	housing 	at
Silver 	End. 	Essex, 	of 	1927; 	but 	it 	was 	typical 	of 	the
situation 	as 	a 	whole 	that 	it 	should 	have 	been 	the
'watered-down' 	versions 	of modern 	architecture - 	e.g..
those 	of 	Dudok 	and 	Mallet-Stevens 	- 	which 	received
attention 	in 	England. 	It 	was 	not 	until 	1929 	with 	the
Crawfords 	Advertising 	building 	in 	London 	by 	Etchells
{translator 	into 	English 	of 	Vers 	line 	architecture) 	and
the 	white 	cubic 	concrete 	forms 	of 	Amyas 	Connell's
house 	for 	Ashmole. 	at 	Amersham 	( 	1930) 	that 	a 	more
rigorous 	modernism 	was 	made 	manifest. 	Joseph
Emberton's 	Royal 	Corinthian 	Yacht 	Club 	of 	1931,
meanwhile, 	was 	clear 	evidence 	that 	the 	new 	archi-
tecture 	was 	at 	least 	being 	understood 	for 	its 	structural
principles. 	This 	building 	was 	even 	included 	in 	Hitch-
cock 	and 	Johnson's 	International 	Style 	of the following
year.
The 	outstanding 	architect 	of the 	thirties in 	England
was 	undoubtedly 	Berthold 	Lubetkin. 	Born 	in 	1901 	in
the 	Caucasus 	in 	Russia, 	he 	had 	experienced 	the
architectural 	debates 	following the 	Soviet 	Revolution
first-hand, 	had 	studied 	in 	Paris 	at 	the 	Atelier 	Perret.
where 	he 	had 	been 	initiated 	into 	the 	secrets 	of
reinforced-concrete 	construction, 	and 	had 	absorbed
the 	principles 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	'five 	points 	of a 	new
architecture'. 	The 	flats 	designed 	by 	Lubetkin 	and 	R.
Ginsberg 	at 	25 	Avenue 	de 	Versailles 	in 	1927 	were 	a
suave 	reinterpretation 	of 	Maison 	Cook, 	mated 	to
certain 	ideas 	derived 	from 	the 	Soviet 	context, 	Lubetkin
maintained 	contacts 	with 	Russia 	in 	this 	period,
designed 	the 	Soviet 	Pavilion 	for 	Strasbourg 	in 	1929.
and 	kept 	a 	firm 	grasp 	on 	the 	ideological 	issues 	then
being 	hammered 	out 	in 	his 	homeland.
In 	1930 	Lubetkin 	went 	to 	England 	and 	gathered
about 	him 	six 	young 	Englishmen: 	the 	group 	was
christened 	'Tecton'. 	Among 	their earliest 	commissions
were 	two 	for 	London 	Zoo. 	the 	Gorilla 	House and 	the
Penguin 	Pool 	(fig. 	I 	7.2). 	The 	latter 	was 	designed 	with
the aid 	of Ove 	Arup 	the engineer, 	as a shallow 	oval 	pool
in 	reinforced 	concrete 	with 	two 	curved 	ramps 	interlac-
ing 	at 	its 	centre 	on 	which 	the 	birds 	could 	parade 	or
from 	which 	they 	could 	dive 	into 	the water. 	The 	ramps
were 	packed 	with 	steel 	reinforcing 	and 	were 	a
structural 	tour 	de 	force 	for 	the 	time, 	but 	it 	was 	the
imagery and the taut 	abstraction which were so 	new 	in
the 	English 	context. 	The 	penguin 	pool 	recalls 	some 	of
Meyerhold's 	constructivist 	stage-sets 	or 	Gabo's 	scien-
tific 	sculptures 	from 	the 	twenties, 	and 	was 	further
evidence 	of 	Lubetkin's 	indebtedness 	to 	the 	formal
inventions 	of the 	previous 	decade 	in 	Russia.
Lubetkin 	and 	Tecton's 	next 	major 	work 	was 	High
Point 	I 	flats. 	Highgate 	(1933-5), 	designed 	for 	a 	site
surrounded 	by 	greenery 	with 	long 	views south 	over
the whole 	of London, 	The flats 	were packed 	into a 	cross
of 	Lorraine 	plan 	so 	as 	to 	maximize 	views, 	cross-
ventilation, 	and 	contact 	with 	the 	outside 	(fig. 	I 	7. 	1 	1.
The 	main 	eight-storey 	body 	of 	the 	building 	was 	lifted
up 	on 	pilotis 	and 	surmounted 	by 	a 	public 	roof terrace.
The 	lower 	storey 	was 	also 	communal, 	containing

-- 227 of 420 --

226 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
lobby, 	winter 	garden, 	main 	hall, 	access 	to 	the 	lifts, 	a
tea-room, 	and 	a 	fantastic 	curved 	ramp 	descending 	to
the 	garden 	at 	the 	rear 	- 	a 	vaguely 	Baroque 	flourish.
This 	lower 	zone 	of 	the 	building 	was 	expressed 	as
curved 	free-plan 	elements 	swinging 	out 	and 	back 	from
the 	prevalent 	rectangular 	order 	of the 	grid 	of supports
and 	the 	axial 	discipline 	of 	the 	main 	forms 	(fig. 	i 	7.3).
The 	vocabulary 	was. 	once 	again, 	an 	intelligent
adaptation 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	white 	forms 	of 	the
twenties 	and 	of the 	system 	of 	the 	'five 	points 	of a 	new
architecture'. 	In 	this 	case, 	though, 	the 	walls 	were
weight-bearing, 	and 	the 	rooms 	cellular 	and 	compact.
More 	than 	that. 	High 	Point 	I 	was 	among 	the 	earliest
demonstrations 	of 	the 	S5mthesis 	of 	architecture 	and
urbanistic 	doctrine, 	derived 	from 	both 	Le 	Corbusier
and 	Soviet 	collective 	housing 	of 	the 	twenties. 	Le
Corbusier 	himself 	visited 	the 	building 	and 	(uncharac-
teristically) 	praised 	it 	as 	one 	of the 	first 	'vertical 	garden
cities 	of the 	future'. 	A 	tower 	standing 	in 	a 	green 	park,
its 	white 	wings 	spread 	out. 	its 	details 	tight 	and 	clear.
High 	Point 	I 	became 	a 	rallying 	point 	of 	the 	emergent
English 	modern 	movement, 	and 	a 	demonstration 	of
what 	could 	be 	done when 	rigorous 	functional 	analysis,
formal 	lyricism, 	and 	a 	social 	vision 	were 	synthesized.
Of course 	the 	coUectivist 	polemic 	of the 	building 	was 	a
little 	uneasy 	in 	its 	upper-middle-class 	context, 	but 	the
rhetoric 	was 	nonetheless 	clear: 	these 	were 	principles
which 	might 	later be 	applied 	to 	collective 	housing 	on 	a
broader 	scale.
It 	is 	when 	one 	probes 	the 	abstraction 	of High 	Point 	I
further 	that 	one 	appreciates 	the 	complexity 	of 	its
sources. 	The 	conception 	owes 	much 	to 	those 	'social
condensers' 	designed 	in 	Russia 	only 	five 	years 	before:
the 	radio 	mast 	at 	High 	Point 	was 	even 	detailed 	as 	a 	sort
of 	Constructivist. 	high-tension 	sculpture. 	Perhaps 	the
aeroplane 	imagery 	of the 	plan 	incorporates 	something
of the 	notion 	of a 	social 	engine 	of the 	future. 	But 	along
with 	those 	references from 	the machine-age imagery of
the 	twenties, 	there 	was 	a 	Classical 	quality 	as 	well. 	The
distinction 	of 'areas 	served' 	and 	'circulation' 	by 	means
of 	different 	geometries 	recalls 	the 	principles 	of 	Beaux-
Arts 	planning. 	Indeed 	the 	plan 	as a 	whole 	is 	a 	masterly
exercise 	in 	the 	articulation 	of 	movement 	through 	a
sequence 	of 	ceremonial 	spaces 	and 	of 	the 	control 	of
primary 	and 	secondary 	axes 	that 	will 	stand 	com-
parison 	with 	the 	plan 	of Charles 	Garnier's 	Paris 	Opera
(1861-74I. 	Once 	again, 	we 	have 	to 	do 	with 	a 	fusion
of 	lessons 	learned 	from 	various 	earlier 	periods 	in
history.
By 	1935, 	when 	High 	Point 	I 	was 	completed, 	a
number 	of 	other 	modern 	buildings 	had 	also 	been
erected 	in 	England. 	Lawn 	Road 	flats 	Hampstead
( 1 9 	34) 	by 	Wells 	Coates 	- 	a 	Canadian 	born 	in 	Tokyo 	-
was 	another 	collective 	statement 	(fig. 	17.4). 	The
individual 	flats 	were 	packed 	like 	the 	cabins 	on 	a 	ship
jw i"^^

-- 228 of 420 --

The 	Spread 	of Modern 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	• 	227
17.4 	((op) 	Wells Coates.
'Isokon' 	flats 	at 	Lawn
Road. 	Hampstead.
London. 	I4?4.
17.5 	[centre) 	Erich
Mendelsohn 	and 	Serge
Chermayell'. 	Bexhill
Pavilion, 	Sussex, 	1934.
ij.h 	[below] 	Amyas
Connell, 	Colin 	Lucas,
Basil 	Ward, 	house 	at
Frognal, 	Hampstead,
London. 	1938.
into 	a 	simple 	oblong 	form 	served 	by 	cantilevered
balconies. 	The 	memories 	of 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	perhaps
Mendelsohn 	are 	evident 	(especially 	in 	the 	sketches
with 	their 	trncees 	reciuhiteurs 	and 	their 	looming,
dynamic 	perspectives), 	yet 	the 	building 	has 	an
authenticity 	of 	its 	own. 	In 	the 	English 	context 	Lawn
Road was an 	emblem 	of a new 	way 	of life. 	Significantly,
many 	of 	its 	first 	inmates 	were 	cosmopolitan 	English
intellectuals 	of leftist 	opinion 	or 	such 	immigrants 	from
the 	continent 	as 	Mondrian, 	Gropius 	and 	Breuer.
Gropius 	set 	up 	a 	partnership 	with 	Maxwell 	Fry, 	Breuer
with 	F. 	R. 	S. 	Yorkc. 	but 	it 	would 	be 	wrong 	to 	see 	their
influence 	as 	anything 	other 	than 	an 	encouragement
for 	a 	movement 	which 	had 	its 	own 	momentum.
Erich 	Mendelsohn 	also arrived 	in 	England 	in 	1 9 	^4 	to
escape 	Nazi 	persecution, 	and. 	in 	partnership 	with
Serge 	ChermayelT. 	immediately 	won 	the 	competition
for the 	De 	La 	VVarr seaside 	pavilion 	at 	Bexhill 	in 	Sussex
(fig. 	17.5). 	This 	was 	to 	be 	a 	place 	for 	public
entertainment 	of 	the 	usual 	south 	coast 	resort 	type,
with 	a 	theatre/cinema, 	bars, 	a 	cafeteria, 	some 	offices, 	a
bandstand, 	and 	a 	swimming 	pool 	(later 	abandoned).
The 	site 	was 	on 	the 	edge 	of 	the 	English 	Channel 	with
south 	exposure 	and 	long 	views. 	The 	scheme 	was 	close,
programmatically, 	to 	some 	of 	the 	buildings 	Men-
delsohn 	had 	designed 	in 	Berlin 	in 	the 	twenties, 	such 	as
cinemas, 	bars 	and 	canteens; 	he 	therefore 	felt 	free 	to
experiment 	formally, 	and 	his 	early 	sketches 	show 	a
sort 	of looming 	dynamic 	structure, 	fully 	fenestrated 	to
give 	views 	over 	the 	sea. 	Even 	the 	rectilinear 	final
building 	has 	the quality of dynamism 	of the 	First 	World
War 	sketches 	(fig. 	9.5), 	a 	quality 	which 	upset
'functionalist' 	prigs 	who 	detected 	what 	they 	called
'formalism'.
Although 	the 	overall 	conception 	came 	about 	in
organic, 	freely 	expressive 	sketches, 	the 	layout 	of 	the
plan 	shows 	careful 	logic. 	The 	theatre/cinema 	was
treated 	as 	a 	major 	entity 	and 	allowed 	to 	take 	up 	the
whole west 	end 	of the 	building : 	its 	axial symmetry, 	and
the 	fact 	that 	it 	scarcely 	needed 	daylight 	made 	its
exterior 	treatment 	as 	a 	closed, 	rectangular 	box
appropriate. 	The 	bar. 	restaurant 	and 	cafeteria 	funct-
ions 	were 	grouped 	to 	the 	other 	end 	of the 	building 	on 	a
long 	strip 	and 	given 	wide 	horizontal 	windows 	by
means 	of 	concrete 	cantilevered 	terraces 	and 	a 	'free
facade'. 	These 	two 	main 	zones 	were 	linked 	by 	a
hallway 	running 	between 	them, 	which 	also 	served 	to
link 	the 	town 	and 	the 	sea. 	This 	element 	was
demonstrated 	on 	the 	exterior 	by 	means 	of curved 	glass
projections 	at 	each 	end. 	The 	one 	on 	the 	sea 	side 	was 	a
tour deforce 	in 	concrete, 	with 	stairs 	spiralling 	up 	inside
a 	glazed 	semi-cylinder 	linking 	the 	whole 	height 	of the
building, 	and 	the 	main 	light-fixture 	treated 	as 	an
abstract 	sculpture 	suspended 	at 	the 	centre.
Public 	commissions 	on 	this 	scale 	were 	rare 	for
modern 	architects 	in 	England 	during 	the 	thirties, 	and
many 	of them 	had 	to 	be 	content 	with 	designing 	small
houses 	which 	took 	on 	the 	significance 	of experiments
for 	some 	hoped-for 	future 	collective 	programme. 	The
partnership 	of 	Lucas, 	Connell 	and 	Ward 	(an 	English-
man 	and two 	New 	Zealanders) 	developed 	a 	style 	of
their 	own 	on 	the 	basis 	of Dutch, 	French, 	and 	Russian
precedents, 	in 	which 	solids 	and 	voids 	were 	juxtaposed
in 	strong 	contrasts, 	and 	reinforced-concrete 	con-
struction 	was 	adapted 	to 	the 	unique demands 	of clients
and 	sites. 	Thus 	'New 	Farm' 	at 	drayswood 	( 	1 	932 	) 	was
splayed in 	plan, 	in 	an 	attempt 	to maximize views 	and 	to
link 	it 	to 	the 	landscape, 	while 	the 	house 	in 	Frognal 	of
1938 	(fig. 	17.(1) 	was 	more 	sedate, 	and 	combined 	the
formality 	of 	an 	urban 	fagade 	with 	informality 	to 	the
rear, 	where 	a 	terrace 	and 	full-length 	glazing 	allowed 	a
link 	with 	the 	garden. 	The 	model 	for 	this 	building 	was
probably 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches, 	and 	it 	is
interesting 	to 	compare 	the 	force 	of a 	major 	prototype
with 	a 	much 	softened, 	but 	creditable 	adaptation. 	The
house 	at 	Frognal 	included 	brick 	because 	a 	local
planning 	authority 	had 	insisted 	on 	some 	reference 	to
typical 	local 	materials.
Indeed, 	'modern' 	buildings 	were often 	regarded 	with
suspicion 	in 	England. 	In 	their 	design 	for 	a 	small 	house
in 	the 	Sussex 	countryside 	of 	1935, 	Lucas, 	Connell 	and
Ward 	were 	presented 	by 	the 	local 	council 	with 	the
option 	of either 	using 	a 	pitched 	roof and 	retaining 	their
intended 	white 	walls, 	or 	a 	flat 	roof, 	but 	employing
wooden 	cladding. 	They 	chose 	the 	second 	option. 	To
compare 	Lubetkin's 	design 	for 	a 	bungalow 	at
Whipsnade, 	with 	its 	curved 	aerofoil 	forms 	and 	its 	tight
discipline, 	to 	the 	house 	at 	Frognal 	and, 	say, 	Breuer's
and 	Yorke's 	house 	at 	Angmering 	of 	1936, 	is 	to 	be
impressed 	by 	the 	great 	variety 	of 	expression 	being
worked 	out 	within 	the 	inherited 	forms 	of the 	Internat-
ional 	Style, 	At 	the 	same 	time 	it 	is 	to 	be 	made 	aware
how 	far the imported 	foreign ideas were 	from 	prevalent
English 	notions 	of 'the 	home'.
Two of the 	most 	remarkable 	buildings 	of the 	modern
movement 	in 	England 	served 	commercial 	purposes:
Boots 	Warehouse 	at 	Beeston 	by 	Owen 	Williams 	of
1930-32 	(fig. 	I 	y.j} 	and 	Peter 	Jones's 	Store 	in 	Sloane
Square. 	London, 	by 	Slater. 	Moberly. 	Reilly 	and
Crabtree 	of 	1936. 	Both 	were 	clad 	in 	glass 	curtain
walls, 	and 	both used 	a 	concrete-skeleton 	construction
to 	open 	up 	wide 	spaces 	on 	the 	interior, 	and 	to 	create
unobstructed 	voids 	where 	outside 	and 	inside 	met 	at
ground 	level. 	These 	were 	used 	as 	loading 	bays 	for
packing 	and 	unpacking drugs 	in 	the 	Boots case: 	and 	as
uninterrupted 	shop 	windows 	for 	the 	display 	of
merchandise 	in 	Peter 	Jones. 	There 	the 	similarities
ended, 	for 	the 	Boots 	building 	had 	an 	assertive, 	even
brutal 	character, 	quite 	in 	contrast 	to 	the 	elegantly
proportioned 	mullions 	and 	urbanity 	of 	Peter 	Jones.

-- 229 of 420 --

228 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
Owen 	Williams 	was 	an 	engineer 	with 	a 	icmarkablc
tectonic 	sensibility: 	his 	building 	had 	mushroom
columns 	holding 	it 	up. 	which 	were 	perfectly 	suited 	to
their 	purpose, 	as 	they 	created 	wider 	spans 	and 	allowed
movement 	of goods 	around 	them. 	The 	central 	space 	of
the 	Boots 	warehouse 	was 	a 	sort 	of nave 	interrupted 	by
cross-galleries 	and 	top-lit 	by 	a 	thin 	glass 	brick 	and
concrete 	membrane 	roof 	The 	effect 	was 	tough 	but
ennobling, 	a 	quality 	which 	understandably 	endeared
it 	to 	the 	so-called 	New 	Brutalists' 	of the 	1950s.
By 	the 	end 	of 	the 	thirties, 	some 	of 	the 	avant-garde
were 	beginning 	to 	labour 	and 	stretch 	inside 	the 	strait-
jacket 	of 	the 	International 	Style: 	they 	were 	perhaps
sensing its limitations visually and perhaps intuiting 	its
foreignness. 	ideologically, 	to 	the 	English 	scene. 	The
most 	outstanding 	case 	of 	the 	pursuit 	of 	more 	overtly
formal 	values 	was 	Lubetkin's 	High 	Point 	I! 	of 	1936-8.
designed 	to 	go 	alongside 	High 	Point 	I 	(fig. 	17.8).
Admittedly 	there 	were 	unusual 	constraints 	on 	the
design 	(including 	a 	hostile 	local 	planning 	authority),
but 	these 	do 	not 	account 	for 	the 	almost 	neo-Palladian
fai^ade 	composition: 	a 	plastic 	expressiveness 	in 	the
overall 	form 	which 	reminds 	one 	of 	Lubetkin's 	ad-
miration 	for 	the 	Baroque: 	the 	rich 	textural 	effect 	of a
variety 	of 	materials: 	and 	the 	use 	of Classical 	caryatids
on 	the 	canopy. 	Here 	there 	was 	obvious, 	and 	indeed
rather 	decorative, 	wilful 	aesthetic 	experimentation 	-
what 	the 	critic 	J.M.Richards 	might 	have 	called
'celebrity 	architecture' 	in 	contrast 	to 	a 	hoped 	for
'anonymous' 	modern 	vernacular. 	Lubetkin 	was
expressing 	yearnings 	for 	the 	Grand 	.Vrchitectural
tradition, 	and 	reacting, 	perhaps, 	to 	the 	greater
complexity 	of 	texture 	and 	material 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's
works 	of 	the 	early 	thirties. 	The 	Architectural 	Review
assessed 	High 	Point 	II 	as 	'an 	important 	move 	forward
from 	functionalism' ; 	but 	the 	Puritan 	left-wing 	element
who 	espoused 	the 	utilitarian 	and 	moral 	qualities 	of
modern 	architecture, 	and 	played 	down 	its 	aesthetic
aspects, 	were 	outraged. 	This 	is 	how 	Anthony 	Cox. 	a
young 	socialist 	architect, 	criticized 	High 	Point 	II:
Standing 	in 	the 	garden 	and 	looking 	up 	at 	the 	two
blocks. 	I935and 	1938, 	it 	is 	clear 	that 	something
has 	changed, 	and 	that 	the 	change 	is 	not 	merely 	due
to 	the 	higher 	level 	of building 	technique, 	or 	to 	the
use 	of a 	smooth, 	clean 	tile 	facing 	to 	the 	concrete. 	. 	.
.
It 	is 	as 	if during 	the 	three 	years 	that 	separate the
buildings, 	rigid 	conclusions 	have 	been 	reached 	as 	to
what 	is 	formally 	necessary 	in 	architecture. 	This
tendency 	towards 	certain 	formal 	conclusions, 	that
are 	very 	near cliches, 	is 	noticeable 	in 	the 	work 	of
many 	modern 	English 	architects, 	but 	in 	Tecton's
later 	work 	it 	is 	more 	than 	a 	tendency. 	It 	is 	con-
siderably 	marked 	and 	mature. 	. 	. 	. 	The 	change 	in
aim 	must 	be 	due 	to 	personal 	reasons, 	to 	a 	turning
inwards 	towards 	private 	formal 	meanings 	which
have 	no 	general 	recognizable 	social 	basis 	... 	Is 	it
really 	an 	'important 	move 	forward 	from 	func-
tionalism' 	from 	which 	development 	is 	possible:
or 	is 	it 	a 	symptom 	of decline, 	an 	end 	in 	itself.'
17.7 	Owen 	Williams.
Boots 	Warehouse,
Beeston. 	Nottingham-
shire. 	1930-2.

-- 230 of 420 --

The 	Spread 	ofModern 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	229
17.8 	Berthiold 	Lubetlcin
and Tecton. 	Higii 	Point
II 	flats 	seen 	alongside
High 	Point 	I 	from 	the
garden. 	1956-8.
It 	is 	ironical 	that 	the 	criteria 	by 	which 	Lubetkin 	was
here 	being 	judged 	were 	ones 	that 	he 	may 	himself have
introduced 	into 	the 	English 	architectural 	world.
However, 	there 	is 	some 	truth 	in 	Cox's 	assessment.
High 	Point 	II 	has 	a 	flaccid 	elegance 	in 	contrast 	to 	the
taut, 	sharp-edged 	polemic 	of 	the 	earlier 	building.
Perhaps 	Lubetkin 	was 	beginning 	to 	sense 	the 	diver-
gence 	between 	his own 	socialist 	aims, 	and the 	values of
the 	only 	clientele 	who would 	or indeed could 	put 	up 	his
buildings. 	Or 	perhaps 	a 	tendency 	to 	formalism 	is
inevitable 	at 	a 	certain 	stage 	in 	working 	out 	the
implications 	of 	a 	style. 	However 	one 	sees 	it, 	the
'formalism' 	of 	High 	Point 	II 	was 	symptomatic 	of 	a
much 	broader 	problem: 	given 	that 	mere 	imitations 	of
the 	prototypes 	of 	the 	twenties 	would 	be 	inadequate,
what 	direction 	should 	the 	modern 	movement 	now
take.^ 	Given 	that 	a 	sort 	of modern 	academicism 	was 	to
be 	avoided, 	where 	would 	sources 	of a 	new 	vitality 	lie.'
The 	work 	of Alvar 	Aalto 	during 	the 	thirties 	provides
one 	example 	of 	these 	problems 	being 	solved 	with 	full
conviction, 	and 	with 	due 	response 	to 	regional 	climate
and 	traditions. 	Aalto 	was 	bom 	in 	1898 	in 	Finland,
studied 	in 	Helsinki, 	and 	grew 	up 	in 	an 	atmosphere
fraught 	with 	questions 	of 	national 	identity 	for 	the
Finns 	seeking 	autonomy 	from 	the 	Russian 	sphere 	of
influence. 	Broadly 	speaking 	there 	were 	two 	main
strands 	in 	the 	'high' 	architectural 	culture 	of 	the 	late
nineteenth 	century 	which 	influenced 	Aalto: 	a 	stripped
Classical 	style 	stemming 	from 	certain 	late 	eighteenth-
century 	sources 	and 	coming 	to 	a 	refined 	twentieth-
century 	resolution 	in 	the 	works 	of 	Gunnar 	Asplund;
and 	a 	National 	Romantic 	tendency 	which 	drew 	on 	the
Gothic 	revival 	and 	on 	the 	nineteenth-century
American 	architect, 	H.H. 	Richardson, 	while 	seeking
inspiration 	in 	national 	myths and 	local 	vernaculars.
Aalto 	would 	eventually 	succeed, 	with 	the 	help 	of
modern 	architectural 	abstraction, 	in 	forging 	a 	syn-
thesis 	between 	these 	inherited 	tendencies. 	And 	in 	that
respect 	the 	true 	vernacular 	(rather 	than 	romantic
interpretations 	of 	it) 	was 	a 	crucial 	trigger, 	as 	it 	gave
evidence 	of 	type 	forms 	adapted 	to 	the 	stringencies 	of
the 	Finnish 	climate, 	to 	the 	character 	of the 	landscape,
and 	to 	the 	outlook 	of the 	people. 	At 	the 	same 	time, of
course, 	it 	bore 	witness 	to 	a 	direct 	and 	elegant 	use 	of
local 	materials, 	particularly 	timber.
The 	modern 	movement 	began 	to 	seep 	into
Scandinavia 	only 	gradually 	in 	the 	twenties. 	By 	1931
the 	Stockholm 	Exhibition 	buildings, 	designed 	by
Asplund, 	were 	in 	the 	new 	style. 	However. 	Aalto 	and
his 	compatriot 	Erik 	Bryggman 	encountered 	the 	new
ideas 	a 	little 	earlier 	than 	this, 	especially 	through 	Dutch
and 	German 	examples. 	Aalto's 	Turku 	Sanomat
newspaper 	building 	(for 	which 	design 	began 	in 	1928)
was 	conceived 	in 	the 	terminology 	of 	the 	new 	archi-
tecture, 	was 	based 	on 	the 	'live 	points 	of 	a 	new
architecture', 	and 	in 	its 	plastic 	accentuation 	of
structure 	(fig. 	17.9), 	its 	variation 	of 	space, 	and 	the
disciplined 	articulation 	of 	the 	fai^ade 	even 	suggested
the 	imprint 	of 	a 	vital 	new 	talent 	on 	received 	canons.
Aalto's 	gradual 	growth 	from 	his 	neo-classical 	begin-

-- 231 of 420 --

230 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
nings 	to 	the clarity 	of his 	"functional' 	style, 	can 	be seen
clearly 	in 	the evolution 	of 	three 	main 	projects 	for 	the
Viipuri 	library 	between 	1927 	and 	193 S- 	But 	while 	he
rejected 	overt 	usage 	of 	the 	Classical 	orders, 	he 	still
retained 	abstract 	schemata 	from 	the 	Classical 	tradition
(e.g.. 	the 	frequent 	use 	of a 	piano 	nobile. 	a 	processional
character 	in 	circulation, 	a 	refined 	sense 	of 	proportion
in 	the 	placement 	of voids 	and 	solids |. 	The 	library 	plan
employs 	ingenious 	shifting 	symmetries, 	and 	its 	inter-
nal 	volumes 	flow 	into 	one 	another 	under 	a 	ceiling
formed 	of 	gradually 	stepping 	planes 	perforated 	by
skylights. 	Such 	rich 	modulations 	of space 	and 	light 	are
enhanced, 	in 	the 	meeting 	room, 	by 	the 	curved 	and
textured 	wooden 	roof 	(fig. 	17.10), 	which 	gives 	some
hint 	of 	the 	naturalism 	of 	Aalto's 	later 	development.
The 	character 	of 	the 	building 	was 	such 	as 	to 	suggest
already 	the 	rejection 	of mechanistic 	qualities 	in 	earlier
modern 	architecture: 	moreover, 	the 	functional 	disci-
pline 	of the 	work 	was 	bound 	up 	with 	a 	poetic 	reaction
to 	human 	needs 	rather 	than 	with 	arid 	calculation.
In 	the 	design 	of the 	Paimio 	Sanatorium 	( 	1929-32),
Aalto gave body 	to his 	'humanist' 	aspirations in 	a 	work
which must 	be 	counted 	one 	of the 	masterpieces 	of the
modern 	movement 	(fig. 	1 	7. 1 	1 	). 	The 	building stands on
high 	ground 	twenty 	miles 	from 	Helsinki, 	overlooking
forests 	and 	lakes. 	At 	the 	time 	it 	was 	built, 	the 	best 	cure
for 	tuberculosis 	(the 	Sanatorium 	was 	to 	specialize 	in
the 	cure 	of this 	disease) 	was 	felt 	to 	be 	exposure 	to 	sun,
fresh 	air, 	and 	greenery. 	This 	was 	one 	of 	these 	cases
where 	the 	aims 	of 	the 	client 	and 	the 	'sanitary'
philosophical 	and 	visual 	aspects 	of the 	new 	style 	were
in 	accord 	from 	the 	beginning. 	The 	patients' 	rooms
were 	placed 	in 	a 	long 	six-storey 	slab 	facing 	south,
served 	by 	corridors 	running 	along 	the 	north 	side, 	and
with 	an 	open 	roof terrace, 	part covered 	by 	a canopy, 	on
the 	top 	floor: 	the 	beds 	could 	be 	wheeled 	here 	on
particularly 	warm 	days. 	The 	structure 	of 	this 	part 	of
the building 	was a tapered concrete 	'trunk' 	from 	which
the 	floors 	were 	cantilevered. 	thus 	allowing 	the
openness 	of 	facades 	and 	freedom 	of 	circulation. 	The
mono-material 	character of this 	wing 	was 	accentuated
by 	curved 	details 	and 	a 	sculptural 	sense 	of 	volume,
which 	belied 	the 	more 	cardboard 	qualities 	of 	certain
other 	buildings 	in 	the 	International 	Style.
Behind 	the 	slab 	were 	grouped 	the 	'serving' 	elements
of the 	hallway, 	the 	doctors' 	wing 	and 	lounge, 	and 	the
nurses' 	wing. 	Each 	function 	was expressed 	in 	a slightly
different 	form, 	and 	angled 	to 	the 	topography 	of the 	site
(fig. 	17.12). 	The 	effect 	on 	approaching 	the 	building
was 	that 	the 	slab 	and 	the 	lounge 	block 	funnelled 	one
towards 	the 	entrance. 	Variations 	in 	fenestration 	and
detail 	ensured 	that 	the 	main 	divisions 	in 	the 	form
were 	articulated 	throughout. 	Rising 	like 	a 	well-
proportioned 	ship 	above 	the 	Finnish 	landscape, 	the
Sanatorium 	announced 	its 	healing 	function 	through
clean 	forms, 	tidy 	proportions, 	and 	well-lit 	volumes. 	At
the 	same 	time, 	its 	horizontal 	balconies 	and 	garden
terracing 	supplied 	links 	to 	the 	surrounding 	land-
masses.
It 	has 	been 	convincingly 	argued 	that 	the 	Paimio
Sanatorium 	was 	modelled, 	in 	part, 	on 	Duiker's
Zonnestraal 	Sanatorium 	of 	1927, 	outside 	Hilversum
(fig. 	13.5). 	a 	building 	in 	which 	the 	various 	functions
were 	also 	splayed 	in 	different 	directions 	on 	a 	wooded
site. 	Moreover, 	there 	are 	particular 	details, 	like 	the
extractor 	stack 	of 	the Zonnestraal, 	which 	have 	been
reworked 	by 	Aalto. 	Equally, 	it 	might 	be 	argued 	that 	he
was 	drawing 	on 	the 	formula 	for 	collective 	dwellings
17.9 	Hop) 	Alvar Aalto.
Turku 	Sanomat
Newspaper Office.
Turku. 	Finland.
1928-30.
17.10 	Alvar Aalto.
Viipuri 	Library, 	f-inland.
1 92 7- 3 s. 	interior view
of meeting room
showing sinuous
wooden ceiling.

-- 232 of 420 --

The 	Spread 	of Modem 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	• 	231
~
—
I
1 7. 1 1 	(above 	right) 	Alvar
Aalto. 	Paimio
Sanatorium. 	Finland.
1929-32.
17.12 	(rifl/il) 	Alvar
Aalto, 	Paimio
Sanatorium. 	Finland.
1929-32. 	plan 	of
ensemble.
i\-
evolved 	a 	couple 	of years 	earlier 	in 	the 	Soviet 	Union: 	in
those 	buildings 	individual 	rooms 	were 	placed 	in 	a 	slab,
and 	collective 	functions 	were 	grouped 	in 	ancillary
volumes 	of 	different 	geometry 	or 	form. 	It 	has 	been
suggested 	already 	that 	such 	a 	formulation 	may 	have
influenced 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Pavilion 	Suisse 	as 	well: 	in
both 	the 	student 	hostel 	and 	the 	tuberculosis 	sana-
torium, 	forms 	were 	found 	which 	extended 	the
vocabulary 	of 	earlier 	modern 	architecture 	into 	new,
and 	more 	complex, 	formal 	territory.
In 	1933 	Aalto 	went 	to 	the 	CIAM 	meeting 	on 	the 	SS
Patras. 	Here, 	against 	the 	setting 	of 	the 	Greek 	islands,
the 	Parthenon, 	and 	the 	sea. 	he 	met 	Lc 	Corbusier. 	Mies
van 	der 	Rohe, 	Walter 	Gropius - 	indeed 	the 	protagon-
ists 	of 	modern 	architecture: 	and 	they 	in 	turn 	were
impressed 	by 	a 	newly 	emergent 	talent. 	At 	home 	it 	had
been 	possible 	by 	degrees 	to 	convert 	patrons 	to 	an
understanding 	of 	the 	new 	architecture, 	a 	process
which 	had 	not 	been 	easy. 	However, 	between 	1 934 	and
the 	outbreak 	of the 	war, 	Aalto 	was 	kept 	busy 	with 	the
large 	commission 	for 	the 	Sunila 	pulp 	mills 	(including
worker's 	housing) 	and 	with 	entries 	to 	a 	variety 	of
competitions, 	including 	one 	for 	the 	Finnish 	embassy 	in
Moscow. 	In 	1936 	he 	designed 	a 	house 	for 	himself and
his 	wife 	outside 	Helsinki 	which 	made 	use 	of 	local
materials like 	brick and wood, 	contrasting textures and

-- 233 of 420 --

2 32 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
subtle 	curves: 	plants 	and 	natural 	materials 	were
integrated 	in 	a 	statement 	that 	was 	more 	humanly
tactile 	than 	the 	white 	concrete 	forms 	of 	five 	years
earlier. 	The 	transition 	has 	been 	called 	the 	shift 	to
'Romantic 	Modernism'; 	but 	whatever 	one 	calls 	it, 	it
was 	a 	style 	which 	was 	increasingly 	personal, 	and 	in
which 	a 	more 	accommodating 	relationship 	to 	both 	the
Finnish vernacular tradition 	and the regional demands
of climate 	and 	landscape 	were 	worked 	out. 	Aalto 	was
later to 	write:
Architecture 	cannot 	disengage 	itself from 	natural
and 	human 	factors, 	on 	the 	contrary, 	it 	must 	never
do 	so. 	. 	. 	. 	Its 	function 	rather 	is 	to 	bring 	nature 	ever
closer 	to 	us.
Perhaps 	the 	masterpiece 	of 	this 	phase 	in 	Aalto's
development 	was 	the 	Villa 	Mairea 	of 	1938. 	built 	for
Maire 	and 	Harry 	Gullichsen 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	villa, 	guest-
house, 	and 	rural 	retreat 	(fig. 	17.13). 	His 	clients 	were
immensely 	wealthy 	and 	told 	their 	architect 	that 	'he
should 	regard 	it 	as 	an 	experimental 	house'. 	Aalto
seems 	to 	have 	treated 	this 	as 	an 	opportunity 	to 	pull
together 	many 	of 	the 	themes 	which 	had 	been
preoccupying 	him in the preceding years, 	but which he
had 	not 	always 	been 	able 	to 	introduce 	in 	actual
buildings; 	in 	much 	the 	same 	way. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
taken 	the opportunity offered 	him 	by 	a 	well-to-do client
to 	condense 	his 	driving 	preoccupations 	in 	the 	\'illa
Savoye.
The 	plan 	of the 	Villa 	Mairea 	is 	a 	modified 	L-shape 	of
the 	kind 	Aalto 	had 	used 	frequently 	before, 	and 	would
use 	often 	again 	(fig. 	17.14). 	It 	was 	a 	layout 	which
automatically 	created 	a 	semi-private 	enclosure 	to 	one
side, 	and 	a 	more 	exclusive, 	formal 	edge 	to 	confront 	the
public 	world 	on 	the 	other. 	It 	is 	possible 	that 	the
architect's 	fascination 	with 	these 	'semi-courtyards'
may 	have 	been 	partially 	inspired 	by 	typical 	Finnish
farm 	layouts, 	where 	a 	similar 	form 	was 	used 	to 	protect
livestock 	from 	the 	rigours 	of 	winter, 	and 	to 	define 	an
inward-looking 	community. 	In 	the 	Villa 	Mairea 	the
lawn 	and 	the 	swimming 	pool 	were 	situated 	in 	the
enclosure, 	alongside 	a 	variety 	of 	rooms 	looking 	over
them : 	indeed, 	these 	outdoor 	features 	were 	integrated
into 	the 	composition 	by 	careful 	placement, 	and
through 	the 	use 	of 	horizontals 	and 	overhangs 	in 	the
main 	composition. 	The 	pool 	was 	kidney-shaped, 	and
wedded 	with 	the 	nearby 	semi-wooded 	topography 	as
well. 	In 	contrast 	to 	these 	softening 	characteristics, 	the
main 	facade 	had 	a 	more 	rigid, 	formal 	mood, 	and 	even
possessed 	a 	sort 	of Classical 	porte-cochere 	restated 	in 	a
garden 	pergola 	vocabulary.
The 	interiors 	of 	the 	Villa 	were 	richly 	furnished 	in
natural 	woods 	and 	stonework 	and 	brick, 	and 	varied 	in
spatial 	quality 	from 	the 	grand 	to 	the 	cabin-like.
Sequences 	were 	orchestrated 	to 	make 	the 	most 	of
different 	views 	and 	lighting 	effects, 	and 	there 	was 	a
hierarchy 	to 	the 	rooms, 	which 	culminated 	in 	the
master 	bedroom, 	standing 	at 	the 	pinnacle 	of the 	house
overlooking 	the 	little 	enclosure 	below. 	The 	spaces
below 	this 	- 	the 	fibrary. 	dining-room, 	sitting-room,

-- 234 of 420 --

The 	Spread 	of Modern 	Architecture 	to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia 	233
17.1 	^ 	[above 	left) 	Alvar
Aalto. 	Villa 	Mairea.
Noormarkku. 	Finland.
19^8-4. 	view.
17.14 	{left] 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Villa 	Mairea.
Noormarkku. 	Finland,
ig VS-4. 	plan.
1 7. 1 	S 	Iflbovi' 	rkiht ) 	Alvar
Aalto. 	Villa 	Mairea.
Noormarkku. 	Finland.
1938-9. 	detail 	of sauna
wing showing turf roof.
studio 	(for 	Maire's 	painting) 	and 	art 	gallery 	- 	varied 	in
height 	and 	were 	even 	overlapping 	in 	section, 	recalling
spatial 	devices 	discovered 	in 	the 	Viipuri 	library, 	for
example. 	To 	one 	end 	the 	house 	descended 	to 	a 	sort 	of
rustic' 	wing, 	which wrapped 	around 	two 	sides 	of the
swimming 	pool 	and 	contained 	the 	sauna. 	This 	wing
alone 	was emblematic 	of Aalto's 	increasingly 	'natural-
istic' 	concerns: 	it 	was 	a 	wooden 	palisade 	with 	an
overhanging 	flat 	roof surmounted 	by 	a 	ragged 	band 	of
turf 	(fig. 	17.15). 	The 	spirit 	of 	this 	primitivist. 	Nordic
garden 	temple 	brooding 	next 	to 	a 	dark 	pool 	of 	water
surrounded 	by 	boulders 	could 	not 	be 	further 	from 	the
pristine 	solarium 	of 	the 	Villa 	Savoye, 	with 	its
Mediterranean 	evocations 	and 	its 	crisp, 	machine-age
imagery. 	But 	in 	details 	like 	these, 	each 	architect
managed 	to 	condense 	an 	entire 	world 	outlook, 	and 	to
indicate 	his 	ability 	to 	transform 	the 	rituals 	of 	upper-
middle-class 	existence 	into 	the 	stuff 	of 	a 	lasting
architectural 	dream.
Indeed, 	the 	Villa 	Mairea 	is 	the 	condensation 	of 	so
many 	ideas 	that 	it 	is 	tempting 	to 	see 	it 	as 	the 	pivotal
building 	for 	Aalto 	in 	which, 	so 	to 	say, 	he 	sloughed 	off
the 	last 	inherited 	skin, 	and 	revealed 	his 	true 	nature.
The 	formal 	disciplines 	of 	Classicism, 	the 	philosophy
and 	form 	of the 	International 	Modern 	movement, 	and
the 	perennial 	lessons 	of 	a 	regional 	vernacular 	all
contributed 	to 	the 	synthesis, 	but 	it 	was 	a 	fusion 	which
utterly 	transformed 	its 	sources. 	After 	the 	Villa 	Mairea,
the 	style 	was 	assured 	at 	a 	deep 	level : 	variation 	seemed
to 	occur 	on 	the 	basis 	of a 	few 	fundamental 	themes 	and
forms, 	capable 	of apparently 	endless combinations 	and
meanings. 	The 	result was a 	style 	deeply related 	to 	ideas
about 	the 	human 	condition, 	in 	which 	weathered
materials, 	lyrical 	spaces, 	and 	magical 	effects 	of 	light
produced 	a 	lasting 	primal 	poetry 	far 	beyond 	merely
'modern' 	concerns.
Aalto's 	Villa 	Mairea 	is 	a 	fitting place 	to 	begin 	to 	close
the 	second 	part 	of 	this 	book 	because 	it 	is 	a 	building
which 	rests 	on 	the 	discoveries 	of 	the 	early 	modern
movement, 	yet 	transcends 	them. 	This 	was, 	indeed, 	'an
important 	move 	forward 	from 	functionalism' 	and 	not
simply 	a 	relapse 	into 	decorative 	formalism. 	It 	was 	to
examples 	like 	this 	that 	a 	post-war 	generation 	could
turn, 	in 	their 	own 	attempt 	to 	break 	with 	the
increasingly 	restrictive 	bondage 	of 	modern 	formulae
and 	in 	their 	own 	quest 	for 	an 	authentic 	architecture
blending 	internationalist 	and 	regionalist. 	modern 	and
ancient 	concerns.

-- 235 of 420 --

1 	8. 	The 	Continuity 	of 	Older 	Traditions
. 	. 	. 	after 	all, 	architecture 	is 	an 	art 	and 	from 	time 	immemorial 	it 	has 	been
regarded 	as 	one 	of the 	greatest. 	Beautiful 	buildings, 	the 	Parthenon 	for
instance, 	the 	Pantheon. 	Chartres 	or 	St. 	Paul's 	have 	moved 	men 	more
profoundly 	than 	any 	but 	the 	very 	greatest 	masterpieces 	of painting 	and
sculpture: 	but 	who 	is 	going 	to 	be 	moved, 	except 	to 	resentment, 	by 	buildings
such 	as 	Herr 	Mendelsohn 	produces 	in 	Germany 	or 	M. 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	France,
or 	by 	buildings 	of steel 	and 	brick 	that 	purport 	to 	be 	made 	of concrete,
buildings 	cased 	in 	steel 	and 	glass, 	buildings 	that 	appear 	to 	follow 	no 	principle
but 	that 	of contradicting 	everything 	that 	has 	ever 	been 	done 	before,' 	I 	suggest
that 	our 	modernists 	are 	wrong 	in 	principle.
R. 	Blomfield. 	19 	52
The 	early 	historians 	and 	propagandists 	of 	modern
architecture tended 	to 	portray 	it 	as 	the 	single true 	style
of 	the 	times 	and 	to 	relegate 	deviants 	to 	a 	historical
dustbin. 	While 	this 	historiographical 	exercise 	un-
doubtedly 	had 	a 	useful 	purgative 	function, 	it 	conveyed
an 	extremely 	lopsided 	historical 	picture 	and 	en-
couraged 	a 	partisan 	view of architectural 	quality. In 	its
early 	days 	the 	modern 	movement, 	like 	any 	other
young 	movement, 	was 	in 	a 	minority. 	The 	majority 	of
buildings 	constructed 	in. 	say. 	the 	year 	1930 	were
continuations 	of 	earlier 	traditions 	and 	vernaculars. 	It
is 	useful 	to 	be 	reminded 	of this 	pluralist 	background 	in
considering 	the 	very 	significance 	of 	avant-garde
production. 	Furthermore, 	the 	determinist 	slant 	of 	the
aforementioned 	writers 	tended 	to 	leave 	the 	impression
that 	a 	building 	which 	failed 	to 	ally 	itself 	to 	new
tendencies 	must 	be 	inferior. 	But 	the 	fact 	that 	a 	building
might 	be 	a 	transformation 	of 	Gothic 	forms 	(e.g.. 	the
Hood 	design 	for 	the 	Chicago 	Tribune) 	did 	not 	guarantee
its 	inferiority 	any 	more 	than 	the 	use 	of 	the 	new 	style
guaranteed 	quality. 	It 	has 	to 	be 	said, 	at 	this 	juncture,
that 	writers 	who 	were opposed 	to 	modern 	architecture
sometimes 	adapted 	counterpart 	tactics 	by 	auto-
matically 	opposing 	anything 	new.
While 	modern 	architects 	as 	diverse 	as 	Wright. 	Le
Corbusier. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and 	Aalto 	sought 	to
express 	contemporary 	life 	and 	new 	spatial 	ideas, 	and
threw 	off 	the 	garments 	of 	the 	nineteenth-century
'styles' 	in 	order 	to 	crystallize 	their 	version 	of 	the
fundamentals 	of 	'style' 	in 	general, 	they 	were 	deeply
rooted 	in 	tradition. 	The 	distinction 	between 	modern-
ists' 	and 	'traditionalists' 	can 	therefore 	be 	overstressed.
I 	do 	not 	believe 	that 	it 	is 	being 	over-sophisticated 	to
suggest 	that 	the 	outstanding 	works 	of 	modern
architecture 	transcended 	period concerns, 	and 	became
clo.se 	relatives 	of 	other 	outstanding 	buildings 	of 	the
past 	which 	had. 	likewise, 	cut 	far 	deeper 	than 	the
changing 	trends 	of their 	own 	times.
Be 	this 	as 	it 	may, 	the 	obvious 	still 	has 	to 	be 	stated:
the 	Villa 	Savoye 	and 	the 	Bauhaus 	buildings 	did 	not
employ 	Classical 	orders, 	arches, 	or 	rib 	vaults! 	They
were 	part 	of 	the 	same 	general 	grouping 	in 	ways 	that
the 	Chrysler 	building 	by 	Van 	Alen 	or 	Edwin 	Lutyens's
designs 	for New 	Delhi 	were 	not. 	At 	the 	time 	the 	modern
movement 	tirst 	emerged, 	its 	differences 	from 	other
architecture 	were 	far 	more 	easily 	identified 	than 	its
similarities. 	It 	was 	clear 	that 	this 	was 	something 	new
and 	that 	its 	anatomy 	was 	in 	profound 	ways 	different
from 	that 	of 	predecessors: 	it 	was 	not 	simply 	a 	change
of 	clothes. 	Moreover, 	'the 	moderns' 	eventually 	won
in 	the 	sense 	that 	their 	schemata 	were 	the 	ones
generally 	adopted 	around 	the 	world. 	It 	was 	no 	divine
law 	of progress 	that 	brought 	this 	about: 	rather 	(as 	we
have 	begun 	to 	see) 	the 	reasons 	for 	adopting 	the 	new
forms 	over 	pre-existing 	traditions 	varied 	considerably
from 	place 	to 	place. 	Whatever 	the 	lasting 	qualities 	of
some 	buildings 	within 	these 	pre-existing 	traditions,
their 	formulations 	seemed 	less 	and 	less 	relevant 	to 	the
next 	few 	generations. 	Such 	perhaps 	is 	the 	picture 	after
any 	major 	revolution 	in sensibility, 	which 	the 	modern
movement 	certainly 	was.
Another 	effect 	of 	treating 	the 	history 	of 	modern
architecture 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	conveyor 	belt 	(as 	the 	early
mythographers 	tended 	to), 	was 	that 	'survivals' 	from

-- 236 of 420 --

The 	Continuity 	of Older Traditions 	235
1 8. 1 	Auguste 	Perret.
Church 	of Notre Dame
du 	Raincy. 	1424. 	view
of nave.

-- 237 of 420 --

z^b 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
earlier 	'pioneer' 	phases 	also 	tended 	to 	be 	relegated. 	Art
Nouveau, 	for example, 	was 	a 	temporary 	phase 	for such
individuals 	as 	Behrens 	and 	Le 	Corbusier. 	but 	its 	effects
lingered 	on 	well 	into 	the 	twenties 	in 	places 	as 	varied 	as
Majorca 	and 	Buenos 	Aires. 	A 	major 	artist 	like 	Caudi
was 	still 	extending 	his 	personal 	manner 	up 	to 	the 	time
of his 	death 	in 	1926. 	It 	is 	wrong 	then 	to 	pin 	a 	style 	to 	a
particular 	'historical 	moment'. 	Rather, 	a 	variety 	of
options 	of 	expression 	remained 	open 	and 	were 	often
continued 	with 	conviction. 	After 	all, 	Auguste 	Perret
continued 	his 	pre-war 	manner 	with 	little 	impact 	from,
and 	in 	parallel 	with, 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	the 	'white
architecture 	of 	the 	twenties'. 	The 	church 	of 	Notre
Dame 	du 	Raincy 	of 	1924 	(fig. 	18. i) 	was 	even 	the
logical 	culmination 	of 	all 	that 	Perret 	had 	been
pursuing 	for 	reinforced 	concrete 	for 	the 	previous 	three
decades.
Another 	major 	omission 	in 	the 	early 	historiography
of the modern 	movement was 	'Expressionism', 	because
the 	extreme 	bizarreness 	and 	emotionalism 	underlying
some 	works 	labelled 	by 	this 	term 	were 	at 	odds with 	the
personal 	taste 	of 	men 	like 	Pevsner. 	Giedion, 	and
Hitchcock, 	and 	because 	the 	inherent 	belief 	of 	these
writers 	in 	a 	unifying 	Zeitcjeist 	at 	the 	core 	of 	modern
culture 	left 	them 	looking 	for 	a 	single 	'true' 	modern
style. 	The 	Einstein 	tower 	by 	Mendelsohn 	was 	some-
thing 	of 	an 	embarrassment 	in 	this 	scheme 	of 	things,
while 	a 	curious 	creation 	like 	the 	theosophically
inspired 	Goetheanum 	at 	Dornach of 	1925-8 	(fig. 	1S.2)
simply 	had 	to 	be 	left 	out 	of the 	account 	altogether. 	This
was 	despite 	the 	fact 	that 	both 	buildings 	were 	inspired
by 	revolutionary 	conceptions 	and 	were 	certainly
capable 	of 	standing 	alongside 	much 	that 	was 	within
the 	safer, 	supposedly 	more 	'rational' 	pale 	of 	the
'International 	Style'. 	Here 	again 	historians 	showed
how easily they could 	be influenced 	by 	the 	prejudices of
artists, 	for 	many 	of the 	architects 	who 	were 	'safe' 	had
passed 	through 	Expressionism 	and 	rejected 	it 	as 	a 	sort
of juvenile 	phase 	before 	their 	mature 	flowering.
There 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	in 	retrospect 	that
Expressionism 	was 	an 	extension 	of 	certain 	basic
qualities 	of 	Art 	Nouveau. 	However, 	there 	were 	other
strands 	which 	stemmed 	from 	the 	same 	source, 	in
particular 	the 	manner 	of design 	called 	'Art 	Deco' 	after
its 	appearance 	at 	the 	Exposition 	des Arts 	Decoratifs 	in
1925. 	This 	loose 	affiliation 	of 	exotic 	and 	highly
decorative 	tendencies 	was 	quite 	at 	odds 	with 	the
fundamentalism 	and 	rigorous 	moral 	tenor 	of the 	New
Architecture, 	but 	it 	nonetheless 	reached 	its 	full 	(and
brief) 	efflorescence 	at 	about 	the 	same 	time. 	In 	the
decorative 	arts 	one 	thinks 	of the 	glass-work 	of Lalique.
or 	of 	evocative, 	spangled 	interiors 	in 	which 	neo-
Egyptian 	motifs, 	chevron 	geometries, 	and 	luxuriant
indulgence 	in 	lustrous 	materials 	played 	a 	part. 	'Art
Deco' 	scarcely 	presents 	a 	coherent 	stylistic 	entity, 	and
it 	has 	to 	be 	admitted 	that 	there 	was 	little 	of 	lasting
architectural 	value 	in 	it; 	nonetheless, 	buildings 	of
considerable 	richness 	like 	the 	Richfield 	building 	in 	Los
Angeles 	of 	1928 	or 	the 	Hoover 	factory 	in 	London 	of
1935 	(fig- 	18.3) 	(not 	to 	mention 	the 	Chrysler 	building
in 	New 	York) 	were 	all 	related 	to 	Art 	Deco 	trends. 	In
each 	of 	these 	cases, 	an 	inherited 	armature 	of 	Beaux-
Arts 	axial 	planning 	was 	cloaked 	in 	modern 	materials
and 	elaborately 	decorated 	and 	coloured 	wall 	surfaces.
The attitude 	behind such 	forms was far indeed 	from 	the
ideals 	of dematerialization, 	'honesty' 	and 	puritanism,
which 	were 	inherent 	in 	the 	smooth 	white 	planes 	and
stark 	surfaces 	of 	the 	International 	Style. 	Ornament
was 	embraced 	and 	elaborated 	in 	gaudy 	stripes 	and
violent 	contrasts 	of 	texture: 	and 	the 	style 	was
frequently 	and 	blatantly 	employed 	in 	the 	service 	of
commercial 	advertising 	- 	to 	attract, 	to 	delight, 	and 	to
persuade. 	There 	was 	a 	notable 	lack 	of 	that 	cultural
high-mindedness 	with 	regard 	to 	industrialism 	which
had 	propelled 	the 	more 	profound 	thinkers 	of 	the
modern 	movement. 	Art 	Deco 	served 	as 	a 	middle-brow
bridge 	between 	modernism 	and 	consumerism. 	This
was 	also 	true 	of 	the 	'Streamlined 	Moderne' 	style
prevalent 	in 	industrial 	design 	in 	the 	United 	States 	in
the 	late 	twenties 	and 	early 	thirties 	(fig. 	18.4). 	The
market 	laws of obsolescence 	and 	fashion 	were 	here met
with 	less 	anguish 	than 	in 	the 	moral 	positions 	of 	the
modern 	mainstream.
This 	leads 	to 	a 	further 	point 	about 	the 	modern
movement 	which, 	possibly, 	applies 	to 	many 	novel
systems 	of 	forms: 	for 	a 	time 	it 	remained 	beyond 	the
grasp 	of 	public 	understanding 	and 	sympathy.
Although 	it 	had 	been 	a 	central 	underlying 	doctrine
that 	the 	architect 	was 	somehow 	specially 	endowed
18.2 	Rudolf Steiner.
Goetheanum 	II,
Dornach. 	192S-8.

-- 238 of 420 --

The 	Continuity 	of Older 	Traditions 	• 	2.^-j
18.3 	(top) 	Wallis.
Gilbert 	and 	Partners.
Hoover 	I'actory. 	Perivale.
Middlesex. 	1932-5.
18.4 	Raymond Loewy
.
sketch 	for streamlined
train. 	1930.
with 	the 	ability 	to 	intuit 	communal 	aspirations, 	the
majority 	taste 	remained 	allied 	to 	more 	traditional
modes, 	and 	more 	customary 	associations. 	Perhaps 	this
problem 	olcommunication 	was 	further exacerbated by
the 	very 	position 	of 	avant-garde 	culture 	with 	its
haughty 	disdain 	for 	the 	cliched 	and 	the 	conventional.
It 	is 	perhaps 	understandable 	that 	the 	juries 	of 	the
Chicago 	Tribune, 	the 	League 	of 	Nations, 	and 	even 	the
Palace 	of the 	Soviets 	competitions 	voted 	the 	way 	they
did. 	Part 	of 	the 	problem 	was 	a 	lack 	of 	understanding
about 	how 	the 	new 	forms 	could 	possibly 	convey
generally 	held 	beliefs.
The 	point 	is 	made 	in 	another 	less 	grandiose 	field 	of
design: 	the 	family 	home. 	The 	new 	domestic 	archi-
tecture tended to 	become the cultural 	property 	of either
isolated 	pockets 	of upper-middle-class 	bohemia, 	or 	else
of large-scale planning bureaucracies 	of a 	progressivist
outlook. 	The 	taste of 'everyman' 	in 	the 	twenties 	tended
to 	be 	more 	at 	home 	with 	images 	derived 	from 	the 	Arts
and 	Crafts 	movement, 	which 	had 	itself been 	based 	on
time-worn 	notions 	of 	the 	dwelling. 	The 	extreme 	Nazi
criticisms 	of 	the 	factory 	appearance 	and 	lack 	of
psychological 	warmth 	in 	modern 	architecture 	were
not 	so 	very 	far 	away 	from 	complaints 	which 	might
have 	been 	delivered 	by 	many 	decent 	home 	owners 	in
the 	West 	at 	the 	same 	time. 	Far 	from 	being 	perceived 	as
elements 	of 	a 	new 	universal 	language 	of 	design, 	the
creations 	stemming 	from 	the 	Bauhaus 	or 	from 	Purism
were 	as 	likely 	to 	be seen 	as 	emblems 	of 	a 	highbrow
clique. 	It 	was 	to 	take 	over 	two 	decades 	for 	the 	imagery
of 	'the 	modern' 	to 	become 	popularized 	and. 	so 	to 	say,
vernacularized: 	and, 	of course, 	once this 	had 	happened
much 	of 	the 	original 	meaning 	and 	polemical 	impulse
had 	been 	lost. 	Perhaps 	a 	confusion 	of 	this 	sort 	was
inevitable, 	given 	avant-garde premisses: 	obsessed 	with
the 	idea 	that 	a 	major 	decay 	was 	in 	process, 	the 	avant-
garde 	thought 	it 	was 	its 	business to rescue 	the values of
higher 	forms 	and 	to 	instate 	new 	prototypes. 	Divorce
from 	conventions 	was 	intrinsic 	to 	this 	process.
In 	the 	majority 	of 	Western 	European 	countries, 	the
United 	States 	and 	the 	Soviet 	Union, 	the 	'official 	tastes'
against 	which 	the 	avant-garde 	launched 	some 	of 	its
battles 	tended 	to 	derive 	from 	nineteenth-century
eclecticism. 	As 	we 	have 	seen 	in 	the case 	of skyscraper
design 	in 	the 	United 	States, 	the 	hotchpotch 	of 	styles
was 	actually 	capable 	of 	supporting 	a 	broad 	range 	of
associations 	and 	meanings. 	It 	is 	intriguing 	to 	reflect
that 	in 	1929. 	the year the 	Villa Savoye was designed 	in
Paris, 	major 	collegiate 	construction 	in 	the 	United
States 	was 	still 	fully 	committed 	to 	neo-Georgian 	(fig.
iS.^) 	and 	neo-CjOthic 	modes. 	To 	the 	avant-garde, 	of
course, 	this 	seemed 	like 	further 	evidence 	of 	retro-
gressive 	sentimentalism: 	however, 	in 	a 	situation

-- 239 of 420 --

238 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
where 	modern 	forms 	were 	not 	even 	known, 	this 	was
scarcely 	fair 	criticism. 	Even 	if modern 	architecture 	had
been 	known, 	it 	is 	doubtful 	that 	it 	would 	have 	been
employed 	in 	a 	context 	where 	associations 	with 	past
learning 	and 	with 	tradition 	were 	sought. 	The 	same
was 	often 	true 	of 	major 	civic 	monuments 	and 	of
churches, 	tasks 	which 	virtually 	demanded 	continuity
of symbolism, 	rather 	than 	a 	radical 	break. 	In 	domestic
architecture 	in 	the 	United 	States 	between 	the 	wars,
some 	of the 	same 	regionalist 	currents 	we 	have 	sensed
in 	Europe 	as counterforces 	to 	internationalism 	also 	ran
strong; 	it 	was 	highly 	misleading 	of the 	early apostles of
modernism 	to 	have 	condemned 	traditional 	tendencies
across 	the 	board. 	It 	would 	have 	been 	more 	sensible 	to
have 	considered 	the 	unique 	symbolic 	purposes 	re-
quired 	in 	a 	particular 	context 	and 	to 	have 	enquired
what 	forms 	were 	most 	likely 	to 	fulfil 	these 	functions.
The 	fact 	was 	that 	'modern' 	forms 	were 	better 	able 	to
handle 	some 	contexts, 	and 	'traditional' 	forms 	to
handle 	others.
Were 	this 	a 	book 	on 	the 	architecture 	of 	the 	entire
twentieth 	century, 	instead 	of a 	study 	of the 	traditions
of 	modern 	architecture 	in 	their 	cultural 	setting, 	it
would 	be 	necessary 	to 	devote 	a 	number 	of chapters 	to
such 	phenomena 	as 	the 	continuation 	of 	the 	Gothic
revival 	well 	into 	the 	thirties 	in 	the 	United 	States, 	and
the 	broad 	resurgence of neo-classicism 	which 	occurred
in 	the 	West 	during 	the 	19305. 	Presumably, 	too. 	a
representative 	coverage 	would 	concern 	itselt 	with 	the
many 	exported 	eclectic 	'colonial' 	styles 	which 	prolife-
rated 	in 	countries 	whose 	official 	culture 	was 	imported
or 	imposed. 	However, 	the 	aims 	of this 	book 	are 	a 	little
different, 	so 	it 	is 	necessary 	to 	single 	out 	a 	few 	key
examples 	of 	'traditions 	other 	than 	the 	modern', 	in 	an
attempt 	to 	explain 	why 	'historical' 	forms 	were
employed, 	and 	to 	what 	effect.
One 	context 	in 	which 	traditional 	attitudes 	lived 	on
was 	the 	design 	of state 	monuments 	and 	memorials. 	A
case 	in 	point 	was 	the 	Lincoln 	Memorial 	in 	Was-
hington, 	D.C.. 	designed 	in 	19 11 	by 	Henry 	Bacon, 	and
completed 	in 	1922 	(fig. 	18.6). 	The 	forms 	of 	Bacon's
solution 	were 	inconceivable 	without 	the 	pre-existing
tradition 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	Classicism 	within 	the 	United
States, 	stemming 	from 	R. 	M. 	Hunt 	and 	R.F, 	McKim.
However, 	the 	pre-existing 	neo-classical 	context 	of
Washington 	- 	not 	to 	mention 	various 	moral 	as-
sociations 	attached 	to 	Classical 	forms 	within 	the
American 	tradition 	- 	also 	have 	to 	be 	taken 	into
account. 	The 	idea 	for 	a 	memorial 	to 	Lincoln 	had 	first
been 	formulated 	soon 	after his 	death, 	but 	it 	was 	only 	in
the 	twentieth 	century 	that 	debates 	were 	set 	in 	motion
over 	a 	site 	and 	an 	architect. 	The 	former 	was 	chosen
18.5 	(Je/O 	Shepley.
Buiftnch. 	Coolidge
and 	Abbott. 	Memorial
Ciiurch. 	Harvard
University. 	Cambridge.
Mass.. 	1929-33.
18.6 	(below) 	Henry
Bacon. 	Lincoln
Memorial. 	Washington
D.C.. 	191 	1-22. 	The
Washington 	Memorial
obelisk 	and 	Capitol 	dome
are in 	the background.

-- 240 of 420 --

The 	Continuity 	of Older Traditions 	• 	239
18.7 	Edwin 	lAityens.
Viceroy's 	House. 	New
Delhi. 	1915-24.
/
from 	a 	set 	of 	six 	alternatives, 	the 	latter 	on 	the
recommendation 	of Daniel 	Burnham. 	who 	had 	already
been 	involved 	with 	the 	replanning 	of the 	Washington
Mall 	according 	to 	Classical 	planning 	principles. 	The
project 	was 	inseparable 	in 	this 	era 	from 	a 	sense 	of
Washington 	as 	a 	sort of new 	Rome 	at 	the 	centre 	of an
emergent 	empire. 	The 	monument 	had 	to 	stand 	on 	the
main 	axis with 	the Capitol 	and 	the 	Washington 	Obelisk
and 	to 	be 	an 	eventual 	visual 	link 	between 	this 	grand
avenue 	of 	presidential 	associations 	and 	the 	Arlington
Cemetery on 	the other side of the Potomac. 	The scheme
adopted 	avoided 	a 	dome, 	so as 	not 	to 	distract 	from 	the
dome of the 	Capitol, 	and 	was 	a 	low, 	horizontal, 	elegant
neo-Greek 	box 	on 	an 	elevated 	mound. 	It 	was 	a 	cross
between 	a 	temple 	and 	a 	tomb, 	and 	was 	made 	from 	the
purest 	of 	white 	Colorado 	marbles. 	The 	low 	attic 	was
supported 	on 	a 	peristyle 	of 	sharp-cut 	Doric 	columns,
while 	the 	frieze 	and 	entablature 	were 	engraved 	with
symbols 	of 	the 	states 	and 	their 	unity. 	On 	the 	interior.
Daniel 	Chester 	French's 	sculpture 	of 	the 	seated
Abraham 	Lincoln 	sat 	facing down 	the main 	axis over a
long 	reflecting 	pool 	(modelled 	on 	the 	Taj 	Mahal)
towards 	the 	Washington 	Monument. 	In 	symbolic
terms 	the 	aim 	was 	to 	mirror 	the 	purity 	of 	Lincoln's
character 	and 	to 	anchor 	his 	historical 	position 	in
relation 	to 	his 	great 	predecessors 	and 	vis-d-vis 	the
guiding 	ideals 	of 	the 	Union. 	The 	synthesis 	of 	these
particular 	Classical 	prototypes 	fitted 	no 	simple 	or-
thodox 	procedure; 	but 	the 	fusion 	had 	architectural
value nonetheless. 	It 	is 	intriguing 	to speculate 	how 	this
building 	could 	have 	handled 	this 	range 	of 	evocations
and 	emotions 	without 	the 	references 	to 	Classical
antiquity 	and 	to 	American 	re-uses 	of Classicism 	of the
previous 	century 	and 	a 	half 	As 	will 	be 	shown 	in 	the
final 	section 	of 	this 	book, 	the 	modern 	movement 	had
eventually 	to 	solve 	analogous 	rhetorical 	problems 	by
turning 	back 	to 	ancient 	precedents, 	but 	without 	such
obvious 	re-use of historical 	vocabulary.
Another 	example 	of 	the 	intelligent 	abstraction 	of
precedent 	is 	provided 	by 	Edwin 	Lutyens's 	designs 	for
the 	Viceroy's 	House 	at 	New 	Delhi 	of 	1915-24 	(fig.
18.7). 	The 	pejorative 	associations 	attached 	to 	the 	term
'eclectic' 	would 	simply 	be 	insulting 	in 	this 	instance.
Once 	again, 	the 	issue 	unfolds 	around 	the 	ability 	of the
inventor to fuse a 	new 	order out 	of inherited 	forms, 	and
to 	imply 	a 	new 	range 	of 	meanings 	for 	a 	new 	context.
The 	symbolic 	task 	in 	this 	case 	was 	nothing 	less 	than
the 	authentication 	of 	the 	authority 	of 	the 	British 	Raj.
Lutyens 	drew 	upon 	a 	range 	of 	imperial 	associations
and 	symbols 	within 	both 	European 	and 	Classical
traditions 	to 	achieve 	the 	right 	tone. 	The 	Viceroy's
House 	was 	placed 	at 	the 	end 	of a 	three-mile 	axis 	in 	a
manner 	resonating 	with 	evocations 	of 	such 	Baroque
prototypes 	as 	Versailles, 	Blenheim, 	and 	Greenwich
Hospital. 	The 	dome 	over 	the 	main 	axis 	was 	a 	curious
hybrid 	of 	Classical 	and 	Mogul 	emblems 	of 	authority

-- 241 of 420 --

240 	• 	Modern 	Architecture 	between 	the 	Wars
18.8 	(k/O 	P.V.Jensen-
Klint, 	Grundtvlg Church.
Copenhagen. 	1422.
i8.9(rig/i() 	Erick 	Gunnar
Asplund. 	Stockholm
Public 	Library.
1920-28.

-- 242 of 420 --

The 	Continuity 	of Older Traditions 	• 	241
which 	also 	seemed 	to 	return 	to 	the 	(perhaps 	proto-
typical) 	image 	of a 	'head'. 	The 	roofscapes 	with 	their
inverted 	basins 	and 	deep-cut 	overhangs 	were 	also
derived 	from such 	sources 	as 	the 	'Chattris' 	of Fathepur
Sikri 	(late 	sixteenth 	century). 	The 	articulation 	with
bases 	and 	horizontal 	mouldings 	was 	itself 	a 	fusion of
Classical 	proportions 	and 	climatic 	and 	structural
devices 	nearer 	at 	hand. 	What 	stopped 	the 	whole 	from
being 	a 	mere 	assemblage 	of 	quotations 	was 	the 	way
that 	Lutyens 	was 	able 	to 	grasp 	the 	principles 	of earlier
styles 	and 	to 	blend 	them 	with 	his 	own 	imaginative
intentions 	and 	private 	metaphors. 	The 	fusion 	of 	old
and 	new 	relied 	upon 	a 	feat 	of 	abstraction 	and 	a
capacity 	to 	generate 	expressive 	forms 	in 	a 	new
context: 	the 	critical 	issue 	at 	stake 	was 	less 	the
distinction 	between 	'modernist' 	and 	'traditionalist'
positions 	than 	between 	authentic 	form 	and 	pastiche.
Another example 	of 	the 	successful 	synthesis 	of past
prototypes 	and 	new 	meanings 	is 	provided 	by 	the
Grundtvig 	Church 	outside 	Copenhagen, 	by 	P. 	V.
Jensen-Klint 	(fig. 	18.8). 	This 	was 	originally 	designed
just 	before 	the 	First 	World 	War. 	but 	it 	was 	brought 	to
completion 	in 	the 	early 	twenties. 	Here 	the 	sources
were medieval. 	The design was based on 	a generic form
of 	ecclesiastical 	architecture 	prevalent 	in 	Zeeland
using 	stepped 	gable 	ends 	and 	vertical 	brick-beading.
Such 	indigenous 	motifs 	were 	transformed 	into 	a
language of sharp 	geometries, 	over a 	plan that 	was 	also
a 	variant 	on 	a 	traditional 	type. 	Jensen-Klint's 	solution
was 	clearly 	influenced 	by 	so-called 	'National 	Roman-
tic' 	attitudes, 	which 	required 	that 	one 	draw 	upon
national 	traditions 	and 	define 	images essentially 	linked
to 	a 	particular culture 	and 	landscape. 	According 	to 	the
standard 	critical 	views 	of 	modernism, 	this 	procedure
should 	have 	been 	destined 	to 	reproduce 	a 	'dead'
formula : 	but 	Jensen-Klint 	was 	able 	to 	breathe 	new 	life
into 	forms 	which 	were 	nonetheless 	heavily 	influenced
by 	earlier 	definitions 	of religious 	types.
A 	similar 	point 	can 	be 	made 	about 	another
Scandinavian 	example: 	the 	Stockholm 	Public 	Library
by 	Gunnar 	Asplund 	of 	1920-28 	(fig. 	18.9). 	Here 	the
solution 	was 	clearly 	modelled 	on 	a 	cluster 	of 	themes
derived 	from 	neo-classicism 	and 	the 	nineteenth-
century 	tradition 	of 	library 	design. 	The 	reading-room
was 	set 	upon 	a 	round 	plan 	and 	expressed 	as 	a
centralized 	cylinder 	poking 	up 	through 	a 	rectangular
box. 	It 	was 	a 	formula 	with 	numerous 	antecedents
including, 	ultimately, 	the stripped 	geometrical 	vocabu-
lary 	of the 	French 	eighteenth-century 	architect 	Claude
Nicolas 	Ledoux. 	Had 	Asplund 	been 	a 	lesser 	architect,
he 	might 	have 	produced 	a 	mere 	pastiche. 	As 	it 	was. 	he
was 	able 	to 	reinvigorate 	earlier 	forms 	with 	his 	own
expressive 	intentions 	and 	metaphors. 	The 	suggestion
has 	even 	been 	made 	that 	Asplund's 	vocabulary 	rested
on 	a 	sort 	of 	substructure 	of physiological 	imagery. 	In

-- 243 of 420 --

242 	Modern 	Architecture 	hct\\eeii 	tlio 	Wars
the 	case 	of 	the 	library 	the 	original 	section 	emerged
from 	a 	sort 	of reconstituted 	cranium 	- 	presumably 	an
idea 	the 	architect 	felt 	appropriate 	to 	the 	function. 	He
rejected 	the 	clothing 	of 	neo-classicism 	only 	a 	year 	or
two 	after 	completing 	the 	library, 	when 	he 	adopted 	the
usages 	of 	the 	International 	Style 	at 	the 	Stockholm
exhibition, 	but 	his 	underlying 	metaphors 	and 	formal
strategies 	did 	not 	change 	drastically. 	In 	the 	Stockholm
Crematorium 	(1939) 	Asplund 	drove 	together 	his
earlier 	neo-classicism 	and 	the 	stripped 	forms 	and
spatial 	ideas 	he 	had 	worked 	out 	from 	the 	International
Modern 	movement 	(fig. 	iS.io). 	The 	main 	portico 	was
a 	superbly 	disciplined 	abstraction 	of load 	and 	support,
while the 	plan 	was 	a 	rich 	combination 	of open, 	flowing
spaces 	and 	closed 	compartments. 	Again, 	it 	is 	arguable
that 	the 	design 	contained 	hermetic 	imagery 	linked, 	in
this 	instance, 	to 	themes 	of life 	and 	death.
France 	and 	England 	were 	generally 	less 	fortunate
than 	this 	in 	their 	'traditionalist' 	architects 	in 	the 	period
from 	around 	1910 	to 	1940. 	P.-H. 	Nenot. 	for 	example
(mentioned 	in 	Chapter 	13 	in 	connection 	with 	the
League 	of 	Nations), 	was 	fully 	endowed 	with 	all 	the
scholarly 	trappings 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	respectibility, 	but
lacked 	a 	gift 	for 	original 	synthesis. 	The 	same 	may 	be
said 	of 	the 	English 	architect 	Reginald 	Blomfield. 	who
was 	one 	of 	a 	number 	of 	exponents 	of 	the 	stylish
importation 	of 	Beaux-Arts 	Classicism 	from 	France
around 	1 	9 	1 	o. 	His extensive 	fa<;ades on 	Regent 	Street 	of
1922 	(fig. 	18.11 	1. 	for 	instance, 	were 	uninspired
reworkings 	of 	motifs 	derived 	from 	Palladio 	and
Sansovino. 	One 	can 	understand, 	on 	inspection, 	why
a 	younger 	generation 	felt 	the 	need 	for 	change: 	it 	is
even 	arguable 	that 	Ferret, 	Behrens 	and 	Wright 	(in 	one
generation). 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and
Aalto 	(in 	another), 	had 	a 	deeper 	insight 	into 	the
essentials of Classicism 	than 	their learned counterparts
who 	made 	a 	more 	overt 	reference 	to 	the 	past. 	The
Unity 	Temple, 	for 	example, 	reflected 	a 	far 	more
profound 	rethinking 	of 	architectural 	basics 	than
anything 	produced 	at 	the 	same 	time 	by 	a 	revivalist.
Even 	so. 	Blomfield 	became 	one 	of 	the 	leading
spokesmen 	of 	the 	'traditionalist' 	position. 	In 	a 	debate
which 	took 	place 	in 	i 	9 	32 	between 	himself and 	Amyas
Connell. 	Blomfield 	claimed 	that 	the 	new 	architecture
was 	bound 	to 	end 	up 	in 	barbarism 	because 	of its 	stress
on 	function 	and 	its 	lack 	of 	concern 	with 	the 	great
lessons 	of the 	past.
I 	part 	company 	with 	the 	modernists, 	not 	for 	their
dismissal 	of Gothic 	tracery 	and 	Classical 	orders 	or
meaningless 	ornament, 	or 	for 	their 	use 	of steel 	and
reinforced 	concrete 	or 	any 	other 	material 	suitable
for 	building, 	but 	because 	they 	insist 	on 	our
regarding 	architecture, 	no 	longer 	as 	an 	art. 	but
only 	as 	a 	branch 	of engineering.
18.10 	ErikGunnar
Asplund. 	crematorium
at 	Enskede. 	Stockholm,
1939-

-- 244 of 420 --

The 	Continuity 	of Older 	Traditions 	• 	243
18. 1 	1 	Reginald
Blomticld. 	lacades on
Regent 	Street. 	London.
1923.
Against 	this 	I5lomfield 	set 	the 	position 	of 	the 	'tradit-
ionalist' 	(which 	he 	was 	better 	able 	to 	convey 	in 	words
than 	in 	his 	own 	architecture):
. 	. 	. 	civilisation 	is 	far 	too 	old 	and 	complicated 	for 	a
clean 	sweep. 	It 	runs 	back 	for 	thousands 	of years,
and 	in 	all 	those years 	man 	has 	been 	building 	up
certain 	instinctive 	preferences 	or 	prejudices, 	if you
like, 	which 	lie 	at 	the 	back 	of consciousness. 	They
may 	be 	stamped 	out 	lor 	a 	time, 	but 	they 	will
inevitably 	play 	their 	part 	again 	, 	,
,
One 	suspects 	that 	if 	Blomfield 	had 	spent 	less 	time
taking 	the 	slogans 	of 	'functionalism' 	literally, 	and
more 	time 	examining 	actual 	works 	of 	modern 	archi-
tecture, 	he 	might 	have 	understood 	that 	his 	position
was 	not 	so 	drastically 	opposed 	to 	'modern' 	architects
as 	he 	imagined. 	After 	all. 	one 	of the 	main 	messages 	of
Vers 	line iinliitccturc had 	been 	that one should 	return 	to
the 	great 	signposts 	of 	the 	Classical 	past 	in 	order 	to
resolve 	the 	problem 	of 	a 	modern 	architecture. 	The
difference 	between 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Blomfield 	lay, 	of
course, 	not 	only 	in 	the 	divergence 	of 	their 	respective
talents, 	but 	also 	in 	their 	attitude 	to 	the 	contemporary
world, 	Le 	Corbusier 	might 	have 	argued 	that 	the 	only
way 	to 	use 	the 	lessons 	of 	the 	past 	fruitfully 	was 	to
rethink 	them 	in 	terms 	of the 	present; 	Blomfield. 	on 	the
other 	hand, 	put 	forth 	the 	Academic 	position, 	which
was 	liable 	to 	lead 	to 	sterility, 	as 	there 	was 	insufficient
transformation 	of precedent.
The 	Connell/Blomfield 	debate 	was 	by 	no 	means 	an
isolated 	instance 	of 	a 	sort 	of 	caricaturing 	of 	both
'modernist' 	and 	'traditionalist' 	outlooks: 	numerous
versions 	of the 	same 	discussion 	occurred 	in 	the 	i 	t)20s
and 	1930s. 	Unfortunately 	this 	polemical 	atmosphere
did 	little 	to 	clarify 	the 	true 	relationship 	between
modern 	architecture 	and 	the 	past. 	The 	matter 	was
scarcely 	helped 	by 	the 	early 	mythographers 	of 	the
modern 	movement. 	Hitchcock, 	Pevsner 	and 	Ciedion
(whose 	seminal 	works 	appeared 	in 	1932, 	19^(1 	and
1 	94 	1 	respectively!, 	as 	these 	lent 	extra 	weight 	to 	the
notion 	that 	the 	new 	architecture 	was 	indeed 	al-
together 	new. 	This 	attitude 	was 	entirely 	under-
standable 	given 	the historical context and, 	in 	a 	sense, 	it
became 	the 	official 	line: 	it 	was 	bequeathed 	to 	the
generation 	who 	came 	to 	the 	fore 	after 	the 	Second
World 	War. 	Their 	upbringing 	occurred 	under 	the
mantle 	of a 	new 	tradition 	whose 	slogans 	of modernity
they 	understood, 	but 	whose 	subtleties 	with 	respect 	to
tradition 	they 	failed 	to 	grasp. 	The 	way 	to 	the 	more
distant 	past 	was 	therefore 	temporarily 	barred 	by
lopsided 	dogma. 	Thus 	historians, 	who 	had 	played 	such
a 	crucial 	role 	in 	the 	very 	invention 	of 	the 	idea 	of 	a
modern 	architecture, 	continued 	to 	influence 	its
development 	by 	the 	promulgation 	of their 	myths.

-- 245 of 420 --



-- 246 of 420 --

1 	{left) 	Charles 	Rennie
Mackintosh, 	Glasgow
School 	of Art. 	library
wing, 	1908.
2 	(right) 	Auguste 	Perret.
apartments 	at 	2 5bis.
Rue Franklin. 	Paris,
1902. 	top portion 	of
faijade.

-- 247 of 420 --

J, 	( left ) 	Frank Lloyd
Wright. 	Fricke House.
Oak 	I'ark. 	Illinois. 	1902.
4l/)i'/(ni') 	Cerrit Thomas
Rietveld. 	Schroeder
House. 	Utrecht. 	1923-4.
'i;//!() 	William Van
Alen. 	Chrysler Building.
New 	York. 	1928-30.

-- 248 of 420 --

1
5' 	>• 	«W 	§15 	Kg'
^ ^^ 	SB 	ffS ^*=^-' 	i^-
M 	^^ 	5g 	^'m 	^9 	^£i 	a*^'

-- 249 of 420 --

6 	[above) 	Richard
Neutra. 	Lovell 	House.
Los Angeles. 	California.
1927.
7 	Ueft) 	Le 	Corbusier. 	'Les
Heures 	Claires', 	the Villa
Savoye. 	Poissy, 	1928-9.
view 	towards 	ramp 	and
stack 	containing spiral
stair, 	at the main, 	first-
floor level.
8(rii;hn 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Falling 	Water,
the 	Bear 	Run.
Pennsylvania. 	1936.

-- 250 of 420 --



-- 251 of 420 --



-- 252 of 420 --

y. 	'<»• 	.
" -- ^^""'."^vVyi^7^:.r^^-^-'.~ --.'; f\-""''''-^>^fl
3 	(left) 	Ludwig Mies 	van
der Rohc. 	Lake 	Shore
Drive 	apartments.
Chicago. 	1950. 	view 	up
towers 	showing
attached 	T 	beams.
io(«/)in'i') 	Le 	Corbusier.
Parliament 	Building.
Chandigarh. 	India.
1953-62.
II 	{right) 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Town 	Hall 	and civic
centre. 	Saynatsalo.
Finland. 	1949-52.

-- 253 of 420 --



-- 254 of 420 --

nrijrw
I2{left) 	James 	Stirling,
lingineering 	Building.
Leicester 	University.
England. 	1965-7.
13 	{above) 	Denys
Lasdun. 	Royal 	College of
Physicians, 	Regents
Park. 	London, 	i960.
14 	irijiht) 	Luis
Barragiin. 	Riding 	School
at San 	Cristobal. 	Mexico.
1962-S.

-- 255 of 420 --

IS 	Cift) 	Andre
Ravereau. 	Medical
Centre. 	Mopti, 	Mali,
14 74-6.
1 	h 	(nij/iO 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Kimbell 	Museum. 	Fort
Worth. 	Texas. 	1969-73.

-- 256 of 420 --



-- 257 of 420 --

>w

-- 258 of 420 --



-- 259 of 420 --

1 	9. 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America:
Immigration 	and 	Consolidation
In 	the 	iq2os 	one 	was 	forced 	to 	do 	away 	with 	nineteenth-century 	tendencies,
when 	one 	had 	to 	begin 	again 	from 	scratch. 	Today 	the 	situation 	is 	completely
different. 	We 	stand 	at 	the 	beginning 	of a 	new 	tradition. 	One 	need 	no 	longer
destroy 	what 	the 	preceding 	generation 	accomplished, 	but 	one 	has 	to 	expand
it....
S. 	Giedion, 	1955
Even 	now 	it 	is 	difficult 	to 	assess 	the 	full 	impact 	of 	the
Second 	World 	War 	on 	architecture. 	Like 	the 	earlier
world 	war. 	it 	destroyed 	a 	previous social 	and 	economic
order, 	and 	to 	that 	extent 	eroded 	some 	of 	the 	impulses
which 	had 	brought 	modern 	architecture 	into
existence. 	It 	discredited 	technology 	with 	the 	avant-
garde 	and 	so 	disrupted 	a 	key 	element 	in 	an 	earlier
Utopia, 	and 	brought 	with 	it 	a 	severe 	physical 	and
cultural 	destruction, 	especially 	in 	Europe, 	the 	Soviet
llnion. 	and 	Japan. 	Rebuilding 	was 	necessary, 	but
optimism 	in 	architectural 	innovation 	had 	been
severely 	undermined. 	The 	intellectual 	climate 	varied
considerably 	from 	country 	to 	country, 	but 	there 	was
nothing 	to 	compare 	with 	the creative 	quest 	for 	a 	brave
new 	world 	which 	had 	filled 	a 	certain 	vacuum 	after 	the
First 	World 	War 	in 	Europe.
Despite 	radically 	altered 	circumstances, 	the 	'new
tradition' 	was 	not 	so 	easily 	defeated, 	though: 	all 	the
masters 	of modern 	architecture 	were 	still 	alive, 	and 	so
were 	many 	of their 	guiding 	ideas. 	There 	was 	no 	going
back 	and 	pretending 	that 	the 	architectural 	revolution
of 	the 	twenties 	had 	not 	occurred, 	no 	use 	pretending
that 	another 	revolution 	of 	parallel 	depth 	was 	likely 	to
happen. 	The 	architect 	seeking 	forms 	in 	the 	late 	1 	940s
found 	himself 	in 	the 	position 	of 	an 	extender 	of
tradition. 	Whatever 	new 	meanings 	might 	be 	sought,
whatever 	functions 	might 	need 	handling, 	whatever
regional 	traditions 	might 	need 	respecting, 	trans-
formation 	could 	occur 	only 	on 	the 	basis 	of, 	or 	in
reaction 	to. 	the 	earlier 	modern 	movement.
It has 	to be stressed 	that creative transformation 	was
a 	necessity: 	simply 	U) 	have 	repeated 	the .solutions of the
inter-war 	period 	would 	have 	been 	to 	court 	the 	worst
form 	of 	academicism; 	unfortunately, 	this 	often 	hap-
pened, 	offering 	a 	classic 	case 	of 'symbolic 	devaluation'
and 	of 	the 	misapplication 	of 	prototypes. 	One 	of 	the
striking 	features 	of 	the 	years 	between 	the 	end 	of 	the
war 	and 	about 	i960 	was 	a 	battle 	between 	factions
intent 	on 	a 	tired 	international 	formula, 	and 	factions
seeking 	a 	revitalization 	on 	the 	basis 	of a 	new 	post-war
state of mind. 	Even 	the 	'masters' 	themselves were 	faced
with 	the 	dual 	problem 	of 	extending 	their 	earlier
discoveries 	and 	of 	seeking 	new 	solutions 	simul-
taneously.
Another 	feature 	of 	the 	broad 	picture 	after 	the 	war
was 	the 	international 	'victory' 	of modern 	architecture.
From 	Rio 	de 	Janeiro 	to 	Sydney, 	from 	Tokyo 	to 	Beirut,
the 	inheritance 	of 	pre-war 	architecture 	began 	to 	pop
up. 	In 	part 	the 	spread 	of 	images 	(many 	of 	them
bastardized 	and 	stereotyped) 	was 	encouraged 	by 	the
internationalization 	of 	trade, 	with 	the 	United 	States
supplying 	many 	of the 	standard 	emblems 	of 	'modern-
ization'. 	In 	part 	it 	was 	a 	matter 	of 	indigenous 	elites
seeking 	a 	break with 	either 	earlier 	nineteenth-century
colonial 	traditions, 	or 	else 	with 	earlier 	national 	or
regional 	tendencies 	which 	they 	found 	too 	restrictive.
In some countries - for example, 	England 	and 	Brazil 	- it
was 	a 	matter 	of 	extending 	tentative 	pre-war 	begin-
nings, 	though 	the 	contrast 	between 	countries 	which
had industrialized gradually 	and 	those which 	had done
so 	in 	a 	single 	generation 	was 	dramatic. 	In 	other
countries 	for 	example. 	India 	or 	Australia 	modern
architecture 	had 	to 	begin 	from 	scratch. 	When
examining 	the 	international 	picture 	it 	is 	crucial 	to
PREVIOUS 	pac;e
Louis 	I. 	Kaiin. 	Jonas Salk
Institute 	for 	Biological
Studies. 	La Jolla.
California. 	1959-65.
view 	towards sea
between 	study rooms.

-- 260 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America ; 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	• 	259
iq.i 	Walter 	dropius.
Gropius 	House. 	Lincoln.
Massaciiusetts. 	193^.
understand 	at 	what 	stage 	of maturity, 	and 	with 	what
depth 	of 	content, 	modern 	forms 	first 	entered 	a 	local
scene; 	then 	to 	try 	and 	gauge 	how 	the 	foreign 	body 	was
received, 	rejected, 	or 	made 	amenable 	to 	pre-existing
cultural 	matter.
Some 	of the 	dramas 	of transmigration 	were 	already
being 	played 	out 	in 	the 	thirties. 	We 	have 	seen 	how-
architects 	as 	diverse 	as 	Aalto 	and 	Schindler 	were
concerned 	with 	finding 	forms 	well 	attuned 	to 	local
climates 	and 	patterns 	of life. 	The 	emigration 	of some 	of
the 	modern 	masters 	added 	another 	dimension 	to 	the
process 	of 	change. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and 	Walter
Gropius. 	for 	example, 	both 	arrived 	in 	the 	United 	States
in 	1937. 	They 	brought 	with 	them 	mature 	philosophies
and 	vocabularies, 	and 	their 	arrival 	gave 	immense
prestige 	to 	the 	International 	Modern 	movement 	in
America. 	However, 	they 	still 	entered 	a 	culture 	quite
foreign 	to 	their 	original 	aims. 	They 	changed 	it. 	but 	it
also 	changed 	them. 	Arguably. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe
survived 	the 	transatlantic 	crossing 	more 	satisfactorily
than 	did 	Gropius.
Gropius 	left 	Germany 	in 	1 	9 	54. 	realizing 	that 	Nazism
and 	modern 	architecture 	were 	irreconcilable, 	and
spent 	three 	years 	in 	England 	before 	being 	invited 	by
Dean 	Hudnut 	of 	the 	Harvard 	Graduate 	School 	of
Design 	to 	teach 	there. 	Soon 	after 	his 	arrival 	in
Massachusetts, 	he built a 	house for 	himself and 	his 	wife
in 	Lincoln 	(fig. 	19. 	1 	). 	just 	beyond 	the 	Boston 	suburbs.
The 	crisp 	white 	forms, 	wide 	openings, 	and 	free 	plan
marked this out 	as a 	foreign, 	internationalist 	intrusion;
however, 	there 	were 	some 	respectful 	regionalist
touches, 	such 	as 	indigenous 	wooden 	framing 	and
white-painted 	New 	England 	siding. 	It 	seems 	that
Gropius 	may 	have 	sensed, 	in 	the 	stripped 	forms 	of the
early 	Massachusetts 	vernacular, 	a 	concentration 	on
essentials 	akin 	to 	his 	own. 	Marcel 	Breuer. 	Gropius's
colleague 	from 	the 	Bauhaus, 	soon 	followed 	to 	Boston,
and 	he 	too 	built 	himself 	a 	house 	combining 	ideas
derived 	from 	the 	collective 	housing 	experiments 	of the
twenties, 	with 	curious 	rustic 	intrusions 	like 	a 	rubble
wall 	of 	local 	stone. 	Compared 	with 	the 	taut 	machine-
age 	designs 	of 	a 	decade 	earlier, 	there 	was 	a 	con-
siderable 	mellowness, 	which 	perhaps 	betokened 	a 	loss
of 	polemical 	edge. 	Jordy 	has 	described 	this 	character
well 	with 	the 	phrase 	'the 	domestication 	of 	modern'.
Both 	Breuer 	and 	Gropius 	had 	experienced 	the 	up-
heaval 	of 	the 	diaspora; 	some 	loss 	of 	intensity 	was
probably 	inevitable; 	forms 	which 	had 	been 	created 	to

-- 261 of 420 --

26o 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
deal 	with 	the 	social 	conditions 	of Weimar 	were 	bound
to 	mean 	something 	different 	in 	the 	vicinity 	of Walden
Pond.
As 	important 	as 	their 	individual 	buildings 	was 	their
influence 	as 	teachers. 	At 	Harvard 	(always 	a 	school
with 	a 	national 	and 	international 	influence) 	an 	era 	of
Beaux-Arts 	inspired 	instruction 	came 	to 	an 	end. 	The
past, 	once 	the 	source 	of 	all 	wisdom, 	came 	to 	be
regarded 	with 	suspicion. 	Suave 	manipulation 	of
inherited 	elements 	of tradition 	was 	replaced 	by 	a 	nuts
and 	bolts 	rationality, 	allied 	to 	more 	nebulous 	notions
of a 	'new 	architecture' 	supposedly 	in 	tune 	with 	the
dictates 	of 	contemporary 	social 	and 	technological
reality. 	An 	appealing 	progressivist 	sentiment 	was 	also
implied 	(though 	the 	original 	ideological 	imperatives
were 	never 	spelt 	out), 	and 	when 	the 	apologist 	and
historian 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Sigfried 	Giedion.
presented 	the 	work 	of his 	European 	friends 	as 	the 	only
true 	tradition 	of the 	modern 	epoch 	in 	his 	Charles 	Eliot
Norton 	lectures 	at 	Harvard 	of 	1938 	(later 	published 	as
the 	monumental 	Space. 	Time 	and 	Arcbkecture), 	it
seemed 	as 	if 	manifest 	destiny 	must 	have 	singled 	out
Massachusetts.
Of course, 	there 	had 	been 	'modern' 	developments 	in
the USA before this date, 	as 	we 	have seen: 	the buildings
of 	Howe 	and 	Lescaze, 	Neutra 	and 	Schindler, 	the
uncategorizable 	middle 	works 	of 	Wright, 	the 	experi-
ments 	of 	Buckminster 	Fuller: 	and 	Hitchcock 	and
Johnson's 	book 	The 	International 	Style 	of 	1932 	had
done 	much 	to 	change 	taste. 	But 	Gropius 	brought 	with
him 	the 	full 	authority 	of 	one 	of 	the 	founding 	fathers.
With 	the 	dousing 	of the 	modern 	movement 	in 	Europe
in 	the 	thirties, 	it 	seemed 	as 	if 	the 	liberal 	generosity 	of
America 	was 	allowing 	a 	flame 	to 	keep 	burning 	which
might 	otherwise 	have 	gone 	out. 	A 	new 	generation 	of
young 	Americans, 	sickened 	by 	the 	weak 	eclecticism
rife 	in 	America, 	flocked 	to 	Cambridge 	to 	hear 	the 	new
gospel. 	Paul 	Rudolph, 	Edward 	L. 	Barnes. 	leoh 	Ming
Pei. 	Philip 	Johnson, 	and 	Benjamin 	Thompson 	were
among 	the 	first 	disciples.
Modern 	architecture 	in 	its 	American 	beginnings
was 	primarily 	a 	suburban 	matter. 	But 	after 	the 	war
came 	more 	general 	acceptance 	and 	larger 	com-
missions. 	In 	1948, 	Gropius 	and 	his 	firm 	TAC 	(The
''--'l^"'^^
19.2 	Walter Gropius
and The 	Architects
Collaborative. 	Harkness
Commons 	dormitories,
Harvard 	University,
1948-

-- 262 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America : 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	261
^^mm':M
19.3 	Ludwig 	Mies van
der Rohe. 	Illinois
Institute of Technology,
Chicago. 	1940. 	model 	of
ensemble.
Architects 	Collaborativel 	designed 	a 	new 	Graduate
Center 	complex 	for 	Harvard 	University, 	comprising
low 	dormitory 	blocks 	(fig. 	19.2) 	and 	a 	commons
building 	of 	amplified 	scale. 	In 	the 	local 	context, 	the
intrusion 	of 	the 	'factory 	aesthetic', 	the 	flat 	roofs, 	strip
windows 	and 	asymmetrical 	forms, 	was 	a 	symbolic
event 	of 	some 	importance, 	since 	the 	same 	university
had 	favoured 	neo-Georgian 	sentimentality 	in 	its
dormitory 	designs 	two 	decades 	earlier. 	In 	the 	same
period 	Breuer 	designed 	Ferry 	House 	dormitory 	at
Vassar, 	in 	a 	softer, 	less 	demanding 	modern 	mode,
while 	Aalto's 	Baker 	House 	at 	MIT 	already 	pointed 	the
way 	beyond 	the 	rigidities 	of the 	International 	Style.
Gropius 	stressed 	teamwork 	and 	the 	necessity 	to 	seek
a 	sort 	of anonymity 	arising, 	supposedly, 	from 	the 	logic
of 	programme 	and 	structure, 	and 	from 	a 	sense 	of
'objectivity' 	about 	modern 	conditions. 	In 	the 	wrong
hands this quest for simplicity could 	very easily become
mere 	banality; 	the 	rationality 	could 	all 	too 	easily
degenerate into the wilderness 	of real estate values 	and
management 	science. 	To 	trace 	Gropius's 	American
development 	from 	the 	hopeful 	beginnings 	(which
certainly 	lacked 	the 	force 	and 	conviction 	of his 	earlier
works), 	to 	such 	designs 	of 	the 	mid-sixties 	as 	the 	Pan
Am 	skyscraper 	in 	New 	York 	or 	the 	J, 	F, 	Kennedy 	build-
ing in Boston is to see a loss of expressive power and to be
made 	aware 	of a 	decline. 	Can 	this 	be 	accounted 	for 	in
merely 	biographical 	terms, 	or 	is 	it 	perhaps 	symptoma-
tic 	of a larger situation 	in 	the 	post-war period 	when 	the
'alternative' 	vision 	of 	modern 	architecture 	was
gradually 	absorbed 	by 	the 	institutions 	of 	consumer
capitalism? 	The 	'victory' 	of 	modern 	forms 	certainly
brought 	with 	it 	the 	onus 	of representing 	the 	establish-
ment; 	and 	once 	the 	devalued 	International 	Style
became 	a 	tired 	orthodoxy, 	a 	new 	rejection 	and 	re-
evaluation 	became 	absolutely 	necessary.
In 	America 	the 	process 	was 	already 	under 	way 	by
the 	late 	fifties, 	with 	divergent 	results. 	On 	the 	one 	hand
there 	were 	those 	'Expressionists' 	who, 	like 	Eero
Saarinen, 	sought 	'to 	extend 	the 	ABC 	of 	modern
architecture 	into 	curvaceous, 	occasionally 	powerful,
sometimes 	delicious, 	but 	all-too-often 	mannered
realms 	of 	expression. 	Then 	again, 	there 	were 	rever-
sions 	to 	historicism; 	the 	Beaux-Arts 	was 	never 	far
beneath 	the 	surface, 	and 	a 	bland 	neo-classicism 	was
pursued 	by 	Philip 	Johnson, 	Edward 	Durell 	Stone.
Wallace 	Harrison 	and 	Max 	Abramovitz, 	perhaps
because 	the 	monumental 	tasks 	handed 	to 	these 	archi-
tects 	seemed 	to 	require 	a 	greater 	degree 	of 	rhetoric
and 	reference 	than 	the 	spindly 	forms 	of 	Gropian
modernism 	allowed. 	Or 	again, 	there 	were 	forceful
new 	integrations, 	like 	that 	of 	Louis 	I, 	Kahn, 	who
achieved 	a 	synthesis 	of modern 	and 	ancient 	values.
The 	picture 	of 	dissemination 	in 	the 	1950s 	in
America 	cannot 	be 	understood 	at 	all 	without 	the 	late
works 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	appears to 	have 	had 	fewer 	problems
of adjustment 	in 	the diaspora 	than 	Gropius. 	Indeed, 	his
arrival 	in 	Chicago, 	the 	home 	of the 	steel 	frame, 	seems
to 	have 	been 	engineered by 	fate. 	Like 	Gropius. 	he owed
one 	of 	his 	earliest 	commissions 	to 	university 	patron-
age: 	from 	1940 	to 	19S2 	he 	redesigned 	the 	Illinois
Institute 	of Technology 	campus. 	The 	idea 	shows 	most
clearly 	in 	the 	model 	(fig. 	i9-3)- 	The 	main 	functions
were 	grouped 	in 	rectangular 	steel-framed 	boxes 	on 	a
podium, 	in 	a 	composition 	combining 	neo-classical
axiality 	with 	the 	asymmetrical 	planning 	ideas 	of 	the
twenties. 	It 	was 	as 	if a 	sort 	of industrialized 	abstraction
had 	strayed 	from 	some 	foreign 	land 	into 	the 	grid 	of the
surrounding 	south 	side 	of 	Chicago. 	The 	lower 	build-
ings 	in 	the 	hierarchy 	were 	like 	elegant 	factories, 	and
may 	well have 	been 	partially 	inspired by 	Albert 	Kahn's
steel-frame 	factory 	designs. 	With 	their 	brick 	panel
infills, 	their 	tight 	steel 	detailing, 	their 	sober 	pro-
portions, 	and 	their 	air 	of 	straightforward 	'factuality',
they 	were 	a 	unique 	blend 	of Mies 	van 	der 	Robe's 	stern
intellectual 	quest 	for 	impersonality 	and 	the 	potentials
of 	high-quality 	American 	steel 	craftsmanship. 	The
local 	fire 	laws 	required 	that 	steel 	be 	coated 	in 	a 	layer 	of
fireproofing, 	so 	that 	in 	order 	to 	express 	the 	structure
'honestly', 	the 	architect 	had 	to 	adopt 	the 	artifice 	of an
extra 	veneer of steel 	around 	the 	fireproof casing. 	At 	the
corners 	of 	the 	buildings 	this 	led 	to 	a 	curious 	detail 	in
which 	the 	recessed core of steel 	structure 	was 	hinted at
in 	a 	cut-away 	involving 	a 	steel 	veneer 	over 	concrete
fireproofing 	over 	the 	actual 	structure 	within 	the 	wall.
This 	was 	variously 	praised 	for 	its 	structural 	clarity'

-- 263 of 420 --

262 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
and 	its 	supposed 	Mondrianesquc. 	metaphysical 	im-
plications 	- 	as 	if such 	a 	corner 	implied 	lines 	running
on 	to 	infinity'.
At 	the 	head 	of the 	campus 	was 	Crown 	Hall, 	destined
to 	become 	the 	architecture 	building 	(fig. 	14.4). 	Once
again the image of the 	factory 	was dominant 	- the 	idea
for 	this 	vast, 	uninterrupted 	'universal' 	space 	seems
traceable 	directly 	to 	Kahn's 	Bomber 	Assembly 	Plant 	of
1939. 	which 	also 	employed 	a 	dramatic 	truss 	system.
However, 	the 	neo-classical 	qualities 	of 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	design 	are 	just 	as 	crucial: 	these 	were 	schematic
and 	relied 	on an 	interpretation 	of 	such 	essentials 	as
symmetry, 	proportion, 	the 	clear expression 	of load 	and
support, 	and 	a 	certain 	honorific 	mood. 	Crown 	Hall 	is
approached 	up 	a 	grand 	flight 	of 	steps 	and 	is 	detailed
with 	all 	the 	care 	and 	clarity 	that 	Schinkel 	might have
mustered 	in 	similar 	circumstances. 	In 	reducing 	the
building 	to 	the 	essence. 	Mies 	believed 	it 	possible 	to
transform 	naked 	construction 	into 	the 	most 	basic
underlying form. 	This 	is surely what was implied 	by 	his
well-known 	statement 	"less 	is 	more'. 	Such 	a 	simplicity
was 	the result of a 	prodigious 	abstraction, 	and 	indeed 	a
highly 	idealistic 	view 	of 	architecture's 	spiritual
mission. 	One 	is, 	once 	again, 	only 	too 	aware 	how 	easily
less 	could 	become 	less 	rather 	than 	more, 	in 	the 	hands
of Mies's 	followers. 	In 	much 	the 	same 	way 	Mondrian's
followers 	managed 	to 	reduce 	his 	sublime 	abstractions
to 	mere 	checkerboard 	or 	tablecloth 	patterns.
The 	glass 	box 	implied 	a 	generalized 	view 	of 	human
function: 	a 	space 	good 	for 	everything, 	in 	which 	little
attempt 	was 	made 	to 	respond 	to 	individual incident 	or
a 	sense 	of 	place. 	In 	the 	Farnsworth 	House 	of 	1946.
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	indicated 	how 	a 	similar 	idea 	could
be 	applied 	to 	the 	domestic 	pavilion, 	with 	a 	supremely
anti-natural 	attitude: 	the 	obverse 	of 	Wright's 	land-
scape 	Romanticism. 	This design, 	for all 	its 	idiosyncrasy
and 	impracticalities. 	fathered 	a 	host 	of 	imitations
around 	the world, 	the 	most 	notable 	being, 	probably,
Philip 	Johnson's 	erudite 	and 	elegant 	Glass 	House 	at
New 	Canaan 	of 	195 	i 	(fig. 	I9.S)- 	The 	'machine 	in 	the
garden' 	had 	been 	an 	image 	of some 	insistent 	meaning
in 	American 	culture, 	and 	here 	it 	was 	restated. 	Johnson
claimed 	a 	multiplicity 	of 	'sources' 	for 	his 	design, 	from
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	to 	Schinkel, 	to 	Palladio, 	to 	the
brick-stack/wooden-frame constructions of the earliest
settlers. 	However 	one 	assesses 	the 	references, 	the 	fact
der 	Rohe. 	Illinois
Institute of Technology.
Crown 	Hall. 	1952-6.

-- 264 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America : 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	• 	265
remains 	that 	a 	Miesian 	aesthetic 	was 	here 	being
transformed 	into 	a 	chic 	evocation 	of 	high 	living
different 	in 	tone 	from 	the 	originals. 	Colin 	Rowe 	caught
the 	atmosphere 	of such 	a 	shift 	in 	meaning 	in 	American
modern 	architecture 	when 	he 	later 	wrote:
The 	revolutionary 	theme 	was 	never 	a 	very
prominent 	component 	of American 	speculation
about 	building. 	European 	modern 	architecture,
even 	when 	it 	operated 	within 	the 	cracks 	and
crannies 	of the 	capitalist 	system, 	existed 	within 	an
ultimately 	socialist 	ambience: 	American 	modern
architecture 	did 	not. 	And 	it 	was 	thus, 	and 	either 	by
inadvertence 	or 	design, 	that 	when 	in 	the 	1930s.
European 	architecture 	came 	to 	infiltrate 	the 	United
States, 	it 	was 	introduced 	simply 	as 	a 	new 	approach
to 	building 	- 	and 	not 	much 	more. 	That 	is: 	it 	was
introduced, 	largely 	purged 	of its 	ideological 	or
societal 	content; 	and 	it 	became 	available 	not. 	as 	an
evident 	manifestation 	(or 	cause) 	of Socialism 	in
some 	form 	or 	other, 	but 	rather 	as a 	'decor 	de 	la 	vie'
for 	Greenwich. 	Connecticut, 	or 	as 	a 	suitable 	veneer
for 	the 	corporate 	activities 	of 'enlightened
capitalism.'
However, 	the 	steel 	box 	could 	have 	other 	domestic
applications 	than 	Johnson's 	quasi-Classical 	one.
especially 	when 	broken 	open, 	irregularized. 	or 	cross-
bred 	with 	more sprawling domestic 	plan 	types. 	Charles
Barnes's 	own 	house 	in 	California 	of 	1949 	(fig. 	ly.h)
was. 	in 	a 	sense, 	the 	obverse 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's
Platonism 	- 	the 	building 	was 	assembled 	from 	standard
parts 	and composed 	in 	a 	sensitive 	irregularity 	which
reflected 	an 	interest 	in 	Japanese 	wooden-frame 	tra-
ditions 	and 	a 	refined 	sense 	of the 	'ordinary 	. 	The 	siting
of 	the 	Eames 	'shed' 	was 	subtle, 	alongside 	a 	row 	of
eucalyptus trees 	which 	filtered 	the 	light 	into an 	interior
where judiciously selected objects were 	as much 	part of
the 	architecture 	as 	the 	building 	itself. 	The 	aesthetic
effect 	arose 	from 	the 	careful 	juxtaposition 	of 	'ready-
made' 	elements, 	but 	without 	the 	claims 	on 	a 	higher
abstract 	order 	implied 	by 	Mies. 	In 	the 	same 	period 	in
California, 	the 	case-study 	houses 	by 	EUwood 	and
others 	showed 	how 	ideas 	of 	standardization 	could 	be
employed 	to 	create 	extremely 	specific 	landscape
responses, 	and 	open 	patio 	plans: 	the 	very 	opposite 	of
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	pristine 	boxes.
Thus 	the 	steel 	frame 	with 	glass 	infill 	seems 	to 	have
had 	the status of a 	'leitmotif 	in 	the first decade after the
war 	in 	America, 	but 	it 	was 	a 	leitmotif 	capable 	of
supporting 	a 	wide 	range 	of 	philosophies 	and 	ideas.
Probably 	the 	most 	typical 	usage 	was 	in 	the 	design 	of
19. S 	Philip Johnson,
Glass 	House. 	New
Canaan, 	Connecticut,
1951.

-- 265 of 420 --

264 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 94»
tall 	office 	buildings 	and. 	less 	frequently, 	apartment
blocks: 	in 	both 	cases 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	may 	be 	said 	to
have 	made 	a 	major 	impression 	with 	seminal 	buildings.
860. 	Lake 	Shore 	Drive 	apartments. 	Chicago, 	was
designed 	by 	him 	in 	1 	948 	and stands in 	two 	towers 	on 	a
triangular 	lot 	with 	views 	across 	Lake 	Michigan 	(fig.
19.8). 	Here the theme of the elegant, 	steel-framed 	glass
rectangular 	slab 	on 	stilts 	is 	stated 	with 	unparalleled
purity. 	The 	two 	towers 	rise 	to 	twenty-six 	storeys 	and
are 	the 	same 	in 	plan 	and 	size, 	but 	are 	disposed 	on
adjacent 	sites 	so 	that 	the 	oblong-plan 	forms 	face
different 	ways 	and 	are 	perceived 	in 	constant 	tension
(fig. 	19.7). 	They 	are 	linked 	at 	the 	lower 	levels 	by
hovering 	steel 	overhangs. 	The 	lobby 	spaces 	of 	the
towers 	are 	situated 	in 	glazed, 	transparent 	undercrofts
beneath 	the 	rows 	of 	stilts 	and 	are 	furnished 	with
polished 	steel 	and 	marble. 	Elevators 	stand 	to 	the 	core,
and rise through 	the centre of each 	block, 	giving access
to 	luxury 	apartments 	situated 	around 	the 	edges. 	The
uniformity 	of 	interior 	plans 	is 	expressed 	as a 	repeated
bay 	system 	on 	the 	fagades. 	However, 	on 	closer
inspection, 	it 	becomes 	apparent 	that 	there 	are 	minute
variations 	in 	the 	dimensions 	of the 	window 	bays 	at 	the
end 	of each 	horizontal 	row 	of four, 	where 	the 	vertical
structural 	posts 	pass 	up 	the 	fagade. 	This 	results 	in 	an
increase 	of 	vertical 	stress 	visually, 	and 	in 	an 	illusion-
istic 	sense 	of 	depth 	and 	movement. 	Further 	visual
subtleties 	are 	introduced 	by 	the 	slender 	T 	beams
attached 	to 	the 	facade 	at 	regular 	intervals. 	These 	have
no 	practical 	structural 	function, 	but 	what 	might 	be
called 	a 	'visual 	structural' 	role: 	they 	emphasize 	the
verticality 	of 	the 	building 	and 	preserve 	a 	uniform
rhythm 	and 	texture 	over 	what 	are 	in 	fact 	a 	variety 	of
interior 	structural 	realities. 	The 	main 	structural 	posts
are once 	again 	wrapped 	in 	concrete 	fireproofing 	which
is 	then 	wrapped 	in 	steel: 	and 	where 	the 	facades 	come
together 	at 	the 	corner, 	adjacent 	T 	beams 	conspire 	to
produce 	a 	sharp 	visual 	emphasis 	to 	the 	theme 	of two
attached 	planes 	linked to 	an 	underlying 	armature. 	The
'Rationalist 	puritan' 	may 	be 	upset 	by 	the 	extent 	of
these 	'artificialities', 	but 	they 	are 	employed 	precisely 	to
heighten 	one's 	awareness 	of 	the 	inner 	nature 	of 	the
frame. 	One 	calls 	to 	mind 	Geoffrey 	Scott's 	dictum 	that
architecture studies 	'not structure 	in 	itself but the effect
of structure 	on 	the 	human 	spirit' 	(Plate 	9).
But 	the 	T 	beams, 	and 	the 	purity 	of 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	trabeated 	rectangular 	skeleton 	seem 	to 	have
further 	meaning 	than 	that. 	These 	exquisitely 	rolled
industrial 	elements, 	smooth 	blue-black 	against 	the
glint 	of 	glass 	and 	the 	silver 	chrome, 	are 	themselves
celebrated 	as 	objects 	of 	machine 	production. 	At 	the
same 	time 	they 	recall 	Classical 	pilasters 	and 	imply 	a
harmonic, 	geometrical 	order. 	And 	yet 	they 	remain
simply 	what 	they 	arc: 	commonplace 	steel 	beams. 	They
call 	to 	mind 	once 	again 	Oud's 	suggestion 	made 	thirty
hr^—
'm>
years 	earlier 	that 	the 	new 	architecture 	should 	lead 	to
the 	experience 	of 	'higher 	things' 	through 	a 	ruthless
objectivity. 	Mies 	himself 	tried 	to 	express 	a 	similar
thought 	when 	he 	stated:
I 	believe 	tiiat 	architecture 	has 	little 	or 	nothing 	to 	do
with 	the 	invention 	of interesting 	forms 	or 	with
personal 	inclinations.
True 	architecture 	is 	always 	objective 	and 	is 	the
expression 	of the 	inner 	structure 	of our 	time 	from
which 	it 	springs.
There can 	be 	little doubt that 	Mies 	van 	der Rohe 	was
stimulated 	in 	his 	search 	for 	simplicity 	by 	the 	frame
buildings 	of 	the 	early 	Chicago 	School 	(particularly
Burnham 	and 	Root's 	Reliance 	Building 	of 	1893) 	and
by 	the romanticization 	of American 	garage 	and 	factory
structures 	which 	had 	been 	so 	prevalent 	among 	the
European 	avant-garde 	in 	the 	twenties. 	It 	was 	a
position 	in 	which 	the 	true' 	products 	of 	American
19.6 	Charles 	Eames.
Eames 	House. 	Santa
Monica. 	California,
1944-
19.7 	(inset) 	Ludwig
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe. 	Lake
Shore 	Drive 	apartments.
Chicago. 	1950. 	plan.
19.8 	Ludwig Mies 	van
der 	Rohe. 	Lake Shore
Drive apartments. 	1950.

-- 266 of 420 --

Modern 	Arcliitecture 	in 	America ; 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	26;
4:
IC-IC! 	IIS 	I
l-liJb!lJliil

-- 267 of 420 --

266 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 94*^
culture 	were 	seen 	to 	be 	the 	anonymous 	vernacular
creations, 	while 	the 	self-conscious, 	and 	usually
eclectic, 	qualities 	of 'artistic 	architecture' 	were 	rejected
as 	an 	aberration. 	As 	we 	have 	seen 	in 	an 	earlier
chapter, 	such 	transatlantic 	myths played 	a 	central 	role
in determining the appearance of some of the European
entries to 	the 	Chicago 	Tribune competition. 	Mies van 	der
Rohe's 	arrival 	in 	Chicago 	in 	the 	late 	thirties, 	his 	later
commissions 	in 	the 	city, 	and 	his 	enormous 	influence,
ensured 	that 	the 	images 	of 	the 	European 	avant-garde
of the 	twenties 	became 	realities 	in 	the 	America 	of 	the
fifties 	I admittedly 	with 	a 	change 	in 	meaning). 	Indeed,
his 	glass 	slab 	prototypes 	became 	parents 	of a 	world-
wide 	progeny: 	a 	tribute, 	no 	doubt, 	to 	his 	intellectual
clarity. 	However, 	his 	imagery 	also 	conjured 	up
associations 	of 	efficiency, 	cleanliness, 	organization,
and 	standardization 	which 	fitted 	the 	bill 	for 	what 	one
might 	call 	the 	heraldry 	of big-business 	America. 	Thus
it 	was 	the 	(often) 	crudely 	handled 	glass-box 	imitations
of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	which 	proliferated 	around 	the
world 	as a 	species 	of 	corporate 	imagery. 	None 	of 	the
excellence 	and 	most 	of the 	faults 	of the 	prototype 	were
reproduced : 	the 	brash 	results 	are 	to 	be 	seen 	today 	in
most 	major 	cities.
The Seagram 	building on 	Park Avenue 	in 	New York,
designed 	by 	Mies 	and 	Johnson 	between 	I9S4 	and
1958 	(fig. 	19.9). 	must 	be counted 	a.seminal 	building 	in
this 	development. 	The 	skyscraper 	here 	achieved 	a
grand 	and 	honorific 	character, 	sober 	and 	symmetrical,
clothed 	in 	elegant 	materials 	such 	as 	bronze-tinted
auburn 	glass. 	Seagram 	stands 	opposite 	McKim. 	Mead
and 	White's 	palace-like 	Racquets Club 	of 	1 9 1 8. 	but 	an
affinity 	is 	sensed 	between 	old 	and 	new 	in 	terms 	of
nobility 	and 	Classical 	restraint. 	One 	approaches 	along
a 	main 	axis 	between 	symmetrical 	rectangular 	pools
Hanked 	by 	ledges 	of marble. 	A 	portico 	is 	implied 	by 	the
overhanging 	slab 	and 	this 	then 	guides 	one 	to 	the 	main
lobby, a 	space 	of little 	consequence. 	Every 	detail 	of the
interior 	design 	has 	been 	carefully 	considered 	in
relation 	to 	the 	whole: 	and. 	as 	at 	Lake 	Shore, 	attached
vertical 	mullions 	have 	a 	variety 	of visual 	and 	symbolic
attributes.
In 	a 	sense, 	then. 	Seagram 	stands 	in 	the 	line 	of ideas
stemming 	from 	the 	Deutscher 	Werkbund 	- 	form
upgrading 	and 	idealizing 	industrial 	technique. 	But 	it
has 	to 	be 	admitted 	that 	the 	filters 	of 	aesthetic
excellence 	rarely 	intervened 	in 	this 	way 	between 	the
mass 	production 	of 	building 	components 	and 	the
construction 	of 	architecture. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	was
able 	to 	make 	of the 	repetitious 	and 	abstract 	qualities 	of
modern 	urban 	existence 	a 	sort 	of 	sublime 	order. 	But
the 	imitators 	portrayed 	the 	uniformity 	neat, 	ending 	up
with 	the 	aspects 	of 	(to 	paraphrase 	Muthesius) 	'a
merely 	brutish 	world'. 	The 	muteness 	of 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe 	became 	magnified 	as 	the 	dumbness 	and 	sensual
redundancy 	of glass-box 	city 	centres 	of the 	1960s 	and
1970s 	around 	the 	world 	- 	the 	slick, 	alienated
environment 	of 'Alphaville'.
Between 	the 	sublimities 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and
the 	emptiness 	of 	the 	mere 	glass 	box 	there 	were
gradations 	of 	quafity. 	In 	particular 	one 	thinks 	of 	the
school 	of architects stemming 	from 	the 	German 	master
and 	best 	represented 	by 	firms 	like 	Skidmore. 	Owings
and 	Merrill. 	This 	firm's Lever 	House of 	1 9 s 	1 	(for which
Gordon 	Bunshaft 	was 	chief 	designer) 	stands 	almost
opposite 	the 	Seagram 	building 	on 	Park 	Avenue 	in
Manhattan 	(fig. 	19.10). 	By 	contrast 	it 	was 	weightless,
almost 	planar, 	in 	appearance. 	Perhaps 	following 	some
of the 	hints 	of 	the 	PSFS 	building 	twenty 	years 	earlier,
the 	Lever 	building 	employed 	a 	podium 	for 	its 	mezza-
nine offices, 	which 	created 	a 	courtyard 	at 	ground 	level,
and 	a 	roof terrace 	on 	top. 	The 	main 	slab 	then 	rose 	clear
as a 	hovering 	volume clad 	in 	a 	network 	of chrome 	lines
and 	blue-and-green 	tinted 	glass. 	The 	machine rooms
14.9 	Ludwig Mies 	van
der Rohe. 	Seagram
building. 	New 	York.
1457-

-- 268 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America: 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	• 	26;
19.10 	(above) 	Skidmore.
Owings 	and 	Merrill.
Lever House. 	New 	York,
1951.
1 9. 1 	1 	{above 	right) 	Le
Corbusier 	(main 	idea).
Wallace 	Harrison 	and
Max 	Abramovitz. 	United
Nations 	Headquarters.
New 	York. 	1947-so.
containing 	the 	air-conditioning 	plant 	were 	expressed
at 	the top 	in 	a 	variation 	in 	pattern, 	while 	the 	presence
of the 	individual 	tloor 	slabs 	was 	hinted 	at 	through 	the
horizontal 	banding. 	An 	effect 	of 	weightlessness 	and
dematerialization 	was 	achieved 	by 	recessing the 	main
vertical supports within 	the 	skin, 	by 	reducing 	mullions
to 	the 	thinnest 	of 	lines, 	and 	through 	the 	use 	of
polished, 	shimmering 	surfaces 	and 	semi-reflecting
glass. 	Of 	course, 	such 	a 	sealed-box 	solution 	relied
totally 	on 	air-conditioning 	and 	mechanical 	ventilation
for 	its 	environmental 	quality. 	Modifications 	of the 	slab
using 	sunshades, 	balconies, 	and other 	natural 	climatic
devices 	would 	emerge 	later 	on 	the 	American 	skyline.
For 	the 	moment. 	Lever, 	Seagram, 	and 	such 	buildings
as 	Belluschi's 	Equitable 	Life 	Assurance 	building 	in
Portland 	(1944-7) 	and 	Eero 	Saarinen's 	'horizontal
skyscrapers' 	for 	the 	General 	Motors 	Technical 	Center
at 	Warren. 	Michigan 	(1955). 	set 	the 	pattern 	for
forward-looking 	commercial 	architecture.
But 	the 	glass 	box 	could 	also 	be 	employed 	in 	non-
commercial 	contexts, 	as 	is 	clear 	from 	the 	LIN 	complex
by 	Wallace 	Harrison 	and 	Max 	Abramovitz of 	1947-50
(fig, 	19,11). 	Here 	the 	Secretariat 	was 	the 	dominant
image 	and 	was 	housed 	in 	a 	slab 	overlooking 	the 	East
River. 	The 	Assembly 	was 	contained 	in 	a 	symmetrical
curved 	volume 	alongside, 	expressing 	something 	of the
interior 	function. 	Members' 	lounges, 	press 	galleries,
etc.. 	were situated 	in 	a third 	volume, 	between 	the other
two and 	the 	river. 	The 	effect 	of the 	scheme 	arose 	from
the way 	the 	main 	elements were disposed 	as 	sculptural
objects on 	a 	platform, 	with 	walkways, 	a 	small 	park 	and
other 	public 	facilities 	weaving 	between. 	Lewis
Mumford. 	reviewing 	the 	scheme, doubted 	the 	appro-
priateness 	of 	a 	slab 	to 	the 	symbolic 	aspirations 	of 	the
new 	post-war 	congress 	of 	nations, 	until 	he 	reflected
that 	perhaps 	the 	bureaucracy 	would 	be 	the 	most
notable 	feature 	of the 	organization.
Perhaps 	if the 	UN 	had 	been 	carried 	out 	as 	originally
intended, 	a 	poetry 	and 	power 	appropriate 	to 	the
idealism 	of 	the 	enclosed 	institution 	would 	have 	been
achieved. 	For 	there 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	that 	Harrison
and 	Abramovitz 	adapted 	their 	building 	from 	an
original 	idea 	by 	Le 	Corbusier 	known 	as 	project 	'23A'
(fig. 	19.12) 	and 	enshrined 	in 	a 	wooden 	model 	and
some 	notebook 	sketches. 	It 	was 	not 	the 	first 	time 	this
architect 	had 	set 	his 	mind 	to 	the 	design 	of 	a 	world
parliament, 	as 	we 	have 	seen, 	and 	it 	is 	notable 	that 	a
similar 	articulation 	was 	employed 	to 	distinguish 	the

-- 269 of 420 --

268 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	144"
honorific 	assembly, 	a 	curved, 	sculptural 	mass, 	from
the 	less 	intense, 	standardized 	containers 	of 	the
Secretariat, 	as 	had 	been 	used 	in 	the 	League 	of Nations
scheme 	twenty 	years 	earlier. 	But 	in 	the 	UN. 	the
Secretariat 	was 	given 	greater 	importance 	by 	being
made 	vertical. 	It 	is 	even 	possible 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	was
here 	influenced 	by 	Meyer's 	League 	of 	Nations 	entry
which 	had 	employed 	a 	tower. 	Probably, 	too. 	he 	was
seeking 	to 	demonstrate 	to 	Americans 	the 	'true
morphology' 	of the skyscraper, 	and 	seeking to display 	a
sort 	of 	fragment 	of 	the 	'Ville 	Radieuse'. 	liberating
Manhattan 	from 	congestion, 	introducing 	light, 	space.
and 	greenery 	into 	the 	life 	of the 	metropolis. 	Evidently
he 	intended 	to 	follow 	the 	lead 	of 	his 	Algiers 	tower 	of
1 94 1 	and 	to 	integrate 	brise-soleil 	with 	the 	UN 	facades.
These 	gave 	a 	weighty 	and 	monumental 	character 	to 	a
building 	(as 	at 	Marseilles 	or 	Chandigarh) 	and
amounted 	to 	a 	major 	transformation 	of 	the 	glass-box
formula. 	In 	this 	instance 	Le 	Corbusier 	proposed 	to
regulate 	the 	proportions 	of 	his 	building 	with 	yet
another 	recent 	invention, 	his 	proportional 	system 	-
the 	'Modulor'. 	This 	drew 	together 	the 	Golden 	Section,
the 	six-foot 	human 	figure, 	and 	harmonic 	proportions
in 	an 	elaborate 	proportioning 	device 	loaded 	with
Corbusian 	ideology, 	and 	concerned 	with 	the 	harmon-
ization 	of 	machine-age 	design. 	When 	one 	bears 	in
mind 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	also 	envisaged 	a 	Museum 	of
World 	Culture 	in 	the 	form 	of a 	spiral 	ziggurat. 	to 	stand
alongside 	the 	UN. 	one 	becomes 	aware 	of the 	extent 	to
which 	the 	project 	excited 	his 	universal 	aspirations.
But 	this 	is 	to 	discuss 	a 	project 	which 	was 	never 	built
or 	of 	which 	only 	a 	shadow 	was 	constructed. 	Le
Corbusier's 	advice 	was 	accepted 	freely, 	but 	he 	did 	not
receive 	the commission 	and 	returned 	to 	Europe 	empty-
handed 	and 	embittered. 	The 	present 	building 	is 	a
diluted 	concept 	in 	search 	of 	appropriate 	articulation
and 	details: 	the 	lobbies 	with 	their 	curvaceous 	canti-
levers, 	and 	their 	akstract 	art 	adornments, 	speak 	more
of 	the 	cliches 	of 	the 	'international 	hotel 	style' 	of 	the
1950s 	than 	they 	do 	of dignified 	places 	of assembly. 	To
grasp how 	Le Corbusier would 	handle 	a 	programme on
this 	scale, 	we 	have 	to 	turn 	to 	his 	Indian 	buildings, 	in
which 	primitivist 	yearnings 	and 	rough 	concrete 	come
together 	in 	a 	fusion 	of enormous 	power.
It remains 	to 	consider 	Wright in 	the 	immediate 	post-
war years. 	By 	the 	end 	of the 	war 	he 	was 	nearly 	70 	and
involved 	with 	the 	design 	of the 	Guggenheim 	Museum,
which 	was 	not to 	be constructed 	for over a decade. 	This
was 	to 	stand 	on 	a 	site 	opposite 	Central 	Park 	in
Manhattan 	and 	to 	house 	an 	extensive 	collection 	of
non-objective 	art. 	Wright's 	initial 	reaction 	to 	the
programme 	was 	to 	suggest 	a 	sort 	of 	'center 	for 	the
arts', 	including 	attached 	studios: 	he 	perhaps 	saw 	it
as 	an 	antidote 	to 	the 	visual 	squalor 	of 	city 	centres.
But 	by 	degrees 	he 	reverted 	to 	a 	more 	conventional
programme, 	though 	by 	no 	means 	to 	a 	conventional
solution. 	The 	building 	as 	it 	stands 	is 	organized 	around
an expanding 	spiral 	ramp which 	rises 	around 	a 	central
volume 	in 	ever 	wider 	bands 	(figs. 	19.13, 	19.14).
Ancillary 	volumes 	containing 	offlces 	and 	the 	director's
apartment 	are 	fashioned 	in 	the 	same 	smooth, 	curved
layers, 	and 	from 	the 	outside 	the 	building 	is 	a 	complete
antidote 	to 	the 	grid 	of 	the 	city 	and 	the 	prevalent 	box-
and-frame 	architecture. 	One 	passes 	through 	a 	low
zone 	of 	transition 	(which 	loosely 	recalls 	the 	Johnson
Wax entry) 	and comes 	into a 	stunning 	space with 	light
coming 	in 	from 	the 	top. 	However, 	the 	material 	-
concrete 	- 	is 	curiously 	smooth 	and 	without 	texture: 	it
is 	as 	if 	an 	idea 	had 	failed 	to 	find 	quite 	the 	right 	skin.
Wright 	himself declared 	something 	of 	his 	intention 	in
designing 	the 	museum 	in 	this 	form.
Here 	for 	the 	first 	time 	architecture 	appears 	plastic,
one 	floor 	flowing 	into 	another 	(more 	like 	sculpture)
instead 	of the 	usual 	superimposition 	of stratified
layers 	cutting 	and 	butting 	into 	each 	other 	by 	way
of post 	and 	beam 	construction.
The 	whole 	building, cast 	in 	concrete, 	is 	more 	fike
an 	egg 	shell 	- 	in 	form 	a 	great 	simplicity. 	. 	. 	. 	The
light 	concrete 	flesh 	is 	rendered 	strong 	enough
everywhere 	to 	do 	its 	work 	by 	embedded 	filaments 	of
steel 	either 	separate 	or 	in 	mesh. 	The 	structural
calculations 	are 	thus 	those 	of the 	cantilever 	and
continuity 	rather 	than 	the 	post 	and 	beam. 	The 	net
result 	of such 	construction 	is 	a 	greater 	repose, 	the
atmosphere 	of the 	quiet 	unbroken 	wave: 	no
meeting 	of the 	eye 	with 	abrupt 	changes 	of form.
The Guggenheim 	Museum 	appears 	to draw 	together
19.12 	Le 	Corbusier.
project 	'23A' 	for ttie
t'nited 	Nations
Headquarters. 	1447.

-- 270 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America: 	Immigration 	and 	Consolidation 	• 	269
19.13 	iabom) 	Frant;
Lloyd 	VVrigiit.
Guggenhieim 	Museum.
New 	York. 	1944-57.
exterior.
19.14 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright. 	Guggenheim
Museum. 	New 	York.
1944-57. 	interior.
4<l^ 1^.^^

-- 271 of 420 --

Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
a 	number of themes 	with 	roots 	deep 	in 	Wright's 	earlier
experiences. 	The 	idea of an 	inward-looking 	communal
space 	with 	overhanging 	galleries 	was 	surely 	a
centralized 	variant 	on 	the 	interiors 	of 	the 	Unity
Temple, 	the 	Larkin 	building, 	or 	the 	Johnson 	Wax
building. 	The 	search 	for 	spatial 	continuity 	between
interpenetrating 	horizontal 	layers of cantilevered 	trays
seems 	to 	run through 	Wright's 	work 	from 	the 	early
prairie 	houses 	- 	indeed 	it 	is 	instructive 	to 	compare 	the
Robie 	House 	elevation 	to 	the 	Guggenheim 	to 	see 	how
basic 	devices 	of massing 	recur 	within 	a 	much-changed
idiom. 	Curved 	forms 	had 	also 	occurred 	early 	in
Wright's 	career 	- 	initially 	perhaps 	stemming 	from 	the
pantheistic 	geometries of the 	Froebel 	blocks 	- and 	were
reinforced 	by 	the 	organic 	siiapes 	occurring 	in 	nature.
In 	designs 	like 	the 	mural 	for 	the 	Coonley 	House 	play-
room, 	they 	were 	composed 	in 	mysterious 	floating
coloured 	blobs, 	not 	unlike 	Kandinsky's 	nearly 	contem-
porary 	pioneering 	abstract 	paintings. 	But 	curves 	only
emerged 	gradually 	in 	his 	actual 	buildings, 	a 	notable
case 	being 	the 	Sugar 	Loaf Mountain 	project 	of 	1 9 2 5 	in
which 	a 	spiral 	traffic 	ramp 	was 	envisaged 	encircling 	a
domical 	Planetarium 	and 	rising 	to 	the 	summit. 	In
the 	thirties, 	curves 	recurred 	more 	frequently, 	in 	such
buildings 	as 	the 	Johnson 	Wax. 	and 	seemed 	to 	mirror
an 	intention 	of 	achieving 	a 	greater 	fluidity 	of 	form,
light, 	space, 	structure, 	and 	material. 	In 	parallel 	with
the 	Guggenheim. 	Wright 	designed 	a 	petite 	and
exquisite 	show-room 	for 	jewellery 	and 	elegant 	home-
wares 	in 	San 	Francisco 	which 	used 	the 	theme 	of 	an
interior 	spiralling 	ramp. 	The 	Guggenheim 	thus
assembled 	a 	number 	of earlier 	motifs 	in 	the 	architect's
work, 	drawing 	them 	together 	in 	a 	new 	way.
But 	a 	building 	is 	more 	than 	the 	assembly 	of inherited
elements 	of language: 	it 	must 	bear 	the 	imprint 	of new
intentions 	and 	result 	in 	a 	new 	synthesis. 	Part 	of
Wright's 	specific 	intention 	in 	the 	Guggenheim 	was 	to
create 	a 	museum 	in 	harmony 	with 	non-objective 	art.
The 	building 	was 	intended 	by 	Solomon 	R.
Guggenheim 	to 	make 	a 	suitable 	place 	for 	the
exhibition 	of an 	advanced 	form 	of painting 	wherein
line, 	color 	and 	form 	are 	a 	language 	in 	themselves
. 	. 	. 	independent 	of reproduction 	of objects 	animate
or 	inanimate, 	thus 	placing painting 	in 	a 	realm
hitherto 	enjoyed 	by 	music 	alone.
This 	advanced 	painting 	has 	seldom 	been
presented 	in 	other 	than 	the 	incongruous 	rooms 	of
old 	static 	architecture. 	Here 	in 	the 	harmonious 	fluid
quiet 	created 	by 	this 	building 	interior 	the 	new
painting 	will 	be seen 	for 	itself under 	favorable
conditions.
It 	has 	to 	be 	said 	that 	there 	was 	much 	wishful 	thinking
in 	the 	architect's 	own 	assessment, 	as 	the 	outward
sloping 	walls, 	the 	'lobster 	bisque' 	colours, 	and 	the
lighting 	.system 	of Wright's 	design 	were 	found 	to 	be 	at
variance 	with 	some 	of 	the 	fundamental 	requirements
for 	viewing 	works 	of 	art. 	Wright, 	after 	all. 	saw
architecture 	as 	the 	mother 	art. 	and 	conceived 	of
furniture, 	paintings, 	and 	sculptures 	as 	almost 	a 	form 	of
integral 	ornament.
On 	another 	level, 	the 	Guggenheim 	surely 	had 	the
status 	of 	a 	demonstration 	of 	Wright's 	ideal 	of 	an
'organic' 	architecture, 	in 	which 	form 	and 	space 	were
fused. 	Space 	had 	of 	course 	been 	central 	to 	his 	vision
from 	the 	beginning: 	as 	a 	tactile 	medium 	of 	varying
intensity 	and 	psychological 	character, 	and 	as 	the
means 	for 	ennobling 	human 	action. 	Many 	years
before, 	Wright 	had 	written 	of 	the 	Unity 	Temple 	in 	a
way 	which 	could 	equally 	describe 	the 	Guggenheim
:
You 	will 	find 	the 	sense 	of the 	great 	room 	coming
through 	- 	space 	not 	walled 	in 	now 	but 	more 	or 	less
free 	to 	appear 	. 	. 	. 	the 	new 	reality, 	that 	is 	space
instead 	of matter.
Thus 	the 	Guggenheim 	was 	a 	sort 	of 	apotheosis 	of
Wright's 	organic 	philosophy 	in 	which 	plan, 	section,
and 	elevation 	ideas 	of his earlier experimentation 	were
brought 	together 	in 	a 	cogent, 	three-dimensional
weave 	of form, 	space, 	and 	abstraction. 	Perhaps 	only 	a
spiral 	in 	concrete 	could 	have 	embodied 	his 	intentions,
for 	this 	form 	combined 	centrality 	and 	procession,
equilibrium 	and 	movement, 	and 	an 	inherent 	sense 	of
growth and 	aspiration. 	Even 	so. 	it 	has 	to 	be 	said 	that
the 	Guggenheim 	lacks 	the 	force 	of 	many 	of 	Wright's
earlier 	works. 	The 	mannered 	fussiness 	of certain 	of the
joints 	and 	ornaments 	anticipates 	the 	'space-ship'
kitsch 	of 	the 	later 	Marin 	County 	Court 	House,
completed 	just 	after 	Wright's 	death. 	Since 	then 	his
work 	has 	had 	little 	appreciable 	impact 	on American
architecture. 	The 	followers 	- 	the 	Taliesin 	fellows 	-
tended 	to 	reproduce 	the 	surface 	effects 	of his style 	with
little 	grasp 	of the 	underlying 	order.
Thus 	it 	can 	be 	seen 	that 	the 	masters 	of 	the 	pre-war
period 	attempted, 	in 	the 	decade 	after 	194s. 	to 	bring 	to
fruition 	ideas which 	had 	been 	with 	them 	for some 	time.
This 	is 	surely 	not 	surprising, 	as 	the 	late 	works 	of any
artist 	of 	calibre 	are 	liable 	to 	involve 	some 	balance 	of
retrospection 	and 	innovation. 	Gropius's 	post-war
works 	were 	the 	least 	satisfactory, 	while 	Wright's
remained 	idiosyncratic 	monuments 	to 	his 	individu-
ality 	and 	isolation 	from 	prevalent 	values. 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	architecture 	seemed 	to 	tit 	a 	certain 	bill 	as 	a
provider 	of 	commercial 	prototypes. 	It 	remains 	to
consider 	certain 	other 	masters 	to 	see 	how 	they 	fared
outside 	the 	United 	States 	- 	particularly 	Aalto. 	and. 	of
course, 	Le 	Corbusier, 	who 	managed 	the 	difficult
transition 	after 	1 	945 	most 	resplendently.

-- 272 of 420 --

20. 	Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works
ofLe 	Corbusier
The 	principle 	which 	gives 	support 	to 	a 	work 	of art 	is 	not 	necessarily
contemporary 	with 	it. 	It 	is 	quite 	capable 	of slipping 	back 	into 	the 	past 	or
forward 	into 	the 	future. 	. 	. 	. 	The 	artist 	inhabits 	a 	time 	which 	is 	by 	no 	means
necessarily 	the 	history 	of his 	own 	time.
H. 	Focillon, 	iq^g
Between 	1945 	and 	1965. 	when 	he 	died. 	Le 	Corbu.sier
produced 	a 	series 	of elusive 	masterpieces, 	each 	of them
characterized 	by 	a 	complex 	interweaving of old 	themes
and 	new 	means of expression, 	by an 	increasing sense of
primitivism. 	and 	by 	a deliberate 	cultivation 	of 	ancient
associations. 	There 	was 	none 	of 	the 	loss 	of 	nerve
manifest 	in 	the 	late 	works 	of 	Gropius. 	nor 	the
regression 	into 	feeble 	mannerism 	which 	seemed 	to
afflict 	Wright, 	nor 	the 	technological 	perfectionism 	of
Mies 	van 	dcr 	Robe. 	Like 	the 	aging 	Michelangelo, 	Le
Corbusier entered 	an 	increasingly 	private 	and 	mystical
world 	of 	poetry 	in 	his 	last 	years. 	But 	any 	tendency 	to
expressionistic 	wilfulness was 	held 	in check by 	a 	strong
intellectual 	discipline 	and 	a 	refinement 	of 	earlier 	type
forms 	and 	themes. 	The introduction 	of new 	devices 	like
bftoii 	brut 	(bare 	concrete), 	the 	brise-sokil 	(the 	sun
breaker), 	or 	complex 	curved 	geometries, 	should 	not
blind 	one 	to 	the 	elaboration 	of earlier 	principles, 	such
as 	the 	'five 	points 	of 	a 	new 	architecture'. 	Part 	of 	the
richness 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	late 	works 	lies, 	precisely, 	in
the 	tension 	between 	well-worn 	formulations 	and 	new
patterns 	of form 	and 	meaning.
There 	were 	already 	hints 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	later
direction 	in 	some 	of his 	designs 	of the 	thirties, 	such 	as
the 	Petite 	Maison 	de 	Weekend. 	In 	these 	the 	brittle 	and
pristine 	world 	of 	Purism 	had 	been 	broken 	open 	to
reveal 	something 	more 	archaic, 	deliberately 	crude,
and rooted 	in 	the 	organic. 	The 	mechanical 	slaughter of
the 	Second 	World 	War may 	have 	gone 	further 	to
disrupt 	Le 	Corbusier's 	confidence 	in 	the 	machine 	and
its 	'progressive' 	potential. 	The 	poet 	of the 	machine 	age
spent 	the 	early 	forties 	in 	rustic 	seclusion 	in 	the
Pyrenees, 	emerging 	from 	his 	retreat 	in 	fitful 	and
unsuccessful 	attempts 	at 	persuading 	the 	Vichy 	auth-
orities 	to 	build 	bis 	Algiers 	plan. 	At 	the 	same 	time 	be
painted 	a 	series 	of biomorphic 	monsters 	known 	simply
as 	'Ubus' 	after 	Alfred 	larry's 	well-known 	and 	pre-
posterous character 	'Ubu 	Roi'. 	These 	seemed to sum 	up
the 	artist's 	mixed 	feeUngs 	of futility 	and 	irony, 	and 	to
correspond 	to 	a 	mental 	state 	of 	withdrawal. 	In 	these
years 	Surrealism 	also 	held 	out 	an 	appeal 	in 	the 	search
for 	primal 	subject-matter 	and 	subconscious 	imagery;
one 	notes 	a 	loose 	parallel 	between 	Le 	Corbusier's
biological 	sculptures 	and 	developments 	in 	avant-garde
painting 	and 	sculpture 	in 	the 	USA 	(e.g.. 	early 	Jackson
Pollock 	or 	David 	Smith), 	in 	which 	totemic 	and
primitivist 	features 	also 	came 	to 	the 	fore. 	By 	the 	end 	of
the 	war. 	when 	he 	returned 	to 	Paris. 	Le 	Corbusier 	was
in 	bis 	late 	fifties : 	be 	had 	not 	built 	for over 	a 	decade. 	It 	is
scarcely 	surprising, 	then, 	that 	each 	of 	his 	post-war
commissions should 	have been treated 	as an opportun-
ity 	to 	cram 	together 	many 	levels 	of 	ideas. 	He 	became
increasingly 	obsessed 	with 	leaving 	behind 	him 	auto-
biographical 	mementoes 	and 	lexicons 	of principle.
The 	late 	forties 	in 	France 	was 	not 	the 	most
propitious time for an 	architect of Le Corbusier's 	formal
calibre. 	Of 	course, 	there 	were 	vast 	programmes 	of
rehousing, 	but 	he 	failed 	in 	his 	ambition 	of 	becoming
France's 	'chief 	architect/urbanist 	of 	reconstruction'.
Instead 	of seeing 	his 	grand 	models 	adopted, 	he 	had 	to
be 	content, 	once 	again, 	with 	piecemeal 	demon-
strations. 	Thus 	the 	Unite 	d'ffabitation 	at 	Marseilles
(and 	the 	handful 	of other 	Unites 	he 	was 	called 	upon 	to
design 	during 	the 	fifties ) 	were 	fragmentary 	realizations

-- 273 of 420 --

Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
20.1 	{left) 	LeCorbusier.
Notre-Dame-du-Haut.
Roncliamp. 	1950-54:
tlie open-air cfiapel 	is in
tfie 	east 	wall 	to 	the 	right.
20.2 	(below) 	Le
Corbusier, 	Notre-Dame-
du-Haut. 	Ronchamp.
14SO-54. 	site 	plan.
compared 	with 	his 	expectations. 	Even 	so 	las 	will 	be
shown 	in 	the 	next 	chapter), 	these 	buildings 	did
effectively 	serve 	the function 	of prototypes. 	The 	allure
of the 	Marseilles 	Unite 	was 	as 	powerful 	as 	the 	hold 	over
the 	post-war imagination 	of Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	glass
towers; 	these 	were 	among 	the 	seminal 	images 	of 	the
fifties. 	At 	the 	same 	time 	the 	'theorems' 	of 	the 	UN
skyscraper and 	the 	Moduior proportional 	system 	failed
to 	have 	the 	grand 	societal 	impact 	which 	their 	creator
had 	craved.
It 	was 	almost 	as 	if 	the 	post-war 	world 	conspired 	to
stop 	the Le 	Corbusier 	of 	'standards' 	and 	industrialized
prototypes 	from 	having 	an 	effect, 	leaving, 	presumably,
the 	idiosyncratic 	poet 	of 	form 	to 	dig 	ever 	deeper 	into
private 	worlds 	of metaphor. 	The 	society 	at 	which 	the
artist 	had 	directed 	his 	pre-war 	Utopias 	had 	un-
doubtedly 	changed. 	He 	seemed 	now 	to 	.seek 	inspiration
less 	in 	the 	'miracles 	of 	contemporary 	life' 	than 	in 	a
fraternity 	with nature 	and 	with 	the 	great 	works 	of the
past. 	A 	nostalgia 	for 	the 	giant ruins 	of antiquity 	began
to 	creep 	in. 	Of 	course, 	the 	search 	for 	perennial 	and
unchanging 	values 	had 	always 	been 	a 	primary
motivation ; 	now 	it went 	on 	less disturbed 	by a 	quest 	for
'modernity'.
Such 	preliminary 	remarks 	seem 	appropriate 	to 	the
Mi	t.-MAISON
:®V-maison
du 	garden
lA--^^^^'
'l-V'-
fj
LA 	PYRAMIOE

-- 274 of 420 --

Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	• 	273
Chapel 	of 	Notre-Dame-du-Haut 	at 	Ronchamp 	of
1950-4 	(figs. 	20.1, 	20.2). 	This 	stands 	brooding 	on 	a
hilltop 	in 	the 	Vosges 	mountains 	with 	views 	across
valleys 	of evergreens 	towards 	the 	far 	horizons. 	A 	dark
roof 	with 	pointed 	angle 	and 	complex 	curvature 	rests
uneasily 	on 	convex 	and 	concave 	battered 	rubble 	walls
punctured 	by 	irregular 	openings 	and 	sprayed 	in
whitewashed 	gunnite 	concrete. 	The 	fluidity 	of 	the
resulting 	composition 	is 	held 	in 	check 	by 	three 	hooded
towers 	facing 	in 	varying 	directions. 	These 	and 	the
undulating 	surfaces 	echo 	the 	pressures 	of 	the 	sur-
rounding 	landscape. 	The 	interior 	is 	hollowed 	out 	like 	a
cave 	and 	has 	a 	sloping 	floor 	which 	focuses 	attention
towards 	the 	altar. 	The 	smaller 	chapels 	are 	top-lit
within 	the 	towers 	while 	the 	perforated 	side 	wall
streams 	the 	light 	into 	an 	otherwise 	sober 	interior. 	The
junction 	between 	roof and 	walls 	is 	deftly 	handled 	with
a slight 	gap so that 	a 	crack 	of daylight 	gleams 	through
:
what 	seemed 	solid 	outside 	becomes 	planar 	and 	thin
when 	inside. 	Such 	ambiguities 	of 	mass 	and 	space,
support 	and 	supported, 	are 	basic 	to 	the 	formal
character 	of 	the 	chapel, 	and 	the 	readings 	vary 	as 	one
changes 	position. 	Ronchamp 	is 	a 	sculpture 	to 	be seen
in 	the 	round: 	exterior 	and 	interior 	movements 	of 	the
spectator 	become 	involved 	with 	the 	dynamics 	of 	the
composition 	and 	are central 	to 	the concept of the work.
Typical 	of 	this 	sense 	of 	unfolding 	ambiguity 	is 	the
space 	outside 	the 	east 	wall, 	where an 	open-air 	altar 	sits
under 	the 	boat-like 	roof 	(fig. 	20.1). 	This 	outdoor
sanctuary 	is 	replete 	with 	pulpit 	and 	an 	image 	of 	the
Madonna 	in 	a 	glazed 	box 	embedded 	in 	the 	wall 	(so 	that
it 	can 	be 	seen 	from 	the 	inside 	too). 	The 	'nave' 	of 	the
church 	now 	becomes 	the 	grass 	platform 	stretching 	to
the 	edge 	of the 	hill. 	There 	is 	the 	stunning 	backdrop 	of
woods 	and 	hills, 	while, 	to 	one 	side, 	a 	ziggurat 	of 	old
stones 	marks 	the 	spot 	where 	a 	previous 	church 	was
destroyed 	in 	the 	final 	years 	of 	the 	war. 	The 	site 	had
traditionally 	been 	a 	place 	for 	pilgrimages 	(even 	in 	pre-
Christian 	times), 	and 	Le 	Corbusier managed 	to 	capture
the 	spirit 	of 	the 	place. 	The 	gradual 	ascent 	up 	the 	hill
has 	a 	ritualistic 	character, 	which 	the 	architect 	turned
to 	good 	effect 	by 	organizing 	the 	building 	as a 	sequence
of 	evenements 	plastiques 	('sculptural 	events') 	in-
corporating 	the 	setting 	and 	the 	surrounding 	horizons.
The culmination 	of the 	procession 	might 	vary: 	it 	might
be 	a 	Mass 	in 	the 	open 	air 	or 	a 	private 	prayer 	in 	the
interior 	with 	its 	numinous 	space 	and 	filtered 	light.
At 	the 	time 	of its 	completion 	in 	19s 	S. 	the 	Chapel 	at
Ronchamp 	shocked 	the 	critics 	who 	flocked 	to 	see 	it.
Pevsner 	complained 	of 	a 	retreat 	into 	'irrationality'
(thus betraying 	his 	prejudice that Le Corbusier's earlier
works 	had 	been 	somehow 	'rational'), 	while 	James
Stirling 	was 	dismayed 	by 	'conscious 	imperfectionism'
and 	'mannerism', 	and 	questioned 	whether 	the 	build-
ing 	'should 	influence 	the 	course 	of 	modern 	archi-
tecture'. 	One 	thing 	seemed 	to 	be 	clear 	amidst 	these
confused 	reactions: 	the 	master 	of 	European 	modern
architecture 	had 	changed 	direction 	profoundly. 	The
commentators seemed 	to 	forget 	that 	these changes 	had
been 	in 	the 	making 	for 	some 	time: 	that 	the 	architect's
style 	had 	been 	in 	gradual 	transition 	for 	two 	decades,
since 	his 	works 	of the 	twenties, 	which 	they 	seemed 	to
regard 	as 	'normative'. 	The 	forms 	of 	Ronchamp 	were
not 	without 	precedent 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	rugged
wooden 	sculptures, 	in 	his 	sketches 	of shells 	and 	boats
(the 	roof 	structure 	was, 	in 	fact, 	directly 	inspired 	by 	a
crab 	shell), 	in 	the 	landscape 	sculptures 	of the 	buildings
in 	his 	Algiers 	schemes 	and 	in 	the 	curved 	rubble 	wall 	of
Pavilion 	Suisse.
Le 	Corbusier 	was 	not 	a 	member 	of 	any 	particular
faith, 	yet 	his 	outlook 	was 	fundamentally 	idealistic. 	He
later 	wrote 	that 	he 	was 	interested 	in 	'the 	effect 	of
architectural 	forms 	and 	the 	spirit 	of architecture 	in 	the
construction 	of a 	vessel 	of 	intense 	concentration 	and
meditation' 	and 	in 	what 	he 	called 	'an 	acoustic
component 	in 	the 	domain 	of form'. In 	other 	words, 	he
sought 	to evoke 	religious 	emotions 	through 	the 	play 	of
form, 	space, 	and 	light, 	and 	without 	recourse 	to 	any
obvious 	church 	typology. 	The 	patronage 	conditions
were 	well 	suited 	to 	this 	kind 	of 	free 	interpretation, 	as
Father 	Couturier 	(with 	whom 	Le 	Corbusier 	liaised
throughout 	the design) 	believed 	that a vital, 	existential
expression 	of 	religious 	consciousness 	was 	best
achieved, 	not 	by 	forcing 	an 	artist 	into 	a 	traditional
ecclesiastical 	straitjacket, 	but 	by 	allowing 	the 	free 	play
of 	imagination. 	Le 	Corbusier 	seemed 	to 	mirror 	this
intention 	of the 	client 	when 	he 	wrote:
I 	have 	not 	experienced 	the 	miracle 	of faith 	but 	I
have 	often 	known 	the 	miracle 	of inexpressible
space, 	the 	apotheosis 	of plastic 	emotion.
In 	fact 	some 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	inspirations 	at
Ronchamp 	were 	heathen 	in 	tone. 	The 	attitude 	to
landscape 	and 	to 	natural 	forms 	provided 	the 	key 	to 	his
sacral 	interpretation. 	As 	a 	young 	man 	he 	had 	soaked
himself in 	nature 	worship, 	in 	the 	writings 	of Ruskin. 	in
the 	symbolic 	allegories 	of 	Art 	Nouveau. 	and 	had 	even
had 	the vision of a 	sort 	of temple 	to 	nature to stand 	on 	a
Jura 	mountain 	top. 	The 	forms 	of Ronchamp 	speak 	of a
similar 	pantheism : 	this was 	an 	artist 	for whom 	natural
forms 	were 	capable 	of a 	divine 	and 	magical 	character.
Immediately 	before 	he 	received 	the 	commission, 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	been 	giving 	thought 	to 	the 	design 	of 	a
shrine 	at 	St,-Baume 	(never 	built), 	which 	he 	had
envisaged 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	top-lit 	cave 	embedded 	among
boulders. 	Ronchamp 	was 	pervaded 	by 	a 	similar
primitive 	animism.
Other connections 	can 	be 	found 	with 	a 	great 	variety
of 	'sources'. 	It 	seems 	that 	the 	top 	lighting 	of 	the

-- 275 of 420 --

274 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 	94"
'Canopus' 	at 	Hadrian's 	Villa 	(sketched 	in 	191 	1) 	may
have 	inspired 	the 	lighting 	system 	of the towers; 	certain
mud 	buildings 	from 	the 	Mzab, 	seen 	in 	Algeria 	in 	the
mid-thirties, 	may 	have 	influenced 	the 	main 	perforated
wall: a 	fascination 	with 	sluices 	may 	have 	registered 	in
the 	water 	scoop 	of 	the 	Ronchamp 	roof. 	Dolmens 	and
Cycladic 	vernacular 	structures 	have 	even 	been
adduced 	as 	other 	clues, 	and 	it 	is 	possible 	that 	the
procession 	to 	the 	Parthenon 	was 	once 	again 	in-
spirational. 	But, 	whatever 	the 	sources 	and 	other
memories, 	the 	important 	point 	is 	that 	they 	were 	here
brought 	together 	in 	a 	coherent 	work 	of 	art: 	they
became 	inseparable 	elements 	of a 	synthesis.
It 	was 	soon 	after 	Ronchamp 	was 	completed 	that 	Le
Corbusier 	was 	asked 	to 	design 	another 	religious
structure, 	the 	Dominican 	monastery 	of La 	Tourette 	at
Eveux, 	not 	far 	from 	Lyons 	(fig. 	20. 	5). 	Monasteries 	had,
of 	course, 	had 	a 	strong 	hold 	over 	Le 	Corbusier's
imagination 	as 	collective 	paradigms 	since 	his 	visit 	to
the Charterhouse 	at Ema 	in 	Tuscany 	in 	1907, 	when 	he
had 	been 	deeply 	impressed 	by 	the 	ordered 	rule of 	the
architecture, 	the 	balance 	between 	public 	and 	private
realms, 	and 	the 	emphasis 	on 	contemplation 	of 	nature
from 	the 	cells. 	In 	designing 	La 	Tourette 	he 	was
therefore 	able 	to 	draw 	on 	years 	of 	researches 	in 	his
reinterpretation 	of an 	ancient type. 	It 	is striking that 	he
employed 	vestiges 	of 	the 	traditional 	cloister 	arrange-
ment 	in 	his 	plan 	and 	that 	his 	use 	of bare 	concrete 	and
stark 	forms 	was 	intended 	as 	an 	equivalent 	to 	the 	stern
stonework 	of old 	Dominican 	buildings. 	However, 	the
site 	- 	a 	slope 	overlooking 	meadows 	- 	required
considerable modification 	of the 	inherited 	device of the
cloistered 	court. 	The 	resulting 	monastery 	did 	not 	ape
the 	prototypes 	but 	transformed 	them, 	restating 	them
in 	a 	new 	structural 	terminology 	in 	concrete, 	and 	in 	a
social 	vocabulary 	related 	to 	Le 	Corbusier's 	admiration
of 	the 	well-regulated 	community 	living 	towards 	a
common, 	ideal 	purpose.
The 	form 	of 	La 	Tourette 	expressed 	some 	of 	these
institutional concerns. 	The 	individual 	cells 	were 	placed
around 	the 	crowning 	overhang, 	wrapped 	around
three 	of 	the 	outside 	edges 	and 	expressed 	as 	deep-cut
rectangular embrasures. 	Each monk had his individual
balcony 	framing 	a 	private view 	over trees 	or far 	distant
hills 	to 	the 	west. 	The 	communal 	portions 	of 	the
monastery 	were 	set 	in 	the 	recessed 	lower 	levels, 	the
most 	public 	(e.g,, 	classrooms 	and 	library) 	being 	placed
close 	to 	the 	entrance. 	The 	refectory 	was 	situtated 	at
one 	level 	down 	from 	the 	entrance 	floor, 	but 	since 	the
site 	sloped 	so 	steeply, 	it 	provided 	a 	splendid 	vantage-
point 	over 	the 	meadows. 	The 	chapel 	was 	entered 	from
this 	lower 	level 	too, 	but 	was 	entirely 	inward-looking
and 	was 	a 	lull 	triple 	volume 	in 	height. 	It 	made 	a 	solid
block 	along 	one 	side 	of the 	building, 	an 	anchor 	on 	the
slope, 	and 	its 	interior 	(to 	paraphrase 	Le 	Corbusier! 	was
'd'une 	pauvrete 	totale' 	('of 	a 	total 	poverty'). 	In 	other
words, 	it 	possessed 	a 	stern 	moral 	beauty 	arising 	from
the 	interplay 	of 	stark 	concrete 	surfaces, 	colour 	and
20.3 	Le Corbusier,
Monastery 	of La
Tourette. 	Eveux. 	near
Lyons, 	1955.

-- 276 of 420 --

20.4 	LcCorbusier.
Maisonsjaoul, 	Neuilly-
sur-Seine. 	1956.
light. 	All 	these 	major 	spaces 	of the 	plan 	were 	linked 	by
corridors 	and 	platforms, 	some 	of 	them 	entirely 	glazed
to 	offer 	views 	to 	the 	interior 	of 	the 	court 	or 	over 	the
landscape.
What 	gave 	these 	variously 	articulated 	functions 	the
power 	of 	architecture 	was 	the 	way 	they 	were 	linked
and 	orchestrated 	within 	a 	clear 	overall 	form. 	There
was 	precision 	in 	the 	relationship 	of plane 	and 	volume,
of 	the 	dense 	and 	the 	transparent, 	the 	heavy 	and 	the
light. 	Much 	of 	the 	necessary 	experimentation 	for 	the
use 	of bare 	concrete 	had 	gone 	on 	at 	Marseilles 	- 	half a
decade 	before 	- 	but 	La 	Tourette 	still 	succeeded 	in
extending 	the 	vocabulary. 	One 	may 	recognize 	the 	old
Le 	Corbusier 	theme 	of 	the 	box 	on 	stilts, 	but 	dismem-
bered 	and 	rearranged 	in 	a 	sort 	of 	collage 	composition
in 	which 	'found 	objects' 	- 	a 	triangular 	skylight, 	a
stack, 	a 	protruding 	balcony 	- 	introduced 	staccato
incidents. 	Moreover. 	La 	Tourette 	was 	still 	based 	on 	the
principles 	of the 	'five 	points 	of a 	new 	architecture', 	but
the 	number 	and 	type 	of 	architectural 	elements 	had
increased. 	Instead 	of 	just 	cylindrical 	supports, 	there
were 	now 	directional 	piers 	as 	well: 	instead 	of the 	thin
planes 	of stucco 	of the 	earlier 	works, 	there 	were 	robust
walls; 	instead 	of the 	plane 	glass 	or strip 	windows, 	there
were 	now 	hiise-sok'U. 	oiuiuhitoircs 	(the 	rhythmically
positioned 	concrete 	struts 	laid 	out 	according 	to 	the
Modulor), 	and 	aerateurs 	- 	the 	last 	being 	vertical
wooden 	ventilating 	panels 	inserted 	into 	the 	fenestra-
tion 	membrane. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	recherche 	paticnte
Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	• 	275
(patient 	research') 	proceeded 	in 	this 	way: 	each 	new
project 	became 	a 	testing 	ground 	for 	new 	ideas, 	as 	well
as 	an 	extension 	of old. 	La 	Tourette 	demonstrated 	how
the 	increase 	in 	the 	number 	of 	elements 	allowed 	a
greater 	variety 	of 	articulation 	both 	functionally 	and
formally. 	Aside 	from 	the 	obvious 	features 	- 	like 	rough
concrete, 	inverted 	overhangs, 	and 	slab-like 	piers 	- 	it
was 	this 	conceptual 	richness 	which 	endeared 	La
Tourette 	to 	followers 	seeking 	a 	way 	out 	of 	the
limitations 	of the 	inherited 	'International 	Style'.
Two 	little 	houses 	designed 	at 	approximately 	the
same 	time 	as 	La 	Tourette 	- 	the 	Maisons 	Jaoul 	in
Neuilly-sur-Seine 	- 	were 	also 	widely 	imitated 	(fig.
20.4). 	Here 	the 	contrast 	with 	Le 	Corbusier's 	early
works 	was 	even 	more 	dramatic, 	for 	these 	deliberately
crude 	brick 	dwellings, 	with 	their 	rough 	concrete
frames, 	their 	curved 	'Catalan' 	vaults 	and 	their 	turf
roofs, 	stood 	less 	than 	two 	miles 	from 	the 	Maison 	Cook
and 	the 	Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches. 	and 	could 	not 	be
explained 	away 	as 	rustic 	religious 	sprees. 	Peter
Smithson. 	the 	English 	architect, 	characterized 	the
combination 	of 	sophistication 	and 	primitivism 	nicely
when 	he 	spoke 	of 	the 	Jaoul 	Houses 	as 	being 	'on 	the
knife 	edge 	of 	peasantism'. 	Stirling 	once 	again 	regis-
tered 	nervousness 	in 	a 	well-known 	comparison 	of
jaoul 	with 	Garches. 	in 	which 	he 	suggested 	that 	the
polemical 	drive 	of 	early 	modern 	architecture, 	the
expression 	of a 	new 	way 	of 	life 	in 	built 	forms, 	was
giving 	way 	to 	a 	more 	comfortable, 	less 	challenging
view 	of 	social 	progress. 	Once 	again, 	though, 	the
themes 	of 	the 	houses 	had 	already 	been 	evident 	in 	the
Petite 	Maison 	de 	Weekend, 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
already 	written 	rhapsodically 	of 	the 	lessons 	to 	be
learned 	from 	the 	French 	vernacular 	tradition 	in 	the
early 	forties. 	The 	machine-age polemic 	had gone, 	but it
had 	been 	replaced 	by 	new 	attitudes 	concerning 	the
primal 	relationship 	between 	man 	and 	nature. 	Stirling
himself seems 	to 	have 	sensed 	the 	cogency 	of the 	vision,
for 	his 	Ham 	Common 	houses 	of 	the 	following 	year
adopted 	the 	rough 	brick 	and 	concrete. 	Indeed, 	the
Jaoul 	houses 	became 	one 	of the 	canonical 	works 	of the
so-called 	'New 	Brutalists' 	in 	England 	and 	elsewhere - a
younger 	generation 	sensing 	the 	devaluation 	of 	the
heroic 	vision 	of 	the 	earlier 	modern 	movement 	into
something 	smooth 	and 	ersatz, 	and 	seeking 	a 	visual
language 	to 	give 	body 	to 	their 	own 	rough 	awakening
to 	the 	social 	realities 	of the 	post-war 	years.
The 	Maisons 	Jaoul 	were on 	the 	drawing 	boards 	at
the same 	time 	as 	two dwellings 	for 	India 	- the Sarabhai
House 	and 	the 	Villa 	Shodan 	in 	Ahmadabad 	where
effects 	of 	precision 	were 	out 	of 	the 	question, 	even 	had
the architect 	wanted 	them, 	and 	where 	handmade sun-
baked 	brick 	and 	rough 	concrete 	were 	right 	for 	the
labour 	conditions, 	for 	the 	climate 	and 	for 	the 	ethos 	Le
Corbusier was trying 	to express in 	a 	country 	which 	had

-- 277 of 420 --

276 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
not 	yet 	undergone 	the 	traumas 	of 	the 	industrial
revolution. 	It 	seems 	that 	India 	entered 	his 	mythology
as 	a 	place 	destined 	to 	bystep 	the 	chaos 	of 	the 	'first
machine 	age' 	and 	to 	enter directly 	the 	phase 	of natural
harmony 	of 	the 	deuxieme 	ere 	machiniste 	('the 	second
machine 	age'). 	These 	houses 	of Ahmadabad's 	well-do-
do 	could, 	of course, 	be 	only 	partial 	vehicles 	for 	such 	a
new strain 	of nature 	worship. 	The Sarabhai 	House 	(fig.
20.5) was 	built 	for Mrs. 	Manorama 	Sarabhai, 	sister-in-
law 	of 	Gautam 	Sarabhai 	(who 	was 	director 	of 	the
National 	Institute 	of 	Design 	in 	the 	town), 	and 	the 	site
stood 	on 	a 	tree-filled 	estate. 	Mrs. 	Sarabhai belonged 	to
the 	Jain 	sect, 	which 	stressed 	the 	inviolability 	of nature.
Le 	Corbusier's 	design 	was 	a 	variant 	on 	his 	Monol 	type
of 	1919 	(of which 	the 	Petite 	Maison 	de 	Weekend 	had
also 	been 	a 	cousin) 	with 	low 	vaults 	and 	an 	earth-
hugging 	character. 	He 	oriented 	the 	house 	to 	the
prevailing 	winds 	and 	designed 	the 	fai;ade 	with 	deep-
cut 	piers 	which 	acted 	as 	brise-soleil 	and 	porticoes
simultaneously. 	The 	Catalan 	vault 	system 	was 	again
employed 	on 	the 	shaded 	interiors, 	while 	the 	roof had 	a
thick 	mat 	of turf traversed 	by 	water 	channels 	(to 	cope
with 	the 	monsoons) 	laid 	over 	it. 	There 	was 	even 	a
dramatic 	scoop/slide 	sluicing 	the 	rain 	water 	down 	into
a 	pool.
The 	Shodhan 	Villa, 	on 	the 	other 	hand, 	belonged 	to
Le 	Corbusier's 	box 	typology: 	in 	the 	long 	run 	it
descended 	from 	the 	Citrohan. 	Originally 	it 	was
designed 	for Surrotam 	Hutheesing. 	the 	President of the
Mill-owners 	Association 	(for 	which 	Le 	Corbusier 	also
designed 	a 	building ). 	but the 	house was then 	sold at 	the
planning 	stage 	and 	transferred 	to 	another 	site. 	The
building's 	cubic 	form 	was 	carved 	out 	with dramatic
concrete 	crates 	and 	overhangs 	to 	create 	a 	textured,
dynamic 	composition, 	and 	a 	habitation 	traversed 	by
breezes. 	The 	whole 	was 	capped 	by 	a 	hovering 	slab 	on
piers 	- 	recalling 	the 	image 	of 	the 	Dom-ino 	- 	but
referring as well 	to 	the concept of a 	parasol against 	rain
and 	sun. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	decided 	that 	this 	should 	be
one 	of 	the 	central 	elements 	of 	any 	new 	Indian
architecture; 	variants 	on 	a 	similar 	theme 	had 	recurred
in 	the 	Indian 	architecture 	of the 	past.
These 	Ahmadabad 	commissions 	were 	relatively
marginal 	to 	Le 	Corbusier's 	main 	Indian 	commitment:
the 	design 	of 	the 	new 	city 	of 	Chandigarh 	(fig. 	20.6)
which 	occupied 	him 	from 	1 95 1 	up 	to 	his 	death 	in
1965. 	In 	1948 	Western 	Punjab 	and 	the 	traditional
state capital 	of Lahore 	were 	ceded 	to 	the 	newly 	created
Pakistan, 	leaving 	the 	Indian 	Punjab 	and 	a 	large
number 	of 	Hindu 	refugees 	in 	need 	of 	a 	capital. 	A
scheme 	was 	drawn 	up 	by 	Albert 	Mayer 	and 	Matthew
Nowicki, 	but 	in 	1951 	the 	latter 	was 	killed 	in 	a 	crash.
The 	chief engineer, 	P. 	L. 	Varma, 	and 	the 	state 	admini-
strator 	of public 	works, 	P. 	N. 	Thapar, 	toured 	F.urope 	in
search 	of 	an 	architect/planner, 	and 	on 	the 	re-
commendation 	of 	Jane 	Drew 	and 	Maxwell 	Fry 	(who
eventually 	played 	a 	major 	role 	in 	the 	design 	of 	the
housing 	sectors) 	turned 	to 	Le 	Corbusier. 	In 	February,
1 95 1, 	in 	a 	little 	rest-house 	on 	the 	road 	to 	Simla, 	close
to the small 	village of Chandigarh, 	the blueprint 	for 	the
new 	capital 	was 	born. 	After 	all. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	been
ruminating 	on 	the 	history 	and 	meaning 	of 	cities 	for
over 	forty 	years, 	and 	came 	supplied 	with 	his 	own 	pre-
existing 	vision 	of 	a 	modern 	urban 	ideal 	ready 	to 	be
modified 	by 	particular 	conditions.
The 	main 	body 	of the 	city 	was 	planned 	on 	a 	grid 	of
circulation 	(in 	fact, 	there 	were 	seven 	different 	'hierar-
chies' 	of movement in 	the design), 	dividing 	up a 	variety
20.$ 	{top) 	Le Corbusier.
Sarabhai 	House,
Ahmadabad, 	1955,
interior view.
20. h 	Le Corbusier.
Chandigarh, 	plan 	of city.
c. 	iqsi-

-- 278 of 420 --

2o.7(top) 	LeCorbusier.
Governor's 	Palace,
Chandigarh, 	c. 	19S4.
perspective 	showing
intended 	water gardens.
2n.8 	Fathepur 	Sikri.
India, 	late 	i6th 	century,
view 	towards 	Diwan-i-
Khas. 	the 	Private
Audience Hall.
of 	rectangular 	sectors, 	containing 	neighbourhoods 	of
relatively 	low-rise 	dwellings 	in 	a 	sort 	of 	garden 	city
arrangement. 	At 	the 	'heart' 	of 	this 	body 	was 	the
commercial 	centre 	off 	the 	main 	artery 	running 	up 	to
the 	'head', 	containing 	the 	main 	state 	buildings: 	the
Governor's 	House, 	the 	Parliament, 	the 	judiciary, 	and
the 	Secretariat. 	The 	University, 	the 	Museum, 	the
Stadium, 	and 	other 	'leisure' 	activities 	were disposed 	on
a 	cross-axis 	extending 	to 	the 	north, 	while out 	to 	the
south-east, 	separate 	from 	the 	main 	body, 	was 	the
railway 	station 	with 	its 	depots.
The 	rationale 	for 	this 	overall 	plan 	embodied 	Le
Corbusier's 	major 	principles: 	his 	belief 	in 	the 	ordered
Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	• 	277
distinction 	of 	urban 	functions, 	his 	notion 	of 	the
essential 	joys 	of 	'light, 	space, 	and 	greenery', 	his
conception 	of 	social 	order 	and 	rationalization, 	his
dream 	of 	a 	polis 	inhabited 	by 	forward-looking 	techni-
cians 	and 	bureaucrats 	of high 	cultural 	aspiration. 	The
form 	was 	a 	variant 	on 	the 	basic 	layout 	of the 	Radiant
City, 	but 	without 	a 	redent 	housing 	blocks, 	and 	with
free-standing 	sculptural 	monuments 	symbolizing
government 	at 	the 	head, 	instead 	of 	the 	glass 	towers.
However, 	Chandigarh 	also 	incorporated 	ideas 	from
Paris 	- 	the 	grand 	boulevards 	and 	focal 	points: 	from
ancient 	Peking 	- 	in 	the 	overall 	geometrical 	form: 	and
from 	Lutyen's 	New 	Delhi, 	with 	its 	own 	extraordinary
blend 	of 	garden 	city 	principles 	and 	Baroque 	vista
planning. 	Le 	Corbusier 	fully 	appreciated 	another
aspect of New 	Delhi, 	evident in 	the 	Viceroy's 	house and
other 	monumental 	buildings: 	the 	way 	they 	fused 	the
European 	and 	the 	Indian 	traditions 	in 	an 	iconography
of state 	magnificence.
Much 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	attention 	over 	the 	sub-
sequent years 	would 	be 	devoted 	to 	the 	capital 	complex,
in 	which 	he 	allowed 	his 	ideas 	on 	monumental
expression 	free 	rein. 	Like 	Lutyens, 	he 	learned 	his
lessons 	from 	the 	Mogul 	tradition, 	in 	the 	provision 	of
deep 	loggias, 	romantic 	roofscapes, 	and 	water. 	The
'parasol' 	upturned 	against water and sun 	incorporated
a 	traditional 	image 	of authority, 	and 	became 	a 	sort 	of
shared 	leitmotif 	at 	Chandigarh, 	recurring 	on 	top 	of
the 	Governor's 	Palace 	(fig. 	20. "Land 	the 	Secretariat,
transformed 	into 	the 	colossal 	scoop 	of 	the 	Parliament
building 	portico, 	becoming 	the 	very 	form 	of the 	justice
basilica 	itself. 	Indeed, 	the 	genesis 	of 	his 	monumental
vocabulary 	seems 	to 	have 	involved 	a 	prodigious 	feat
of 	abstraction 	in 	which 	devices 	from 	the 	Classical
tradition 	- 	the 	grand 	order, 	the 	portico 	- 	were 	fused
with 	Le 	Corbusier's 	generic 	system 	of forms 	in 	concrete
(the 	'five 	points', 	the 	brise-soleil. 	etc. I 	and 	in 	turn 	cross-
bred 	with 	Indian 	devices 	like 	the 	'chattri', 	the
trabeated 	terraces, 	balconies, 	and 	loggias 	of Fathepur
Sikri 	(fig. 	20.8). 	In 	turn, 	this 	architectural 	language,
rich 	in 	references 	and 	associations 	of 	a 	public
institutional kind, 	was 	suffused 	with 	the 	artist's 	private
cosmological 	themes 	- 	the 	fantasy 	of 	water 	dowsing
and 	splashing 	over 	giant 	concrete 	roofs 	and 	surfaces,
the 	image 	of 	the 	sun's 	path 	at 	the 	solstice 	and 	the
equinox 	attached 	to 	the 	colossal 	lighting 	tower 	of the
Parliament, 	and 	the curious 	'Valley 	of Contemplation',
emblazoned 	with 	signs 	representing different 	aspects of
the 	architect's 	philosophy.
The 	apotheosis 	of 	this 	new 	state 	imagery 	drenched
in 	Corbusian 	references 	was 	perhaps 	the 	'Open 	Hand',
a 	monument 	designed 	to 	stand 	close 	to 	the 	Governor's
house 	(and 	eventually 	on 	its 	own 	when 	the 	latter
function 	was 	dropped 	because 	Nehru 	found 	it 	un-
democratic). 	Had 	it been 	realized, 	this would have 	been

-- 279 of 420 --

278 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
^1%^
a bizarre compound of a 	Picasso 	peace dove and 	a giant
gesturing 	hand. 	Some 	of 	the 	meaning 	of 	the 	symbol
was 	spelled 	out 	by 	the 	architect:
It 	was 	not 	a 	political 	emblem, 	a 	politician's 	creation
. 	. 	. 	[but] 	an 	architect's 	creation 	... 	a 	symbol 	of
peace 	and 	reconciliation. 	. 	.
.
Open 	to 	receive 	the 	wealth 	that the 	world 	has
created, 	to 	distribute 	it 	to 	the 	peoples 	of the 	world
... 	It ought 	to 	be 	the 	symbol 	of our 	age.
He 	then 	went 	on 	to 	say: 	'The 	Open 	Hand 	will 	affirm
that the second era of machinist 	civilization 	has begun
:
the 	era 	of harmony.'
The 	Parliament 	building 	itself (fig. 	20.4) 	was 	loaded
with 	symbolism 	and 	enriched 	with 	ancient 	references.
Basically, 	it 	was 	designed 	as a large 	box 	with 	a 	grid 	of
columns 	inside 	it. 	approached through 	a 	portico 	along
one 	side 	supported 	on 	flange-like 	piers, 	with 	the 	large
'objects' 	of 	the 	main 	Assembly 	and 	Senate 	set 	down
into it. 	These were made 	visible on 	the exterior through
20.9 	LeCorbusier.
Parliament 	Building.
Chandigarh. 	I9s?-fi2

-- 280 of 420 --

Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	279
20.10 	Parliament
Building. 	Chandigarh,
interior.
20.11 	[right]
Parliament 	Building.
Chandigarh: 	plan
compared 	to 	plan 	of
Altes Museum, 	Berlin,
182 s, 	by Schinkel.
the 	sculptural 	roofscape 	forms, 	a 	tilted 	pyramid 	for 	the
Senate 	and 	a 	dynamic 	funnel-like 	shape 	for 	the 	main
Assembly 	(tig. 	20.14). 	Rugged 	concrete, 	with 	all 	the
signs 	and 	enrichment 	of 	rough 	handicraft, 	was 	used
throughout; 	the 	searing 	climate 	soon 	added 	its 	own
patina. 	If 	the 	result 	has 	the 	appearance 	of 	a 	colossal,
grave, 	and 	dignified 	ruin, 	this 	was 	probably 	intended:
one 	has 	the 	sensation 	that 	these 	buildings 	must 	have
stood 	on 	this 	plateau 	for 	centuries. 	The 	sides 	of the 	box
were 	perforated 	by 	the 	deep-cut. 	repeated 	shadows 	of
brise-snleil. 	while 	the 	main 	facade 	(on the 	cross-axis 	of
the 	Capital 	plateau 	facing 	the 	Justice 	building 	in 	the
distance) 	provided 	a 	gesture 	of considerable 	formality.
The 	rhetoric 	was 	continued 	on 	the 	interior 	where 	one
left 	behind 	the 	blazing 	heat 	and 	the 	jagged 	shadows 	to
enter 	a 	cool, 	serene 	world 	of limpid 	cylinders 	rising 	to 	a
black 	soffit 	(tig. 	20.10). 	The 	light 	filtered 	in 	from 	the
sides 	of 	this 	hovering 	element 	to 	reveal 	a 	space 	the
ancient 	Egyptians 	might 	have 	revered. 	Indeed, 	the
mushroom 	supports 	looked 	as 	if they 	had 	been 	inspired
by 	hypostyle 	prototypes. 	Concrete 	was 	here 	endowed
with 	the 	density 	and 	gravitas 	of 	hewn 	and 	polished
stone. 	With 	the 	awe-inspiring 	volume 	of 	the 	great
funnel 	containing 	the 	Assembly 	descending 	into 	it.
with 	the 	rising 	sequences 	of ramps and 	the 	vast 	floors,
this 	was 	a 	sure 	demonstration 	that 	monumentality
had 	not 	died 	in 	the 	modern 	era.
The 	Assembly 	room 	itself 	was 	top-lit. 	It 	lacked 	the
charismatic 	atmosphere 	of 	the 	hypostyle 	around 	it.
and 	its round 	floor 	plan 	was somewhat at odds with the
function 	of 	accommodating 	a 	democratic, 	political
debate. 	Nevertheless, 	it 	is 	interesting 	to 	probe 	the
genesis 	of 	the 	'funnel' 	concept 	as 	this 	gives 	clues
concerning 	the 	way 	Le 	Corbusier 	translated 	images
and 	ideas 	into 	forms.
In 	the 	earliest 	stages, 	the 	Parliament 	building 	was 	a
close 	relative 	of the 	Hall 	of [ustice 	opposite: 	a 	large 	box
under 	a 	massive 	parasol 	in 	concrete. 	By 	degrees 	the
theme 	of 	the 	portico 	emerged 	naturally 	from 	the 	ex-
pression 	of 	the 	rectangular 	trabeation 	within. 	At 	this
stage the main 	chambers were submerged 	in 	the box as
two 	gland-shaped 	rooms 	enclosed 	by 	free-form 	curved
partitions 	set 	into 	the 	grid 	of 	supports. 	A 	key
breakthrough 	was 	made 	in 	mid-1953 	when 	the
architect 	began 	to 	envision the 	dramatic 	possibility 	of
sun 	and 	moonlight 	penetrating 	the 	roof; 	there 	were
even 	vague 	hints 	of 	'nocturnal 	festivals' 	and 	'solar
celebrations'. 	It 	was 	then 	that 	the 	idea 	of 	the 	light-
tower 	- 	an 	object 	within 	the 	bigger 	object of the 	box 	-
began 	to 	emerge, 	its 	form 	partly 	inspired 	by 	the
hyperboloid 	shape 	of 	power 	station 	cooling 	towers

-- 281 of 420 --

28o 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
:!.,-
(indeed 	ventilation 	concerns 	may 	have 	triggered 	the
analogy). 	In 	the 	placement 	of a 	stack-like 	form 	in 	the
centre 	of a 	box. 	one 	recognizes 	a 	basic 	Corbusian 	habit
of mind extending 	back 	at 	least 	as 	far as 	the 	villas 	of the
1920s. 	The 	suggestion 	has 	been 	made 	that 	the
architect 	may 	have 	been 	inspired 	by 	the 	plan 	of
Schinkel's 	Altes 	Museum 	in 	Berlin, 	where 	the 	theme 	of
portico, 	grid, 	and 	circular 	form 	had 	been 	stated 	with
great 	clarity 	and 	force 	(fig. 	20.1 	1 	). 	The 	choice 	of these
forms 	far 	transcended 	utilitarian 	concerns 	(in 	fact, 	the
solution 	was 	never 	entirely 	practical): 	they 	arose 	as
much 	from 	the 	artist's 	aim 	of creating 	a 	sort 	of modern
equivalent 	to 	the 	dome 	- 	an 	emblem 	of state 	authority
and 	rule. 	Among 	the 	early 	doodles, 	there 	were 	some
showing 	the 	Chandigarh 	stack 	alongside a 	section 	of
the 	dome 	of 	the 	imperial 	church 	of 	Hagia 	Sophia 	in
Istanbul, 	and 	others 	showing 	the 	sun 	streaming 	down
through 	the top 	in 	a 	manner 	inevitably 	recalling 	the
Pantheon 	(tig. 	20.12). 	Whatever 	the 	precise 	'sources',
one 	Is 	struck, 	once 	again, 	by 	the 	depth 	of 	the
transformation 	into 	the 	stuff 	of 	the 	artist's 	own
expression.
A 	funnel, 	a dome, 	a 	roofscape. 	a 	sculpture beckoning
to 	the 	foothills 	of the 	Himalayas, 	the 	Chandigarh 	roof
element partook of all 	of these things. 	From 	the earliest,
too, 	Le 	Corbusier 	sought 	to 	incorporate 	some 	of 	his
universalizing 	Iconography. 	At 	one 	stage 	a 	spiral 	ramp
was 	made 	to 	run 	around 	it 	(useful 	for 	cleaning, 	but
equally 	a 	symbol 	of 	the 	Modulor): 	later 	a 	strange
collage 	of 	upturned 	curves 	was 	attached, 	referring 	to
the 	gesturing 	leitmotif of the 	whole 	scheme, 	as 	well 	as
to 	the 	path 	of 	the 	sun. 	It 	is 	possible 	that 	these 	solar
implications 	were 	prompted 	by 	a 	group 	of 	sculptural
abstractions 	Le 	Corbusier 	enormously 	admired: 	the
astronomical 	devices 	of 	the 	Jantar 	Mantar 	In 	Delhi,
and 	at 	Jaipur. 	The 	architect 	spoke 	of his 	invention 	as 	'a
true 	physics 	laboratory, 	equipped 	to 	ensure 	the 	play 	of
lights, 	. 	.
.'
The 	solar 	symbolism 	was 	linked 	In 	turn 	to
the very notion 	of state authority, 	and 	to the 	architect's
own 	conception 	of 	an 	all-embracing 	order 	of 	nature:
the 	lighting 	system 	(fig, 	20.12) 	was 	designed 	so 	that 	a
beam 	would 	fall 	on 	the speaker's 	chair on 	the day of the
opening 	of 	Parliament. 	On 	that 	occasion 	a 	procession
would 	proceed 	from 	the 	civic 	space 	outside, 	through
the 	great 	enamel 	door 	adorned 	with 	cosmic 	signs,
reminding 	man 	once 	every 	year 	that 	he 	is 	a 	son 	of the
sun'. 	The 	Parliament 	building 	exemplifies 	the 	extra-
ordinary 	depth 	and 	texture 	of Le 	Corbusier's 	symbolic
thinking 	in 	his 	late 	years 	(Plate 	10).
At 	the 	inauguration 	of 	the 	Parliament 	in 	\^h^.
Nehru 	spoke 	of 	Chandigarh 	as 	'a 	temple 	of 	the 	new
India':
. 	. 	. 	the 	first 	expression 	of our 	creative 	genius,
llowering 	on 	our 	newly 	earned 	freedom 	, 	,
,
20.J 2 	{above left) 	Le
Corbusier. 	sketch 	of
lighting 	system 	for
I'iirliament 	Building,
Chandigarh, 	c. 	I9sf>-
20.1 	^ 	(/f/ll 	Le 	Corbusier
jotting 	in 	his 	sketchbook
during 	one 	of his trips to
India. 	1950s.

-- 282 of 420 --

FormandMeaningin 	the 	I.ate 	Works 	of LeCorbusier 	281
20.14 	Parliament
Building. 	Chandigarh.
14S 	?-62. 	roofscape
with 	attached 	cosmic
signs.
unfettered 	by 	traditions 	of the 	past 	- reaching
beyond 	the 	encumbrances 	of old 	towns 	and 	old
traditions. 	. 	.
.
There 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	that 	it 	was 	these 	'progressive'
qualities 	of the 	new 	city 	and 	its 	buildings 	which 	were
first 	to 	make their 	mark. 	But 	Chandigarh, 	even 	though
it 	was 	not 	'fettered' 	by 	tradition, 	was 	still 	steeped 	in 	it:
and 	while in 	the 	Indian context 	it 	was an 	emblem 	of the
new. 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	mind 	it 	was 	equally 	a 	symbol 	of
values 	which 	transcended 	the 	Western 	progressive
mythology 	altogether.
By 	i960 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	73 	and 	generally
acknowledged 	as 	the 	world 	leader 	in 	architecture. 	His
small 	atelier 	at 	35 	Rue 	de 	Sevres 	had 	become 	a 	sort 	of
breeding-ground 	for 	a 	new 	international 	tradition. 	His
own 	commissions 	involved 	him 	in 	constant 	travel. 	The
publications 	of 	the 	Oeuvre 	complete 	ensured 	a 	wide
following. 	The 	late 	works 	soon 	fostered 	a 	series 	of
transformations 	in 	various 	countries. 	The 	'New
Brutalists' 	I to 	be 	discussed 	more 	fully 	later) 	learned
from 	the 	direct 	use 	of materials, 	which 	they 	gave 	their
own 	moral 	meaning. 	Architects 	as 	diverse 	as 	Kenzo
Tange 	in 	Japan, 	Paul 	Rudolph 	in 	the 	USA, 	and
Balkrishna 	Doshi 	in 	India 	drew 	lessons 	from 	the
monumental 	and rugged 	concrete expression. 	And 	just
as 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	the 	1920s 	were 	frequently
devalued 	and 	turned 	into 	cliches, 	so 	the 	late 	works
were often 	imitated for their surface effects without due
attention 	to 	underlying 	principles: 	brise-soleil 	and
rough 	concrete 	finishes 	could 	become 	a 	sort 	of facjade
cosmeticism 	just 	as 	easily 	as 	strip 	windows 	and 	thin
inlotis.
Le 	Corbusier 	must 	have 	been 	aware 	of 	the 	dual
pressure 	to 	consolidate 	principles 	and 	to 	continue
experimenting. 	This 	seems 	to 	show 	in 	two 	of his 	latest
works, 	the 	Carpenter 	Center 	for 	the 	Visual 	Arts, 	in
Cambridge. 	Mass., 	and 	the Venice Hospital 	(fig. 	20. 1 5),
which 	remained 	only 	a 	project 	when 	the 	architect
died. 	The 	latter 	scheme 	was 	envisaged 	for 	a 	site 	half on
the 	land, half in 	the 	water, 	not 	far 	from 	Venice 	railway
station. The architect decided 	on 	a 	low 	project so as 	not
to 	interfere 	with 	the 	historic 	skyline 	of the 	city. 	But 	the
most striking aspect of his strategy 	is 	revealed by 	a 	plan
or 	the 	model. 	For 	the 	hospital 	was 	a 	sort 	of 	modern
analogue 	to 	the 	urban 	structure 	around 	it: 	an
extension 	of 	the 	neighbouring 	order, 	yet 	an 	inten-
sification 	of 	it 	into 	a 	new 	form. 	This 	was 	not 	just 	a

-- 283 of 420 --

282 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
matter 	of 	imitating 	local 	house 	types, 	but 	of penetrat-
ing 	intellectually 	to 	the 	typical 	pattern 	of 	Venetian
urban 	spaces 	and 	reinterpreting 	them 	in 	the 	shape 	of
the 	building. 	It 	was 	the 	opposite 	of 	what 	might 	be
called 	'object planning' 	and 	indicated 	that Le Corbusier
was 	sensitive 	when 	necessary 	to 	the 	historic 	tissue 	of a
city. 	Perhaps, 	too, 	in 	setting 	the 	guidelines 	for 	the
scheme 	he 	reflected 	awareness 	of the 	renewed 	debates
of the Team 	X 	generation 	of architects, 	who 	identified a
typical 	weakness 	of earlier 	CI AM 	planning 	as 	being 	its
crass 	disregard 	for 	the 	sense 	of 	place, 	and 	for 	the
unique 	qualities 	of 	context 	(see 	chapter 	21). 	Unfor-
tunately 	the 	hospital 	was 	not 	built, 	but 	the 	project
exerted 	considerable 	influence 	on 	numerous 	'mat'
buildings 	of 	the 	early 	sixties, 	in 	which 	circulation
became 	a 	major 	generator 	of form.
The 	Carpenter 	Center 	(fig. 	20.16) 	was 	built,
however, 	and 	seems 	to 	have 	issued 	from 	a 	retro-
spective state of mind. 	The function 	was to 	house a 	new
department 	of 	Visual 	Studies 	at 	Harvard 	University.
The 	site 	was 	jammed 	in 	between 	neo-Georgian
neighbours 	close 	to 	the 	arcadian 	setting 	of 	'Harvard
Yard'. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	solution 	was 	a 	free-plan 	'loft'
building 	amply 	lit 	from 	the 	edges 	by 	a 	variety 	of
fenestration 	devices, 	including 	brise-soleil 	and 	ondii-
latoires. 	The 	heart 	of 	the 	idea 	was 	an 	S-shaped 	ramp
linking 	the 	new 	function 	to 	the 	nearby 	streets, 	and
implying 	a 	continuity 	of the 	diagonal 	paths 	of Harvard
Yard 	opposite. 	The 	main 	studios 	were 	formed 	as 	free-
hand 	curves, 	extending 	from 	a 	cubic 	volume 	to 	the
centre, 	the 	entire 	arrangement 	being 	twisted 	from 	the
prevalent 	orthogonal 	geometry. 	The 	power 	of 	the
scheme 	arose 	from 	the 	dramatic 	interpenetration 	of
curved 	and 	rectangular 	volumes, 	of 	transparent 	and
massive 	elements, 	whose 	dynamism 	was 	further
varied 	by 	the 	fact 	of 	changing 	position. 	For 	the 	ramp
supplied 	not 	only 	a 	show-case 	of the 	inner 	workings 	of
the 	department 	(a 	response 	to 	a 	request 	in 	the
programme), 	but 	an 	orchestrated 	sequence 	of 	archi-
tectural 	events.
Even 	considering 	its 	formal 	elements. 	Carpenter
Center 	was 	a 	rich 	amalgam 	of various 	earlier 	phases 	of
Le 	Corbusier's 	evolution. 	It 	was 	as 	if 	the 	'acoustic'
forms 	of 	Ronchamp 	had 	been 	cross-bred 	with 	the
elemental 	attitude 	to 	structure 	manifest 	in 	the 	early
works: 	the 	extremely 	pure 	skeleton 	inevitably 	recalls
the 	primary 	statement 	of the 	Dom-ino. 	The 	evidence 	is
abundant 	that 	the 	architect 	conceived 	Carpenter
Center 	as 	a 	demonstration 	of 	his 	vocabulary 	in
concrete and 	as a sort ofsumma of structural principles.
In 	line 	with 	this 	intention, 	the 	Quincy 	Street 	facjade
was 	fitted 	with 	a 	barrage 	of 	different 	fenestration
devices 	which 	far 	outstripped 	practical 	justification.
Once 	again 	Le 	Corbusier 	was 	involving 	himself 	in
demonstrations, 	in 	this 	case 	in 	a 	true 	'teaching
building'. 	The 	Oeuvre 	complete 	was 	right 	to 	claim 	that
'many 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	guiding 	ideas' 	found 	their
place 	in 	Carpenter 	Center.
But 	this 	was 	also 	Le 	Corbusier's 	only 	building 	in 	the
United 	States 	and 	thereby 	achieved 	further 	sig-
20.15 	Cf/') 	Le
Corbusier. 	Venice
Hospital proposal. 	1962.
20.16 	(rig/K) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Carpenter
Center for the Visual
Arts. 	Cambridge,
Massachusetts,
1960-63.

-- 284 of 420 --

Form 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late 	Works 	of Le 	Corbusier 	• 	283
nificance. 	It 	was 	not 	industrially 	advanced 	America 	-
spiritually 	poor 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	eyes 	- 	which 	gave
him 	the 	opportunity 	to 	build a 	city, 	but 	the 	culturally
rich, 	materially 	poor 	India. 	He 	had 	always 	hoped 	to
persuade 	the 	American 	authorities 	to 	adopt 	his 	V'ille
Radicuse 	ideals, 	but 	without 	success. 	It 	seems 	possible
that 	his 	didactic 	statement 	in 	Carpenter 	Center 	did
include 	urbanistic 	ideas, 	however: 	the 	S-shape 	of 	the
ramp 	appears 	to 	refer 	to 	the 	ideogram 	for 	the 	rise 	and
fall 	of 	the 	sun 	('which 	regulates 	all 	our 	urban
enterprises'), 	while 	the 	ramp 	itself 	may 	well 	be 	a
metaphor 	for 	the 	American 	freeways 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
so 	admired 	as 	potential 	tools 	for 	the 	realization 	of 	his
urban 	ideal. 	It 	seems, 	in 	other 	words, 	that 	Carpenter
Center, 	despite 	its 	relatively 	humble 	size, 	was 	an
emblem 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	philosophy 	- 	a 	building
fusing 	his 	lifelong 	concerns 	as 	painter, 	sculptor.
architect, 	and 	urbanist.
In 	1965,3 	little 	over 	two 	years 	after 	the 	completion
of Carpenter 	Center, 	Le 	Corbusier 	died 	in 	a 	swimming
accident 	in 	his 	beloved 	Mediterranean, 	at 	Roquebrune.
where 	he 	always 	spent 	his 	summers. 	Since 	then 	his
ideas 	have continued 	to 	exert 	a 	great 	influence, 	but 	it 	is
still 	too 	early 	to 	assess 	them 	in 	a 	balanced 	way 	in 	the
light 	of history. 	Some 	of the 	standard 	reactions 	against
a 	great 	man 	who 	left 	a 	major 	imprint 	on 	his 	time 	have
already 	occurred, 	and 	this 	only 	serves 	further 	to 	blur
the 	picture. 	It 	seems 	likely, 	though, 	when 	the 	mists
clear, 	that 	Le Corbusier will 	deserve 	to 	be considered 	as
an 	artist 	of 	the 	highest 	calibre. 	Whether 	one 	agrees
with 	this 	assessment 	or not. 	it 	must surely 	be clear that
the 	architect 	realized 	his 	ambition 	of 	creating 	for 	the
modern 	era 	an 	architecture 	which 	extended 	principles
from 	the 	past.

-- 285 of 420 --

21. 	The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	at 	Marseilles
as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype
Every 	important 	work 	of art 	can 	be 	regarded 	both 	as 	a 	historical 	event 	and 	as
a 	hard-won 	solution 	to 	some 	problem 	. 	. 	. 	other 	solutions 	to 	this 	same 	problem
will 	most 	likely 	be invented 	to 	follow 	the 	one 	now 	in 	view. 	As 	the 	solutions
accumulate 	the 	problem 	alters. 	The 	chain 	of solutions 	nonetheless 	discloses
the 	problem.
G. 	Kubler. 	1962
A 	tradition 	is 	composed 	of 	features 	other 	tlian 	the
sequence 	of 	personal 	styles 	within 	broadly 	shared
themes. 	Some 	of 	its 	lines 	of 	continuity 	may 	also 	be
defined 	in 	terms 	of 	the 	"evolution' 	of 	building 	types.
These 	may 	cut 	across 	a 	variety 	of 	individuals'
vocabularies 	yet 	still 	respond 	to 	certain 	kernel
problems. 	It 	may 	even 	happen 	that 	a 	single 	building
stands 	at 	the 	head 	of a 	sequence 	and 	takes 	on 	the 	role
of 	a 	prototype. 	The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	at 	Marseilles
(1947-53) 	had 	something 	of this 	function 	in 	the 	field
of 	collective 	housing. 	It 	was 	a 	difficult 	building 	to
ignore 	for 	any 	later 	architect 	facing 	analogous 	tasks.
To 	chart 	the 	lessons 	learned 	from 	it. 	and 	the 	various
reactions 	against 	it. 	is 	to 	provide 	an 	extraordinarily
clear summary 	of Western 	architectural 	attitudes 	over
a 	period 	of nearly 	a 	quarter 	of a century.
The 	Unite 	stands 	off 	the 	Boulevard 	Michelet 	on 	the
outskirts 	of 	Marseilles. 	The 	first 	impression 	is 	of 	a
textured 	cliff 	towering 	above 	a 	dry 	landscape 	dotted
with 	scrub 	and 	trees 	(fig. 	21.1). 	In 	the 	summer, 	the
deep 	crates of 	the 	brise-soleil 	are 	gashed 	with 	shadow
and 	the 	concrete 	takes 	on 	the 	tawny 	colour 	of 	the
stonecrop 	nearby. 	The 	slab 	rises 	to 	twelve 	storeys
excluding 	the 	undercroft 	and 	the 	roof terrace, 	and 	has
an 	ingenious 	interlocking 	section. 	Each 	apartment
possesses 	a 	double-height 	living-room 	with 	a 	terrace
and 	a 	lower 	portion 	passing 	through 	to 	the 	smaller
balconies 	on 	the 	opposite 	side. 	There 	are 	twenty-three
different 	apartment 	types 	catering 	for 	tbe 	entire 	range
from 	the 	single 	individual 	to 	the 	family 	with 	four
children. 	The 	elements 	of each 	are 	standardized, 	their
combination 	varied. 	The 	factory-produced 	units 	are
slotted 	into 	the 	overall 	lattice 	of 	the 	building's
structural 	frame 	as 	wine 	bottles 	might 	be 	in 	a rack. 	But
the 	aesthetic 	result 	is 	neither 	repetitious 	nor 	busy:
banality 	is 	avoided, 	unity 	maintained, 	through
judicious 	attention 	to 	proportion, 	rhythm, 	human
scale, 	and 	sculptural 	control 	of the 	mass 	(fig. 	21.2).
The 	hierarchy 	of 	individual 	cells 	to 	overall 	form, 	of
private 	spaces 	to 	public 	whole, 	has 	been 	handled 	deftly
throughout. 	The 	colossal 	pilotis 	(tapered 	descendants
of 	the 	ones 	at 	Pavilion 	Suisse) 	define 	a 	public
undercroft 	to 	the 	slab, 	and 	create 	a 	zone 	of shadow 	on
which 	the 	fully 	lit 	volumes 	appear 	to 	rest. 	Major
verticals 	are 	created 	by 	the 	lift, 	service 	and 	stair 	towers
and 	by 	the 	flange 	walls 	at 	the 	end 	of 	the 	block. 	An
interior 	street 	containing 	shops, 	a 	restaurant, 	even 	a
hotel, 	is 	expressed 	half-way 	up 	the 	block 	as 	a 	glazed
gap 	of increased 	transparency. 	The 	roof terrace 	on 	top
is 	acknowledged 	by 	a 	series 	of sculptural 	objects 	- the
gymnasium 	building, 	the 	creche, 	and 	the 	bizarre 	form
of 	the 	ventilator 	stack 	(fig. 	21.3), 	a 	hollow 	version 	of
the pilotis 	down 	below, 	reminiscent 	in 	its 	surreal 	mood
of 	a 	chimney-scape 	by 	Gaudi. 	This 	terrace, 	with 	its
running 	track, 	its 	pool, 	and 	its 	odd 	concrete 	sculptures
rhyming 	with 	the 	Proven(;al 	hills 	in 	the 	distance 	is
surely 	yet 	another 	celebration 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's
Mediterranean 	myth. 	When 	the 	sun 	streams 	down 	on
the bold 	concrete 	forms 	and 	Hashes 	off the 	pool, 	when
the 	trees 	rustle 	below 	and 	the 	bay 	is 	gfimpsed 	in 	the
distance, 	one 	is 	forcibly 	affected 	by 	the 	Corbusian
dream 	of 	the 	good 	life 	- 	his 	antidote 	to 	the 	squalor 	of
the 	industrial 	city. 	The 	memories 	of Oircece 	are 	strong:
this 	little 	acropolis 	of resounding 	silent 	objects 	in 	light

-- 286 of 420 --

The 	Unite d'Habitation 	as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	285
21. 	1 	{idwve) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Unite
d'Habitation. 	Marseilles,
1447- S3, 	view with
setting.
21.2 	iriqht) 	Le
Corbusier. 	Unite
d'Habitation. 	Marseilles
facade.

-- 287 of 420 --

286 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
seems 	set 	up 	to 	celebrate 	a 	healthy 	balance 	between
the 	mental 	and 	the 	physical. 	The 	Unite 	as 	a 	whole 	is 	a
synthesis 	of social 	and 	formal 	imagination, 	of abstract
and 	material 	qualities. 	It 	is 	far 	more 	dense 	and 	robust
in 	its 	materials 	than 	the 	pre-war 	works, 	yet 	the 	whole
is 	regulated 	by 	the 	numerical 	abstraction 	of 	the
Modulor.
If the 	Unite 	stands 	at 	the 	beginning 	of a 	typological
tradition 	in 	the 	post-war 	years, 	it 	also 	represents 	the
culmination 	of a 	long 	quest 	for 	a 	collective 	order 	in 	Le
Corbusier's 	philosophy. 	The 	pedigree 	stretches 	back
through 	the 	Algiers 	viaduct, 	to 	the 	a 	redent 	houses 	of
the 	Villc 	Radieuse. 	to 	the 	Pavilion 	Suisse, 	and. 	even
further, 	to 	the 	immeuhles 	villas 	and 	the 	Maison
Citrohan. 	Each 	of 	these 	schemes 	considered 	different
ways 	in 	which 	the 	modern 	building 	might 	anticipate
the 	Utopian 	city. 	The 	Unite 	explored 	some 	of the 	same
themes 	and 	may 	be 	interpreted 	as 	yet 	another
demonstration 	of 	urbanistic 	principles, 	which 	also
acted 	as 	a 	laboratory 	for 	experimentation. 	Central 	to
the 	endeavour 	was 	the 	idea 	that 	mass 	production
should 	be 	co-opted 	to 	deal 	with 	housing 	shortage, 	and
it was 	probably 	this 	that ensured 	the support of Eugene
Claudius-Petit. 	Minister 	of 	Reconstruction. 	Le 	Cor-
busier's 	analysis 	began 	with 	the 	individual 	family.
He 	sought 	to 	reconcile 	high-density 	urban 	living 	with
the 	provision 	of 	the 	essential 	joys 	of 	light, 	space, 	and
greenery. 	This 	was 	reflected 	in 	the 	2:1 	ratio 	of 	each
apartment 	section. 	The 	living-rooms 	were 	ample 	and
spacious 	and 	had 	good 	\'iews 	to 	the 	outside 	over
balconies which 	( in 	Marseilles 	at 	least) could be 	used 	as
living 	space. 	The 	kitchen, 	bathroom 	and 	bedrooms
were 	half 	the 	height 	and 	tucked 	into 	the 	remaining
part 	of 	each 	dwelling. 	It 	was 	the 	Citrohan 	section
rethought: 	the 	Unite 	apartment 	even 	included 	a
gallery, 	slung 	at the 	middle 	level 	of the 	double 	volume.
The 	communal 	aspects 	of 	the 	Unite 	were 	quite
crucial 	to 	Le 	Corbusier's 	theorem. 	The 	individual
apartments 	were 	ingeniously 	stacked 	so 	that 	the
double-height 	part 	of 	one 	dwelling 	stood 	below 	or
above 	the 	single-height 	part 	of another: 	the 	result 	was
a 	jigsawed 	entity 	equal 	to 	three 	normal 	floor 	heights,
with 	a 	corridor 	running 	through 	it. 	At 	the 	middle 	level
of 	the 	building 	the 	corridor 	was 	amplified 	to 	become
the 	rue 	intcricuri' 	or 	interior 	street, 	an 	element 	which
recalled 	the 	walkways 	halfway 	up 	the 	Algiers 	viaduct
fifteen 	years 	earlier. 	The 	other 	major 	public 	domain
was 	the roof terrace. 	It 	was 	hoped 	that 	this 	would 	be 	a
safe 	place 	for 	people 	to 	sit 	and 	unwind 	in 	the 	sun 	while
their 	children 	played. 	As 	in 	Le 	Corbusier's 	'five 	points
of a 	new 	architecture', 	the roof was thought 	of as 	a 	new
level 	of 	ground 	in 	the 	air. 	The 	actual 	ground 	beneath
the 	piblis 	was 	reserved 	for 	circulation 	and 	had 	little 	of
the 	intimacy 	of 	the 	analogous 	area 	in 	the 	Pavilion
Suisse. 	The 	society 	of 	the 	Unite 	was 	lifted 	bodily 	into
space.
The 	next 	scale 	of consideration 	was 	the 	relationship
between 	the 	Unite 	and 	its 	physical 	setting. 	The 	theory
behind 	the 	high-density 	vertical 	slab 	was 	the 	usual
Corbusian 	one: 	modern 	techniques 	of 	construction
and 	production 	were 	to 	be 	used 	to 	create 	high
concentrations 	of 	population 	so 	as 	to 	liberate 	the
ground 	for 	traffic 	and 	nature; 	in 	the 	process 	the 	old
distinctions 	between 	country 	and 	city 	were 	to 	dissolve
away. 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	hoped 	to 	construct 	a 	number
of Unites 	alongside 	one 	another 	in 	support 	of this 	idea.
If he 	had 	done 	so 	some 	of the 	drawbacks 	of his 	concept
might well 	have 	been 	dramatized. 	For 	while 	each 	block
expressed 	the 	notion 	of a 	unified 	community, 	it 	is 	likely
that 	a 	gulf 	would 	have 	existed 	between 	blocks.
Mumford 	hinted 	at 	this 	problem 	when 	he 	criticized 	the
interior street 	as 	an 	inadequate social equivalent to the
traditional 	street 	at 	ground 	level 	in 	a 	dense 	urban
setting. 	The 	individual 	Unite 	was 	just 	right 	for
Marseilles 	and 	the 	Midi: 	but 	the 	concept 	of 	the 	Unite
was 	liable 	to 	raise 	problems 	if applied 	indiscriminately
to 	all 	situations. 	This 	was 	ironical: 	there 	can 	be 	no
doubt 	that 	Le 	Corbusier 	thought 	his 	solution 	was
normative 	and 	universal.
21.? 	Le Corbusier. 	Unite
d'Habitation. 	Marseilles,
view of roof terrace 	and
ventilating 	stack.

-- 288 of 420 --

The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	287
21.4 	(riij/if) 	Le

-- 289 of 420 --

288 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
the 	Dubrovnik 	meeting 	of CIAM 	in 	1956 	by 	'Team 	X'.
an 	international 	affiliation 	ofarchitects, 	mostly in 	their
thirties, 	who 	wished 	to 	recapture 	the 	heroic 	moral
drive, 	yet 	channel 	it 	in 	ways 	relevant 	to 	an 	utterly
transformed 	world. 	For 	them 	the 	Unite 	at 	Marseilles
was 	charismatic: 	its 	philosophy 	was 	rooted 	in 	the
Utopianism 	of 	the 	pre-war 	modern 	movement 	but 	its
forms 	embodied 	a 	new 	sensibility 	which 	suited 	their
mood. 	Essentially 	their 	attitude 	was 	ambivalent. 	The
same 	absolutism 	which 	gave 	the 	building 	its 	compel-
ling 	power 	was 	also 	repellent 	to 	their 	pluralism. 	But 	as
a 	prototype 	the 	Unite 	was 	unavoidable. 	The 	problem
was 	to 	transform 	its 	fundamental 	lessons 	into 	a
terminology 	more 	flexibly 	attuned 	to 	particular 	social,
physical, 	and 	regional 	conditions.
The 	Unite 	idea 	had 	been 	published 	long 	before 	the
building 	was 	completed, 	so 	the 	theorem 	had 	already
influenced 	numerous 	housing 	schemes 	of 	the 	late
1 940s. 	The 	critical 	attitudes 	later embodied 	in 	Team 	X
had 	also 	been 	fermenting 	for 	some 	time. 	One 	of 	the
most 	cogent 	statements 	of 	a 	new 	attitude 	had 	been
conceived 	before 	the 	Aix 	meetings: 	the 	'ATBAT'
housing 	proposal 	for 	Morocco 	by 	Vladimir 	Bodiansky
and 	Shadrach 	Woods 	(fig. 	21.6). 	The 	idea 	had 	been 	to
produce 	a 	collective 	habitat 	in 	tune with 	local 	climate,
culture, 	and 	context. 	The 	architects 	therefore 	at-
tempted 	to 	abstract 	some 	of the 	spatial 	features 	of the
traditional 	North 	African 	city 	and 	to 	cross-breed 	the
resulting 	order 	with 	such 	useful 	devices 	of 	the 	Unite
idea 	as 	the 	street-in-the-air. 	the 	bn.sf-so/<'i//balcony
and 	the 	roof 	terrace. 	Evidently, 	the 	two 	sources
blended 	together 	well; 	indeed, 	it 	is 	arguable 	that 	the
tight 	aggregation 	of 	North 	African 	cities 	which 	Le
Corbusier 	saw 	in 	the 	1930s 	inspired 	some 	features 	of
the 	Unite 	in 	the 	first 	place.
The 	Charter 	of 	Athens 	had 	separated 	urban
functions 	into 	broad 	divisions 	of 	living, 	working,
leisure, 	and 	circulation. 	The 	new 	sensibility 	required
something 	less 	simplistic 	and 	mechanical. 	A 	new
formal 	pattern 	was 	needed 	to 	express 	a 	more 	complex
image 	of 	the 	city 	and 	of 	social 	behaviour. 	In 	the 	mid-
fifties 	words 	like 	'association', 	'neighbourhood', 	and
'cluster' 	began 	to 	replace 	the 	earlier 	abstract 	termin-
ology, 	while 	organic 	analogies 	for 	growth 	and change
began 	to 	supersede 	the 	rigid, 	Cartesian 	geometries 	of
the 	Ville 	Radieuse. 	The 	younger 	generation 	was
troubled 	by 	the 	grand-slam 	aspect 	of 	tabula 	rasa
Utopian 	planning 	and 	sought 	a 	more 	complex 	and
sympathetic 	relationship 	between 	old 	urban 	tissue 	and
new 	functions. 	Even 	so. 	it 	has 	to 	be 	emphasized 	that
the 	inherited 	schemata 	of earlier 	modern 	architecture
were 	not 	completely 	rejected ; 	quite 	the 	contrary, 	they
were 	accepted 	as 	valuable 	and 	then 	modified.
The 	English 	situation 	in 	the 	decade 	after 	the 	war
offered 	every 	opportunity 	for 	experiment 	due 	to 	the
combined 	impact 	ot 	liic 	blilz 	and 	.i 	socialist 	govern-
ment committed to public 	housing. 	Bland 	blocks of flats
soon 	rose 	up. 	although 	London 	boroughs 	like 	Rich-
mond. 	Pimlico, 	Finsbury. 	and 	Paddington 	were
fortunate 	in 	acquiring 	creditable 	reworkings 	of 	Unite
ideas. 	The 	other 	major 	paradigm 	was 	the 	Garden 	City
which 	was reinterpreted in 	the New Towns ; 	again 	fittle
architecture 	of lasting 	value 	was 	achieved. Alison 	and
Peter Smithson. 	two young 	architects 	who 	delighted 	in
the 	role 	of 	enfants 	terribles, 	felt 	that 	none 	of 	these
approaches 	captured 	the 	essence 	of 	English 	post-war
life. 	With 	a 	little 	help 	from 	the 	critic 	Reyner 	Banham
they 	indulged 	in 	the 	sensibility 	of 'the 	New 	Brutalism',
a 	term 	which 	suggested 	their 	fascination 	with 	the
toughness 	of 	English 	working-class 	existence 	and 	the
'art 	brut' 	of 	Dubuffet, 	and 	their 	rejection 	of 	the
saccharine 	version 	of 	modern 	architecture 	they 	saw
being 	built. 	It 	is 	tribute 	to 	the 	power 	of the 	Unite 	image
that 	it 	should 	have 	intervened 	in 	what 	was 	a
somewhat 	routine 	English 	exercise 	in 	sentimental
populism 	of 	the 	'kitchen 	sink' 	variety. 	But 	in 	their
scheme for workers' 	housing at Golden 	Lane in 	the East
End 	of London 	(1952! 	the 	hold 	of the 	prototype 	can 	be
sensed 	in 	the 	use 	of slabs 	with 	access 	streets in 	the 	air
(fig. 	21.7). 	Like 	the 	ATBAT 	scheme 	for 	Morocco,
Golden 	Lane 	also 	implied 	a 	critique of the 	free-standing
block. 	The 	slabs 	were 	linked 	together 	in 	a 	linear 	way
and 	disposed 	to 	respond 	to 	the 	surrounding 	street
patterns, 	while 	the 	interior 	street 	was 	brought 	to 	the
edge 	of the 	facade 	where 	it 	was 	repeated 	at 	every 	third
21.6 	Shadrach 	Woods
and J. 	Bodiansky.
ATBAT housing
Morocco, 	195 1-6.
I

-- 290 of 420 --

The 	Unite d'Habitation 	as a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	• 	289
21.7 	Alison 	and 	Peter
Smithson. 	street-deck
scheme 	for Golden 	Lane.
London, 	1952.
level. 	The 	'street-deck' 	was 	intended 	to 	encourage
chance 	encounters, 	and 	was 	a rather 	abstract 	attempt
at 	restating 	traditional 	working-class 	doorstep 	life 	in
the 	air. 	In 	the 	same 	period 	the 	Smithsons 	evolved
designs 	with 	zigzags 	of 	linear 	housing 	based 	on
patterns 	of 	movement, 	and 	designed 	a 	scheme 	for
Sheffield 	University 	in 	which 	the 	street-deck 	was 	the
unifying 	element. 	They 	pointed 	gleefully 	to 	the 	drip
paintings 	of 	Jackson 	Pollock 	and 	the 	grainy 	photo-
graphs 	of 	Nigel 	Henderson 	as 	evidence 	of 	a 	new
aesthetic 	blending 	change, 	coarseness, 	and 	the
primitive. 	They 	insisted 	that 	they 	were 	seeking 	a 	new
language 	for 	urban 	design, 	and 	rejected 	the 	Garden
City 	and thirties' 	Rational models as equally 	irrelevant.
Of the 	latter 	they 	wrote:
The 	social 	driving 	force 	of this 	movement 	was 	slum
clearance, 	the 	provision 	of sun. 	light, 	air, 	and 	green
space 	in 	the 	over-populated 	cities.
This 	social 	content 	was 	perfectly 	matched 	by 	the
form 	of functionalist 	architecture, 	the 	architecture
of the 	academic 	period 	which 	followed 	the 	great
period 	of Cubism and 	Dada 	and De 	Stijl, 	of the 	Esprit
Nouveau. 	This 	was 	the 	period 	of the 	minimum
kitchen 	and 	the 	four 	functions, 	the 	mechanical
concept 	of architecture.
Today 	in 	every 	city 	in 	Europe 	we 	can 	see
Rational 	Architecture 	being 	built. 	Multi-storey 	flats
running 	north-south 	in 	parallel 	blocks 	just 	that
distance 	apart 	that 	permits 	winter 	sun 	to 	enter
bottom 	storeys, 	and 	just 	high 	enough 	to 	get 	fully
economic 	density 	occupation 	of the 	ground 	area 	-
where 	the 	extent 	of development 	is 	sufficient 	we
can 	see 	the 	working 	out 	of the 	theoretical 	isolates,
dwelling, 	working, 	recreation 	(of body 	and 	spirit),
circulation ; 	and 	we 	wonder 	how 	anyone 	can
possibly 	believe 	that 	in 	this 	lay 	the 	secret 	of town
building.
Instead 	the 	Smithsons 	claimed 	that 	they 	were
seeking 	an environment which 	would 	give 	'form 	to our
generation's 	idea 	of order', 	and 	that Golden 	Lane 	was 	a
partial 	realization 	of 	this 	idea. 	Their 	polemics 	were
heavily 	laced 	with 	illustrations 	of Greek 	islands. 	Bath,
working-class 	backyards, 	kasbahs, 	and 	other 	dwelling
arrangements 	of the 	past 	which 	seemed 	to 	be 	'a 	direct
expression 	of a 	way 	of life', 	but 	it 	was 	obvious 	that 	the
dominant 	image 	was 	still 	the 	Unite 	d'Habitation; 	the
vein 	of 	'peasantism' 	that 	they 	detected 	in 	Le 	Corbusier
clearly 	allied 	his 	post-war 	works 	in 	their 	minds 	with
some 	of 	the 	traditional, 	pre-industrial 	qualities 	they
sought 	to 	reinterpret. 	However, 	they 	remained 	com-

-- 291 of 420 --

2g() 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 	94(1
mitted 	to 	the 	definition 	of 	images 	which 	would 	be
'coimterforms' 	to 	a 	post-war. 	mobile 	automobile
world. 	At 	later 	Team 	X 	meetings 	in 	which 	they
played 	a 	major 	role, 	the 	Smithsons 	were 	to 	discover
that 	many 	of 	their 	enthusiasms 	and 	dilemmas 	were
shared 	by 	the 	other 	members 	despite 	their 	varied
backgrounds.
Among 	the 	housing 	schemes 	actually 	built 	in 	this
period 	in 	England. 	Denys 	Lasdun's 	'cluster 	blocks' 	in
Belhnal 	Green, 	London, 	embodied 	a 	new 	position 	most
clearly 	(fig. 	21.8). 	These 	were 	also 	an 	attempt 	at
forming a 	new 	image of community, 	appropriate 	to 	the
problems of post-war 	urban 	reconstruction, 	in 	which 	it
became 	increasingly 	clear 	that 	the 	new 	and 	the 	old
must have 	a 	more complex 	symbiotic 	relationship 	than
that 	proposed 	by 	'diagrammatic' 	slab 	planning.
Lasdun 	was 	older 	than 	the 	Smithsons. 	but 	younger
than 	the 	generation 	of 	I.ubetkin. 	and 	so 	straddled 	the
pre- 	and 	post-war 	worlds. 	He 	remained 	aloof from 	the
polemics 	of 	the 	'Brutalists'. 	and 	his 	own 	style 	was
partly 	formed 	in 	the 	19305. 	A 	superficial 	inspection 	of
the 	Uskdale 	and 	Claredale 	Street 	clusters 	(1952 and
I9S4 	in 	design, 	respectively) 	reveals 	clear 	debts 	to
Lubetkin's 	vocabulary, 	to 	the 	image 	of 	the 	modern
tower 	and 	to 	the 	ideal 	of 	well-lit. 	well-ventilated 	flats
open 	to 	the 	view 	and 	the 	sun. 	However, 	such 	themes
were 	overlaid 	with 	others 	which 	amounted 	to 	a
critique 	of 	the 	monolothic 	slab. 	The 	circulation 	and
noisy 	service 	chutes 	were 	placed 	in 	a 	central 	core,
while 	the 'maisonettes 	in 	the 	air' 	were 	located 	in 	four
separate 	volumes 	linked 	to 	the 	core 	by 	bridges. 	Part 	of
the 	rationale 	for 	this 	form 	was 	that 	it 	allowed
maximum 	exposure 	of the 	living 	rooms 	to 	the 	sun : 	but
it 	also 	involved 	the 	idea 	of 	turning 	the 	traditional
Bethnal 	Green 	Street on 	its end. 	re-creating some of the
indigenous 	features 	(backyards 	for 	washing, 	etc.) 	in
the 	air. 	and 	avoiding 	the 	bleakness 	of 	a 	tunnel-like
corridor 	in 	the 	usual 	'block' 	of 	flats. 	The 	actual
dwellings 	were 	made 	two 	storeys 	high 	and 	were 	thus
based 	on 	the 	typical 	local 	house-type, 	while 	the 	sills
and 	proportions 	restated 	the 	scale 	and 	rhythms 	of the
neighbouring 	nineteenth-century 	fa(,'ades. 	Thus 	the
sanitary 	and 	sculptural 	qualities 	of 	the 	Unite 	were
employed 	but 	in 	a 	way 	which 	incorporated 	the 	local
social 	and 	physical 	context. 	The 	plan 	shape, 	with 	its
splayed 	angles 	and 	its 	suggestions 	of 	stems 	and
arteries, 	relied 	on 	biological 	analogies 	at 	odds 	with 	the
Cartesian 	geometries 	of the 	Ville 	Radieuse 	slab 	idea.
Among 	the 	eventual 	members 	of 	the 	loose 	Team 	.\
affiliation 	were 	two 	Dutch 	architects, 	Joseph 	Bakema
and 	Aldo 	Van 	Hyck. 	Despite 	the 	tenor 	of his 	theoretical
remarks, 	the 	former 	seemed 	to 	do 	little 	in 	his 	actual
works 	to 	modify 	pre-war 	housing 	tactics: 	but 	the 	latter
was 	preoccupied 	with 	the 	contrast 	between 	the 	vapid
post-war 	rebuilding 	of 	cities 	like 	Rotterdam 	and 	the
close-knit 	traditional 	Dutch 	cities. 	Van 	Eyck 	realized
that 	the 	way 	forward 	lay 	in 	the 	re-creation 	of basic
psychological 	qualities 	of 	shelter, 	yet 	in 	a 	language
attuned 	to 	modern 	realities. 	He 	spelt 	out 	the 	position
clearly 	at 	the 	1959 	ClAM 	congress 	at 	Otterlo 	where
Team 	X 	ideas 	began 	to 	dominate:
Each 	period 	requires 	a 	constituent 	language 	- 	an
instrument 	with 	which 	to 	tackle 	the 	human
problems 	posed 	by 	the 	period, 	as well 	as 	(hose
which, 	from 	period 	to 	period, 	remain 	the 	same, 	i.e..
those 	posed 	by 	man 	- 	by 	all 	of us 	as 	primordial
beings. 	The 	time 	has 	come 	to 	gather 	the 	old 	into 	the
new: 	to 	rediscover 	the 	archaic 	qualities 	of human
nature. 	1 	mean 	the 	timeless 	ones 	. 	.
.
21.8 	Denys 	Lasdun,
"Cluster', 	Bethnal 	Creen,
London, 	I9S4-

-- 292 of 420 --

fefeS
Ji r'^i i:i! 	r"^
^5f5^'|
21.9 	Shadrach 	Woods.
Alexis Josic 	and Georges
Candilis. 	Free 	University.
Berlin. 	1962-70. 	plan.
Van 	Eyck's 	quest 	for 	these 	timeless 	qualities
eventually 	took 	him 	far 	afield 	to 	Dogon 	mud 	commun-
ities 	in 	the 	pre-Sahara 	and 	to 	the 	field 	of 	linguistic
anthropology. 	His 	approach 	to 	vernacular 	forms 	was
mystical; 	he 	saw 	them 	as 	expressions 	of 	coherent
spiritual 	mythologies 	which 	he 	felt 	were 	sorely 	missing
from 	most 	industrial 	building. 	His 	analysis 	focused 	on
the 	cosmic 	meaning 	of 	symbolic 	elements 	like 	gates
and entrances 	and 	on the 	hierarchies of spaces. 	He was
also 	fascinated 	by 	the 	way 	buildings 	and 	streets 	were
woven 	together. 	The 	problem 	came 	in 	translating
these 	qualities 	to 	deal 	with 	the 	realities 	of 	an
increasingly 	affluent 	Northern 	Europe. 	Van 	Eyck's
orphanage 	near 	Amsterdam 	bore 	witness 	to 	his
attempt 	at 	forming 	equivalent 	architectural 	systems
using 	modern 	means 	of construction 	(see 	Chapter 	26).
But 	the 	process 	by 	which 	an 	authentic 	vernacular was
conceived 	and 	constructed 	was 	necessarily 	far 	away
from 	the 	activities 	of 	even 	a 	sensitive 	mind 	seeking
basic 	values 	in 	an 	industrial 	society 	which 	seemed
increasingly 	committed 	to 	a 	trashy 	and 	insubstantial
consumerism.
The 	preoccupation 	with 	primary 	qualities 	of shelter,
enclosure, 	procession, 	etc.. 	grasped 	in 	part 	from 	the
study 	of 	traditional 	urban 	structures, 	went 	hand-in-
hand 	with 	an 	obsession 	with 	the 	notion 	of 	'place' 	in
numerous 	projects 	of 	the 	early 	1960s. 	The 	Utopian
ideas 	of 	the 	pre-war 	period 	had 	seemed 	to 	imply 	the
imposition 	of 	a 	new. 	more 	'rational' 	order 	on 	the
texture 	of 	the 	metropolis. 	The 	problem 	was 	how 	to
handle 	the 	demands 	of 	an 	automobile 	society,
employing 	the 	means 	of 	industrialization, 	in 	ways
which 	still 	maintained 	the 	sense 	of urban 	- 	or 	rural 	-
identity. 	Forms 	had 	therefore 	to 	be 	found 	which
allowed 	a 	gradual 	transition 	between 	the old 	tissue 	and
the 	new 	object. 	Urban 	spaces 	and 	architectural 	objects
needed 	to 	be 	coalesced 	in 	a 	more 	complex 	overlapping
The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	• 	291
order 	than 	was 	usual 	in 	modern 	planning. 	It 	is 	no
surprise 	to 	discover 	that 	the 	urban 	theories 	of Camillo
Sitte were avidly restudied 	in 	this 	period. 	Moreover, 	the
social 	meaning 	of 	the 	street 	(which 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
overlooked 	in 	his 	destruction 	of 	the 	rue 	corridor) 	was
given 	new 	emphasis. 	Even 	the 	'street-deck' 	concepts 	of
the 	Smithsons 	seemed 	to 	lack 	a 	rich 	enough 	con-
nection 	with 	pre-existing 	urban 	routes.
Something 	of this 	new 	urban 	consensus 	emerged 	in
Alexis 	Josic, 	Georges 	Candilis 	and 	Shadrach 	Woods's
project 	for 	Frankfurt-Romerberg 	of 	1963. 	Like 	their
later 	scheme 	for 	Berlin 	University 	(fig. 	21. 9I. 	this 	was
based 	on 	a 	system 	of upper decks 	and 	streets 	linking 	the
buildings 	together 	as a 	sort 	of pedestrian 	net 	above 	the
services 	and 	automobiles 	beneath. 	One 	might 	perhaps
see 	this 	order 	as 	an 	abstraction 	of 	the 	form 	of 	ancient
Classical 	towns 	like 	Priene 	(in 	Asia 	Minor), 	or 	as 	a
relative 	(in 	procedure 	as 	well 	as 	form) 	of Le 	Corbusier's
low-level 	Venice 	Hospital 	scheme. 	The 	buildings 	and
the 	spaces 	between 	were 	locked 	together 	as 	a 	single
system 	which 	attempted 	to 	restate 	the 	patterns 	of 	the
neighbouring 	traditional 	city. 	The 	theme 	of the 	upper
walkway 	- 	a 	place 	preserving 	the 	social 	character 	of
the 	street 	against 	modern 	vehicular 	functions 	- 	was
virtually 	a 	leitmotif of the 	period. 	The 	mat' 	concept 	of
architecture 	was 	the 	antithesis, 	obviously, 	of the 	free-
standing 	slab; 	even 	so 	it 	was 	still 	essentially 	part 	of the
Unite 	tradition 	as 	a 	fusion 	was 	still 	sought 	between
concepts 	of 	city 	and 	individual 	building. 	Indeed, 	a
number 	of models 	antithetical 	to 	the 	free-standing 	slab
with 	a 	vacuum 	at 	its 	base 	were 	reactivated 	in 	this
period: 	the 	perimeter 	courtyard 	block 	creating 	an
interior 	precinct 	and 	reinforcing 	the 	shape 	of 	the
street; 	the 	village, 	with 	its 	hierarchy 	of 	buildings 	and
spaces: 	the 	hill 	town 	(or 	its 	conceptual 	relative 	the
kasbahl 	with 	its 	apparent 	unity 	of 	topography, 	social
hierarchy, 	built 	form, 	and 	open 	space.
This 	last 	prototype 	may 	have 	influenced 	the
planning 	of 	the 	Siedlung 	Halen 	outside 	Berne 	(i960,
by 	the 	Atelier 	s 	group), 	a 	'squashed 	Unite', 	packed
down 	to 	conform 	to 	the 	patterns 	of the 	landscape 	(fig.
2 	1 	. 1 	1 	). 	The social 	relations of the scheme were directly
expressed 	in 	the 	gradual 	transition 	in 	scales 	from 	the
main 	piazza 	and 	street 	in 	the 	middle, 	to 	the 	secondary
routes, 	to 	the 	gardens, 	and 	then 	to 	the 	individual
quarters. 	Giancarlo 	de 	Carlo's 	college 	at 	Urbino 	was
another 	variant 	(fig. 	21.10); 	indeed, 	universities 	were
frequently 	employed 	as 	microcosms 	of 	urbanistic
ideals, 	just 	as 	they 	had 	been 	in 	the 	inter-war 	years. 	In
this 	case the 	buildings 	were 	laid 	out 	on 	the 	crest 	of a
low 	hill 	and 	were 	splayed 	in 	a 	fan 	shape 	to 	maximize
views 	and 	to 	harmonize 	with 	the 	contours. 	While 	the
form 	probably 	reflected 	the 	influence 	of 	Aalto's
'organic' 	ideas, 	it 	was 	also 	a 	modern 	restatement 	of
some of the 	typical elements 	and 	spaces 	of the 	medieval

-- 293 of 420 --

292 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
Italian 	city. 	A 	semi-enclosed 	space, 	rather 	than 	a 	free-
standing 	object, 	became 	the 	main 	social 	focus, 	and
everything 	possible 	was 	done 	to 	express the 	hierarchy
of 	individual 	cells 	and 	social 	functions. 	A 	far 	less
coherent 	version 	of 	this 	hill 	town 	imagery 	was 	later
pursued 	by 	Moshe 	Safdie 	in 	his 	'Habitat' 	at 	Expo 	'67 	in
Montreal, 	while 	the 	most 	successful 	'university-city' 	of
the 	period 	was 	probably 	Denys 	Lasdun's 	'urban
landscape' 	University 	of 	East 	Anglia 	of 	1963-8 	(see
Chapter 	24).
The 	combination 	of 	high-rise 	towers, 	perimeter
blocks, 	and courtyards 	was 	pursued in 	another variant
of the 	'unite', 	also 	for 	university 	housing, 	but 	this 	time
in 	the 	United 	States. 	This 	was Jose Luis 	Sert's design 	for
married-student 	housing 	at 	Harvard. 	Sert 	had 	been 	a
friend 	and 	previous 	collaborator 	of 	Le 	Corbusier. 	one-
time 	president 	of ClAM. 	and 	the 	author of the 	book 	Can
Our Cities 	Survive? 	( 	1 942 1 	which 	spread 	CIAM 	pre-war
urban 	doctrines 	in 	the 	English-speaking 	world. 	The
Harvard 	scheme, 	known 	as 	Peabody 	Terraces, 	was
disposed 	as 	three 	main 	towers 	in 	a 	cluster 	around 	the
traditional 	communal 	device 	of 	a 	courtyard 	(fig.
21.12). 	The 	usual 	vacuum 	at 	the 	base 	of 	the 	tall
building 	was 	avoided 	by 	gradations 	of 	scale 	between
the 	main 	towers 	where 	lower 	perimeter 	dwellings
stepped 	down 	to 	lawns, 	pathways, 	and 	sheltered
pedestrian 	routes. 	Delicate 	frame-like 	balconies 	with
^1iiliiii 	iiiiiiiuiiii,„j 	,.
liirii 	iiirliiii|ii
2 1 . 1 o 	I above I 	Giancarlo
de 	Carlo. 	University of
Urbino. student
residences. 	1962-69.
21. 1 1 	(left) 	Atelier 	5
Group. 	Siedlung Halen.
Berne. 	1960.

-- 294 of 420 --

The 	Unite d'Habitation 	as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	•	
293
movable 	slats 	acted 	as 	sunshades 	and 	articulated 	the
facades 	at 	a 	human 	scale. 	Variation 	was 	achieved 	on
the 	basis 	of 	a 	few 	standardized 	apartment 	types,
ingeniously 	arranged 	in 	section, 	and 	linked 	by 	upper
gallery 	streets 	and 	bridges 	to 	the 	increasingly 	public
spaces 	outside. 	One 	may 	see 	the 	scheme 	as 	an
extension 	of 	the 	principles 	of 	the 	Unite, 	where 	such
inherited 	ideas 	as 	the 	street-in-the-air. 	the 	sun-break,
and 	the 	roof 	terrace 	have 	been 	fused 	with 	the 	local
courtyard 	tradition 	for 	student 	residences, 	and 	with
the 	light 	wooden 	balcony 	qualities 	of 	the 	nearby 	new
England 	triple 	deckers. 	Thus 	a 	Utopian 	vision 	of 	an
alternative 	city 	in 	which 	an 	ideal 	harmony 	of 	man,
nature, 	and 	urban 	existence 	had 	been 	implied 	was
modulated, 	rendered 	less 	absolute, 	and 	wedded 	with 	a
pre-existing 	context. 	The 	strategy 	was 	loosely 	similar
to 	the 	one 	adopted 	a 	decade 	before 	in 	Lasdun's 	cluster
conception, 	but 	it 	was 	expressed 	in 	a 	different 	personal
style 	and 	with 	different 	regional 	responses 	in 	mind.
Sert's 	scheme 	was 	remarkable 	for 	the 	attention 	it
gave 	to 	the 	quality 	of spaces 	between, 	to 	the disguise 	of
parking, 	to 	its 	townscape 	detail, 	as 	well 	as 	to 	the
expression 	of the 	actual 	buildings. 	He 	was 	fortunate 	in
having 	a 	client 	who 	intended 	the 	best, 	and 	was
perhaps 	better 	able 	to 	achieve 	it 	than 	the 	usual 	public
housing 	agencies 	in 	the 	USA, 	and 	indeed 	most
countries. 	The story of inventive 	reinterpretation 	of the
Unite 	ideal 	has, 	alas, 	the 	dreary 	and 	brutal 	backdrop 	of
endless 	egg-crate 	high-rises 	built 	around 	the 	world 	in
the 	fifties 	and 	sixties, 	in 	which 	minimum 	functional
definitions 	were 	allowed 	to 	prevail 	over 	the 	rich
elaboration 	of 	new communal 	images 	in 	touch 	with
basic 	human 	needs. 	The 	problem 	must 	be 	traced 	to 	the
oversimplification 	of a 	theorem: 	the 	Unite 	ideal 	needed
all 	of 	its 	constituent 	parts 	to 	have 	a 	chance 	of
succeeding. 	To 	reduce 	the matter to 	high 	density 	when
no 	due 	attention 	was 	given 	to 	communal 	facilities 	was
to 	court 	disaster: 	to 	create 	open 	space 	without
greenery 	was 	to 	devalue 	the 	idea 	of 	the 	community
living 	in 	nature. 	The 	imitations 	of 	the 	Unite 	usually
involved 	such 	drastic 	omissions. 	Does 	this 	mean 	that
the 	prototype 	should 	be 	blamed 	for 	the 	later 	disastrous
variations.' 	Or 	is 	the 	blame 	to 	be 	laid 	on 	housing
agencies 	and 	their 	architects 	for 	cutting 	corners 	in 	an
over-simple 	response 	to 	the 	urban 	crises 	of 	the 	post-
war 	era.' 	However 	one 	answers 	these 	questions, 	the
fact 	remains 	that 	the 	slang 	appellation 	'vertical 	slum'
fits 	only 	too 	well 	many 	of the 	post-war 	experiments. 	It
21.12 	Jose 	Luis Sert.
Peabody 	Terraces.
Cambridge.
Massachusetts. 	1964.

-- 295 of 420 --

294 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	i 	940
il 	...
M 	^'>':m 	m 	^^ 	ri
• 	1: 	II 	i>
i 	JWIilii 	if 	01 	m
ri 	mitmi 	m 	lo 	ii
--^m
MM '^^
u 	mam 	m 	m 	m
I 	MM 	Mmm
is 	SLurcely 	surprising 	tliat 	tlie 	now 	notorious 	arson
(and 	eventual 	dynamiting 	by 	officials) 	of 	Minora
Yamasaki's 	low-cost 	housing scheme 	for St. 	Louis - the
Pruitt-Igoe scheme 	(tig. 	2 1 . 1 	3 ) 	- should 	have 	taken 	on
the 	dimensions 	of 	a 	symbolic 	event: 	as 	the 	ultimate
revenge of the 	populace for some supposed 	professional
planning 	trick 	foisted 	upon 	them.
But 	it 	is 	hard 	to 	generalize 	about 	the 	'high-rise' 	in
the 	abstract. 	What 	may 	be 	good 	for 	Chicago's 	well-to-
do 	may 	be 	bad, 	in 	its 	cheaper 	version, 	for 	the
proletariat of Paris; 	what 	may 	be 	right 	for the 	outskirts
of Copenhagen 	may 	be 	wrong 	for 	Willamaloo. 	Neither
the 	proponents 	nor 	the 	opponents 	of 	high-rise 	ideas
were 	very 	subtle 	in 	their 	arguments. 	Where 	the
former, 	especially 	in 	the 	fifties, 	had 	succeeded 	in
constructing a vulgate of 'virtues' 	(cleanliness, 	density,
greenery, 	order, 	replacement 	of slums, 	etc.), 	the 	latter,
in the sixties, 	assembled 	a 	standard 	set 	of complaints. 	It
was 	argued 	that 	'tall 	buildings' 	(all 	tall 	buildings,
anywhere) 	caused 	social 	'isolation', 	destroyed 	decent
urban 	scale, 	were 	a 	strain 	for 	the 	very 	young 	and 	the
very 	old, 	were 	lacking 	in 	domestic 	feeling, 	and
represented 	the 	imposition 	of 	one 	social 	class 	on
another. 	Whether 	or 	not 	these 	complaints 	were 	really
traceable 	to 	architectural 	shortcomings, 	or 	to 	other
forms 	of a 	malaise, 	it 	was 	evident 	that 	the 	charisma 	of
the 	Unite, 	and 	of 	large-scale 	town 	planning, 	was
beginning 	to 	fade.
The 	1960s 	also 	witnessed 	further 	architectural
critiques 	of 	the 	Unite 	concept 	that 	were 	not 	so
nihilistic, 	but 	which 	reflected 	societal 	reaction 	against
i

-- 296 of 420 --

The 	Unite 	d'Habitation 	as a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype 	• 	29 s
21.14 	Darbourne 	and
Darlie. 	Lillington 	Street,
housing, 	London.
iSfih-7 5-
by 	de 	Klerk, 	or 	of 	the 	red-brick 	vocabulary 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	Maisons 	[aoul. 	Equally 	one 	might 	see
Lillington 	Street 	as a 	fully 	domesticated 	and 	thorough-
ly 	Anglicized version 	of 	the 	Unite: 	a 	fitting 	image 	for
the 	well-meaning 	impulses 	and 	compromised 	Fabian-
ism 	of the 	Welfare 	State, 	It 	may 	have 	lacked the 	visual
unity 	and 	polemical 	challenge 	of 	its 	parent 	building,
but 	it 	was 	decent, 	socially 	responsible 	design
nonetheless.
The 	history 	of 	the 	transformation 	of 	the 	Unite
summarizes 	the 	process 	through 	which 	a 	major
symbolic 	work, 	driven 	by 	an 	alternative 	Utopian
dream, 	could 	be 	gradually 	sweetened 	and 	absorbed 	by
the status quo. 	The 	Unite 	theorem was dragged from 	its
remote 	position 	on 	the 	fringe 	of a 	Mediterranean 	myth
and 	forced 	to 	come 	to 	terms 	with 	the 	complexities 	of
individual 	cities. 	In 	this process much 	fine 	housing was
produced, 	and 	much 	that 	was 	disastrous, 	but 	in 	either
case 	the 	contradictions 	of 	the 	avant-garde, 	visionary
approach 	to 	planning 	were 	brought 	to 	the 	fore. 	Le
Corbusier 	genuinely 	believed 	his 	was 	the 	right
universal 	formula 	for the 	regeneration 	of the commun-
ity. 	But 	the 	societies 	in 	which 	the 	debased 	versions 	of
his 	dream 	were 	built 	grew 	increasingly 	sceptical 	of
both 	environmental 	determinism 	and 	social 	engineer-
ing; 	in 	the process 	they 	became 	less 	and 	less 	able 	to
project 	or 	define 	a 	sense 	of the 	possible 	social 	order 	in
architecture. 	The 	single 	chapter 	of 	the 	Unite 	encap-
sulates 	the 	transition 	from 	the 	hopes 	of one 	era 	to 	the
doubts, 	caution, 	and 	cynicism 	of another.

-- 297 of 420 --

22. 	Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian
Tradition
Only 	imagination 	can 	detect 	what 	is 	basic 	and 	wliat 	is 	not. 	The 	values 	with
which 	architecture 	is 	concerned 	(should be 	concerned) 	are 	elementary
values. 	. 	.
.
A. 	VanEyck, 	1967
The 	process 	described 	in 	the 	last 	chapter 	whereby 	the
ideas of a 	powerful 	prototype 	were 	transformed 	to 	meet
various 	conditions 	was 	repeated 	many 	times 	through-
out 	the 	1950s and 	1960s. 	Linked 	to 	this 	pattern 	of
dissemination 	were 	self-conscious 	attempts 	at 	blend-
ing 	modern 	architecture 	with 	national 	and 	regional
traditions. 	Uninventive 	modern 	building 	was 	dull 	and
seemed to represent technological 	brashness 	and 	social
anomie. 	h 	was 	a 	long 	way 	from 	the 	poetic 	power of the
finest 	inter-war 	works 	to 	the 	dreary 	housing 	schemes,
offices 	and 	schools 	that 	constituted 	the 	debased
international 	manner 	prevalent 	in 	the 	early 	fifties.
Some 	sort 	of regeneration 	was 	evidently 	necessary.
In 	the 	search 	for 	new 	inspirations 	and 	primal
signposts, 	peasant 	vernaculars 	once 	again 	came 	into
vogue. 	They 	evoked 	a 	reassuring, 	pre-industrial 	world
in 	which 	men. 	things, 	and 	natural 	forces 	seemed 	to
work 	in 	unison. 	They 	also 	suggested 	keys 	for 	adapting
to 	local 	environments, 	climates, 	and 	traditions, 	and
were 	a 	good 	antidote 	to 	the 	diluted 	International 	Style.
Vague 	yearnings 	for 	archetypes 	were 	sensed 	in 	many
of 	the 	arts 	in 	this 	period. 	Pan-cultural 	aspirations
towards 	a 	psychologically 	based 	theory 	of 	'Man' 	kept
uneasy 	company 	with 	a 	quest 	for 	regional 	identity
which 	steered 	carefully 	around 	nationalist 	overtones.
In 	this 	way 	a 	war-torn 	Europe 	sought 	internal
equilibrium. 	The 	undercurrents 	were 	felt 	by 	artists 	as
diverse 	as 	Le 	Corbusier and 	Aalto: 	they 	emerged 	in 	the
debates 	around 	the 	conference 	tables 	and 	in 	the
musings 	of Team 	X.
(liedion 	baptized 	the 	mood 	the 	'New 	Regionalism'
and 	hastened 	to 	point 	out 	that 	it 	had 	nothing 	in
common 	with 	its 	inter-war 	blood-and-soil 	ideological
cousins. 	The 	idea 	was 	to 	cross-breed 	principles 	of
indigenous 	building 	with 	languages 	of modern 	design.
A 	procured 	naivety 	was 	evidently 	to 	be 	valued 	and
modern 	architecture 	was 	to 	show 	both 	greater 	respect
for 	differences 	of 	climate 	and 	a 	more 	sensitive
appreciation 	of 'place'. 	At 	its 	worst 	this 	could 	end 	up 	in
tepid 	imitations 	of vernacular 	forms: 	at 	its 	best 	it 	led 	to
Le 	Corbusier's 	Maisons 	Jaoul. 	or 	to 	LItzon's 	houses 	at
Kingo. 	in 	Denmark.
In 	Scandinavia 	the 	process 	of 	naturalization' 	of
modern 	architecture 	had 	already 	occurred 	by 	the
thirties, 	particularly 	in 	the 	work 	of 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Indeed, 	the 	International 	Style 	had 	been 	a 	brief
interlude 	and 	its 	lessons 	had 	soon 	been 	grafted 	to 	a
substructure 	of 	national 	(or 	else 	National 	Romantic)
building 	traditions. 	One 	is 	almost 	tempted 	to 	declare
some 	Nordic 	genius 	for 	the 	sensitive 	handling 	of locale
and 	of 	natural 	materials. 	But 	then 	conditions 	were
different 	from 	elsewhere 	in 	fiurope: 	industrialization
and 	the Second 	World 	War 	had 	less of a 	drastic 	impact.
Although 	'Scandinavian 	Modern 	Design' 	enioyed 	a
vogue 	in 	the 	1950s 	and 	was 	associated 	with 	ovoid
wooden 	salad 	bowls 	and 	organic 	bannisters, 	this 	was
not 	the 	whole 	story. 	In 	his 	design 	for 	the 	SAS 	Hotel 	in
Copenhagen 	(fig. 	22.1), 	Arne 	Jacobsen 	demonstrated
how 	Miesian 	ideas 	could 	be 	refashioned 	in 	a 	steel 	and
glass 	vocabulary 	blending 	elegance 	of 	detail 	with
lightness 	of 	touch: 	he 	also 	designed 	furniture,
glassware, 	and 	other 	fittings. 	The 	manufacture 	of
mass-produced 	models 	was 	aided 	by 	the 	strength 	of
Scandinavian 	craft 	traditions 	which 	perhaps 	took 	to

-- 298 of 420 --

Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian 	Tradition 	• 	297
industrialization 	with 	less 	fuss 	than 	had 	been 	the 	case
in 	Germany 	and 	England.
There 	was 	never 	quite 	an 	Aalto 	school, 	but 	he
hovered 	as 	a 	sort 	of 	father-figure 	over 	Scandinavian
architecture 	nonetheless. 	The 	fact 	was 	that 	his
prototypes 	were 	well 	adapted 	to 	unique 	regional
conditions 	and 	to 	such 	features 	as 	the 	scale 	of
landscape 	and 	the 	stringencies 	of 	the 	Nordic 	climate.
He 	was 	also 	inimitable, 	and 	the 	pasticheurs 	in 	this 	case
evolved 	jagged 	ground-plans 	and 	clumsy 	sprawls 	of
steps 	and 	brick 	surfaces. 	On 	the other hand, 	there 	were
talents 	like 	J0rn 	lltzon 	and 	Ralph 	Erskine 	who 	were
able 	to 	translate 	the 	basic 	lessons 	and 	emerge 	with
their 	own 	creative 	identities. 	Aside 	from 	his 	influence
on 	others. 	Aalto's 	late 	works 	contained 	a 	drama 	of
their 	own: 	they 	need 	to 	be 	considered 	alongside 	the
works 	of the 	other 	'modern 	masters' 	in 	their 	maturity;
as 	with 	them, 	new 	territories 	of 	expression 	were
extended, 	while 	certain 	older 	themes 	continued 	to
grow.
When 	the 	war 	came 	to 	an 	end. 	Aalto 	was 	47 	years
old. 	He 	had 	managed 	to 	survive 	stagnant 	economic
conditions 	in 	Finland 	by 	precarious 	trips 	across 	the
Atlantic 	to 	teach 	in 	Cambridge. 	Massachusetts, 	at 	MIT,
only a 	mile 	away 	from 	Gropius 	at 	Harvard 	(but 	very 	far
removed 	in 	spirit). 	Aalto's 	first 	notable 	post-war
commission 	stemmed 	from 	this 	institutional 	con-
nection: 	it 	was 	to 	design 	'Baker 	House', 	a 	student
dormitory 	on 	a 	site 	to 	one 	side 	of 	the 	campus, 	with
views 	over 	a 	busy 	road 	towards 	the 	broad 	basin 	of the
River 	Charles 	(fig. 	22.2). 	Aalto broke 	the 	programme
down 	into 	its 	private 	and 	communal 	elements 	and
disposed 	the 	former 	- 	the 	students' 	rooms 	- 	in 	a
serpentine 	spine. 	This 	form 	was 	no 	mere 	whimsy, 	but
22.1 	iahovv] 	Arne
lacobscn. 	SAS 	Hotel.
Copenhagen, 	i'-)^H.
22.2 	(ri.<(/i() 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Baker 	House.
Cambridge.
Massachusetts.
I947-SI.

-- 299 of 420 --

298 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
had 	a 	variety 	of 	practical, 	aestiietic. 	and 	symbolic
justifications. 	It 	created 	considerable 	variety 	in 	the
rooms 	and 	allowed 	diagonal 	views 	up 	and 	down 	the
river; 	it 	made 	for 	an 	unmonolithic 	form 	of 	great
sculptural 	vitality : 	and 	it marked 	out 	a 	small enclave to
one 	side 	of 	the 	campus. 	The 	communal 	parts 	of 	the
programme 	were 	enclosed 	in 	rectangular 	forms 	at
ground 	level, 	laid 	out 	on 	a 	diagonal 	axis. 	This 	contrast
in 	geometry 	was 	reinforced 	by 	contrasts 	in 	material
between 	the 	horizontal, 	hovering 	concrete 	and 	stone-
clad 	roofs 	of 	the 	lounge/dining-room 	area, 	and 	the
rough 	red-brick 	textures 	of 	the 	serpentine 	wall
punctured 	by 	windows 	of 	the 	private 	rooms. 	Overall,
the 	organization 	seemed 	to 	suggest 	that 	Aalto 	had
taken 	the 	formula 	of the 	Pavilion 	Suisse 	- 	a 	hovering
rectangular 	slab 	for 	the 	student 	rooms, 	curved 	rubble
areas 	for 	the 	public 	functions 	- 	and 	turned 	it 	on 	its
head. 	Indeed, 	the 	Baker 	House 	design 	started 	as 	a
parallel-piped 	block 	that 	was 	only 	gradually 	modu-
lated 	into 	a 	curved 	form.
Although 	Aalto 	was 	probably 	inspired 	by 	the 	local
Boston 	tradition 	of 	red-brick 	houses 	with 	sinuous,
curved 	sequences 	of 	bays, 	the 	thinking 	behind 	the
building 	and 	its 	forms 	was 	rooted 	in 	his 	pre-war
explorations. 	The 	curves 	were 	related 	to 	Aalto's
continuous 	search 	for 	anthropomorphic 	forms 	in
everything 	from 	furniture 	design 	to 	the 	layout 	of large
schemes 	on 	the 	Finnish 	landscape. 	Among 	the
drawings 	for 	Baker 	House 	is 	one 	showing 	the 	building
covered 	with 	trellises 	of thick 	greenery, 	like 	some 	vast
natural 	formation. 	The 	rough 	brick 	surfaces 	gave 	the
impression 	that 	the 	building 	was 	already 	old. 	and 	the
effects 	of weathering were 	anticipated 	and 	invited. 	The
contrast 	with 	the 	mechanical 	slickness 	then 	in 	vogue
in 	America 	was 	extreme, 	and 	.seemed 	to 	suggest 	a
rejection 	of 	industrialism 	in 	favour 	of 	more 	lasting
human 	themes. 	It 	is 	scarcely 	surprising 	that 	Baker
House 	should 	have 	been 	perceived 	in 	America 	at 	the
time 	as 	a 	challenge 	to 	the 	straitjacket 	of 	the 	Internat-
ional 	Style 	stemming 	from 	Gropius; 	it 	is 	equally
notable 	that 	the 	building 	had 	little 	influence 	in 	the
United 	States.
Aalto's 	concern 	for 	buildings 	as 	intermediaries
between 	human 	life 	and 	the 	natural 	landscape 	was
explored 	continuously 	in 	the 	post-war 	years. 	This 	was
an 	architect who felt that there were almost archetypal
building 	configurations 	to 	express 	the 	basic 	forms 	of
human 	society. 	These 	he 	was 	able 	to 	intuit 	in 	both
vernacular forms 	and 	the 	most 	ancient 	monumental
buildings; 	indeed, 	there 	was 	no 	false 	opposition
between 	'high' 	and 	'low' 	traditions 	in 	his 	search 	for
fundamentals. 	One 	such 	archetype 	was 	the 	courtyard,
or 	to 	be 	more 	precise, 	the 	'harbour', 	formed 	by 	an
Inward-looking 	perimeter 	building 	on 	three 	sides, 	and
linked 	to 	the 	surroundings 	by 	overflows 	of 	steps 	and

-- 300 of 420 --

Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian 	Tradition 	299
22. 	? 	[elbow 	left) 	Alvar
Aalti). 	Town 	Hall 	and
centre. 	Siiyiiatsalo.
Finland. 	1949-52.
22.4 	(/<•/() 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Rovaniemi. 	Finland.
1 96 1, 	sketch 	plan 	of
library.
levels. 	The 	Villa 	Mairea 	had 	been 	a 	variant 	on 	this
scheme 	before 	the 	war 	and 	it 	was 	to 	recur 	time 	and
again 	in 	public 	and 	quasi-public 	schemes 	in 	the 	fifties
and 	sixties 	when 	a 	focus 	was 	needed 	which 	nonethe-
less 	had 	to 	be 	linked 	to 	a 	larger 	context. 	Aalto's
sensitivity 	to 	vernacular 	precedent 	emerges 	in 	his
description 	of the 	'Karelian 	House'
:
A 	dilapidated 	Karelian 	village 	is 	somehow 	similar 	in
appearance 	to a 	Greek 	ruin, 	where, 	also, 	the
materials' 	uniformity 	is 	a 	dominant 	feature, 	though
marble 	replaces 	wood 	Another 	significant
special 	feature 	is 	the 	manner 	in 	which 	the 	Karelian
house 	has 	come 	about, 	both 	its 	historical
development 	and 	its 	building 	methods. 	. 	. 	. 	The
Karelian 	house 	is 	in 	a 	way 	a 	building 	that 	begins
with 	a 	single 	modest 	cell 	or 	with 	an 	imperfect
embryo 	building, 	shelter 	for 	man 	and 	animals, 	and
which 	then 	figuratively 	speaking 	grows 	year 	by
year. 	'The 	expanded 	Karelian 	house' 	can 	in 	a 	way
be 	compared 	to 	a 	biological 	cell 	formation
This 	remarkable 	ability 	to 	grow 	and 	adapt 	is 	best
reflected 	in 	the 	Karelian 	building's 	main
architectural 	principle, 	the 	fact 	that 	the roof angle
isn't 	constant.
It is 	interesting to carry 	this 	image in 	mind 	when one
approaches 	Aalto's 	town 	centre 	at 	Saynatsalo 	of
1949-52 	(fig. 	22. 	3I. 	This 	was 	placed 	at 	the heart 	of an
island 	community 	- 	the 	space 	to 	the 	centre 	becoming
in 	a sense, 	the focal point of the entire 	local society. 	The
complex 	included 	a 	council 	chamber 	together 	with 	a
public 	library. 	At 	ground 	level 	there 	were 	shops 	which
could 	be 	transformed 	into 	government 	offices 	once 	the
need 	arose. 	The 	council 	chamber 	was 	contained 	in 	an
almost 	cubic 	volume 	with 	a 	slanted 	roof 	and 	acted 	as
the 	pivot 	of 	the 	scheme 	as 	one 	approached 	over 	the
rising 	levels 	of 	land 	by 	means 	of a 	forest 	path, 	up 	the
stairs, 	and 	across 	the 	court. 	Some 	variation 	of
fenestration 	and 	texture 	was 	employed 	to 	articulate
the 	dift'erent 	sides 	of 	the 	building; 	wooden 	slatted
windows 	and 	balconies 	were 	set 	off 	against 	predomi-
nant 	rough 	brick 	surfaces. 	With 	its 	steps, 	overgrown
with 	grass 	and 	weeds, 	its 	variations 	of silhouette, 	and
its 	weathered 	materials, 	Saynatsalo 	had 	almost 	the 	air
of 	an 	ancient 	complex 	of 	buildings 	which 	had 	grown
gradually, 	bit 	by 	bit. 	The 	buildings 	blended 	with 	their
forest 	setting 	and 	with 	the 	varying 	levels 	of 	the 	site.
Any 	lapse 	into 	the 	merely 	picturesque 	was 	held 	in
check 	by 	an 	underlying 	formal 	discipline 	(Plate 	1 	1 	1.
Between 	1950 	and 	his 	death 	in 	1973, 	Aalto
produced 	an 	extraordinary 	number 	of 	buildings 	and
projects. 	He received commissions in 	places 	as far 	apart
as Oregon 	and 	Persia. 	Still, 	the 	majority 	of his buildings
were 	for 	Finland 	and 	other 	Scandinavian 	countries.
The 	range 	of 	tasks 	handled 	was 	also 	very 	wide 	and
included 	schools, 	libraries, 	churches, 	housing
schemes, 	and 	university 	plans 	and 	entire 	urban
layouts. 	Each 	building 	was 	marked 	by 	a 	unique
response 	to 	the 	aspirations 	of 	the 	client, 	to 	the
anticipated 	character 	of human 	behaviour, 	and 	to 	the
configuration 	of the 	particular 	site, 	but 	there 	were 	still
transcending 	themes 	suggesting 	a 	corpus 	of 	general
principles. 	In 	other 	words 	- 	fike 	Le 	Corbusier, 	Wright.
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	and any 	other 	architects 	in 	the
period 	who 	achieved 	a 	genuine 	style 	- 	Aalto 	was 	able
to 	rely 	on 	certain 	type 	forms 	which 	had 	proved 	their
worth 	time 	and 	again 	in 	a 	variety 	of 	contexts.
Moreover, 	his 	architectural 	language, 	like 	theirs, 	was
drenched 	in 	personal 	mythologies 	and 	reminiscences,
as 	well 	as 	being 	a 	crystallization 	of 	values 	he 	felt
central 	to 	the 	social fabric 	of his 	time.
An 	example of such 	a 	recurrent 	Aalto theme 	was the
juxtaposition 	of 	the 	fan 	shape 	with 	an 	orthogonal,
rigid 	form. 	Perhaps 	at 	a 	most 	basic 	psychic 	level, 	this
contrast 	of motifs 	reflected 	his 	sense 	of polarities 	in 	the
human 	condition. 	Certainly 	it 	was 	a 	pattern 	which
signaled 	his 	interest 	in 	the 	contrast 	and 	dissolution 	of
man-made 	and 	natural 	orders. 	Time 	and 	again 	the
formal 	contrast 	was 	employed 	to 	soften 	and 	modulate
edges, 	or 	to 	blend 	with 	landscape 	formations, 	nearby
buildings 	of variable 	geometry, 	or clumps 	of trees.
On 	another 	level, 	the 	formal 	pattern 	was 	related 	to
programmatic 	distinctions. 	Often the 	fan 	was 	made 	to
contain 	a 	community 	of scholars 	(e.g.. 	in 	libraries I. 	an
amphitheatre 	(e.g.. 	in 	opera 	houses 	and 	university
auditoria). 	or 	an 	outdoor public 	link 	(e.g.. 	in 	the curved
steps 	outside 	his 	own 	studio 	in 	Helsinki 	of 	1955). 	By
contrast 	the 	oblong 	flanges 	were 	often 	employed 	to
contain 	more 	'private' 	areas, 	such 	as 	offices 	or
individual 	studies. 	Sometimes 	the 	fan 	shape 	would
become 	a 	sort 	of extended 	ear or 	organ, 	creating 	a 	free-
standing 	wedge 	like 	a 	detached 	piece 	of landscape; 	or
again 	the 	shape 	might 	be 	embedded 	in 	a 	courtyard 	or
grasped by 	a 	precinct 	wafl.
Here. 	then, 	was 	one 	of those 	basic 	patterns 	intrinsic
to 	a 	true 	style. 	But 	each 	time 	the 	type-form 	was 	re-
used, 	it 	had 	to 	be 	rethought 	in 	its 	new 	context; 	it 	was
not 	sufficient 	simply 	to re-use 	the 	form 	in 	a 	mechanical
way. 	Thus 	in 	the 	Rovaniemi 	Library 	(1963-8) 	(fig.
22.4) 	and 	the 	Mount 	Angel 	College 	Library 	in 	Oregon.
USA 	(1967I. 	the 	fan 	was 	functionally 	related 	to 	the
common-sense 	requirement 	of a 	single 	central 	point
for 	the 	librarian 	(which 	led 	naturally 	to 	a 	variant 	of the
radial 	plan) 	and 	to 	the 	need 	to 	maximize 	light 	around
the edges. 	Moreover, 	the splayed treatment 	of the 	outer
extremities 	allowed 	a 	variation 	of 	relationships 	to 	a
setting 	and 	a 	variety 	of 	interior 	psychological 	moods
and 	views 	for 	the 	readers. 	In 	these 	cases 	too 	the
entrance 	to 	the buildings 	was 	through 	a 	'hard' 	fagade

-- 301 of 420 --

300 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
22. s 	(Ji'/ll 	Alvar 	Aalto.
Otaniemi 	Institute of
Technology. 	Finland.
1955-64. 	tfiemain
lecture tfieatre.
22.6 	{behnv) 	Alvar
Aalto. 	sketch 	of the
amphitheatre 	at 	Delphi.
Greece. 	1953.
of 	strong 	rectangular 	character, 	to 	which 	the 	fan
shape 	supplied 	a 	softened opposite 	face, 	and 	a 	recep-
tacle 	to 	receive 	the 	circulation 	across 	the 	building.
In a 	design 	for 	an 	art 	gallery 	for 	Shiraz. 	Iran 	( 	I97f)).
the 	fan 	recurred 	once 	again, 	as 	a 	suitable 	way 	of
creating flexible, 	parallel 	bays of varying 	height related
to 	the 	viewpoint 	of 	someone 	entering 	(who 	could
survey 	all 	at 	a 	single 	glance! 	and 	to 	the 	contour 	lines 	of
the 	hilltop 	on 	which 	the 	building 	was 	to 	stand. 	In
Aalto's 	numerous 	theatre 	and 	music 	buildings 	the 	fan
shape 	was 	naturally 	well 	suited 	to 	auditoria 	requiring
a 	focus 	of radial 	lines 	on 	a 	stage.
In 	the Otaniemi 	Institute 	of Technology 	of 	1955-64
(figs. 	22.5. 	22.7), 	the 	form 	appeared 	again 	in 	one 	of its
most 	daring 	manifestations. 	The 	site 	was 	irregular,
fringed 	on 	two 	sides 	by 	motorways, 	with 	a 	slight 	slope
in 	the 	terrain. 	Aalto 	made 	the 	main 	auditorium 	the
focus 	of the 	whole 	group 	of buildings 	and 	placed 	it 	in 	a
prominent 	position, 	expressed 	as 	a 	wedge-shaped
volume. 	But 	it 	also 	acted 	as 	a 	hinge 	between 	the
prevalent 	geometries 	of 	rectangular 	strip 	buildings
containing 	offices, 	classrooms, 	and 	laboratories 	and
laid 	out 	around 	courts or 	else 	with 	direct 	access 	to 	the
/?

-- 302 of 420 --

AlvarAalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian Tradition 	• 	301
22.7 	AlvarAalto.
Otaniemi 	Institute of
Technology 	i4SS-h4-
aerial 	view 	of ensemble.
main 	precinct. 	The 	main 	rectangle 	alongside 	the
auditorium 	'fan' 	was 	the 	administration 	block, 	while
the smaller 	rectangles 	contained 	the 	teaching 	depart-
ments 	(geography, 	architecture, 	etc.). 	These 	were
capable 	of 	future 	linear 	expansion, 	while 	the
ceremonial 	theatre 	suggested 	a 	strong 	'fix' 	in 	the
composition. 	It 	was 	a 	plan 	which 	implied 	a 	hierarchy
and 	separation 	of 	the 	parts, 	yet 	held 	all 	the 	bits 	in 	a
close-knit 	order, 	which 	included 	the 	spaces 	between,
the stepping landscape 	and the surrounding 	pathways.
Similar sensitivity 	to 	the qualities 	of topography 	was 	to
be seen 	in 	Aalto's larger urban 	design 	schemes, 	such 	as
the 	one 	for 	Jyvaskyla, 	where 	the 	council 	chamber 	and
the 	theatre 	were 	expressed 	as 	free-form 	elements
responding 	to 	the 	contours 	of the 	land, 	in 	contrast 	to
the 	orthogonal 	geometry 	of the 	square. 	The 	result 	was
an 	elusive 	order, 	flirting 	with 	the 	idea 	of 	irregularity,
but 	unified 	through 	space 	tensions 	and 	vital 	inter-
actions 	across 	the 	surrounding 	urban 	rectangularity.
One 	scarcely 	needs 	to 	point 	out 	some 	affinity 	of
values 	between 	Aalto's 	'landmass-sculpture' 	approach
to 	architecture, 	and 	the 	late 	works 	of 	l.e 	Corbusier.
particularly 	Ronchamp. 	There 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	that
Aalto. 	like 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	his 	late 	works, 	was
preoccupied 	with 	the 	idea 	of 	an 	architecture 	close 	to
'Nature'. This conception 	implied 	not just 	an 	insistence
on 	natural 	materials 	and 	a 	strong 	feeling 	for genius 	loci
and 	regional 	setting, 	but 	also 	the 	treatment 	of 	nature
as 	a 	source 	of 'Laws'. 	It 	was 	central 	to 	both 	architects'
outlooks 	that 	an 	order 	should 	be 	unearthed 	in 	which
man 	and 	nature should 	once 	again 	live 	in 	unison. 	In
both 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Aalto 	there 	was 	therefore 	an
almost 	totemic 	respect 	for 	natural 	forms.
Moreover. 	Aalto, 	like 	Le 	Corbusier, 	received 	stimuli
from 	Classical 	sources, 	and 	was 	also 	intrigued 	by 	the
forceful 	interaction 	of the 	intellectual 	with 	the 	sensual
in 	the 	architecture 	of ancient 	Greece. 	But 	whereas 	for
the 	Frenchman 	the 	Parthenon 	was the 	prime exemplar
(a 	'pure 	creation 	of 	the 	mind'), 	for 	the 	Finn 	the 	chief
inspiration 	lay 	in 	the 	way 	the 	Greeks 	arranged 	their
urban 	sites 	with 	amphitheatres, 	stadia, 	and
ceremonial 	platforms 	linked 	by 	paths 	and 	routes. 	It
was 	an 	'irregular' 	order 	of 	this 	kind 	~ 	in 	which 	there
was. 	nonetheless, 	a 	harmony 	of 	buildings, 	landscape,
and 	the spirit 	of place - that 	Aalto 	managed 	to evoke 	in
his 	wonderful 	drawings 	of 	Delphi 	(fig. 	22.6). 	Some-
thing 	of this 	landscape 	magic 	he 	attempted 	to 	translate
into 	his 	own 	architecture 	and 	urban 	designs. 	It 	seems
possible 	that 	the 	ultimate 	roots 	of the 	fan 	shape 	which
so 	obsessed 	him 	lay 	in 	the 	amphitheatres 	of Greece.

-- 303 of 420 --

302 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
It 	is 	tempting 	at 	this 	point 	to 	stand 	back 	and 	make
some 	generalizations 	about 	certain 	trends 	in 	the
modern 	movement 	around 	i960. 	In 	the 	late 	works 	of
Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Aalto, 	in 	the 	aspirations 	of Team 	X.
and 	perhaps 	even 	in 	the 	art 	of 	men 	like 	Robert
Rauschenberg 	in 	painting, 	one 	senses 	a 	new 	sort 	of
complexity 	and 	ambiguity 	concerning 	the 	relation 	of
the 	art 	object 	and 	its 	surrounding 	spatial 	and 	cultural
Held. 	No 	doubt 	in 	time 	it 	may 	be 	possible 	to 	divine 	the
underlying 	meaning 	of 	this 	tendency, 	which 	was
certainly 	a 	continuation 	of 	some 	of 	the 	fundamental
changes 	implied 	by 	Cubism 	at 	the 	turn 	of the century.
Another 	prevalent 	trend 	seems 	to 	have 	been 	a 	more
overtly 	traditionalist 	position. 	This 	was 	not 	a 	case 	of
returning 	to 	nineteenth-century 	eclecticism, 	but 	of
blending 	together, 	as 	it 	were, 	some 	of 	the 	primary
devices 	of 	modern 	architecture 	with 	an 	ancient
sensibility. 	Hand-in-hand 	with 	this 	development 	came
a 	renewed 	interest 	in 	the 	unique 	qualities 	of materials
and 	a 	sense 	of 	handicraft, 	which 	often 	had 	to 	be
specially 	procured. 	Finally 	one 	notes 	a 	shift 	from 	pre-
war 	mechanistic 	analogies 	to 	ones concerning 	com-
plex 	geological 	or 	biological 	orders. 	Aalto 	seems 	to
have 	grasped 	and 	incorporated 	all 	these 	tendencies
within 	one 	huge 	imaginative 	structure; 	but 	far 	lesser
talents 	seem 	to 	have 	paid 	increasing 	attention 	to
values 	of this 	sort 	around 	the 	same 	time.
So 	far 	as 	Aalto's 	imitators 	are 	concerned, 	they
tended, 	like 	Corbusier's 	or 	Wright's 	or 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's. 	to 	acquire 	some 	of 	the 	external 	mannerisms
without 	grasping 	the 	underlying 	meaning 	or 	structure
of thought. This 	was 	usual 	and 	to 	be expected. 	Nor was
it 	always 	a 	bad 	thing: 	Aaltoesque 	pastiches 	did 	at least
have 	a complexity 	and 	texture 	which would 	have 	been
lacking 	without 	his 	influence. 	However, 	there 	were
some 	artists 	capable 	of 	extending 	Aalto's 	principles,
and 	using 	them 	to 	feed 	their 	own.
Among 	these 	was 	J^rgen 	Bo. 	who 	designed 	the 	Art
Museum 	at 	Louisiana, 	a 	few 	miles 	north 	of 	Copenha-
gen, 	in 	1958 	(fig. 	22.8). 	The 	site 	was 	both 	demanding
and 	rich 	in 	opportunity, 	in 	that 	a 	collection 	of modern
paintings 	and 	sculptures 	needed 	displaying 	along 	a
walkway 	between 	a 	fine eighteenth-century 	house 	and
the 	sea. 	Bo 	planned 	the 	building 	to 	take 	maximum
advantage 	of 	this 	sequence 	without 	disrupting 	the
landscape. 	Essentially 	it 	was 	a 	linear 	building 	defined
by 	white 	planar walls 	and 	low 	wooden 	roofs: 	the 	result
was 	a 	quiet 	but 	elegant 	structure 	from 	which 	the
garden 	was 	grasped 	as a 	series 	of vignettes, 	and 	these,
in 	turn, 	enhanced 	the 	works 	of 	art. 	One 	of 	the 	most
stunning 	effects 	was 	achieved 	by 	placing the 	stick-like
Giacometti 	sculptures 	in 	a 	double 	volume 	against 	a
backdrop of marshland 	and 	reeds: 	this 	particular 	space
was 	entered 	at 	an 	upper 	level. 	The 	museum 	then
22.8 	I0rgen 	Bo.
Museum 	of Modern 	Art
at 	Louisiana, 	near
Copenhagen, 	1958.

-- 304 of 420 --

Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian Tradition 	303
22.4 	1dm 	Utzon. 	houses
at 	Birkeh0j. 	Elsinore.
1963. 	plan.
gradually changed direction, 	to 	meander to the 	water's
edge 	where 	the 	path 	continued 	(without 	the 	building
over 	it) 	along 	a 	coastal 	way. 	The 	splay 	of the 	plan 	and
the 	sensitivity 	to 	topography 	are 	reminiscent 	of Aalto.
But 	the 	Louisiana 	design 	was 	also 	'regionalism' 	of the
best 	sort, 	since 	it 	seemed 	to 	fuse 	Miesian 	planar 	walls
and 	spatial 	effects 	with 	the 	whitewashed 	enclosures
and 	fine 	wooden 	structures 	of the 	Danish 	vernacular.
The 	whole 	was 	permeated 	with 	a 	fine 	sense 	of
proportion 	and 	a 	delicate 	scale 	which 	made 	it 	a
comfortable 	neighbour 	for 	architecture 	of any 	age.
Another 	Danish 	architect 	to 	transform 	Aaltoesque
lessons 	to 	good 	purpose 	was Jjirn 	LItzon. 	who was 	born
in 	1918 	and 	studied 	at 	the 	Academy 	of 	Art 	in
Copenhagen 	under 	Steen 	Eiler 	Rasmussen. 	The 	period
between 	the 	end 	of 	the 	w'ar 	and 	1SS7' 	w'hen 	he 	won
the 	Sydney 	Opera 	House 	competition, 	was 	one 	of
constant 	travel, 	few 	commissions, 	and 	a 	vast 	ab-
sorption 	of 	impressions. 	He 	worked 	for 	a 	time 	with
Asplund. 	then 	with 	Aalto. 	and 	visited 	Wright 	at
Tahesin : 	he 	was 	also 	drawm 	to 	the sculpture 	of 	Henri
Laurens, 	which 	provided 	basic 	lessons 	in 	abstraction
and 	anthropomorphism. 	He 	travelled 	extensively 	in
Mexico, 	the 	Far 	East, 	and 	North 	Africa, 	tilling 	his
sketchbooks 	with 	ideas 	and 	impressions. 	Among 	the
strongest 	influences 	on 	him 	were 	the 	mud 	buildings 	he
saw 	in 	Morocco 	and 	the 	cubic 	aggregate 	forms 	of
Berber 	villages 	clustered 	around 	platforms 	and 	ter-
races 	in 	the 	High 	Atlas.
It 	is 	therefore 	insufficient 	to 	see 	I'tzon 	as 	a 	mere
follower 	of 	Aalto, 	though 	he 	did 	draw 	on 	Aaltoesque
qualities 	of subtle 	ordering 	and 	spatial 	complexity. 	In
the 	Kingo 	Houses 	near 	Elsinore 	in 	Zeeland 	of
1 9 56-60. 	he designed 	an 	L-shaped 	type 	into the elbow
of which 	a 	small 	garden 	was 	inserted. 	He 	disposed 	this
standard 	in 	a 	variety 	of 	different 	ways 	over 	the
topography 	to 	create 	a 	hierarchy 	between 	the 	indi-
vidual 	home 	and 	the 	community 	and 	to 	maximize 	a
variety 	of 	site 	responses 	on 	a 	gently 	sloping 	terrain.
The 	terrace 	houses 	at 	Fredensborg 	(1962-3) 	con-
tinued 	something 	of 	this 	theme, 	but 	created 	an 	even
greater 	variety 	of 	rhythms 	through 	a 	more 	complex
form 	including 	towers. 	The 	materials 	were 	humble
brick 	and 	pantiles, 	and 	the 	effect 	was 	akin 	to 	the
'anonymous' 	vernacular 	buildings 	so 	much 	discussed
at 	the 	time. 	The 	overall 	plan 	layout 	of the 	Birkehoj 	at
Elsinore 	(1963) 	introduced 	yet 	another 	pattern 	using
standardized 	elements, 	by 	grouping 	them 	around 	a
loosely 	defined 	'harbour' 	in 	which 	the 	sculpting 	of
land-mass 	platforms 	helped 	to 	link 	the 	parts 	and 	give
meaning 	to 	the 	spaces 	between 	(fig. 	22. 9I. 	In 	this 	case
it 	is possible to 	perceive the 	lingering 	debts to 	Aalto and
to 	vernacular 	expressions 	of community, 	but 	the 	style
was 	LItzon's 	own. 	Moreover, 	the 	arrangement 	also
suggests 	loose 	parallels 	with 	some 	of 	the 	ideas 	being
pursued 	by 	Van 	Eyck. 	de 	Carlo 	(and 	other 	architects
discussed 	in 	the 	last 	chapter) 	at 	about 	the 	same 	time.
Of 	course, 	the 	major 	building 	for 	which 	LItzon 	is
internationally 	known 	is 	the 	extraordinary 	Sydney
Opera 	House 	designed 	between 	1957 	and 	1965 	(fig.
22.10). 	and 	then 	brought 	to 	completion 	in 	a 	modified
form 	after 	his 	resignation. 	Here 	is 	not 	the 	place 	to
untangle 	the 	only 	half-known 	personal 	and 	political
complexities 	which 	led 	to 	this 	sad 	state 	of 	affairs. 	The

-- 305 of 420 --

304 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
result, 	so 	far 	as 	the 	architecture 	was 	concerned, 	was
that 	the 	interior 	was 	quite 	different 	from 	Lltzon's
probable 	vision: 	that 	many 	of the 	details 	(of which 	he
seems 	to 	have 	had 	an 	imprecise 	idea himself) 	were 	also
gradually 	evolved 	by 	other 	minds 	than 	his 	own: 	and
that 	the 	shells 	have 	a 	more 	vertical 	thrust 	than 	that
envisaged 	in 	the 	earliest 	drawings.
But 	the 	image 	of 	these 	soaring 	white 	curves 	at 	the
end 	of 	Bennelong 	Point, 	jutting 	out 	into 	the 	harbour
and 	echoing 	the 	curves 	of 	the 	bridge 	and 	the 	sharp
curves 	of 	the 	sails 	nearby, 	still 	has 	great 	power 	to
move. 	They 	soar 	upwards 	from 	low 	platforms 	which
themselves step 	up to their 	highest points 	at 	the water's
edge. 	Into the platforms 	are laid 	the two 	main 	auditoria
on 	a 	slightly 	converging 	geometry, 	while 	a 	small 	space
to 	the 	landward 	side 	contains 	a 	restaurant. 	The 	sails,
butting 	into 	and 	slicing 	one 	another, 	rising 	and
pitching 	against 	the 	sky. 	seem 	to 	transmit 	visual 	force
felt 	equally 	in 	the 	tense 	profiles, 	or 	their 	smooth 	but
slightly 	textured 	surfaces. 	The 	original 	idea 	for 	the
interiors 	is 	best 	grasped 	from 	a 	section 	which 	shows 	a
sort 	of counterwave 	motion 	of curved 	ceilings 	flowing
beneath 	the 	vast 	roofs 	above 	(fig. 	22.11). 	The 	fly-
towers, 	finally, 	were 	buried 	under 	the 	highest 	of 	the
shells, 	thus 	disturbing 	some 	hard-line 	puritans 	who
were 	unable 	to 	enjoy 	the 	contrasts 	and 	complexities
between 	the 	interior 	and 	the 	exterior.
As 	is 	true 	of most 	works of art 	of originality, 	it 	serves
only 	a 	limited 	purpose 	to 	list 	possible 	sources 	or
analogies. 	The 	platform 	theme 	was 	on 	Utzon's 	mind
anyway, 	as 	is 	clear 	from 	his 	housing 	designs, 	but 	in 	a
monumental 	context 	it 	may 	have 	been 	specifically
inspired 	by 	the 	artificial 	hills 	with 	ceremonial 	steps 	of
Monte 	Alban 	or some 	other Central 	American 	site. 	The
shells 	were 	a 	staggering 	invention, 	perhaps 	partly
influenced 	by 	knowledge 	of 	Taut's 	curved 	crustacean
abstractions 	of 	the 	twenties, 	and 	perhaps 	partly
prompted 	by 	the 	love 	of complex 	interlacing 	curvature
which 	Utzon 	had 	seen 	in 	Aalto. 	But 	whatever 	the
prototypes, 	the 	synthesis 	is 	quite 	new 	and 	seems 	to
involve 	subtle 	abstractions 	of the 	sails 	in 	the 	harbour,
as 	well 	as 	expressions 	analogous 	to 	the 	rhythm 	and
flow 	of 	music. 	The 	same 	may 	possibly 	be 	said 	of 	the
interior 	wave-ceilings: 	certainly 	they 	stemmed 	from
the 	Aalto 	example 	of the 	Maison 	Carree. 	but 	here they
had 	as 	much 	to 	do 	with 	the 	flow 	of the 	nearby 	waves
and 	the 	visualization 	of the 	flow 	of sound. 	It 	is 	curious
that 	this 	siimbolic 	visualization 	of 	musical 	rhythms
should 	in 	fact 	have 	posed 	considerable 	acoustic
problems. 	Then 	Utzon 	envisaged certain 	details 	like the
window 	struts 	(immensely 	complex, 	as 	they 	had 	to
reconcile the structural 	problems of vast 	openings 	with
the 	difficulties 	of 	complex 	curvatures), 	which 	were
perhaps 	traceable 	to 	an 	interest 	in 	the 	wing 	structures
of birds.
But 	there 	was 	another 	level 	to 	the 	symbolism 	of the
building. 	It 	was 	in 	a 	sense 	a 	modern 	cathedral
consecrated 	to 	a 	supremely 	important 	national 	art.
22.10 	]0rnUtson.
Sydney 	Opera 	House.
I9S7-6S.
I

-- 306 of 420 --

Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian 	Tradition 	305
22.11 	Jjirn 	Utzon.
Sydney 	Opera 	House.
1957-65. 	section 	of
original 	sclieme 	and
plan.
One 	historian 	wrote 	of the 	concept that it:
. 	. 	. 	concentrates 	the 	unconscious 	meanings 	of its
urban 	context 	in 	the 	same 	way 	as 	Notre-Dame.
situated 	on 	the 	lie 	de 	la 	Cite, 	does 	for 	Paris. 	It
manifests 	the 	spirit 	of the 	city 	. 	.
.
Utzon 	himself referred 	to 	the 	Opera 	House 	as 	a 	sort 	of
church
:
. 	. 	. 	if you 	think 	of a 	Gothic 	church 	you 	are 	closer 	to
what 	I 	have 	been 	aiming 	at 	. 	. 	. 	looking 	at 	a 	Gothic
church, 	you 	never 	get 	tired, 	you 	will 	never 	be
finished 	with 	it 	. 	. 	. 	this 	interplay 	of light 	and
movement 	. 	. 	. 	makes 	it 	a 	living 	thing.
Indeed. 	Utzon 	attempted 	to 	design 	a 	standardized
system 	of 	parts 	which 	could 	eventually 	be 	assembled
into 	his 	free-form 	design, 	in 	much 	the 	same 	way 	that
Gothic 	architects 	had 	used 	repeated 	systems 	to 	achieve
their 	sublime 	and 	complex 	spatial 	effects. 	At 	Sydney
this 	eventually 	necessitated 	a 	change 	in 	the 	geometry
of 	the 	shells 	so 	that 	they 	conformed 	to 	a 	spheroid
profile, 	and 	considerable 	experimentation 	with 	pre-
cast concrete, 	in 	which 	the engineer Ove 	Arup 	played 	a
major 	part. 	Many 	of the 	details 	remained 	to 	be 	worked
out 	at 	the 	time 	of 	Utzon's 	resignation, 	and 	the 	Opera
House 	looked 	for 	a 	time 	as 	if 	it 	might 	be 	a 	white
elephant. 	At 	last 	it 	opened 	in 	1973. 	having 	already
become 	an 	Australian 	national 	icon.
Long 	before 	this, 	the 	Sydney 	Opera 	House 	had
become 	part 	of 	the 	folklore 	of 	modern 	architecture.
Sigfried 	Giedion 	published 	the 	design 	in 	the 	late
editions 	of 	Space. 	Time 	and 	Architecture, 	and 	conferred
upon 	Utzon 	the 	mantle 	of 	the 	great 	tradition. 	The
Opera 	House 	was 	presented 	alongside 	Le 	Corbusier's
late 	works 	and 	Kenzo 	Tange's 	monumental 	buildings
in 	Japan 	as 	evidence 	of a 	new 	elemental 	tendency 	in
which 	the 	fusion 	of 	buildings 	with 	their 	context 	was
held 	to 	be 	crucial 	to 	the 	emergent 	spatial 	conception.
In 	a 	sense 	the choice was 	premature, 	as 	it 	was 	not 	clear
how 	buildable the 	Utzon 	design 	would 	be. 	Even 	so 	this
was 	judicious 	appreciation 	of 	a 	great 	architectural
idea. 	Moreover, 	it 	was 	an 	idea 	which, 	in 	its 	com-
bination 	of 	the 	abstract 	and 	the 	naturalistic, 	in 	its
fusion 	of the 	complex 	and 	the 	simple, 	in 	its 	enrichment
of 	the 	structural 	and 	spatial 	ideas 	of 	earlier 	modern
architecture, 	and 	in 	its 	transformation 	of 	ancient
monumentality, 	encapsulated 	some 	of 	the 	aims 	of a
new 	generation.

-- 307 of 420 --

2 	3. 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of
Monumentality
One 	should 	not 	be 	surprised 	to 	find, 	in fact 	one 	would 	expect 	to 	find 	an 	archaic
quality 	in 	architecture 	today. 	This 	is 	because 	real 	architecture 	is 	just
beginning 	to 	come 	to 	grips 	with 	a 	whole 	new 	order 	of artistic 	expression,
growing 	in 	turn 	from 	the 	new 	set 	of tasks 	which 	society 	has 	set 	for 	the
architect.
L. 	I. 	Kahn. 	i960
Between 	the 	wars 	it 	was 	rare 	for 	modern 	architects 	to
receive 	large 	commissions 	requiring 	monumental
treatment. 	Certainly 	there 	were 	projects, 	like 	Tallin's
Tower 	and 	Le 	Corbusier's 	League 	of 	Nations, 	which
suggested 	some ways 	in 	which 	the 	new 	architecture
could 	be 	adapted 	to 	deal 	with 	the 	problems 	of size 	and
symbolic 	expression 	posed 	by 	large 	institutions. 	But
the 	hold 	of tradition 	over 	official 	taste 	remained 	strong
into 	the 	1 9 	30s 	in 	the 	USA and most of Western 	Europe,
especially 	when 	civic 	ideals 	were 	concerned. 	Perhaps
this 	was 	understandable 	given 	that 	these 	were
situations 	in 	which 	the 	need 	to 	preserve 	values 	and 	to
suggest 	continuities 	with 	the 	past 	was 	pressing. 	This
was 	particularly 	the 	case 	under 	the 	totalitarian
regimes, 	where 	ancient 	models 	enjoyed 	a 	skin-deep
revival 	in 	the 	search 	for 	imperial 	symbols.
In 	the 	circumstances 	it 	was 	understandable 	that
monumentality 	should 	have 	been 	temporarily 	regard-
ed 	with 	suspicion, 	as 	if 	it 	was. 	in 	and 	of 	itself 	an
inherently 	anti-democratic 	characteristic. 	By 	1443.
however. 	Sigfried 	Giedion 	and 	Jose 	Luis 	Sert 	were
already 	discussing 	a 	new 	monumentality 	to 	emerge 	in
the 	post-war 	period. 	In 	a 	pronouncement 	entitled
'Nine 	Points 	on 	Monumentality' 	they 	referred 	to
monuments 	as 	'human 	landmarks 	. 	. 	. 	intended 	to
outlive 	the 	period 	which 	originated 	them', 	and 	as 	'the
expression 	of man's 	highest 	cultural 	needs'. 	They 	also
discussed 	the 	role of collective symbols 	and the 	need 	for
an 	urbanism 	giving 	'more 	than 	functional 	fulfilment'.
A 	decade 	later 	Giedion 	pleaded 	for 	the 	creation 	of
symbolic 	centres 	to 	cities. 	CIAM 	meetings 	shifted 	gear
I'rom 	the 	'four 	functions' 	towards 	a 	more 	nebulous 	and
'emblematic' 	characterization 	of 	urban 	form. 	Perhaps
this 	change 	of 	mood 	was 	linked 	to 	the 	more 	'permis-
sive' 	view 	of 	tradition 	and 	precedent 	expressed 	by
Giedion 	in 	the 	same 	period.
Between 	1950 	and 	1965. 	the 	dissemination 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	around 	the 	world 	meant 	that 	it
became, 	by 	degrees, 	the 	rule 	of 	the 	established 	order
rather 	than 	u 	fringe 	product 	of 	the 	avant-garde.
Although 	it 	was 	often 	co-opted 	to 	express 	'progressive'
ideals 	(e.g.. 	the 	UN), 	it 	had 	to 	come 	to 	terms 	with 	some
of 	the 	traditional 	rhetorical 	functions 	of 	architecture
such 	as 	the 	embodiment 	of the 	state. 	Architecture 	was
itself 	changing 	in 	ways 	which 	allowed 	a 	greater
grandiosity 	of 	expression. 	Lc 	Corbusicr. 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe. 	and 	Aalto 	gave 	indications 	in 	their 	works 	of the
late 	1940s 	and 	early 	1950s 	of 	ways 	in 	which 	civic
problems 	could 	be 	handled 	(e.g.. 	Chandigarh. 	St. 	Die,
Crown 	Hall. 	Saynatsalol. 	External 	social 	conditions
and 	the 	internal 	evolution 	of 	modern 	architecture
were 	not 	out 	of 	step 	when 	it 	came 	to 	questions 	of
monumental 	expression.
There 	was 	still 	the 	problem 	bequeathed 	by 	the
nineteenth 	century, 	that 	no 	clear 	language 	existed 	to
distinguish 	one 	civic 	function 	from 	another, 	or 	from
lesser 	functions 	in 	a 	hierarchy. 	The 	increase 	in 	the
number 	of 	building 	types 	fostered 	by 	industrialization
conspired 	with 	confusions 	over 	'style' 	to 	create 	a
babbling 	urban 	order 	which 	no 	longer 	legibly 	por-
trayed 	the 	relationships 	of 	society 	in 	the 	cityscape.
Ideal 	cities 	of 	the 	early 	modern 	movement 	certainly
brought 	their 	own 	version 	of 	clarity, 	but 	tended 	to
concentrate 	on 	living 	and 	working, 	leaving 	monu-

-- 308 of 420 --

Louis 	1. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	507
2^.1 	Oscar Niemeyer.
Brasilia, 	Brazil.
1957-60. 	the Senate,
Secretariat 	and
Congress.
mental expression 	for 	skyscrapers 	and 	freeways; 	in 	the
Ville Contemporainc 	management 	and 	circulation 	had
been 	those 	elements 	handled 	most 	forcefully.
After 	the 	Second 	World 	War 	Le 	Corbusier's 	archi-
tecture 	began 	to 	possess 	a 	new 	visual 	weight 	and
heroic 	force, 	which 	was 	not 	unconnected 	with 	his own
need 	to 	solve 	problems 	of 	monumental 	expression. 	At
both 	St. 	Die 	and 	Chandigarh 	he seems 	to 	have 	been
preoccupied 	with 	some 	new 	vision 	of 	an 	Acropolis,
Rough 	effects 	of bcton 	brut 	and 	the 	strong 	articulation
of shadow 	allowed 	him 	to 	create 	an 	allusive 	symbolic
language 	in 	the 	service of 	an 	institutional 	pattern. 	In
Chandigarh, 	particularly 	(as 	we 	have 	seen), 	he
transformed 	various 	ancient 	types 	and 	formulations
(e.g.. 	the 	basilica 	into 	the 	Palace 	of 	Justice, 	the
dome/portico 	combination 	into 	the 	Parliament) 	in 	an
attempt 	at 	promoting 	images 	of a 	suitably 	honorific
character. 	Pastiche 	of 	the 	prototypes 	was 	avoided 	by
integrating 	them 	into 	a 	well-tried 	architectural
vocabulary 	itself 	based 	on 	principle. 	The 	'five 	points"
were 	amplified 	and 	given 	a 	new 	sense 	of 	scale 	and
dignity; 	brisc-sokil 	in 	vast 	repeating 	rows 	proved
suitable 	to 	the 	(jraviUts of the 	artist's 	intentions ; 	and 	his
impeccable 	sense 	of 	sculptural 	order 	ensured 	that
unity 	and 	diversity 	were 	held 	in 	balance.
Oscar 	Niemeyer's 	State 	buildings 	at 	Brasilia 	(fig.
23.1), 	built 	in 	the 	late 	igsos. 	drew 	more 	on 	the
example of the 	pre-war Le Corbusier, 	or on 	the model 	of
Harrison's 	and 	Abramovitz's 	version 	of 	the 	UN, 	than
on 	the 	style 	of the 	late 	works. 	As 	at 	Chandigarh 	a 	new
urban 	form 	had 	to 	be 	conceived 	on 	a 	virgin 	site.
Lucio 	Costa, 	the 	architect 	of 	the 	overall 	town 	plan,
designed 	wings 	spreading 	out 	in 	a 	slight 	arc 	from 	the
focal 	point. 	The 	president's 	palace 	and 	main 	congress
buildings 	were 	laid 	out 	in 	front 	of 	vast 	piazzas 	with
water 	and 	sky 	becoming 	essential 	elements 	of 	the
composition. 	But 	Niemeyer's 	buildings 	lacked the force
of 	those 	at 	Chandigarh. 	The 	president's 	palace, 	for
example, 	had 	a 	mannered 	fagade 	of smoothly 	finished
inverted 	arches. 	The 	main 	chambers 	of 	the 	congress
were 	expressed 	by 	saucer-shaped 	elements 	- 	one 	face
down, 	the 	other 	face 	up 	- 	alongside 	the 	dominating
element 	of 	the 	secretariat 	slab. 	It 	is 	possible 	that 	this
imagery 	satisfied 	the 	technocratic 	aspirations 	and
a 	thirst 	for 	grandeur 	on 	the 	part 	of 	the 	Brazilian 	elite:
but 	the 	forms 	were 	inflated, 	diagrammatic 	and
lacking 	in 	symbolic 	or 	sculptural 	substance.
This 	is 	not 	to 	suggest 	that 	a 	rugged 	sculptural
treatment 	of 	the 	kind 	used 	at 	Chandigarh 	was 	an
automatic 	recipe 	for 	good 	monumentality; 	the 	pro-
position 	is 	adequately 	disproved 	by 	the 	all 	too
numerous examples 	around 	the 	world 	of concert 	halls,
state 	houses, 	etc., 	in 	ungainly 	elephantine 	concrete
forms 	surrounded 	by 	wildernesses 	of 	piazzas, 	con-
ceived 	between 	about 	lyho 	and 	1970. 	But 	Le
Corbusier's 	forceful 	late 	style 	could 	prove 	useful 	as 	a
starting-point 	for 	more 	sensitive 	talents 	who 	took 	over
not 	only 	the 	external 	effects, 	but 	also 	the 	intellectual
strategies 	for 	the 	transformation 	of precedent.
The 	Boston 	City 	Hall 	by 	Kallmann. 	McKinnell. 	and
Knowlesof 	1962-7 	(fig. 	2^.2) 	is 	an 	example 	of such 	a
valid 	extension 	of earlier 	discoveries. 	Here 	the 	problem

-- 309 of 420 --

3o8 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
was 	to 	give 	a 	suitable 	civic 	character 	to 	an 	institution
whose 	identity 	seemed 	to 	imply 	both 	authority 	and
openness. 	The 	architects 	produced 	a 	design 	in 	which
massive 	visual 	weight 	and 	perforation 	from 	the
surrounding 	urban 	spaces 	were 	held 	in 	balance. 	The
main 	forms 	of 	the 	building 	expressed 	the 	hierarchical
distinction 	of 	functions 	quite 	clearly, 	and 	allowed 	the
large 	red-brick 	piazza 	to 	invade 	the 	structure 	at 	the
lower 	levels 	by 	means of steps 	and 	ramps. 	The offices 	of
the 	bureaucracy 	were 	on 	the 	top 	floors 	and 	were
legible 	in 	the 	repeated 	pre-cast 	system 	of 	window
elements, 	while 	the 	ceremonial 	functions 	(e.g., 	the
mayor's 	office) 	were 	slung 	in 	amplified 	volumes 	at 	the
middle 	level: 	the 	most 	public 	functions 	were 	at 	the
ground 	level 	where 	most 	easily 	accessible. 	The
programme 	seemed 	to 	suggest 	a 	rectangular 	plan
around 	a court, 	but 	this 	basic 	parti 	in 	section 	and 	plan
was 	articulated 	by 	dramatic 	interpenetrations 	of
spaces 	and 	heavy 	concrete 	forms. 	The 	whole 	was
composed 	into 	an 	overall 	form 	of 	considerable
simplicity; 	at 	the 	top 	levels 	there 	was 	a 	marked
horizontal 	emphasis 	which 	gave 	something 	of 	the
character 	of 	a 	Classical 	cornice, 	and 	supplied 	a 	strong
contrast 	to 	the 	nearby 	skyscrapers.
The 	rugged 	concrete 	and 	the 	variations 	in 	visual
texture 	were 	clearly 	relying 	on 	the 	model 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	monastery 	of 	La 	Tourette: 	the 	overhang-
ing 	section 	and 	broad 	concrete 	piers 	were 	also 	adopted
from 	this 	prototype. 	But 	the 	historical 	references 	went
further 	than 	this 	into 	the 	past. 	The 	architects 	were
intrigued 	by 	those 	public 	palaces 	in 	Italy 	of the 	Middle
Ages 	and 	Renaissance 	in 	which 	piazzas 	penetrated 	a
lower 	storey 	of arcades. 	Such 	precedents 	were 	in 	tune
with 	Kallmann's 	notion 	of 	an 	'action' 	architecture 	in
which 	interior 	spaces 	and 	exterior 	spaces 	were
brought 	into 	vital 	juxtaposition, 	a 	concept 	like
Lasdun's 	urban 	landscape' 	idea 	of 	making 	each
building 	'a 	piece 	of 	the 	city' 	(see 	Chapter 	24), 	but
expressed 	differently 	and 	perhaps 	less 	coherently. 	In
the 	Boston 	City 	Hall 	the 	idea 	was 	encapsulated 	by 	the
way 	the 	piazza 	ran 	in 	under 	the 	entrance 	to 	become 	a
sort 	of interior 	forum, 	whose 	steps 	made 	a 	convenient
bank 	of 	seats 	for 	meetings, 	exhibitions, 	and 	other
public 	events. 	It 	has 	been 	suggested 	in 	an 	earlier
chapter 	that 	the 	blend 	between 	the 	individual 	object
and 	its 	setting 	was 	a 	major 	concern 	of 	the 	arts 	in 	this
period.
Then 	again 	the 	City 	Hall 	attempted 	to pull 	together
modern 	methods 	of component 	standardization 	with 	a
restatement of Classical 	elements. 	The 	piers 	were a 	sort
of 	'grand 	order' 	in 	concrete, 	while 	the 	structural
ceiling 	grid 	was 	reminiscent 	of coffering. 	These 	devices
were 	firm 	reminders 	of the 	fact 	that 	Ihe 	thin 	skins 	and
slender 	pilotis 	of 	the 	International 	.Style 	had 	proved
themselves 	inadequate 	to 	handling 	a 	building 	of 	such
p^-
<t,tv^ 	1%, 	-1
.'>S'
scale. 	Boston 	City 	Hall 	grappled 	with 	a 	wide 	range 	of
issues 	central 	to 	the 	problem 	of 	monumentality, 	and
presented 	solutions 	which, 	if 	not 	always 	totally
resolved, 	were 	nonetheless 	propelled 	by 	serious
thought.
Rough 	concrete 	was 	not 	the 	only 	medium 	through
which 	schematic 	devices 	derived 	from 	Classicism 	could
be 	restated. 	In 	his 	design 	for 	the 	New 	National 	Gallery
in 	Berlin 	of 	1 962. Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	envisaged 	a 	glass
and 	steel 	temple 	on 	a 	podium 	- 	a 	sort 	of 	shrine 	to
German 	art 	(fig. 	23.3). 	The 	main 	effect 	arose 	from 	the
way 	the steel supports 	were 	carefully 	proportioned 	and
spaced 	to 	recall 	Classical 	columns: 	while 	the 	vast
overhanging 	steel 	roof 	was 	intended 	to 	evoke 	the 	idea
of 	the 	entablature. 	On 	the 	interior 	the 	earlier 	Miesian
notion 	of an 	abstract, 	'universal' 	space was 	restated. 	In
this 	case 	it 	was 	subdivided 	by 	supports 	and 	flexible
planar 	partitions 	to 	bear 	pictures. 	Sculptures 	were 	left
standing 	in 	the 	voids 	between. 	It 	was 	as 	if 	the
trabeation. 	the 	overhangs, 	and 	the 	thin 	planes 	of 	the
Barcelona 	Pavilion 	had 	been 	cross-bred 	with 	the
symmetry 	and 	spatial 	ideas 	of 	Crown 	Hall 	at 	IIT, 	The
Berlin 	Art 	Gallery 	also 	bore 	witness 	to 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	consummate 	sense 	of detail 	and 	craftsmanship
in 	steel. 	Like 	Le 	Corbusier 	at 	Chandigarh, 	he 	was 	able
to 	achieve 	monumentality 	by 	expanding 	a 	pre-existing
architectural system 	based on 	rigorous 	intellectual and
expressive 	rules. 	What 	stopped 	the 	Classicism 	from
being 	a 	game 	of 	mere 	quotation 	was 	the 	forceful
expression 	of ideas 	in 	an 	abstract 	form. Classicism 	was
once 	again 	rethought 	in 	a 	new 	material 	and 	in 	a 	new
social 	context.
In 	the 	United 	States 	the 	expansive, 	optimistic, 	and.
indeed, 	imperial 	undercurrents 	of 	the 	1950s 	were
23.2 	G. 	Kallmann, 	M.
McKinnell 	and 	E.
Knowles. 	Boston 	City
Hall. 	1962-7.
25.3 	{above right]
Ludwlg 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe. 	New 	National
Gallery 	of Art. 	Berlin.
1963. 	model.
2^.4 	{right) 	Eero
Saarlnen. 	TW.'\
terminal. 	Kennedy
Airport. 	New 	York.
i960.

-- 310 of 420 --

Louis 	1. 	Kiihn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	309
expressed 	in 	many 	commissions 	for 	large-scale 	monu-
ments. 	The 	influence 	of Beaux-Arts 	Classicism 	certain-
ly 	did 	not 	die 	with 	the 	introduction 	of 	modern
architectural 	ideas. 	At 	its 	deepest 	this 	tradition
culminated 	in 	an 	architect 	like 	Louis 	l.Kahn: 	but 	a
more 	obvious, 	less 	expressive, 	and 	often 	banal 	attempt
at 	neo-classicism 	also 	emerged 	in 	the 	late 	1950s. 	This
was 	no 	doubt 	part 	of a 	general 	mood 	of dissatisfaction
with 	the 	restrictive 	minimalism 	of 	the 	American
version 	of the 	International 	Style 	(a 	reaction 	expressed
in 	other 	ways 	as 	well. 	e.g.. 	in 	the 	'modern 	baroque' 	of
Eero 	Saarinen's 	TWA 	terminal 	at 	New 	York 	Airport,
fig. 	23.4). 	Thus 	architects 	like 	E. 	Durrel 	Stone 	(the 	US
Embassy 	in 	Delhi). 	Philip 	Johnson 	(the 	Art 	Gallery 	in
Lincoln. 	Nebraska), 	and 	Harrison 	and 	Abramovitz
(with 	Johnson, 	the 	Lincoln 	Center 	in 	New 	York. 	fig.
23.5 	) 	all 	indulged 	in 	grand 	axes, 	symmetry, 	expensive
materials and 	tell-tale 	arches, 	to disguise 	an 	essentially
bogus 	and 	skin-deep 	understanding 	of 	the 	nature 	of
monumentality. 	Of 	course, 	their 	buildings 	employed
modern 	techniques 	of 	construction 	in 	a 	Classicizing
way 	just 	as 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	had 	hinted 	in 	his
prototypes: 	moreover, 	these 	well-travelled 	architects
were 	well 	aware 	of the 	high 	moments 	in 	the 	Classical
tradition: 	but 	they 	were 	still 	unable 	to 	transcend 	a
tendency 	towards 	'camp'. 	Classical 	allusions 	were
there 	in 	abundance: 	Classical 	principles 	were 	almost
entirely 	lacking.
Abstractions 	of 	Classicism 	were 	not 	the 	only 	viable
ways 	for 	creating 	a 	new 	monumentality, 	as 	was 	well
demonstrated 	by 	Utzon's 	Sydney 	Opera 	House, 	or 	by
Hans 	Scharoun's 	later 	Philharmonic 	in 	Berlin 	which
was 	in 	the 	'Expressionist' 	free-form 	tradition. 	At
Coventry 	Cathedral. 	Basil 	Spence 	even 	attempted 	to
design 	in 	an 	abstracted 	Gothic 	manner, 	but 	his 	spindly
supports 	and 	fussy 	details 	were 	expressive 	failures.
What 	was 	lacking 	was 	not 	so 	much 	conviction, 	as 	an
ability 	to 	translate 	conviction 	into 	form. 	Nor 	were
monumental 	tendencies 	in 	the 	late 	1950s 	and 	early
1960s 	restricted 	to 	civic 	and 	religious 	programmes:
especially in 	the 	United 	States there seems to 	have 	been
a 	sort 	of 	inner 	will 	to 	grandeur 	affecting 	many
architects 	and 	building 	tasks. 	The 	taut 	steel-frame
skyscrapers 	gave 	way 	bit 	by 	bit 	to 	heavier 	looking
boxes 	clad 	in 	marble 	and 	adorned 	with 	massive 	slivers
of 	stone 	not 	unlike 	pilasters. 	Even 	housing 	was
overwhelmed 	by 	a 	wave 	of 	megastructural 	thinking.
Thus 	the 	myth 	of 	'total 	design' 	came 	together 	with
elephantine 	forms 	in 	yet 	another 	attempt 	at 	giving 	a
clear 	shape 	to 	the 	American 	city.
The 	master of monumentality 	in 	the 	United 	States 	in
this 	period 	was. 	without 	a 	doubt. 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Monumentality 	was 	not. 	of 	course, 	his 	only 	pre-
occupation, 	but 	it 	was 	certainly 	a 	major 	one. 	and 	he
evolved 	a 	philosophy 	and 	system 	of 	forms 	extra-

-- 311 of 420 --

3IO 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
ordinarily 	well 	suited 	to 	the 	expression 	of 	honorific
themes 	and 	moods. 	Kahn 	was 	apparently 	able 	to 	avoid
some 	of 	the 	pitfalls 	mentioned 	in 	earlier 	examples; 	he
was 	well able 	to 	handle 	problems 	of large 	size 	without
degenerating 	into 	either 	an 	'additive' 	approach 	or 	an
overdone 	grandiosity; 	he 	knew 	how 	to 	fuse 	together
modern 	constructional 	means 	with 	traditional 	meth-
ods: 	he 	was 	steeped 	in 	history 	but 	rarely 	produced
pastiche; 	and 	his 	architecture 	was 	infused 	with 	a 	deep
feeling 	for 	the 	meaning 	of 	human 	situations, 	which
enabled 	him 	to 	avoid 	the 	mere 	shape-making 	of 	the
formalists.
Kahn's 	formation 	took 	place 	before 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	had 	established 	a 	firm 	foothold 	in 	the 	United
States. 	He 	was 	trained 	in 	the 	Beaux-Arts 	system 	at
Philadelphia 	and 	was 	therefore 	fully 	acquainted 	with
the 	Classical 	grammar, 	with 	devices 	of 	axial 	or-
ganization 	and 	composition, 	and 	with 	an 	attitude 	to
design 	which 	took 	it 	for 	granted 	that 	one 	should
consult 	tradition 	for 	support. 	Certainly 	he 	sensed 	the
decadence 	of 	most 	American 	architecture 	of 	the
twenties 	and 	thirties, 	and 	realized 	the 	need 	for 	a
change 	which 	better 	accommodated 	the 	needs 	and 	the
means 	of the 	times. 	He 	seems 	to 	have 	learned 	primary
lessons 	from 	Sullivan 	and 	Wright, 	and 	later 	from 	Mies
van 	der 	Rohe, 	but 	he 	was 	a 	slow 	developer, 	and 	his
house 	designs 	of 	the 	forties 	were 	unexceptional
extensions 	of 	the 	International 	Style. 	The 	crystalliz-
ation 	seems 	to 	have 	occurred 	in 	the 	early 	fifties, 	and 	to
have 	been 	prompted 	in 	part 	by 	Kahn's 	stay 	at 	the
American 	Academy 	in 	Rome, 	and 	his 	travels 	through
Greece 	and 	Egypt. 	His 	sketchbooks 	of 	this 	period
suggest 	he 	was 	trying 	to 	get 	back 	to 	basics 	- 	to 	probe
the 	central 	meanings 	of architecture.
A 	key 	transitional 	work 	was 	the 	Yale 	Art 	Gallery 	of
1 95 1-3, 	in 	which 	Kahn 	responded 	to 	the 	many 	levels
and 	textures 	of an 	eclectic 	urban 	environment 	with 	a
subtle, 	inward-looking 	design. 	The 	interior 	spaces 	(fig.
23.6) 	seemed 	to 	evoke 	an 	entirely 	different 	world 	from
the 	brash 	mass-produced 	environment 	of standardized
panels 	and 	suspended 	ceilings 	then 	prevalent 	in 	the
USA, 	by 	subtle effects of light 	falling over the weave of a
diagrid 	ceiling 	and 	the 	elegant, 	but 	bare, 	concrete
supports. 	The 	stair 	was 	contained 	in 	a 	cylindrical
volume, 	and 	rose 	through 	a 	series 	of 	triangular
changes 	of 	direction, 	thus 	hinting 	at 	the 	architect's
later 	tendency 	to 	make 	strong 	formal 	distinctions
between 	circulation 	and 	'areas 	served'. 	The 	exterior
took 	over the Miesian 	glass 	and 	steel 	fagade. 	but 	gave 	it
a 	new 	irregularity 	and 	softness: 	the 	side 	walls 	and
qualities 	of 	interior 	space, 	meanwhile, 	were 	loosely
evocative 	of Wright.
The Yale 	Art 	Gallery was 	not 	a 	totally resolved work,
and 	the 	sources 	were 	still 	not 	absorbed 	sufficiently 	for
one 	to be 	able to speak of a coherent 	personal 	style. 	But

-- 312 of 420 --

23-5 	{above kji) 	Philip
lohnson. 	New 	York 	State
Theater. 	I.incohi 	Center.
New 	York. 	i<-j(is-
23.6 	Heft) 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Yale 	Art 	Gallery. 	New
Haven. 	Connecticut.
1 95 1-?, 	exterior 	at
night.
23.7 	[above 	riijlH) 	Louis
L 	Kahn. 	Richards
Medical 	Laboratories.
Philadelphia.
Pennsylvania. 	i^%"-()i.
23.8 	[right] 	Louis 	I.
Kahn. 	Richards Medical
Laboratories.
Philadelphia.
Pennsylvania. 	1 4
s
J-lii.
plan.
^^
Louis 	I. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	311
^.:v-
*^-r* 	' 	Lh-JS 	»_H_] 	[_H_« 	«_H_J

-- 313 of 420 --

312 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
the 	building 	still 	suggested 	a 	new 	archaic 	direction 	for
modern 	architecture 	in 	America. 	In 	the 	Richards
Medical 	Laboratories 	at 	the 	University 	of Pennsylvania
of 	1957-62 	(fig. 	23.7). 	on 	the 	other 	hand. 	Kahn
articulated 	a 	variety 	of 	ideas 	in 	a 	totally 	convincing
statement. 	The 	laboratories 	required 	vast 	extract 	flues
and 	flexible 	interiors, 	and 	the 	architect 	decided 	to
express 	the 	distinction 	between 	the 	fixed 	and 	the
variable, 	the 	serving 	and 	the 	served, 	by 	monumental-
izing 	the 	service 	and 	stair 	towers 	and 	treating 	the
laboratories 	as 	attached 	cellular 	elements. 	The site 	was
to 	one 	side 	of 	a 	main 	walkway 	through 	the 	campus,
not 	far 	from 	a 	number 	of 	neo-Tudor 	buildings 	with
rich 	tower silhouettes and 	infill 	panels 	of windows, 	and
it 	may 	be 	that 	Kahn 	was 	responding 	to 	this 	setting 	in
making 	these 	moves. 	The 	plan 	was 	itself 	a 	subtle
combination 	of 	the 	linear 	and 	the 	particulate, 	which
also 	created 	external 	harbours 	of 	space 	around 	the
exterior, 	so 	that 	there 	was 	a 	gradual 	shift 	in 	scale 	from
the 	context 	to 	the 	individual 	details 	(fig. 	23.8). 	The
geometry 	of 	the 	plan, 	and 	the 	use 	of service 	and 	stair
towers 	as 	monumental 	devices 	intermediary 	in 	scale
between 	small 	and 	large parts of a 	design, 	suggest 	that
Kahn 	may 	have 	been 	influenced 	by 	Wright's 	I.arkin
building.
But 	any 	influences 	there 	may 	have 	been 	were 	now
absorbed 	into 	the 	internal 	logic 	of a 	personal 	style, 	and
the 	formal 	and 	functional 	logic 	of a 	particular 	design.
The 	structural system 	of the 	laboratory spaces 	was 	pre-
cast 	concrete, 	and 	Kahn 	attempted 	to 	show 	how 	the
building 	was 	put 	together 	by 	the expression 	of 	joints
and 	connections. 	This 	was 	no 	mere 	structural
exhibitionism, 	as 	the 	aim 	was 	to 	give 	a 	suitable 	scale
and 	character 	to 	the 	social 	organization 	of 	laboratory
work. 	The 	approach 	was 	the 	opposite 	of the 	one 	which
clothes 	everything 	in 	a 	single 	envelope; 	indeed 	one
may 	almost 	go 	so 	far 	as 	to 	suggest 	that 	revulsion
against 	the 	'neutral 	box' 	was 	a 	world-wide 	pheno-
menon 	of 	the 	period. 	Kahn 	was 	here 	supplying 	a
variety 	of formal 	devices, 	just 	as 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	done
in 	the 	Unite 	and 	at 	I-a 	Tourette. 	for 	the 	articulation 	of
complex 	social 	programmes. 	Moreover, 	the 	Richards
Laboratories had 	a 	direct, 	tactile 	character 	in 	the 	use 	t)f
brick 	panels 	and 	concrete 	beams, 	which 	evidently 	also
appealed 	to 	a 	generation 	of followers.
It 	has 	to 	be 	said 	that 	the 	Richards 	Medical
Laboratories 	were 	more 	cogent 	as 	an 	'idea 	building'
than 	as 	successful 	laboratories. 	The 	principal 	diffi-
culties 	arose 	from 	lack of sun 	protection 	in 	the 	facades,
and despite 	all 	the 	effort 	of the 	design 	process, 	a 	certain
lack of functional flexibility. 	Still, one 	has to accept that
a 	work 	which 	does 	not 	function 	properly 	may 	be
architecture of a 	high 	order. 	On 	the 	basis of a clear imrti
and 	logical 	system 	of 	servicing 	and 	structure. 	Kahn
was 	able 	to 	create 	a 	building 	evocative 	of 	the 	antique
2 	?.q 	Louis 	L 	Kahn. 	A
consistent 	architectural
strategy 	manifest 	in 	four
plans: 	ikft) 	Institute 	of
Management,
Ahmadabad, 	1963.
dormitory; 	(Mmv /(•/()
I'arlianient 	Building,
IJacca. 	196?; 	(nij/KI
Bryn 	Mawr dormitories.
1964; 	(below ri(]lit)
Library. 	Phillips 	Exeter
Academy. 	New
Hampshire. 	1969.
V/^t^VG^B^/'^ty
qualities 	he 	had 	admired 	in 	Roman 	ruins 	and 	in 	the
towers 	and 	townscapcs 	of 	medieval 	Italy. 	In 	the 	early
1 960s 	in 	America, 	when 	the 	first stage 	was 	completed,
the 	laboratories 	had 	almost 	the 	quality 	of a 	beacon
towards 	timeless 	architectural 	values 	in 	an 	era
otherwise 	beset 	with 	the 	extremes 	of 	meaningless
formal 	gymnastics 	or 	arid 	functionalism. 	Kahn

-- 314 of 420 --

attempted 	to 	put 	his 	own 	sense 	of 	the 	basics 	of
architecture 	into 	words:
If I 	were 	to 	define 	architecture 	in 	a 	word. 	I 	would
say 	that 	architecture 	is 	a 	thoughtful 	making 	of
spaces. 	It 	is 	not 	filling 	prescriptions 	as 	clients 	want
them 	filled. 	It 	is 	not 	fitting 	uses 	into 	dimensioned
areas 	... 	It 	is 	a 	creating 	of spaces 	that 	evoke 	a
feeling 	of use. 	Spaces 	which 	form 	themselves 	into 	a
harmony 	good 	for 	the 	use 	to 	which 	the 	building 	is
to 	be 	put 	. 	.
.
I 	believe 	that 	the 	architect's 	first 	act 	is 	to 	take 	the
Louis 	I. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	• 	313
program 	that 	comes 	to 	him 	and 	change 	it. 	Not 	to
satisfy 	it 	but 	to 	put 	it 	into 	the 	realm 	of architecture,
which 	is 	to 	put 	it 	into 	the 	realm 	of spaces.
Kahn's 	architecture 	was 	based 	in 	part 	on 	a 	social
vision: 	this 	was 	a 	challenge 	to 	the 	status 	quo 	not
through 	some 	Utopian 	expectation 	in 	the 	future, 	but
through 	a 	mystical 	conservatism. 	For 	Kahn 	believed
there 	to 	be 	archetypal 	patterns 	of 	social 	relationship
that 	it 	was 	the 	business 	of architecture 	to 	uncover 	and
celebrate. 	A 	good 	plan 	would 	be 	one 	which 	found 	the
central 	meaning, 	as 	it 	were, 	of the 	institution 	housed.
Related 	to 	this 	notion 	of 	a 	higher 	meaning 	in 	social
forms 	was 	the 	distinction 	between 	'form' 	and 	'design'.
Basically, 	Kahn 	believed 	that 	any 	architectural
problem 	had 	an 	'essential' 	meaning 	which 	far
transcended 	a 	mere 	functional 	diagram. 	This 	or-
ganization 	would 	be 	found 	through 	a 	probing 	and
detailed 	analysis 	of 	requirements 	followed 	by 	an
intuitive 	leap 	which 	would 	uncover 	the 	'type' 	of 	the
institution. 	Only 	when 	this 	was 	discovered 	and
embodied 	in 	a 	suitable 	symbolic 	form 	could 	the
architect 	proceed 	to 	the 	stage 	of design 	- 	of giving 	the
central, 	felt 	concept 	a 	material 	shape. 	A 	good 	design
would 	be 	one 	where 	the 	'form', 	the 	underlying
meaning, 	was 	coherently 	expressed 	through 	all 	the
parts.
This 	idealistic 	position 	with 	regard 	to 	the 	spiritual
roots 	of 	both 	the 	social 	and 	the 	aesthetic 	realms
motivated 	Kahn's 	major 	designs 	of 	the 	early 	1960s
and 	led 	him 	to 	clarify 	a 	simple 	set 	of 'type 	forms' 	based
on 	primary 	geometries 	- 	the 	square, 	the 	circle, 	the
triangle, 	etc. 	- 	capable 	of 	a 	vast 	variety 	of 	inter-
relationships 	over 	certain 	kernel 	patterns 	of 	form 	and
meaning. 	When 	one 	examines 	the 	plans 	of 	such
diverse 	schemes 	as 	the 	Bryn 	Mawr 	dormitories, 	the
.\hmadabad 	Institute 	of Management, 	and 	the 	Parlia-
ment 	building 	at 	Dacca, 	one 	is 	struck 	by 	the
consistency 	of the approach 	(fig. 	23.9). 	Time and 	again
the 	architect 	reverts 	to 	a 	basic 	parti 	in 	which 	the
primary 	meaning 	of 	an 	institution 	is 	expressed 	in 	a
central 	space 	of a 	concentrated 	social 	character 	based
on 	square, 	circle, 	or 	diamond, 	and 	related 	hierarchi-
cally 	to 	the 	surroundings 	by 	axes. 	Secondary 	spaces
tend 	to 	be 	set 	out 	as 	a 	fringe^aj;ound 	the 	primary
generator, 	and 	to 	mark 	out 	variations^ on 	the 	theme:
they 	tend 	too 	to 	contain 	smaller 	and 	more 	private
functions. 	But 	these 	patterns 	of 	geometry 	- 	so 	like
ornamental 	designs 	- 	are 	far 	from 	being 	arbitrary.
They 	suggest 	mandalas 	or 	some 	other 	symbolic
geometry. 	They 	remind 	one 	that 	Kahn, 	like 	Wright,
had 	a 	pantheistic 	vision 	of nature 	which 	he 	attempted
to 	contain 	in 	universalizing 	abstractions. 	Moreover,
the 	strategy 	behind 	these plans 	recalls 	Kahn's 	Beaux-
Arts 	training in 	which 	ceremonial 	routes of circulation

-- 315 of 420 --

314 	' 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 	440
tended 	to 	be 	laid 	out 	along 	the 	primary 	axis of the 	most
important 	symbolic 	space 	of a 	scheme.
Of 	course 	a 	plan 	did 	not 	exist 	independently 	of 	the
volumes 	to 	be 	projected 	into 	space 	above 	it. 	Kahn
never 	lost 	a 	feeling for the 	solidity 	of the wall 	as 	a 	major
part 	of 	architecture, 	even 	when 	he 	employed 	rein-
forced 	concrete 	which 	might 	have 	allowed 	an 	open
facade. 	Openings 	tended 	to 	be 	reduced 	to 	the 	most
simple 	voids 	cut 	deep 	through 	the 	outer skin, 	and 	to 	be
variants 	on 	the 	fundamental 	geometrical 	themes 	of a
design 	circles, 	squares, 	and 	so 	on. 	At 	Ahmadabad. 	in
the 	Institute 	of 	Management, 	the 	architect 	created 	a
deep zone 	of transition 	between 	the 	outer edge 	and 	the
interiors, 	to 	allow 	for 	shaded 	porticoes 	and 	walkways.
The 	colossal 	cylinders 	of baked 	brick 	and 	concrete 	had
something of the quality 	of the 	Roman 	ruins 	that 	Kahn
had 	so 	admired. 	But 	it 	was 	a 	poetry 	of 	shapes 	which
seemed 	to 	transcend 	the 	merely 	European 	tradition:
Kahn. 	like 	Le 	Corbusier. 	was 	intrigued 	by 	the
cosmological 	geometries 	of 	the 	Jaipur 	observatories,
and 	these 	may 	have 	played 	a 	part 	in 	the 	distillation 	of
his 	vocabulary 	(tig. 	27.^).
In 	the 	project 	for 	the 	Jonas 	Salk 	Institute 	for
Biological 	Studies 	(1959-65). 	close 	to 	I,a 	Jolla,
San 	Diego. 	California 	(fig. 	23.11), 	Kahn 	had 	to 	design
for 	a 	community 	of scientists 	involved 	in 	concentrated
research. 	Another 	architect 	might 	have 	attempted 	to
embody 	the 	forward-looking 	aspirations 	of 	such 	a
programme. 	But 	to 	Kahn 	the 	suitable 	references
seemed 	to 	lie 	in 	such 	prototypes 	as 	monasteries 	or
other 	forms 	of intellectual 	retreat. 	Three 	main 	clusters
were 	planned 	apart 	from 	one 	another 	in 	the 	virgin
landscape 	with 	views 	towards 	the 	Pacific: 	the 	com-
munity 	meeting 	and 	conference 	areas 	(the 	'Meeting
House'), 	the 	living-quarters 	(the 	'Village'), 	and 	the
laboratories 	themselves 	(the only 	part 	built), 	contained
25.10 	l.ouis 	I. 	Kalin.
Jonas Salk 	Institute 	for
Biological Studies. 	La
Jolla. 	California.
igS9-fiS. 	view 	towards
sea 	between 	study
rooms.

-- 316 of 420 --

I,()uis 	I. 	Kahn 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of Monumentality 	315
23.1 	1 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Jonas 	Salk 	Institute. 	La
JoUa. 	California.
1^59-65. 	model
showing ensemble.
in 	parallel 	blocks 	with 	a 	water 	garden 	between 	them.
The 	laboratories 	themselves 	were 	large 	free-plan
spaces 	capable 	of considerable 	variation 	in 	the 	design
of 	experiments. 	They 	were 	linked 	by 	bridges 	to 	small
studies 	with 	views 	into 	the 	garden 	or 	out 	towards 	the
sea 	(tig. 	23.10). 	Once 	again 	the 	distinction 	was 	made
between 	the 	society 	of 	shared 	endeavour 	and 	the
private 	world 	of 	thought. 	These 	studies 	were 	sub-
stantially 	furnished 	cells 	- 	or 	perhaps 	cabins 	- 	spaces
for contemplation. 	On 	the exterior they 	were expressed
by 	wooden 	panel 	apertures 	set 	into 	an 	otherwise 	bare-
concrete 	wall 	vocabulary 	which 	clearly 	owed 	debts 	to
Le 	Corbusier. 	except 	that 	the 	concrete 	finishes 	were
deliberately 	refined 	and 	elegant. 	Vincent 	Scully 	has
noted 	similarities 	between 	the 	Salk 	plan 	and 	such
Roman 	schemes 	as 	Diocletian's 	palace 	or 	some 	of 	the
buildings 	dotted 	about 	the 	landscape 	at 	Hadrian's
villa: 	we 	sense 	that 	this 	might 	be 	the 	home 	of 	some
ancient, 	hermetic 	cult.
Kahn's 	capacity 	for 	effective 	monumental 	ex-
pression 	was 	revealed 	to 	the 	full 	in 	his 	design 	for 	the
Parliament 	building 	at 	Dacca 	in 	what 	is 	now 	Bang-
ladesh 	(fig. 	2 	3. 	1 	2). 	For 	this 	architect, 	government 	was
one 	of the deepest 	and 	oldest 	forms 	of social 	order. 	The
'form' 	(using 	his 	meaning 	of the 	term) 	had 	to 	retlect 	the
nature 	of 	such 	an 	institutional 	contract. 	One 	is
scarcely 	surprised 	to find 	that variations 	on 	a circular
theme 	were 	among 	the 	first 	to 	appear 	on 	paper 	(fig.
23.13), 	as 	this 	was 	the 	shape 	the 	architect 	used 	to
express a 	coherent 	social 	grouping, 	a 	sense 	of 	unitary
purpose, 	and 	a 	notion 	of 	'centre'. 	Part 	of 	the 	meaning
of the 	form, 	though, 	arose from 	its 	relationship 	to 	other
institutions, 	and 	in 	the 	early 	diagrams 	exploring 	the
city 	layout 	the 	parliament 	was 	placed 	at 	the 	central
point 	of 	converging 	smaller 	institutional 	relatives
based 	on 	similar 	geometry. 	The 	full 	panoply 	of Beaux-
Arts 	planning 	rhetorical 	devices 	- 	primary 	and
secondary 	axes, 	a 	sense 	of 	climax, 	variations 	in 	size
and 	shape 	- 	was 	employed 	to 	reinforce 	this 	sense of the
building 	as 	the 	'head' 	of 	the 	social 	order. 	It 	is
interesting 	to 	recall 	that 	at 	Chandigarh, 	Le 	Corbusier
had 	also 	used 	grand 	axes 	and 	hints 	from 	a 	variety 	of
precedents 	in 	disposing 	the 	main 	elements 	of 	the
capital 	complex, 	as 	well 	as 	in 	the 	design 	of 	the
parliament 	building 	itself
Rather 	as 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	also done 	at 	Chandigarh,
Kahn 	amplified 	his 	earlier 	architectural 	system 	to
achieve 	effects 	of 	massive 	grandeur. 	The 	great
chamber was circled 	by 	a 	family 	of other spaces - press
galleries, 	members' 	rooms, 	etc. 	- 	expressed 	as 	smaller
variations 	on 	the 	central 	formal 	themes. 	To 	one 	side
was 	a 	mosque 	linked 	to 	the 	main 	body 	by 	steps: 	this
was 	skewed 	slightly 	off the 	main 	axis 	to 	face 	Mecca, 	a
deviation 	which 	served 	to 	reinforce 	the 	power 	of 	the
prevalent 	geometrical 	order 	by 	contrast. 	The 	effect 	of
these surrounding functions 	when 	projected 	into space
was 	of a 	jostling 	series 	of 	cylinders 	and 	vast 	oblongs
grouped 	around 	the central mass. 	With 	the deep cuts of
shadow, 	the 	glaring 	force 	of the 	sun 	and 	the 	rudeness
of 	the 	materials, 	the 	effect 	was 	entirely 	as 	if 	the
buildings 	had 	been 	standing 	there 	for 	centuries. 	As 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	done 	in 	India, 	Kahn made 	the 	most 	of
local 	craftsmen 	in 	the 	creation 	of 	the 	surfaces 	and
textures. 	The 	result 	was 	the 	obverse 	of 	mechanical
slickness 	- 	something 	suggestive 	of 	age 	and
weathering.

-- 317 of 420 --

3i6 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
Without 	the 	underlying 	armature 	of Kahn's 	philo-
sophy, 	his 	ruminations 	on 	the 	nature 	of 	man 	and
architecture, 	and 	his 	ability 	to 	give 	these 	feelings 	a
suitable 	and 	communicable 	symbolic 	form, 	such
external textures would 	have 	been 	mere superficialities
of 	patina, 	as 	skin-deep 	as 	the 	glossy 	intellectual
packaging 	being 	employed 	by 	the 	devaluers 	of 	Mies
van 	der 	Rohe 	at 	the 	same 	time. 	Kahn 	was 	able 	to 	make
a 	convincing monumentality because 	his 	architectural
system 	tended 	in that direction 	already and 	because his
sensibility 	was 	open 	to 	the 	most 	ancient 	lessons 	of the
great 	monuments 	of 	the 	past. 	Like 	Wright. 	Kahn
believed 	in 	a 	'Cause 	Conservative', 	invoking 	'the
elemental 	law 	and 	order 	inherent 	in 	all 	great
architecture'. 	And 	again 	like 	Wright. 	Kahn 	was 	able 	to
achieve 	this 	spirit, 	not 	by 	copying 	the externals 	of past
styles, 	but 	by 	probing 	to 	the 	underlying 	principles 	and
attempting 	to 	universalize 	them 	in 	the 	service 	of
modern 	aspirations. 	For 	Kahn. 	the 	aims 	of architecture
did 	not 	change: 	only 	the 	means.
25.12 	Louis 	L 	Kahn.
Parliament 	building.
Dacca. 	Bangladesh,
1963-
25. 	1 	5 	1'c/'l 	Louis 	L
kahn. 	Parliament
building. 	Dacca,
Bangladesh. 	196 	5.
sketch.

-- 318 of 420 --

24. Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture
in 	England
Whichever 	technique 	he 	chooses, 	the 	architect's 	function 	is 	to 	propose 	a 	way
oflit'e. 	...
P. 	Smithson. 	1965
For 	a 	few 	years 	after 	the 	war 	the 	most 	pressing
problems 	in 	England 	were 	urban 	reconstruction 	and
the provision 	of 	housing. 	It 	is 	scarcely 	surprising 	that
the 	relationship 	between 	architecture, 	urbanism. 	and
a 	new way 	of 	life 	should 	have 	become 	a 	dominant
obsession 	in 	the 	search 	for 	forms. 	The 	Welfare 	State
provided 	more 	than 	a 	chance 	to 	build 	schools,
hospitals, 	and 	flats: 	it 	also 	suggested 	an 	ethos, 	a 	social
ideal, 	to 	which 	architects 	were 	not 	blind. 	The 	well-
meaning 	housing 	experiments 	of 	the 	thirties, 	with
their 	vaguely 	socialist 	underpinnings, 	were 	at 	last 	able
to 	come 	to 	fruition 	under 	a 	Labour 	government 	facing
the 	post-war 	housing 	crisis. 	However, 	the 	limitations
of 	those 	paradigms 	soon 	began 	to 	show; 	besides, 	new
ideas 	needed 	to 	be 	given 	a 	form.
.-Vmong 	the 	projects 	of the 	immediate 	post-war years
were 	the 	'New 	Towns'. 	Here 	the 	intellectual 	impera-
tives of Fabianism 	and the 	fading 	dreams 	of the Garden
City 	movement 	were 	brought 	together 	in 	an 	adequate
but 	uninspiring 	setting 	for 	the 	'New 	Britain'. 	In 	the
inner 	cities 	numerous 	repetitive 	blocks 	of 	flats 	rose
from 	the 	rubble 	above 	the 	nineteenth-century 	slums.
More 	often 	than 	not 	they 	were 	erected 	according 	to
minimum 	standards. 	They 	seemed 	to 	embody 	a
particularly 	modern 	and 	hygienic 	form 	of 	alienation.
Certainly 	there 	were 	exceptions 	(one 	thinks 	of 	Powell
and 	Moya's 	Churchill 	Gardens 	in 	Pimlico. of Lubetkin
and 	Tecton's 	plans 	for 	Finsbur\'. 	of 	the 	LCC's 	'Mini-
unites' 	close 	to 	Richmond 	Park), 	but 	the 	norm 	was
completely 	lacking 	in 	richness. 	It 	is 	scarcely 	surprising
that 	those 	sectors 	of 	the 	avant-garde 	who 	sought 	to
crystallize 	the 	inner 	meanings 	of 	working-class
existence 	should 	have 	turned 	for 	inspiration 	to 	the
dense 	street 	life 	of the 	old 	slums 	which 	either 	bombs 	or
else 	bulldozers 	had 	done 	much 	to 	destroy.
In 	the 	Hertfordshire 	schools' 	programme 	of the early
fifties 	standardization 	and 	clear 	planning 	came
together 	in 	that 	'quiet' 	and 	rational 	version 	of modern
architecture 	which 	Pevsner 	so 	admired. 	Meanwhile 	at
the 	Festival 	of Britain 	in 	1951 	the 	'white 	forms 	of the
thirties' 	went 	out 	with 	one 	last 	mannered 	fanfare. 	The
Royal 	Festival 	Hall, 	designed 	by 	a 	team 	headed 	by
Leslie 	Martin 	(tig. 	24. 1 	1, 	was 	a 	fitting 	monument 	to the
show 	as a 	whole, with 	its 	tidy 	elegance, 	its 	hooded 	roof
so 	reminiscent 	of Lubetkin's 	High 	Point 	II. 	its 	attached
coloured tiles 	and Scandinavian 	touches of detail. 	Here
was 	public 	evidence 	of 	the 	way 	that 	the 	movement
which 	had 	begun 	twenty 	years 	earlier 	under 	a
polemical 	banner 	could 	become 	acceptable, 	sweet-
ened, 	even 	a 	little 	academic.
A 	younger 	generation 	would 	have 	nothing 	of 	it.
Among 	them 	were 	the 	Smithsons, 	whose 	ideas 	of
'urban 	re-identification' 	have 	been 	referred 	to 	earlier.
Before 	the 	Unite 	at 	Marseilles 	catalysed 	them, 	they
relied 	on 	the 	example 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	(w^hose
buildings 	they 	knew 	only 	through 	photographs). 	In
the 	Hunstanton 	School 	in 	Norfolk 	of 	1949- S3 	(fig-
24.2) 	they 	transformed 	the 	steel-frame 	vocabulary 	of
IIT 	into 	an 	asymmetrical 	plan 	and 	left 	fixtures 	and
materials 	deliberately 	crude. 	Without 	addressing 	the
question 	of 	appropriateness 	to 	a 	junior 	school 	design,
the 	critic 	Reyner 	Banham 	pointed 	to 	'the 	memorable
quality 	of 	image' 	of 	Hunstanton, 	suggested 	that 	its
materials 	were 	expressed 	'as 	found', 	and 	implied 	that 	a

-- 319 of 420 --

31 8 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 	940
,>«««IIS8»—
ROYAL 	FESTIVAL 	HALL
iiilii 	ilrSii 	iilHi 	itilail
wm 	H 	H 	BB 	iS! 	S!WJ 	«-™ 	** I 	I 	1 	1 	1
^^ 	•
I Ilia
III
III*
• 	III
I 	I 	I
f 	I 	I 	I
. 	• 	I 	IL
24. 1 	Leslie 	Martin 	and
others. 	Royal 	Festival
Hall. 	Festival 	of Britain.
London. 	195 1.
24.2 	.'\lison 	and 	Peter
Smithson. 	Hunstanton
School. 	Norfolk.
1949-53-

-- 320 of 420 --

24- 	S 	Alison 	and 	Peter
Smithson. 	the 	Economist
'cluster'. 	London.
1963-7.
moral 	stance 	(which 	he 	christened 	'the 	New 	Brutal-
ism' ) 	was on 	the 	point of emerging. 	Like the Smithsons.
Banham 	was 	part 	of 	the 	'20th 	Century 	Group' 	in
London, 	who 	admired 	the 	'Art 	Brut' of 	DubutTet. 	who
were 	interested 	in 	the 	heUvi 	brut 	of 	Le 	Corbusier 	and
who 	were 	involved 	- 	along 	with 	the 	sculptor 	Paolozzi
and 	the 	photographer 	Nigel 	Henderson 	- 	in 	trying 	to
convey 	the 	rough 	grain 	of modern 	urban 	life 	in 	a 	new
art. 	The 	group 	were 	united 	in 	their 	distaste 	for 	the
suavity 	of the 	English 	cultural 	elite 	and 	in 	their 	interest
in 	continental 	ideas 	stemming 	from, 	for 	example.
Existentialist 	writers 	like 	Camus 	and 	Sartre.
Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture 	in 	England 	319
Running 	through 	the 	Smithsons' 	thinking 	in 	the
fifties 	was 	also 	a 	strain 	of 	socialist 	realism 	which 	led
them 	to 	pinpoint 	icons 	of 	contemporary 	life 	in 	such
varied 	things 	as 	machine 	design, 	advertisements, 	and
the 	bric-a-brac 	of street 	life 	(which 	they 	called 	the 	'stuff
of 	the 	urban 	scene' I. 	The 	strategy 	was 	a 	replay 	of the
process Le Corbusier had 	gone through 	in 	his formative
years, 	when 	he 	had 	battened 	on 	ships 	and 	silos 	in 	his
search 	for 	images 	expressing 	the 	nature 	of 	the 	times.
But 	where 	Le 	Corbusier 	had 	attempted 	to 	invest 	the
images 	of 	the 	machine 	age 	with 	a 	Platonic 	idealism.
the 	Smithsons 	rejected 	any 	intimations 	of 	a 	closed
aesthetic 	in 	favour 	of an 	aesthetic 	of change. 	This 	was
manifest 	in 	their 	sprawling 	and 	incomplete 	plans 	for
the 	Golden 	Lane 	housing 	project 	(see 	Chapter 	2 1 	) 	and
in 	their 	refusal 	to 	indulge 	in 	an 	interest 	in 	Renaissance
symbolic 	proportions 	(many 	of 	their 	English 	contem-
poraries 	were 	influenced 	by 	Rudolf 	VVittkower's 	book
Airhiteclitral 	Principles 	in 	the 	Age 	of Humanisw).
Apart 	from 	a 	scheme 	for 	a 	sort 	of 	science-fiction
'House 	of the 	Future' 	in 	1956. 	the 	Smithsons 	had 	little
chance 	to 	carry 	out 	their 	ideas 	until 	the 	early 	1960s
when 	the 	Economist 	newspaper 	asked 	them 	to 	design
new 	offices 	on 	a 	site 	next 	to 	the 	eighteenth-century
gentleman's 	club 	Boodles, 	off 	St. 	James's 	Street 	(fig.
24.3). 	The 	context 	and 	the 	institution 	seemed 	to
require 	a sedate 	solution 	somewhat 	at 	odds with 	the
wilful 	brashness 	the 	architects 	had 	been 	cultivating.
They 	broke 	the 	programme 	down 	into 	three 	separate
towers 	of 	varying 	height, 	placing 	the 	largest 	one.
containing the 	Economist's offices, 	to 	the rear of the site
where 	it 	would 	not 	challenge 	the 	scale 	of 	the 	main
street 	front. 	This 	strategy 	also 	created a 	small 	piazza,
through 	which 	a 	meandering 	route 	over 	the 	site 	was
possible. 	The 	middle-sized 	block 	was 	placed 	on 	the
main 	street 	to 	the 	corner, 	and 	made 	to 	contain 	some
elegant 	shops 	and 	a 	bank, 	which 	was 	inserted 	on 	a
piano 	iwbile 	of 	amplified 	scale 	and 	was 	reached 	up 	a
moving 	staircase 	on 	the 	forty-five 	degree 	angle. 	A
third, 	much 	smaller block, 	containing apartments, 	was
set 	back 	on 	the 	site 	to 	Boodles' 	side.
The main 	office 	block was organized around 	a 	core of
circulation 	with 	fairly 	intimate 	work 	spaces 	at 	the
edges. 	The 	form 	was 	chamfered 	at 	the 	corners 	to 	give 	a
distinctive 	image 	and 	to 	soften 	the 	relationship 	to
neighbours. 	The 	architects 	claimed 	that 	the 	interior
layout 	was 	infiuenced 	by monastic 	arrangements, 	and
it 	may 	be 	that 	they 	were 	deliberately 	trying 	to
introduce 	qualities 	of 	domesticity 	into 	work 	spaces.
Travertine 	slivers 	attached 	to 	the 	steel 	frame 	lent 	the
building 	an 	honorific 	character; 	the 	honey-coloured
stone 	also 	allowed 	it 	to blend 	with 	the 	numerous warm
colours 	of the 	setting.
The 	ideas 	behind 	the 	plan 	as 	a 	whole 	reflected 	the
Smithsons' 	earlier 	urban 	polemics: 	in 	their 	minds, 	the

-- 321 of 420 --

320 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
Economist group 	was 	a 	'cluster', 	an image, 	a sign of the
shape the future city might take. 	The 	asymmetry was 	a
critique 	of 	the 	vapid 	axial 	prism/plaza 	formula,
and 	was 	felt 	to 	be 	one 	of 	the 	keys 	to 	a 	subtle
relationship 	between 	old 	and 	new. 	The 	processional
character 	of 	the 	walkway 	was 	evidently 	inspired 	by 	a
visit 	to 	Greece, 	while 	the 	piazza 	had 	obvious 	Italian
overtones. 	The 	bay 	widths 	of 	each 	slab 	were 	subtly
differentiated 	to 	create 	something 	like 	a 	tableau 	of the
kind 	seen 	in 	the 	background 	of 	some 	Renaissance
pictures. 	The 	placement 	of the 	bank 	on an 	upper 	level
recalled 	the 	PSFS 	solution 	of 	193 1, 	while 	the 	idea 	was
also 	related 	to 	the 	Smithsons' 	own 	Haupstadt 	scheme
for 	Berlin 	(1957). 	in 	which 	raised 	pedestrian 	streets
had 	been 	much 	in 	evidence. 	In 	turn, 	these 	ideas
recalled 	Team 	X 	urban 	theories.
The 	Smithsons 	had 	to 	wait 	almost 	another decade 	to
test 	their 	housing theories 	in 	the working-class context
towards 	which 	they 	were 	originally 	directed. 	Admit-
tedly 	there 	was 	their 	girls' 	dormitory 	for 	St. 	Hilda's.
Oxford, 	but 	this 	was 	for 	a 	far softer 	and 	less 	demanding
visual 	and 	social 	environment. 	By 	contrast 	'Robin
Hood 	Gardens' 	( 	1969-75) 	was 	to 	stand 	in 	Poplar 	(fig.
24.4). 	not 	far 	from 	the 	docklands 	of 	the 	East 	End. 	a
traditional 	Smithson 	stamping 	groimd. 	They 	arranged
the 	housing 	in 	what 	amounted 	to 	yet 	another 	critique
of the 	free-standing 	point 	block: 	two 	serpentine 	spines
marking 	off a 	green 	precinct 	sheltered 	from 	the 	traffic
and 	complete with 	an 	artificial 	hillock. 	The 	dwellings
were 	made 	legible 	in 	the 	fai^ades 	through 	attached
concrete 	struts, 	while 	the 	triple-level 	access 	system
was 	articulated 	by 	a 	larger 	set 	of 	fins. 	In 	theory 	these
devices 	were 	probably 	supposed 	to 	be 	modern 	equiva-
lents 	to 	the 	standardized 	yet 	variable 	usages 	of
Classical 	orders 	in 	such 	eighteenth-century 	prototypes
as 	Bath: 	in 	fact 	they 	seemed 	to 	be 	thin 	descendants
of 	the 	texturing 	devices 	employed 	in 	the 	Unite
d'Habitation. 	The 	street 	decks 	themselves 	seemed 	to
fall 	short 	of their 	symbolic 	intention 	of expressing 	and
embodying 	the 	ideal 	community. 	Indeed. 	Robin 	Hood
Gardens 	as 	a 	whole 	seemed 	propelled 	by 	a stark 	vision
of working-class 	life 	more 	in 	tune 	with 	realities 	of 	the
early 	fifties 	than 	with 	the 	consumerism 	of later 	years.
Another 	architect 	to 	feel 	dissatisfaction 	with 	the
diluted 	modern 	architecture 	of 	the 	fifties 	in 	England
was 	James 	Stirling. 	Born 	in 	1926. 	he 	was 	educated 	at
Liverpool 	University 	from 	1945 	to 	1950 	where 	he
came 	into 	contact 	with 	the 	ideas 	of 	Colin 	Rowe. 	a
historian 	acutely 	conscious 	of 	the 	Utopian 	and
symbolic 	values 	in 	the 	architecture 	of 	the 	twenties.
From 	an 	early 	stage 	Stirling 	seems 	to 	have 	been
conscious 	of his 	position 	in 	a 	modern 	tradition, 	and 	to
have 	enjoyed 	employing 	references 	and 	quotations:
even 	his 	student 	thesis 	was 	a 	clumsy 	but 	forceful
reinterpretation 	of 	Pavilion 	Suisse, 	replete 	with
.'^
.!?' 	If 	' 	_
nautical 	analogies. 	Like 	Lasdun 	and 	the 	Smithsons.
Stirling 	felt 	the 	need 	to 	recharge 	English 	modern
architecture 	and. 	in 	a 	sense, 	to 	enrich 	it 	through
contact 	with 	earlier 	national 	traditions. 	In 	his 	case the
tough 	industrial 	vernacular 	of 	Northern 	towns 	like
Liverpool was 	a 	particularly compelling 	inspiration. 	He
also 	visited 	and 	reviewed 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Chapel 	at
Ronchamp 	and 	the 	Jaoul 	houses. 	He 	was 	ambivalent
towards 	the 	primitivism. 	and 	what 	he 	called 	the
deliberate 	and 	mannered 	imperfectionism' 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	late 	works. 	Yet 	his 	own 	Ham 	Common
houses 	of 	1956 	(designed 	with 	Gowan) 	were 	clearly
influenced 	by 	them. 	Stirling 	was 	fully 	aware 	of
Brutalist 	polemics, 	but 	kept 	a 	certain 	distance 	from 	the
main 	group: 	even 	so, 	repeated 	attempts 	were 	later
24.4 	Alison 	and 	Peter
Smithson. 	Robin 	Hood
Gardens. 	Poplar.
London, 	c. 	1969-75.
axonometric drawing of
whole.
24. s 	(rifl/id 	James
Stirling and 	J. 	(lowan.
Engineering 	building.
Leicester University.
1959-63.
I

-- 322 of 420 --

mm
fi^mr 'frmm

-- 323 of 420 --

Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
made 	to 	claim 	that 	his 	rough 	and 	ready 	machine
poetics 	were 	'Brutalist'.
Stirling's 	strong 	personal 	style 	emerged 	in 	the
extraordinary 	Leicester 	Engineering 	building 	of
1959-63 	(fig. 	24.5). 	This 	was 	formed 	from 	a 	slender
tower 	on 	splayed 	legs, 	rising 	above 	the 	overhanging
forms 	of 	the 	auditoria 	and 	linked 	to 	a 	lower 	block 	of
engineering workshops 	with saw-tooth 	factory 	glazing
laid 	out 	on 	a 	forty-five degree angle. 	As 	the programme
called for 	a 	one-hundred-foot 	hydraulic 	supply 	and 	the
site 	was 	confined, 	a 	tower 	seemed 	reasonable.
However, 	programmatic 	logic 	was 	only 	the 	starting-
point 	in 	a deliberate 	display 	of sculptural 	dynamics, 	in
which 	individualized 	elements 	were 	played 	off against
one 	another. 	Formal 	and 	functional 	considerations
were 	in 	turn 	transcended 	by 	a 	preoccupation 	with
mechanistic 	images 	and 	quotations 	from 	the 	'heroic
period' 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Reminiscences 	of
Hannes 	Meyer's 	'factory' 	scheme 	for 	the 	League 	of
Nations 	seemed 	to 	be 	blended 	with 	memories 	of
Melnikov's 	constructivism: 	battleship 	details 	were
rammed 	together 	with 	Corbusian 	ramps 	and 	elements
not 	unlike 	those 	employed 	by 	Wright 	in 	the 	Johnson
Wax 	laboratory 	tower. 	There 	was 	about 	all 	this
something almost too 	knowing, 	as 	if the 	archilrtl 	were
deliberately 	mannerizing 	the 	machine-age 	polemics 	of
thirty 	years 	before. 	It 	was 	understandable 	that 	the
term 	'Futurist 	revival' 	was 	invoked 	(Plate 	12).
Stirling 	attempted 	to 	apply 	some 	of 	the 	discoveries
made 	at 	Leicester 	in 	the 	very 	different 	functional
context 	of 	the 	History 	Faculty 	building 	at 	Cambridge
University 	of 	1965-7 	(fig. 	24.6). 	This 	commission
came 	from 	a 	limited 	competition 	and 	his 	design 	was
the 	only 	one 	to 	attempt 	a 	complete 	integration 	of 	the
library 	and 	the 	teaching 	spaces. 	This 	was 	done 	by
placing 	the 	reading-room 	in 	a 	quadrant 	under 	a 	glass
tent 	roof 	leaning 	back 	against 	an 	L-shaped 	block
containing 	seminar 	rooms, 	lounges, 	etc. 	Stirling 	put
the 	largest 	and 	most 	public 	accommodations 	at 	the
lowest 	levels, 	and 	this 	led 	naturally 	to 	a 	gradually
stepping 	shape. 	The 	radial 	plan 	of 	the 	main 	reading-
room was 	also 	a 	response 	to 	a 	central 	demand 	of 	the
programme: 	that 	there 	should 	be 	a 	single 	point 	of
control 	from 	which 	the 	reading-room 	and 	the 	stacks
could 	be 	surveyed. 	It 	was 	perhaps 	a 	combination 	of
logic 	and 	erudition 	which 	led 	Stirling 	to 	readapt 	the
'Panopticon' 	principle 	from 	the 	Utilitarian 	philosopher
Bentham, 	with 	its 	'controlling 	eye' 	at 	the 	centre 	of 	a
circle: 	this 	had 	frequently 	been 	employed 	in 	library
designs 	throughout 	the 	nineteenth 	century.
24.6 	James 	Stirling.
History 	Faculty 	building,
Cambridge 	University.

-- 324 of 420 --

24-7 	James 	Stirling.
Florey 	building. 	Oxford
University. 	1967-71.
The 	polygonal 	stair 	towers, 	industrial 	glazing, 	red
quarry 	tiles, 	raised 	podia, 	irregular 	silhouettes 	and
engineering 	romanticism 	all 	recalled 	features 	dis-
covered 	at 	Leicester. 	However, 	the 	glass 	tent 	over 	the
reading-room 	was 	a 	staggering 	invention 	vaguely
reminiscent 	of 	the 	Palm 	Houses 	at 	Kew 	Gardens 	or 	of
the 	rocket-assembly 	building 	at 	Cape 	Canaveral. 	The
roof 	was 	formed 	as 	a 	double 	layer 	to 	incorporate 	an
environmental 	cushion 	against 	extremes 	of 	heat 	and
cold, 	and 	was 	supported 	on 	an 	elegant 	steel-truss
system 	with 	adjustable 	louvers 	and 	other 	mechanistic
attachments. 	At 	the 	peak, 	above 	the 	point 	of 	com-
mand, 	an 	array 	of brightly 	coloured 	extractor 	fans 	was
inserted 	above 	the smoked-glass 	inner layer of the 	roof
With 	its 	canted 	interior 	windows 	and 	its 	glazed
galleries, 	the 	whole 	space 	was 	a 	bizarre 	evocation
which 	seemed 	to 	oscillate 	between 	twentieth-century
science 	fiction, 	the 	actualities 	of 	aircraft 	design, 	and
nostalgia 	for 	the 	era 	of the 	gratuis 	constructeurs 	in 	steel
Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture 	in 	England 	323
and 	glass 	of 	the 	nineteenth 	century. 	As 	before, 	the
imagery 	seemed 	suffused 	with 	Futurist 	poetry: 	but
there 	was 	a 	once-removed 	quality 	about 	this 	heroic
stance 	- as 	if Stirling wanted 	to 	employ 	the 	icons 	of the
machine-age 	polemic 	without 	embracing 	the 	moral
and 	Utopian 	commitments.
In 	presenting 	his 	own 	buildings 	Stirling 	tended 	to
insist 	on 	their 	functional 	rationale 	rather 	than 	in-
dulging 	in 	speculation 	about 	the 	meaning 	or 	sources
of 	his 	forms. 	Factory 	patent 	glazing 	- 	so 	obviously
evocative 	of 	the 	crystalline 	fantasies 	of 	the 	twenties 	-
was 	discussed 	in 	entirely 	pragmatic 	terms:
Glass 	buildings 	are. 	I 	think, 	appropriate 	to 	the
English 	climate. 	We 	are 	perhaps 	the 	only 	country
where 	it 	is 	seldom 	too 	hot or too 	cold, 	and 	on 	a
normal 	cloudy 	day. 	there 	is 	a 	high 	quality 	of
ditfused 	light 	in 	the 	sky. 	A 	glass 	covering 	keeps 	the
rain 	out 	and 	lets 	the 	light 	through.
Even 	so. 	it 	was 	clear 	from 	the 	results 	that 	the
architect 	was 	quite 	deliberate 	in 	his 	manipulation 	of
precedents 	and 	that 	associational 	and 	compositional
criteria 	were 	sometimes 	uppermost: 	sloped 	glass 	was
not 	ideal 	to 	keep 	rain 	out 	and 	could 	let 	in 	too 	much
light, 	cold, 	and 	heat. 	This 	may 	have 	been 	the case 	with
the 	Florey 	building, 	a 	student 	residence 	designed 	for
Queen's 	College. 	Oxford, 	between 	1967 	and 	1971 	(fig.
24.7) 	in 	which 	the 	student 	rooms, 	wrapped 	around 	a
semi-open 	court 	looking 	towards 	fields 	and 	trees, 	were
fully 	glazed 	from 	floor 	to 	ceiling, 	and 	ventilated 	by
louvers. 	The 	outer 	sides 	of 	the 	building, 	where 	the
access 	corridors 	and 	circulation 	towers 	were 	posit-
ioned, 	were 	largely 	clad 	in 	the 	usual 	red 	tiles, 	while 	the
building 	as a 	whole 	sat 	back 	on 	a 	splay-legged 	A-frame
in 	concrete 	and 	looked 	a 	bit 	like 	a 	grandstand. 	The
main 	communal 	function 	- 	a 	breakfast-room 	- 	was
situated 	at 	the 	focal 	point, 	embedded 	in 	the 	court,
while 	the 	porter's 	lodge 	was 	contained 	in 	curved, 	free-
plan 	shapes 	tucked 	in 	under 	the 	box.
Inevitably 	the 	image 	of 	the 	glass 	box 	lifted 	up 	on
concrete 	supports 	and 	looking 	out 	over 	nature 	recalls
the 	Pavilion 	Suisse: 	equally 	the 	stepping 	of 	the
attached 	stair 	volumes 	and 	the 	placement 	of 	the
breakfast-room 	alongside 	a 	slab 	calls 	to 	mind 	Aalto's
Baker 	House: 	finally 	the 	'cloister' 	under the 	A-frame 	at
ground 	level 	and 	the 	vaguely 	courtyard-like 	plan 	are
reminiscent 	of 	the 	Oxbridge 	collegiate 	tradition. 	Thus
the 	form 	of 	the 	Florey 	building 	resulted 	not 	from 	a
'functionalist' 	position 	but 	from 	a 	deliberate 	cross-
breeding 	of 	relevant 	types 	in 	tradition. 	Moreover, 	the
solution 	adopted 	was 	beset 	with 	practical 	and 	acoustic
problems 	and 	amounted 	to 	an 	imposition 	of machine-
age 	constraints 	on 	the 	gentility 	of Oxford 	life. 	Possibly
this 	was 	Stirling's 	version 	of 	the 	challenging 	social

-- 325 of 420 --

324 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
character 	he 	had 	sensed 	in 	the 	architecture 	of 	the
twenties; 	however, 	the 	result 	smacked 	of an 	archaeo-
logical 	exercise 	into 	the 	sources 	of 	modernism. 	In 	his
slightly 	later 	design 	for 	dormitories 	at 	St. 	Andrews 	in
Scotland, 	he 	recalled 	another 	fetish 	of the 	twenties, 	the
collective 	image 	of the 	ship.
Stirling's 	mechanistic 	rhetoric 	seems 	to 	have 	come
fully 	into 	its 	own 	in 	a 	number 	of 	prestige 	schemes 	for
industrial 	concerns 	designed 	in 	the 	1960s and 	early
1970s. 	For 	Dorman 	Long, 	the 	steel 	corporation, 	he
envisaged 	a 	linear, 	sealed-glass 	container 	of 	stepped
form, 	bridging a 	motorway: 	for Olivetti, 	he conjured 	up
collages 	of architectural 	syntax 	and 	business 	machine
quotations; 	and 	for 	Siemens 	AEG. 	he 	projected 	a
computer 	centre 	outside 	Munich 	(never 	built) 	of 	a
distinctly 	mechanomorphic 	character 	(fig. 	24.8). 	The
huge 	cylindrical 	shapes 	of the 	main 	office 	spaces 	were
laid 	out 	as 	a 	grand 	axial 	composition 	with 	moving
conveyors 	running 	along 	the 	spine, 	while 	rows 	of
poplar 	trees 	gave 	the 	image 	a 	curiously 	eighteenth-
century 	feeling. 	The 	whole 	thing 	seemed 	to 	be 	some
cybernetic 	equivalent 	to 	Ledoux's 	Utopian 	Saltworks
at 	Chaux. 	put 	together 	to 	celebrate 	the 	values 	of a 	new
European 	technocratic 	class.
It is possible that Stirling's picturesque manipulation
of 	machine-age 	images 	may 	have 	received 	stimulus
from 	another 	branch 	of 	the 	English 	architectural
avant-garde 	of 	the 	sixties: 	the 	group 	known 	as
'Archigram'. 	This 	was 	founded 	around 	a 	nucleus
consisting of 	Peter 	Cook, 	Warren 	Chalk, 	Ron 	Herron,
Dennis 	Crompton, 	Michael 	Webb, 	and 	David 	Greene,
The 	founding 	pamphlet. 	Archigram 	i'. 	was 	put
together 	in 	1961 	and 	spelled 	out 	many 	of the 	group's
later 	fascinations 	with 	such 	things 	as 	'clip-on'
technology, 	the 	throwaway 	environment, 	space
capsules 	and 	mass-consumer 	imagery. 	As 	early 	as
1959, 	Mike 	Webb 	had 	designed 	a 	project 	for 	a
'Furniture 	Manufacturers 	Association 	Building' 	in 	the
form 	of pods 	and capsules 	plugged 	flexibly into a 	frame
;
and 	in 	1961 	his 	'Sin 	Centre' 	for 	Leicester 	Square
envisaged 	a 	giant 	cybernetic 	pleasure 	machine 	aping
computer 	reels 	and 	comic-book 	space 	ships. 	Robot
fascination 	reached 	a 	peak 	in 	Ron 	fierron's 	'Walking
Cities' 	project 	of 	1 	964. 	in 	which 	colossal 	spider-shaped
cities 	on 	legs 	were 	shown 	clambering 	over 	the 	water
towards 	Manhattan. 	Then 	in 	1964 	Peter 	Cook drew
together most of the 	group's 	themes 	in 	a 	huge but ever-
changing 	megastructure: 	the 	'Plug-in-City' 	(fig. 	24.9).
24.8 	James Stirling,
project for Siemens
Computer Centre, 	near
Munich. 	1973.

-- 326 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture 	in 	England 	325
This 	contained 	no 	buildings 	in 	the 	traditional 	sense,
but 	'frameworks' 	into 	which 	standardized 	components
could 	be 	slotted. 	Functions 	were 	not 	fulfilled 	by 	forms
any 	longer, 	but 	by 	mechanical 	and 	electronic
'services'.
There 	was 	a 	deliberately 	anti-heroic 	stance 	in
Archigram 	which 	rejected 	the 	high-mindedness 	and
nature 	worship 	of the 	Team 	X 	generation. 	Archigram
welcomed 	wholeheartedly, 	without 	moral 	stricture,
the 	hedonistic 	possibilities 	of 	modern 	consumerism.
There 	was 	certainly 	a 	rough 	parallel 	here 	to 	the 	Pop
paintings 	of 	the 	early 	sixties 	produced 	by 	Hamilton.
Warhol. 	Rosenquist. 	and 	Johns. 	The 	Archigram
architects 	learned 	their 	lessons 	from 	the 	earlier 	'20th
Century 	Group' 	I which 	had 	revelled 	in 	American
advertisements) 	and 	from 	the engineer 	R. 	Buckminster
Fuller, 	whose 	anti-monumentalism 	appealed 	to 	them.
Broadly 	speaking, 	their 	aim 	was 	to 	portray 	and
symbolize 	a 	new 	reality : 	as 	Warren 	Chalk 	stated
:
We 	are 	in 	pursuit 	of an 	idea, 	a 	new 	vernacular,
something 	to 	stand 	alongside the 	space 	capsules,
computers 	and 	throwaway 	packages 	of an 	atomic
electronic 	age 	. 	.
.
We 	are 	not 	trying 	to 	make 	houses 	like 	cars, 	cities
like 	oil 	retineries 	. 	. 	. 	this 	analogous 	imagery 	will
eventually 	be 	digested 	into 	a 	creative 	system 	... 	it
has 	become 	necessary 	to 	extend 	ourselves 	into 	such
disciplines 	in 	order 	to 	discover 	our 	appropriate
language 	to 	the present 	day 	situation.
24.9 	(above) 	Peter Cook.
'I'lug-in-City'. 	1964.
24. 	10 	{right) 	Cedric
Price. 	'Potteries
Thlnkbelt', 	1967.

-- 327 of 420 --

326 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
Archigram 	pronouncements 	and 	images 	had 	a
notably 	Futurist 	quality 	about 	tiiem. 	and 	the 	group
was 	certainly 	interested 	in 	Sant' 	Elia's 	descriptions 	of
the 	city 	of 	the 	future 	as 	a 	dynamic 	machine. 	Their
commentary 	on 	reality 	was 	mostly 	undertaken 	in 	the
paper 	world 	of 	collages 	and 	drawings, 	which 	was
probably 	just 	as 	well, 	for 	Archigram 	developed 	an 	anti-
architectural 	philosophy 	towards 	the end 	of the sixties.
Thus 	the 	'instant 	city' 	proposal 	of 	1969 	involved 	the
sudden 	arrival 	of 	blimps 	which 	would 	drop 	the
minimal 	hardware 	necessary 	to 	create 	the 	'true'
urbanism 	- 	a 	software 	dream 	world 	of 	electronic
stimulation 	for 	the eye 	and 	theear. 	The 	mythology 	of a
non-oppressive environment 	rid 	of the 	tiresome weight
of history, 	culture 	and 	architectural 	form 	was 	loosely
entertained: 	it 	was 	an 	idea 	which 	blended 	well 	with
the 	'drop-out' 	consciousness 	of the 	decade.
The 	search 	lor 	an 	anti-heroic 	imagery 	suitable 	to
modern 	pluralism 	was 	given 	a 	considerable 	boost 	by
the 	laconic 	ideas 	of 	the 	inventor 	Cedric 	Price 	in 	the
same 	period. 	He 	maintained 	that 	society 	would, 	on 	the
whole, 	be 	better 	off 	without 	the 	obsessions 	of 	form-
makers. 	A 	typical 	Price 	project 	was 	the 	'Potteries
Thinkbelt' 	- 	a 	design 	for 	a 	university 	in 	which 	he
envisaged 	the 	re-use 	of 	an 	existing 	railway 	system 	in
the 	Midlands 	as 	a 	new 	'non-architectural' 	source 	of
knowledge 	(flg. 	24.10). 	Standardized 	modules 	con-
taining 	books, 	recorded 	lectures, 	etc. 	were 	to 	be 	moved
up 	and 	down 	the 	region 	to 	service 	different 	parts of it
with 	'information', 	but 	without 	buildings. 	Despite 	the
anti-style 	pose, 	the 	position 	did 	crystallize 	a 	style 	of
quiet 	ordinariness. 	A 	similar 	functionalist 	mood 	had
been 	articulated 	by 	Reyner 	Banham 	at 	the 	end 	of 	his
book 	Theory 	and 	Design 	in 	the 	First 	Machine 	Age,
24. 1 	1 	Uenys 	Lasdun.
Royal 	College of
Physicians. 	London.
1 960, view 	across
Regents 	Park.

-- 328 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Anti- Architecture 	in 	England 	327
:l>«WiCV:-r-
published 	in 	i960:
The 	architect 	who 	proposes 	to 	run 	with 	technology
knows 	that 	he 	is 	in 	fast 	company 	and 	that 	in 	order
to 	keep 	up, 	he 	may 	have 	to 	emulate 	the 	Futurists
and 	discard 	his 	whole 	cultural 	load 	. 	.
.
However, 	by 	the 	sixties 	even 	the 	Futurist 	position
and 	imagery 	had 	become 	part 	of 	a 	tradition. 	The
paradox 	of 	the 	anti-architects 	was 	that, 	in 	attempting
to 	overthrow 	the 	bonds 	of the 	past 	and 	the 	constraints
of 	formal 	expression, 	they 	drew 	on 	tradition 	and
employed 	forms 	to 	get 	their 	message 	across. 	Moreover,
in 	the 	1970s 	their 	anti-architectural' 	images 	became
absorbed 	by 	architects: 	Renzo 	Piano 	and 	Richard
Rogers's Pompidou Centre in 	Paris 	( 	1 9 74 > for example,
would 	have 	been 	inconceivable 	without 	the legacy 	of
Archigram.
One 	English 	architect 	whose 	work during 	the 	1960s
stood 	out 	in 	firm 	contrast 	to 	the 	obsessive 	play 	with
technological 	imagery 	was 	Denys 	Lasdun. 	In 	his 	case
technology 	was 	regarded 	as 	a 	means 	(rather 	than 	an
end) 	towards 	the 	creation 	of 	what 	he 	called 	an
'architecture 	of urban 	landscape'. 	Lasdun 	was 	born 	in
1914 	and 	experienced 	the 	seminal 	buildings 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	without 	the 	historical 	and 	ironical
distance 	of the 	generation 	whose 	formation 	took 	place
after 	the 	war. 	He 	learned 	much 	from 	working 	with
Lubetkin 	and 	Coates. 	but 	most 	of all 	from 	his 	study 	of
Le 	Corbusier's 	buildings 	and 	ideas. 	Lasdun 	also 	knew
Wright's 	architecture 	through 	drawings 	and 	photo-
graphs, 	and 	was 	deeply 	impressed 	by 	the 	English
Baroque 	architect 	Nicholas 	Hawksmoor.
Lasdun's 	experimental 	cluster 	blocks 	of 	the 	fifties

-- 329 of 420 --

328 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	194"
have 	been 	mentioned 	earlier 	in 	connection 	with
urbanistic 	reactions 	against 	the 	'unite' 	in 	that 	period.
In 	1958 	he 	designed 	some 	luxury 	flats 	in 	St. 	James's 	in
which 	he 	employed 	a 	3/2 	section 	to 	provide 	ample
living-room 	views 	and 	still 	make 	the 	most of expensive
building 	land. 	The 	organization 	was 	expressed 	directly
in 	the 	fa(,-ades 	and 	handled 	adeptly 	through 	careful
proportioning 	and 	tine 	detailing. 	The 	horizontal
stratification 	also 	related 	to 	the 	buildings' 	neighbours
and 	to 	a 	neo-Palladian 	building 	two 	doors 	away. 	The
sensitive 	relationship 	of 	new 	and 	old 	buildings 	had
been 	a 	matter 	of 	relatively 	small 	importance 	to 	the
majority 	of early 	modern 	movement 	masters, 	the 	more
so 	as 	they 	were 	often 	keen 	to 	heighten 	the 'modernity'
of 	their 	solutions 	through 	contrast: 	but 	in 	the 	fifties
and 	sixties 	the 	matter 	of 	context 	became 	increasingly
important.
Indeed 	the 	relationship 	of the 	individual 	building 	to
its 	historical 	setting 	was 	a 	major 	motive 	force 	in
Lasdun's 	next 	design, 	for the 	headquarters 	of the 	Royal
College 	of 	Physicians 	- 	an 	august 	academic 	medical
body - to 	stand 	close 	to 	Nash's 	neo-classical 	terraces 	in
Regent's 	Park. 	The 	main 	ceremonial 	part 	of 	the
building 	was 	a 	white 	rectangular 	shell 	poised 	de-
licately 	on 	piers 	above 	its 	shadowy 	lower 	areas: 	this
contained 	a 	grand 	hallway, 	the 	historical 	library 	and
the 	focal 	'Censor's 	room'. 	The 	transition 	in 	scale
between 	these 	sharp, 	crisp 	forms 	and 	the 	setting 	was
handled 	by 	a 	curved 	hump in blue 	brick 	containing 	the
auditorium 	(fig. 	24.11). 	Free 	in 	form, 	organic 	in
association, 	this 	was 	intended 	to 	imply 	an 	ability 	to
grow 	and 	to 	change. 	Behind 	the 	hump 	was 	a 	precinct,
appropriate 	to 	an 	inward-looking 	community 	of
scholars, 	while 	the 	main 	hallway 	contained 	a 	square
spiral 	stair 	which 	rose 	in 	ever-wider 	turns 	to 	join
stepped 	levels, 	which 	then 	opened 	out 	on 	one 	side
towards 	Nash's 	terraces. 	Thus 	the 	heart 	of 	the
institution 	was 	defined 	by 	a 	well-scaled 	space 	that 	was
sensed 	as 	being, 	at 	the 	same 	time, 	a 	part 	of 	its
surroundings.
Part of the subtlety of the 	Royal 	College of Physicians
lay 	in 	the 	way 	the 	neo-classical 	setting 	was 	abstracted
in 	its 	forms 	and 	finishes, 	without 	any 	recourse 	to 	a
weak 	historical 	sentimentalism. 	Thus 	the 	main 	shell 	in
white 	terrazzo 	was 	detailed 	in 	a 	manner 	recalling
Nash's 	thin 	stucco 	surfaces, 	and 	the 	piers 	at 	the
entrance 	were 	restatements 	of 	Classical 	orders. 	The
blue 	brick 	hump 	echoed 	the 	neighbouring 	slate 	roofs
and the sequence of spaces 	in 	the hall 	was analogous to
the 	alleyways 	around 	the 	Park, 	kasdun 	expressed 	his
intention 	clearly: 	it 	was 	to 	'rhyme' 	with 	Nash 	and 	to
make 	the 	new 	building 	a 	'microcosm' 	of 	the 	sur-
rounding 	city 	(Plate 	I 	3).
The 	Classicism 	of the 	Royal 	College 	ran 	deeper 	than
these 	witty 	references. 	At 	the 	Architectural 	Associ-
ation 	in 	the 	thirties 	Lasdun had 	been 	trained 	to 	deal
with 	ceremonial 	sequences 	of 	space 	using 	Beaux-Arts
devices 	like 	the 	axis, 	the 	vestibule 	and 	the 	grand 	stair.
Moreover, 	he 	had 	studied 	the 	writings 	of 	Geoffrey
Scott, 	who 	had 	stressed 	the 	anthropomorphic 	qualities
of Classical 	design 	and 	the 	vital 	sculptural 	character 	of
good 	architecture. 	These 	were 	features 	which 	Ijasdun
had 	sensed 	in 	the 	architecture 	of 	Hawksmoor. 	The
dynamic 	contrast 	of light 	and 	shade, 	and 	the 	dramatic
use 	of 	space 	were 	probably 	inspired 	by 	this 	early
eighteenth-century 	precedent.
Thus 	the 	Royal 	College 	of Physicians 	was 	a 	turning
point 	for 	its 	creator 	in 	which 	disparate 	strands 	in 	his
background 	were 	brought 	together: 	his 	admiration 	for
Le 	Corbusier 	and 	the 	English 	Baroque, 	his 	interest 	in
biologically 	inspired 	patterns 	of growth, 	his 	fascination
with 	the 	meaning 	of institutions. 	One of the main 	ideas
to 	crystallize 	in 	the 	building 	was 	the 	concept 	of 	an
'urban 	landscape' 	of 	stepped 	levels 	linking 	spaces
inside 	and 	outside 	an 	individual 	building 	so 	that 	it
became 	part 	of 	its 	setting. 	This 	contextual 	obsession
was carried 	through 	in 	Lasdun's 	next 	major design, 	for
the 	University 	of 	East 	Anglia 	( 	1962-8) 	near 	Norwich
(fig. 	24.12).
The 	University 	was 	one 	of 	a 	number 	commissioned
in 	the 	early 	sixties 	in 	England 	to 	stand 	in 	rural 	settings
near 	Cathedral 	towns. 	The 	site 	was 	on 	open 	meadow
land 	stepping down slowly to the 	River Yare. 	The client
required 	a 	nucleus 	capable 	of 	later 	extension 	and
eventually 	decided 	that 	traditional 	divisions 	between
disciplines 	should 	be 	minimized. 	The 	architect 	there-
fore 	decided 	on 	a 	linear 	pattern 	based 	on 	circulation
and 	adjusted 	to 	tit 	the contours. 	The 	main 	elements
became 	the 	tfexible, 	pre-cast 	concrete 	'teaching 	wall'
(running 	along 	the 	back), 	the 	upper 	walkway 	(con-
ceptual spine of the scheme) 	and the stepped residences
(attuned 	to 	the 	landscape 	setting), 	which 	were
grouped 	around 	a 	space 	at 	the centre called 	simply 	'the
harbour'. 	Clearly 	there 	were 	loose 	parallels 	between
this 	organization 	and 	ideas 	being 	pursued 	by 	Utzon, 	de
Carlo, 	and 	Woods 	at 	the 	same 	time, 	but 	the 	UEA 	plan
and 	its 	underlying 	strategies 	were 	equally 	an 	out-
growth 	of 	ideas 	which 	stretched 	back 	to 	Lasdun's
cluster 	blocks, 	and 	even 	to 	the 	biologically 	inspired
plan-form 	of Hallfield 	School 	in 	1 9 S 	i
.
The 	dominant 	architectural 	element 	of UEA 	was 	the
platform 	or 	raised 	level. 	The 	.section 	was 	worked 	out
ingeniously 	to 	minimize 	the 	use 	of 	lifts 	and 	to 	allow
splendid 	views 	from 	upper 	walkways 	over 	the 	land-
scape. 	Variation 	was 	achieved 	on 	the 	basis 	of a 	few
standardized 	parts 	linked 	together 	by 	a 	strong 	overall
idea 	and 	by 	a 	dominant 	geometry 	of ninety-degree 	and
forty-five-degree 	axes. 	The 	architect 	hinted 	at 	the
underlying landscape romanticism 	when 	he referred to
the 	platforms 	as 	'strata'. 	Indeed, 	UEA 	was 	nothing 	less

-- 330 of 420 --

Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture 	in 	England 	329
24.12 	Denys 	Lasdun.
University 	of East
Anglia. 	near 	Norvvicli.
1962-8.
i 	^
•»'*'* 	jr»
41 	"wW
pffrrfTWB
-rf-rirfTiEff
than 	a 	demonsLration 	ol' 	his 	urban 	landscape'
philosophy:
Activities 	take 	place 	on 	platforms, 	floors, 	paths,
terraces, 	etc. 	See 	Le 	Corbusier's 	pronouncement 	of
191 	5 	- 	The 	actual 	ground 	of the 	town 	is 	a 	sort 	of
raised 	floor, 	the 	paths 	and 	pavement 	as 	it 	were
bridges 	. 	.
.' 	A 	building 	can 	be 	looked 	at 	in 	the 	same
way 	as a 	matter 	of platforms 	or 	connections 	and
interlocking 	spaces. 	Sensitive 	gradations 	of levels
and 	heights 	can 	be 	made 	to 	respond 	to 	site 	and
function 	creating 	an 	endless 	variety 	of rhythms,
satisfactory 	in 	themselves, 	and 	adaptable 	to 	any
existing 	urban 	situation 	including 	the 	architecture
of the 	past.
The 	system 	of 	strata 	(with 	accompanying 	vertical
towers) 	was 	found 	to 	be 	relevant 	to 	Lasdun's 	next
major 	commission, 	the 	National 	Theatre 	of 	1964-75
(Kg. 	24.13). 	In 	the 	earliest 	scheme 	a 	National 	Opera
House 	was 	also 	to 	be 	included 	and 	the 	two 	were 	to
stand 	together 	next 	to 	the 	River 	Thames 	in 	front 	of the
monolithic shaft of the 	Shell 	tower. 	Platforms 	were 	this
time 	used 	to 	create 	a 	series 	of 	interpenetrating 	spaces
along 	the 	riverside 	with 	fine 	views 	towards 	the
historical 	city, 	to 	blend 	the 	building 	with 	its 	setting,
and 	to 	express 	the 	openness 	and 	public 	nature 	of 	the
new 	institution. 	These 	themes 	were 	taken 	up 	in 	the
final 	scheme 	for 	a 	theatre 	on 	its 	own 	next 	to 	Waterloo
Bridge 	(1967) 	in 	which 	the 	'strata' 	supplied 	vantage-
points 	towards 	St. 	Paul's 	and 	over 	the 	river, 	linked 	up
with 	the 	bridge, 	and 	passed 	to 	the 	heart 	of the 	building
where 	they 	supported 	the 	lobbies 	and 	auditoria 	(tig.
24.14). 	They 	thus 	created 	a 	series 	of 	'stages' 	and
'auditoria' 	with 	the 	cityscape 	itself 	as 	backdrop.
Lasdun 	put 	the 	matter 	succinctly 	when 	he 	stated 	'the
whole 	building 	could 	become 	theatre'. 	At 	the 	same
time 	the 	strata 	suggested 	an 	interest 	in 	the 	ceremonial

-- 331 of 420 --

330 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
meanings 	of platforms 	in 	ancient 	architecture, 	and 	the
artist's 	private 	myth 	concerning 	the 	roots 	of 	archi-
tecture 	in 	land-mass 	formations 	or 	strata of rock.
These 	themes 	were 	given 	added 	force 	through 	the
powerful 	expressive 	character 	of 	the 	building's 	form.
The 	composition 	was 	dynamic, 	asymmetrical 	and 	ever
variable in 	mood according to 	the spectator's changing
position. 	Space 	and 	light 	were 	handled 	as 	positive
features 	to 	lend 	drama 	to 	the 	sequences. 	The 	rugged
silhouettes 	of the 	tly-towers 	gave 	the 	whole 	an 	effect 	of
grandeur: 	at 	the 	same 	time 	the 	strata 	stopped 	the
building 	from 	becoming 	an 	overbearing 	monolith 	and
maintained 	the 	human 	scale. 	I^asdun 	referred 	to 	the
building 	as 	a 	'monument-non-monument', 	perhaps
implying 	something 	of 	this 	ambiguity. 	He 	took 	the
concrete 	cantilever 	from 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Dom-ino
system 	and 	gave 	it 	a 	new 	meaning 	in 	the 	service of his
own 	'urban 	landscape' 	ideas.
The 	English 	situation 	in 	the 	quarter-century 	after
the 	war was 	a 	pluralist 	one: 	nonetheless, 	there 	were
shared 	preoccupations. 	One 	of these 	had 	to 	do 	with 	the
expression 	of 	new 	social 	values: 	another 	with 	the
cross-breeding 	of the 	international 	modern 	movement
with 	national 	traditions: 	yet 	another 	with 	the 	relative
human 	and 	architectural 	value 	of 	technology. 	The
National 	Theatre 	took 	a 	strong 	stand 	on 	all 	these
issues: 	it 	is 	a 	good 	place 	to 	stop 	and 	to 	consider 	how
analogous 	issues 	were 	handled 	el.sewhere.
24.13 	((op) 	Denys
La.sdun. 	National
Theatre. 	London,
i9f>7-7^.
24.14 	Denys 	Lasdun.
National 	Theatre.
London. 	1967-73.
section 	through 	main
auditorium 	showing
'strata'.

-- 332 of 420 --

2 	5 	. 	The 	Problem 	of 	Regional 	Identity
Steel 	and 	reinforced 	concrete, 	in 	the 	form 	of columns 	and 	beams, 	provide
framed 	structures 	and 	are, 	in 	this 	respect 	akin 	to 	traditional 	timber
constructions.
N. 	Kawazoe. 	1958
The modern 	movement, 	in 	its 	tbrmative years 	between
the 	world 	wars, 	was 	scarcely 	a 	worldwide 	phenom-
enon; 	it 	was 	the 	intellectual 	property 	of 	certain
countries 	in 	Western 	Europe, 	of the 	United 	States 	and
of some 	parts 	of the 	Soviet 	Union. 	In 	retrospect 	this 	is
scarcely 	surprising 	since 	the 	very 	conception 	of
modern 	architecture 	was 	linked 	to 	the 	existence 	of
'avant-gardes' 	seeking 	authenticity 	within 	(so-called)
'advanced' 	industrial 	societies. 	But 	by 	around 	i960,
transformations, 	deviations 	and 	devaluations 	of
modern 	architecture 	had 	found 	their 	way 	to 	many
other 	areas 	in 	the 	world. 	The 	pattern 	of 	post-war
economic 	development, 	including 	rapid 	industrializat-
ion 	and 	the 	dissemination 	of 	'progressive' 	Western
ideas, 	certainly 	played 	an 	important 	role 	here. 	So 	did
the 	reproducible 	media: 	architectural 	fashions 	were
transmitted 	at 	a 	greater 	speed 	than 	before.
Many 	earlier 	inventions 	in 	architecture 	- the 	Gothic
of the 	lie 	dc 	France, the 	Renaissance 	of Florence 	- 	had
gradually 	radiated 	their 	influences 	across 	frontiers.
Although 	the 	speed 	of 	emigration 	was 	far 	more
dramatic 	with 	modern 	architecture, 	some 	of the 	usual
problems 	obtained. 	The 	first 	of 	these 	was 	not. 	strictly
speaking, 	geographical 	by 	definition, 	since 	it 	had 	to 	do
with 	the 	broader 	issue 	of prototypes 	being 	transformed
into 	cliched 	imitations. 	A 	second 	problem 	concerned
the 	relevance 	of 	forms 	in 	the 	new 	context: 	if 	an
architecture 	had 	been 	right 	for 	Manhattan 	could 	it 	be
right 	for 	Malaya .= 	If a 	form 	had 	emerged 	in 	Boulogne-
sur-Seine 	what 	would 	make 	it 	fit 	the 	conditions 	of
Buenos 	Aires.' 	In 	other 	words: 	what 	should 	be 	kept 	of
the 	prototypes 	and 	what 	transformed 	to 	match 	new
climates, 	cultures, 	beliefs, 	technologies, 	and 	archi-
tectural 	traditions. 	A 	third 	problem 	was 	the 	comple-
ment 	of 	the 	second: 	if 	new 	ideas 	from 	abroad 	were
accepted, 	which 	old 	or 	indigenous 	ones 	should 	be
thrown 	out.- 	Should 	one 	accept 	the 	avowed 	univer-
sality 	of 	modern 	design 	and 	bow 	down 	before 	it: 	or
should 	one 	perhaps 	seek 	some 	fusion 	betw?een 	the 	best
of old 	and 	new. 	of native 	and 	of foreign .=
One 	must 	beware 	of treating the 	'modern 	invader' 	as
some 	monolithic 	entity. 	The 	stage 	reached 	by 	ideas 	in
the 	influencing 	countries 	conditioned, 	in 	some 	degree,
the 	point 	of departure 	in 	influenced 	ones. 	Brazil. 	South
Africa. 	England, 	and 	Japan 	all 	received 	modern
architecture 	when 	it 	was 	still 	young 	in 	the 	twenties
and 	thirties, 	and 	produced 	their 	own 	variants 	in 	the
inter-war 	period. 	To 	compare, 	say. 	Martienssen's
house 	designs 	in 	Cape 	Town 	with 	Lucio 	Costa's
Ministry 	of 	Education 	in 	Rio 	de 	Janeiro 	(both 	of 	the
mid-thirties) 	and 	to 	place 	the 	two 	alongside
Sakakura's 	nearly 	contemporary 	design 	for 	the
Japanese 	Pavilion 	in 	Paris 	is 	to 	be 	made 	aware 	of 	the
extraordinary 	hold 	of 	the 	Internationalist 	Vision'. 	In
this 	case 	too. 	all 	three 	designs 	were 	of 	an 	obviously
Corbusian 	pedigree. 	By 	contrast 	the 	late 	forties, 	fifties
and 	sixties 	were characterized 	by 	a 	far 	greater diversity
within 	the 	modern 	movement 	in 	its 	originating
centres, 	and 	by 	a 	higher 	valuation 	of 	the 	indigenous.
the 	variable, 	and 	the 	regional. 	This 	greater 	pluralism
was 	duly 	reflected 	in 	many 	parts 	of the 	world.
Some 	of 	the 	most 	vital 	immediate 	post-war 	experi-
ments 	were 	undertaken 	in 	Mexico 	and 	South 	America.
The 	International 	Style 	penetrated 	Mexico 	in 	the 	early

-- 333 of 420 --

V52 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940

-- 334 of 420 --

25.1 	(/(/() 	I-Uis
Barragan, 	Plaza y
Fucnte del 	Bebedero, 	Las
Arboledas. 	Mexico 	City,
l9SS-(ii.
25.2 	(Mhu'I 	Oscar
Niemeyer. 	restaurant 	at
Pampulha. 	Brazil, 	194?-
thirties 	and 	so 	formed 	a 	sort 	of 	platform 	from 	which
post-war 	experiments 	could 	continue. 	In 	a 	sense,
modern 	architecture 	was 	but 	another 	cultivated,
colonizing 	influence, 	which 	replaced 	the 	models 	of the
Belle 	Epoque 	and 	the 	Beaux-Arts. 	The 	University 	of
Mexico 	City, 	partly 	designed 	by 	Carlos 	Kazo 	and 	his
associates 	in 	the 	late 	forties 	and 	early 	fifties 	reflected
the 	influence 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	pre-war 	works 	in 	its
disposition 	of 	broad, 	open 	spaces 	and 	free-standing
slabs, 	and in 	its 	use ofpilotis. 	curved entrance ways 	and
roof terraces. 	Juan 	O'Gorman's 	University 	Library 	was
dramatically 	decorated 	in 	highly 	coloured 	murals
incorporating 	strong 	nationalist 	sentiments, 	but 	the
anatomy 	of the 	architecture 	was 	little 	affected. 	In 	this
case 	images 	of international 	modernity 	were 	no 	doubt
intended 	to 	reflect 	a 	progressive 	intellectual 	outlook.
By 	contrast, 	the 	architecture 	of 	Luis 	Barragan
employed 	modern 	devices 	of 	abstraction 	to 	condense
images 	from 	many 	eras 	in 	Mexican 	history, 	especially
The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity 	333
in 	his 	designs 	for 	gardens, 	private 	houses 	and 	luxury
ranches, 	Barragan 	was 	born 	in 	1 902 	and 	trained 	as 	an
engineer. 	In 	1924 	he visited the 	Alhambra 	in 	southern
Spain 	where 	he 	was 	captivated 	by 	the 	water-gardens
with 	their 	dreamlike 	vistas, 	shifting 	axes 	and 	surreal
atmosphere. 	He 	early 	absorbed 	the 	bold 	shapes 	and
stark 	walls 	of Mexico's 	convents 	and 	peasant 	dwellings
with 	their 	introspective 	patios 	and 	gardens. 	In 	the
thirties 	he 	was 	influenced 	by 	the 	simple 	forms 	of 	the
International 	Style, 	but 	he 	attempted 	to 	see 	beyond 	the
machine 	age 	imagery 	to 	a 	deeper 	level 	of synthesis. In
the 	same 	period 	he 	developed 	a 	taste 	for 	the 	metaphys-
ical 	strain 	in 	European 	Surrealism 	(e.g., 	de 	Chirico.
Magritte). 	Barragan's 	native 	style 	began 	to 	emerge 	in
garden 	and 	landscape designs of the 	late 	1940s such 	as
El 	Pedregal. 	in 	which 	austere 	platforms 	of 	lava 	and
abstract 	wall 	planes 	seemed 	to 	channel 	the 	flow 	of
outdoor spaces and 	to link together cascades and 	pools.
In 	the 	residential 	sub-division 	known 	as 	Las 	Arboledas
( 	1958-61), 	close 	to 	Mexico 	City, 	the 	practical 	needs 	of
riding 	stables 	and 	the 	elegant 	rituals 	of equestrianism
were 	organized 	as 	a 	sequence 	of 	outdoor 	rooms
delineated 	by 	boldly 	coloured 	stucco 	walls 	and 	held
together 	by 	a 	network 	of 	water 	tanks, 	pools 	and
troughs. 	Illusions 	of compression 	and depth, 	of size 	and
perspective, 	were 	enhanced 	by 	contrasts 	of 	colour,
controlled 	glimpses 	of distant 	landscapes 	seen 	through
horizontal 	openings, 	and 	the 	dappled 	play 	of 	light 	off
water 	(fig, 	25.1). 	Here 	the 	Islamic 	water 	garden 	and
the 	discoveries 	of 	the 	Barcelona 	Pavilion 	or the 	Villa
Savoye 	came 	together 	in 	a 	labyrinth 	of 	curiously
nostalgic 	character. 	To 	speak 	merely 	of 	the 	fusion 	of
regionalism 	and 	the 	International 	Style, 	of 	the
vernacular 	and 	of 	Le 	Corbusier, 	is 	to 	trivialize
Barragan: 	his 	style 	expressed 	a 	genuinely 	archetypical
mood 	in 	touch 	with 	the 	tragic 	vein 	in 	Mexican 	cultural
history 	(Plate 	14).
In 	Brazil, 	Lucio Costa 	and 	Oscar 	Niemeyer 	also 	took
Le 	Corbusier 	as 	their 	starting 	-point, 	especially 	as 	they
had 	his 	collaboration 	in 	the 	design 	of 	the 	Ministry 	of
Education 	in 	Rio 	in 	the 	mid-thirties. 	In 	this 	case 	the
slab 	was 	elegantly 	modified 	by 	suii 	louvers 	for 	shade 	-
but 	these 	slender 	and 	moveable 	relatives 	of 	the 	brise-
soleil hardly constituted an 	all-out attempt 	at designing
a 	tropical 	regionalist 	architecture. 	In 	the 	Pampulha
Casino 	of the 	early 	forties, 	Niemeyer 	reinterpreted 	the
'five 	points 	of 	a 	new 	architecture' 	in 	an 	imagery
evocative 	of the 	'high-life' 	function 	the 	building 	was 	to
serve. 	Travertine 	and 	Juparana 	stone 	were 	used 	on 	the
exterior, 	while 	the 	mood 	of the 	interior 	was 	enhanced
by 	luxurious 	areas 	of 	pink 	glass 	and 	satin. 	The
architect 	was 	not content with 	the 	limited 	role 	that 	the
economic 	system 	of 	Brazil 	gave 	him 	and 	wrote 	later
that 	he 	would 	like 	to 	have 	presented 	'a 	more 	realistic
achievement' 	reflecting 	'not 	only 	refinements 	and

-- 335 of 420 --

334 	' 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
comfort 	but 	also 	a 	positive 	collaboration 	between 	the
architect 	and 	the 	whole 	society'. 	Of 	course, 	this 	was
but 	one 	example 	of a 	dilemma 	which 	would 	face 	many
architects 	who 	were 	to 	work 	in 	'developing 	countries'
:
their 	architecture, 	to 	be 	built 	at 	all. 	had 	frequently 	to
become 	the 	chic 	plaything 	of 	the 	tiny 	and 	wealthy
minority 	(fig. 	25.2).
The 	majority 	of developing 	countries 	did 	not 	receive
modern 	influences 	until 	the 	post-war 	period 	and
therefore 	adapted 	not 	the 	pure 	examples 	of 	the
International 	Style, 	but 	the 	much 	modified, 	later
variants 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	India, 	for 	example,
was 	heavily 	influenced 	by 	the 	late 	works 	of 	Le
Corbusier 	rather 	than 	his 	early 	ones, 	the 	more 	so 	as
Chandigarh 	did 	show 	obvious 	signs 	of a 	'regionalist'
adaptation. 	Louis 	Kahn's 	designs 	for 	Dacca 	had 	a
similar 	parental 	role 	for 	Indian 	and 	Pakistani 	archi-
tects, 	while 	Wright's 	architecture 	tended 	to 	be 	more
influential 	in 	temperate 	areas 	like 	southeast 	Australia.
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	skyscraper 	designs 	of 	the 	fifties
were 	of 	course 	absorbed 	as 	part 	of 	the 	standard
imagery 	of 	international 	businesses 	and 	hotels, 	often
with 	disastrous 	results 	of 	heat 	loss 	and 	heat 	gain 	in
extreme 	climates. 	However, 	there 	was 	no 	obvious
pattern 	of 	correspondences 	between 	prototypes 	and
imitations 	- 	indeed, 	one 	wonders 	if 	the 	entire 	picture
of 	world 	architectural 	development 	might 	not 	have
been 	utterly 	different 	if 	say. 	Wright 	rather 	than 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	designed 	a 	major 	Indian 	city 	in 	his 	late
years, 	and 	if 	Le 	Corbusier's 	vision 	of 	the 	Imse-soleil
skyscraper 	had 	been 	widely 	adopted 	by 	businesses 	and
bureaucracies 	in 	the 	West, 	instead 	of 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's 	steel 	and 	glass 	prisms. 	Moreover, 	as 	was
suggested 	in 	earlier 	chapters, 	the 	post-war 	period 	in
Europe 	was 	itself 	marked 	by 	pockets 	of 	resistance
against 	sterile 	aspects 	of 	internationalism. 	The 	at-
titudes 	towards 	the 	vernacular 	intrinsic 	to 	the 	late
works 	of Aalto, 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Team 	X, 	for 	example,
suggested 	a 	more 	accommodating 	and 	flexible 	strategy
with 	regard to 	local 	traditions : 	this 	attitude 	would 	bear
fruit in 	many 	other 	parts 	of the 	world 	as 	well.
Something 	of this 	'modern 	regionalist' 	position 	also
emerged 	on 	the 	West 	Coast 	of 	the 	United 	States
immediately 	after 	the 	war. 	where 	an 	attempt 	was
made 	to 	cross-breed 	(as 	it 	were) 	certain 	devices 	of
modern 	design 	(e.g.. 	the 	free 	plan, 	the 	steel 	frame, 	the
cantilevered 	flat 	roof) 	with 	the 	lessons 	of 	local
vernaculars 	and 	turn 	of 	the 	century 	Arts 	and 	Crafts
designs, 	both 	of which 	seemed 	to 	incorporate 	a 	special
sensitivity 	to 	CaUfornian 	climate, 	site 	conditions 	and
style 	of 	life. 	In 	the 	'Bay 	Region 	School' 	around San
Francisco, 	William 	Wurster 	employed 	local 	materials
like 	redwood 	in 	an 	affirmative 	way. 	and 	attempted 	to
blend 	houses 	with 	their 	natural 	setting. 	Balconies,
trellises, 	and Stick 	Style extensions were 	rehandled 	in 	a
manner 	which 	still 	bore 	the 	imprint 	of the 	intervening
years 	of modern 	architectural 	experimentation. 	In 	Los
Angeles, 	architects 	like 	Craig 	Ellwood 	and 	Charles
Eames 	used 	industrial 	components 	and 	a 	steel-frame
vocabulary, 	in 	a 	deliberately 	informal 	interpretation
specially 	attuned 	to 	the 	luxurious 	hillside 	sites 	of
Beverly 	Hills 	and 	Hollywood. 	There 	can 	be 	little 	doubt
that 	these 	architects 	followed 	certain 	of 	the 	leads 	of
Schindler 	and 	Neutra. 	who 	had 	already 	discovered
ways 	of 	bringing 	together 	the 	sorts 	of 	spaces 	en-
couraged 	by 	the 	free-plan, 	open 	fa(;ades 	of 	glass, 	deep
cantilevered 	overhangs 	and 	terraces 	with 	the 	rich
vegetation 	of 	the 	area. 	Neutra's 	Kaufmann 	Desert
House 	of 	1947 	at 	Palm 	Springs 	set 	the 	tone 	of 	the
luxury 	health 	house 	of 	1950s 	American 	suburbia
while 	Schindler's 	late 	works 	took 	on 	a 	'shed-like'
character, 	in 	which 	cheap 	materials 	were 	assembled
on 	site 	in 	a 	deliberately 	humble 	imagery.
Some 	insight 	into 	the 	tensions 	engendered 	by 	the
arrival 	of international 	influences 	in 	a 	particular 	locale
is 	revealed 	by 	the 	Australian 	situation 	immediately
after 	the 	war. 	the 	more 	so as 	white 	Australian 	culture
had 	a 	short 	architectural 	tradition 	of its 	own. 	and 	the
indigenous 	population 	had 	not expressed 	its 	ideas 	in
permanent 	buildings. 	As 	in 	the early 	United 	States, 	the
architecture 	of 	the 	settlers 	had 	emerged 	from 	the
gradual 	adaptation 	to 	local 	conditions 	of 	imported
models. 	To 	be 	sure, 	there 	had 	been 	fragmentary
modern 	influences 	between 	the 	wars, 	stemming
especially 	from 	Walter 	Burley 	Griffin's 	introduction 	of
Wrightian 	forms 	in 	the 	1910s 	and 	1920s, 	but 	a
consolidated 	modern 	movement 	did 	not 	really 	get
under 	way 	in 	Australia 	until 	the 	late 	forties 	with 	such
designers 	as 	Sydney 	Ancher 	and 	Harry 	Seidler. 	Before
this 	the 	problem 	of 	Australian 	cultural 	identity 	had
influenced 	debates 	over 	the 	visual 	arts; 	this 	problem
did 	not 	disappear 	with 	the 	increasingly 	international
cultural 	atmosphere 	of the 	years 	immediately 	after 	the
Second World 	War. 	Indeed nationalism 	and regionalist
architectural 	tendencies 	were 	frequently 	allied, 	es-
pecially 	in 	countries 	asserting 	themselves 	after
colonialism.
Seidler's 	formation 	was 	cosmopolitan ; 	he 	was 	born
in 	Vienna 	and 	educated 	in 	England 	and 	Canada 	before
entering 	the 	Graduate 	School 	of 	Design 	at 	Harvard 	in
the 	mid-forties 	under 	Gropius 	and 	Breuer. 	He 	worked
with 	the 	latter 	and 	with 	Niemeyer 	before 	following 	his
parents 	to 	Australia 	in 	1947. 	partly 	lured 	by 	the
promise of commissions. 	He appears 	to 	have 	thought 	of
Gropius, 	Breuer 	and 	Albers 	(the 	colour 	theorist) 	as
fountain-heads 	of 	modernist 	principles. 	His 	earliest
houses in the Sydney suburbs 	(e.g.. 	the Seidler House of
194S. 	fig. 	25.3: 	or 	the 	Rose 	House 	of 	19S0I 	were
clearly 	imitations 	of 	an 	architectural 	language 	which
he 	had 	absorbed 	in 	the 	eastern 	United 	States 	and

-- 336 of 420 --

The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity 	335
2S- 	3 	iabow) 	Harry
Seidler. 	Seidler 	House,
near 	Sydney, 	1948.
2S-4 	Peter 	Mullcr.
Muller 	House. 	Whale
Beach, 	near Sydney.
1955-

-- 337 of 420 --

33^ 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
which 	(as we have seen) 	was 	already 	watered down 	by
comparison 	with 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	the 	twenties.
Seidler 	evidently 	believed 	in 	the 	universalizing 	ideas
which 	had 	underlain 	his 	Harvard 	education 	and 	made
only 	the 	slightest 	adjustments 	to 	International 	Style
formulae 	to 	wed 	them 	with 	the 	strong 	sunlight,
uneven 	sites 	and 	vegetation 	of 	Australia. 	In 	the 	new
context 	this 	uncompromising 	stance 	was 	appreciated
as 	a 	strong 	'modernist 	position', 	though 	as 	Seidler
himself admitted:
The 	pioneering 	days 	of modern 	architecture are
over. 	We 	are 	now 	in 	a 	period 	of consolidation 	and
development.
In 	a 	broader 	perspective 	it 	appeared 	that 	Seidler 	was
merely 	following 	the 	leaders 	in 	an 	all 	too 	obvious 	way.
The 	American 	architect 	Paul 	Rudolph, 	who 	had 	also
passed 	through 	the 	GSD 	at 	Harvard, 	but 	who 	reacted
more 	strongly 	against 	the 	puritanism 	of 	his 	mentors,
singled 	out 	Seidler's 	house 	for 	his 	parents 	and
described 	it 	as 	'the 	Harvard 	house 	incarnate' 	transfer-
red 	to 	Sydney 	'without 	any 	modifications 	whatsoever'.
He 	made 	a 	plea 	for 	an 	enriching 	'regionalism' 	if
modern 	architecture 	were 	to 	avoid 	an 	ersatz
blandness.
In 	Australia 	itself 	it 	did 	not 	take 	long 	for 	a 	similar
mood 	to 	surface, 	and 	for 	a 	certain 	'foreignness' 	to 	be
sensed 	about 	Seidler's 	taut 	white 	boxes 	poised 	on
slender 	stilts 	among 	the 	boulders 	and 	the 	eucalyptus
trees. 	Instead 	a 	blend 	was 	sought 	between 	the
principles 	of 	modern 	design 	and 	indigenous 	features.
An 	example 	of 	this 	'modern 	regionalism' 	was 	the
Muller 	House 	at 	Whale 	Beach 	of 	1955 	(designed 	by
Peter 	Muller). 	which 	was 	formed 	from 	low 	wooden
overhangs 	nestling 	among 	the 	trees 	(fig. 	25.4). 	The
rocks 	of 	the 	site 	were 	incorporated 	in 	the 	living-room
and 	an 	attempt 	was 	made to 	consult 	the special 	'genius
of 	the 	place'. 	Large 	areas 	of glass 	were 	employed, 	but
carefully 	hooded 	from 	the 	glare. 	The 	vocabulary
clearly 	had 	a 	Wrightian 	character 	and 	the 	strategy
was 	not 	so 	very 	far 	from 	that 	pursued 	a 	little 	earlier 	in
California. 	Muller 	also 	studied 	Japanese 	wooden
architecture 	and 	was 	interested 	in 	Zen 	philosophy. 	His
nature 	worship 	came 	through 	in 	a 	design 	which 	tried
deliberately 	to 	respect 	the 	existing 	order 	of the 	hillside.
The 	image 	of the 	International 	Style 	box 	was 	replaced
by 	one 	which 	attempted 	to 	abstract 	features 	of 	the
context. 	Other 	architects 	in 	Australia 	to 	work 	from
Wright's 	philosophy 	were 	Neville 	Gruzman 	and
William 	Lucas, 	each 	of 	whom 	was 	preoccupied 	with
the 	casualness 	of a 	new 	suburban 	way 	of life, 	and 	with
ways 	of linking 	the 	building 	to 	nature.
However, 	Wright 	was 	not 	the 	only 	example 	to 	be
used 	in 	pursuit 	of 	regionalist 	tendencies. 	In 	the
Johnson 	House 	at 	Chatsworth 	of 	1964 	(fig. 	25.5).
Peter 	Johnson 	reflected 	his 	interest 	in 	'Brutalist
ideology' 	and 	in 	the 	Maisons 	Jaoul, 	in 	the 	use 	of rough
and 	ready clinker bricks and overhanging pitched 	roofs
of a 	type 	found 	in 	the 	area. 	The rooms 	became so 	many
platforms 	following 	the 	natural 	slope 	and 	open 	to 	a
variety 	of views. 	Slender 	wooden 	balconies 	attached 	to
the 	brick 	piers blended with 	the 	dense 	vegetation 	on 	all
sides. 	Johnson 	sought 	to 	combine 	the 	image 	of 	some
indigenous 	shack 	with 	sophisticated 	conceptions
derived 	from 	Europe. 	Thus 	a 	variety 	of influences 	and
ideas 	were 	brought 	together, 	all 	within 	a 	few 	miles 	of
one 	another, 	in 	an 	attempt 	at 	producing, 	among 	other
things, 	'a 	new 	Australian 	architecture'.
For 	such 	cases 	as 	these 	the 	process 	of 	finding
appropriate 	architectural 	forms 	had 	the 	benefit 	of
minds 	intent 	on 	crystallizing 	a 	new 	cultural 	situation.
But 	by 	the 	early 	sixties 	the 	far 	more 	usual 	mode 	of
influence 	was 	through 	straightforward 	exportation 	of
25. s 	Peter lolinson.
Johnson 	House.
Chatsworth. 	Sydney.
196^-

-- 338 of 420 --

ii'-
iiiiiiiiiiiiii	
iiiiiiif	
mil III
25.6 	The 	imagery 	of
international
development : 	Hong
Kong in 	the 	late 	1 960s.
forms 	to 	provincial 	centres. 	Moreover, 	it 	was 	usually 	a
devalued 	style 	of 	industrial 	building, 	rather 	than 	an
architecture 	of any 	formal 	value. 	Thus 	the 	commercial
offices 	of New 	York 	and 	London 	soon 	reproduced 	their
imagery 	in 	cities 	as 	far 	apart 	as 	Hong 	Kong 	(fig. 	25.6)
and 	Lagos. 	It 	was 	as 	if the 	steel 	or 	concrete 	rectangular
frame, 	the 	air-conditioner 	and 	the 	property 	developer
conspired 	to 	reject 	national 	traditions 	overnight. 	This
was 	not 	the 	true 	International 	Style 	- with 	its 	moral
and 	aesthetic 	imperatives 	- 	so 	much 	as 	an 	'inter-
national 	corporation 	style' 	- 	indeed 	big 	business 	and
tourism 	played 	a 	major 	part 	in 	the 	proliferation 	of the
cliched 	forms. 	It 	will 	be 	suggested 	later 	that 	this
development 	was 	linked 	to 	rapid 	mechanization 	and
the confusion 	that 	was 	bound 	to 	ensue when 	countries
proceeded 	in 	a 	single 	generation 	from 	peasant 	to
industrial 	economies; 	the 	technocratic 	and 	Western
style 	of education 	of new 	elites 	also 	played 	a 	part. 	The
bland 	results 	around 	the 	world 	in 	the 	sixties 	soon
engendered 	a 	strong 	reaction 	in 	favour 	of regionalism
of 	various 	kinds 	in 	the 	seventies. 	The 	sophisticated
'peasantism' 	of 	the 	European 	avant-garde 	would 	be
only 	partially 	relevant 	to 	this 	critique.
One 	country 	to 	offer 	a 	virtual 	case-study 	in 	the
absorption 	of 	modern 	architectural 	ideas 	from 	the
West 	was 	Japan. 	The 	history 	of 	Japanese 	ambiva-
lence 	to 	Western 	cultural 	influence 	actually 	stretched
back 	long 	before 	the 	advent 	of 	the 	modern 	move-
The 	Problem 	of Regionalldentity 	337
ment 	in 	Europe 	and 	America. 	Katayama 	Toyu's
Hyokekan 	Museum 	in 	Tokyo 	of 	1908 	was 	an 	eclectic
exercise 	combining 	the 	French 	seventeenth 	century
with 	English 	Palladianism. 	It 	was 	a 	reminder 	that
European 	revivalist 	tendencies 	of 	the 	nineteenth
century 	played 	a 	role 	in 	ideological 	colonialism 	as 	well
as 	in 	the 	political 	and 	economic 	varieties. 	This
structure 	stood 	out 	in 	all 	its 	agonized 	and 	foreign 	self-
consciousness 	against 	a 	setting 	in 	which 	religious 	and
vernacular 	structures 	continued 	to 	be 	built 	in 	tradi-
tional 	styles, 	according 	to 	methods 	of 	craftsmanship
which 	stretched 	back 	uninterruptedly 	for 	hundreds 	of
years. 	Imported 	styles 	and 	methods 	of 	construction
(particularly 	those 	which 	substituted 	brick 	for 	the
usual 	wood) 	were 	not 	always 	welcome. 	In 	1909 	the
architect 	Chinto 	Itoh, 	who 	had 	immersed 	himself 	in
the 	old 	styles 	of 	Japan 	and 	Eastern 	Asia, 	argued 	that
the country should rid 	itself of European influences 	and
revive 	its 	own 	traditions ; 	he 	claimed that 	a 	new 	formal
language 	would 	arise 	automatically 	when 	these 	forms
were 	cross-bred 	with 	imported 	building 	methods. 	A
year 	later 	Yashukura 	Ohtsuka 	put 	the 	opposite
argumenfTthat 	Japan 	should 	whole-heartedly 	accept
Western 	models 	but 	modify 	them 	to 	local 	conditions
and 	means 	of 	construction. 	Both 	men 	had 	essentially
the 	same 	aim: 	the 	creation 	of a 	specifically 	Japanese
modern 	style. 	Different 	versions 	of their 	debate 	would
recur 	many 	times 	around 	the 	world 	in 	the 	ensuing
seventy 	years, 	especially 	in countries preoccupied with
modernization 	and 	national 	identity.
In 	1916 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	designed 	the 	Imperial
Hotel 	in 	Tokyo. 	Wright 	had, 	of course, 	been 	fascinated
with 	the disciplines 	of Japanese design 	in 	the 	formation
of 	his 	own 	architectural 	language,- but 	his 	hotel 	was
highly 	ornate 	and 	mannered. 	Although 	its 	imagery
was 	infused 	with 	respect 	for 	Japanese 	prototypes, 	the
building 	had 	a 	limited 	local 	influence. 	During 	the 	years
of its 	completion 	'progressive' 	Japanese 	architects were
eagerly taking 	up 	Art 	Nouveau. 	a 	full 	two decades 	after
it 	had 	dropped 	out 	of favour 	with 	the 	European 	avant-
garde. 	Mamoru 	Yamada's 	Central 	Telegraph 	Office 	in
Tokyo 	of 	1926 	had 	a 	vaguely 	Secessionist 	air. 	It 	was
through 	publications 	like 	Gropius's 	International
Architecture 	and 	through 	detailed 	reports 	on 	De 	StijI
and 	Esprit 	Nouveau. 	that 	modern 	architecture 	gradu-
ally 	became 	known 	in 	Japan. 	Foreigners 	such 	as 	Bruno
Taut 	(who 	wrote 	on 	Japanese 	traditional 	architecture)
pointed 	out 	an 	affinity 	between 	the 	subtle 	simplicity
and 	geometrical 	discipline 	of traditional 	design 	and 	the
stripping 	to 	essentials 	involved 	in 	the 	modern 	move-
ment 	of the 	West. 	A 	correspondence 	between 	wooden-
frame 	constructions 	and 	reinforced-concrete 	skeletons
was 	also 	suggested. 	This 	may 	have 	done 	something 	to
remove 	suspicions 	of foreign 	construction 	techniques,
as 	these 	had 	been 	directed 	at 	materials 	like 	brick 	and

-- 339 of 420 --

338 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
stone: 	concrete 	could 	be 	moulded 	to 	national 	tra-
ditions 	in 	ways 	that 	these 	materials 	could 	not.
Antonin 	Raymond, 	a 	Czech 	who 	supervised 	the
construction 	of 	the 	Imperial 	Hotel, 	opened 	his 	own
office 	in 	Japan 	in 	192 1, 	and 	attempted 	to 	blend
Western 	and 	indigenous 	forms. 	His own 	house of 	1 9 24
recalled 	the 	simple 	volumes 	of Wright's 	Unity 	Temple,
while 	its 	interior 	spaces 	and 	details 	seemed 	to 	blend
machine-age 	imagery 	with 	Japanese 	finesse. 	Kunio
Mayekawa 	and 	Junzo 	Sakakura 	went 	to 	work 	in 	Le
Corbusier's 	atelier 	in 	the 	late 	twenties 	and 	brought
back an 	understanding 	of 	the 	inner 	principles 	of 	the
new 	architecture 	rather 	than 	just 	surface 	effects. 	By
the 	thirties 	a 	Japanese 	modern 	movement 	existed 	that
was 	not 	just 	a 	pastiche 	of 	earlier 	European 	develop-
ments. 	In 	his 	design 	for 	the 	Okada 	House 	and 	gardens
of 	1933. 	for 	example, 	Sutemi 	Horiguchi 	blended 	the
thin 	planes 	of 	the 	new 	architecture 	with 	traditional
effects 	of lightness 	and 	airiness 	(fig. 	25. 7I. 	The 	garden,
with 	its 	sfight 	level 	changes 	and 	rectangular 	pools
continuing 	the 	patterns 	and 	dimensions 	of 	the 	straw
mats 	on 	the 	interior, 	had 	as 	much 	to 	do 	with
prototypes 	like 	the 	moon-viewing 	platform 	of 	the
Katsura 	Imperial 	Villa 	as 	with 	abstract 	modern 	art.
Sakakura's 	Japanese 	pavilion 	at 	the 	1937 	Paris
Exhibition 	likewise 	restated 	the 	slender steel 	frame 	In 	a
way 	which 	recalled 	the 	proportions 	and 	delicate 	joints
2v7 	(above! 	Sutemi
Horiguchi, 	Okada 	house,
Tokyo. 	19 H?- 	view of
terrace.
2S.8(;p/I)Shokintei.
Katsura 	Imperial 	Villa,
I 	7th 	century, 	detail 	of
refined 	timber
construction.

-- 340 of 420 --

The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity 	•	
339
25.9 	KenzoTange.
Peace 	Memorial 	and
Museum, 	Hiroshima.
I9SS-
of traditional 	Japanese 	wooden 	construction.
But 	the 	flowering 	of the 	early 	modern 	movement 	in
Japan 	was 	interrupted 	by 	a 	resurgence 	of nationalism
and 	then 	by 	the 	war. 	In 	194s. 	at 	the 	time 	of 	the
surrender. 	4.2 	million 	new 	dwellings 	were 	needed. 	The
architectural 	profession 	attempted 	to 	handle 	the
problem 	by 	designing 	standardized, 	mass-producible
low-cost 	units 	based 	on 	the 	module 	of the 	Tatami 	mat.
and 	buildable 	in 	less 	than 	a 	week. 	The 	late 	forties 	was
characterized 	by 	a 	gradual 	democratization 	of
Japanese 	life. 	In 	architectural 	circles 	there 	were
constant 	debates 	about 	the 	viability 	of 	reviving 	pre-
war 	modernist 	tendencies 	and 	about 	the 	possibility 	of
some 	form 	of 	Social 	Realism' 	in 	architecture. 	In 	1 	950.
with 	the 	outbreak 	of the 	Korean 	War. 	an 	inflationary
period 	came 	to 	an 	end 	with 	a 	boom. 	At 	last 	paper
projects 	could 	be 	set 	aside 	in 	favour 	of 	actual
construction, 	lliscussion 	turned 	once 	again 	to 	the
question 	of 	a 	Japanese 	modern 	style. 	It 	was 	clear 	that
this 	would 	have 	to 	be 	appropriate 	to 	a 	rapidly
industrializing 	society 	in 	which 	Western 	technocratic
values 	were 	more 	and 	more 	in 	evidence: 	indeed.
Japanese 	life 	was 	being 	forcibly 	Americanized.
Mayekawa's 	Nippon 	Sogo 	Bank 	or 	Raymond's 	more
delicate 	Readers' 	Digest 	publishing 	house 	{both
designed 	in 	Tokyo 	in 	1951I 	reflected 	an 	attempt 	at
continuing 	pre-war 	'modernist' 	experimentation. 	The
Peace 	Treaty 	of San 	Francisco 	in 	the 	same 	year, 	which
gave 	Japan 	her 	independence 	from 	the 	USA. 	strength-
ened 	the 	consciousness 	of 	national 	traditions 	which
had. 	nonetheless, 	to 	be 	disentangled 	from 	earlier
imperialism. 	Once 	again 	the 	idea 	emerged 	that
internationalism 	should 	be 	purged, 	but 	here 	the
problem 	lay 	in 	knowing 	quite 	how 	to 	transform 	earlier
Japanese 	prototypes. 	The 	way 	forward 	seemed 	to 	lie 	in
a 	sort 	of 	abstraction 	of 	indigenous 	spatial 	and
structural 	concepts, 	and 	a 	mating 	of 	these 	principles
with 	similar 	essential 	ideas 	of modern 	design. 	Noboru
Kawazoe 	spelt 	out 	this 	'modern 	regionalist' 	position
clearly, 	in 	a 	manner 	which 	bolstered 	national 	self-
esteem, 	by 	suggesting 	that 	Japan 	had, 	in 	a 	sense,
anticipated 	modern 	architecture 	(fig. 	25.8).
A 	frame 	structure 	allows 	a 	room 	to 	be 	more 	open
and 	flexible 	and 	obviates 	the 	need 	for 	solid 	walls 	as
a 	structural 	element. 	In 	the 	continuity 	of interior
and 	exterior, 	in 	the 	flexibility 	of a 	room 	design
using 	movable 	partitions, 	traditional 	Japanese
architecture 	has 	pioneered 	many 	solutions, 	such 	as
the 	integration 	of the 	garden 	and 	the 	interior, 	the
protection 	of the 	interior 	by 	oversailing 	roofs, 	the
use 	of the 	verandah 	as a 	link 	between 	interior 	and
garden, 	the 	connection 	of different 	parts 	of a
building 	by 	corridors, 	the 	introduction 	of the 	sliding
wall 	iFusamal 	by 	means 	of which 	a 	room 	can 	be
enlarged 	or 	reduced 	in 	size, 	the 	use 	of screens
(Byobul 	for 	visual 	protection, 	and 	the 	Tatami 	mat
serving 	as 	a 	module 	of floor 	area. 	Not 	only 	for 	the
sake 	of industrialization, 	but 	also 	for 	the 	sake 	of
flexibility, 	it 	is 	necessary 	to 	resort 	to 	standardization
- 	something 	that 	the 	builders 	of the 	past 	have 	done.
In 	traditional 	architecture 	'Kiwari' 	signified 	a
modular 	order 	and 	a 	'grammatical' 	determination
of components 	for 	the 	layout 	and design 	of rooms.

-- 341 of 420 --

340 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
Among 	the 	post-war 	Japanese 	architects 	to 	share
similar sentiments 	to 	these 	was 	Kenzo Tange 	( 	1 9 1 3- 	)
who 	had 	been 	a 	pupil 	of Mayekawa 	and 	Le 	Corbusier.
and 	so 	was 	able 	to 	handle 	the inheritance 	of the 	West
with 	less 	nervousness 	than 	his 	predecessors. 	His 	Peace
Memorial 	and 	Museum 	at 	Hiroshima 	of 	1955 	(fig.
25.9) employed 	an 	updated version of the 	'five 	points of
a 	new 	architecture', 	replete 	with 	delicate 	screens
which 	were 	Japanese 	relatives 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	brise-
soleil. 	Similar 	devices 	were 	employed 	in 	the 	Kagawa
Prefecture 	of 	1954. 	where 	concrete 	struts 	and 	trellises
revealed the 	hierarchy 	of structure 	in 	a 	way 	recalling
traditional 	timber. 	Tange 	was 	among 	the 	first 	in 	Japan
to 	grasp 	the 	implications 	of the 	rugged 	blend 	of 	Asian
and 	European 	traditions 	at 	Chandigarh 	for 	a 	language
of 	monumentality 	in 	his 	own 	country. 	Indeed, 	in 	the
late 	fifties 	and 	early 	sixties 	numerous 	town 	tails 	and
civic 	centres 	were 	planned 	as 	genuine 	attempts 	at
expressing 	both 	the 	notion 	of 	citizens' 	forums 	in 	the
recently 	created 	democracy, 	and 	a 	new 	feeling 	of
national 	self-confidence. 	The 	screen-like 	effects 	of
earlier 	'modern 	regionalism' 	gave 	way 	to 	denser 	and
heavier 	visual 	effects 	produced 	by 	rough 	concrete.
Here 	again 	national 	precedents 	could 	be 	identified 	as
relevant 	- 	especially 	the 	giant 	logs 	and 	brackets 	of the
Imperial 	treasure 	houses 	- 	but 	care 	had 	to 	be 	taken 	to
avoid 	authoritarian 	overtones.
One 	of the 	breakthrough 	buildings 	in 	the 	new 	genre
was 	Mayekawa's 	Kyoto 	Town 	Hall 	of 	1958-60 	(fig.
25.10) 	in 	which 	rough 	wooden 	patterns 	in 	the
concrete 	and 	pre-cast 	beams 	were 	used 	in 	a 	manner
analogous 	to 	the 	'kit-of-parts' 	approach 	of 	traditional
timber. 	Joints 	were 	freely 	expressed 	and 	an 	attempt
was 	made 	to 	demonstrate 	and 	dramatize 	the process 	of
construction. 	In 	the 	Metropolitan 	Festival 	Hall 	in
Tokyo 	of 	1961. 	the 	same 	style 	was 	extended 	further.
Here 	the 	problem 	was 	to 	combine 	auditoria 	and
approach 	spaces 	in 	a 	suitably 	impressive 	visual
framework, 	and 	there 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	that 	the
architect 	modelled 	his 	design 	on 	the 	Parliament
building 	at 	Chandigarh. 	The 	scooped 	overhangs 	and
deep 	porticoes, 	the 	sculptural 	roofscape 	elements
expressing 	the 	auditoria, 	and 	the 	bare 	concrete 	were
all 	drawn 	from 	this 	source. 	However, 	the 	effect 	was
subtly 	different: 	the 	silhouettes, 	shapes 	and 	pro-
portions 	spoke 	a 	language 	evocative 	of 	monumental
traditions 	in 	Japan.
Kenzo 	Tange 	took 	this 	tendency 	towards 	monu-
mental 	expressionism 	still 	further 	in 	the 	Tokyo
Olympic Stadium 	of 	1964 	(fig. 	25.11), 	in 	which 	he
employed 	tensile 	steel 	roofs 	to 	create 	interwoven
curves 	with 	an 	architectural 	effectiveness 	matched
only 	by 	Utzon, 	Nervi, 	Otto 	and 	Saarinen 	at 	the 	time. 	By
the 	mid-sixties 	it 	was 	clear 	to 	the 	rest 	of the 	world 	that
a 	distinctive 	Japanese 	modern 	architecture 	had
emerged 	which 	was 	based 	on an 	almost 	aggressive 	use
of modern 	technology. 	Japan's 	'economic 	miracle' 	was
proceeding 	so 	quickly 	that 	a 	glossy, 	uprooted 	urban
culture 	was 	rapidly 	coming 	into 	being 	which 	seemed
increasingly 	to 	threaten 	any 	sober 	assessment 	of 	the
past 	and 	its 	meaning. 	In 	architecture 	this 	mood 	began
to 	surface 	in 	schemes 	which 	celebrated 	industrial
technique 	at 	the 	expense 	of all 	else.
Such 	a 	tendency 	emerged 	even 	in 	housing 	proposals
made 	to 	deal 	with 	the 	uncontrollable 	urban 	sprawl 	of
Tokyo, 	The 	rapid 	post-war 	increases 	in 	population,
combined 	with 	the 	finite 	habitable 	land 	of the 	country,
forced 	issues 	of 	town 	planning 	to 	the 	fore, 	Tange
25.10 	Kunio
Mayekawa, 	Kyoto Town
Hall, 	1958-60.

-- 342 of 420 --

The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity 	341
25.11 	KenzoTange.
Olympic Stadium,
Tokyo. 	1963.
2S.I2 	'Metabolist'
Group, 	scheme 	for a
modern 	city. 	lyd 	^.
designer Arata 	Isozaki.
turned 	his 	mind 	to 	Tokyo's 	urban 	problems 	around
i960 	with 	a 	scheme 	which 	envisaged 	an 	extension 	of
the 	urban 	network 	into 	the 	bay. 	with 	giant 	stanchions
rising 	out 	of 	the 	water 	(containing 	services 	and 	liftsl
and 	huge 	attached 	structural 	beams 	and 	bridges
(supporting 	housing 	and 	other 	urban 	facilities). 	While
the 	idea 	was 	loosely 	similar 	to 	some 	of the 	raised-deck
proposals 	being 	made 	in 	Europe 	at 	the 	same 	time.
Tange's 	scheme 	had 	a 	far 	more 	forceful 	and 	mega-
structural 	character. 	Critics 	who 	were 	still 	keen 	to
emphasize 	the 	'Japaneseness' 	of 	this 	daunting 	tech-
nological 	wizardry 	pointed 	lamely 	to 	similarities
between 	the 	huge 	lattice 	of 	circulation 	and 	posts 	and
brackets 	in 	wood. 	Tange's 	desperate 	attempt 	at
simplifying 	and 	giving 	form 	to 	the 	chaos 	of 	a 	new
industrial 	pluralism 	seemed 	to 	be 	emblematic 	of 	a
larger 	question: 	how 	to 	find 	the 	deeper 	social 	meaning
of an 	increasingly 	consumer 	culture .-
Grandiose 	Utopian 	schemes 	based 	on 	a 	fantastic
deployment 	of 	technology 	became 	increasingly 	fre-
quent 	in 	the 	early 	sixties 	in 	Japan. 	The 	'Metabolist
Group' 	were 	not 	unlike the 	English 	'Archigram' 	group
in 	their 	obsession 	with 	mechanism, 	change 	and 	a
vaguely 	spaceship 	imagery 	(fig. 	25.12). 	The 	pivotal
members 	were 	Kiyonori 	Kikutake. 	Noria 	Kurokawa,
and 	the 	critic 	Noboru 	Kawazoe; 	the 	architects 	Asade
Oe 	and 	Maki were 	also loosely 	affiliated. 	Kikutake 	spelt
out 	the 	Metabolists' 	fascination 	with 	change:
Unlike 	the 	architecture 	of the 	past, 	contemporary
architecture 	must 	be 	changeable, 	moveable 	and
comprehensible 	architecture, 	capable 	of meeting
the 	changing 	requirements 	of the 	contemporary
age. 	In 	order 	to 	reflect 	dynamic 	reality, 	what 	is
needed 	is 	not 	a 	fixed, 	static 	function, 	but 	rather 	one
which 	is 	capable 	of undergoing 	metabolic 	changes
. 	. 	. 	We 	must 	stop 	thinking 	in 	terms 	of function 	and
form, 	and 	think 	instead 	in 	terms 	of space 	and
changeable 	function.
There 	was 	much 	in 	the 	Metabolist 	position 	that
recalled 	the 	Futurists' 	suggestion 	that 	the 	modern 	city
be 	made 	into 	a 	dynamic 	machine 	of 	moving 	and
variable 	parts, 	and 	the 	Japanese 	architects, 	like 	their
'Futurist 	revival' 	counterparts 	in 	England, 	indulged 	in
an 	imagery 	which 	made 	much 	of 	the 	way 	pods 	and
cells 	could 	be 	plugged 	into 	or 	clipped 	on 	to 	lattice
frames. 	The 	Metabolists 	also 	attempted 	to 	enforce 	the
distinction 	between 	the 	fixed 	and 	changeable 	elements
of 	a 	design, 	often 	resorting 	to 	giant 	towers 	of 	a
monumental 	character 	to 	which 	less 	substantial-
looking 	'variable' 	standardized 	elements 	might 	be
attached. 	As 	early 	as 	1958 	Kikutake 	had 	anticipated
some 	of 	Tange's 	ideas 	by 	suggesting 	marine 	cities 	in

-- 343 of 420 --

342 	Transformation 	and Dissemination 	after 	1 940
the 	form 	of vast 	discs 	on 	towers, 	and 	while 	the 	rhetoric
was 	mechanistic, 	there 	was 	also 	a 	hint 	of an 	interest 	in
organic 	structures 	like 	cells 	and 	beehives. 	Kurokawa
outlined 	the 	typical 	Metabolist 	design 	strategy:
4.
Divide the 	spaces 	into 	basic 	units.
Divide 	the 	units 	into 	equipment 	units 	and 	living
units.
Clarify 	the 	difference 	in 	metabolic 	rhythms
among 	the 	unit 	spaces.
Clarify 	the 	connectors 	and joints 	among 	spaces
with 	different 	metabolic 	rhythms.
Although 	none 	of 	the 	grand 	visions 	of 	the 	Meta-
bolists were realized, their ideas were sometimes carried
out 	on 	a 	smaller 	scale 	and 	occasionally 	influenced
other 	architects' 	schemes. 	Kurokawa's 	own 	bizarre
Yamagata 	Hawaii 	Dreamland 	(fig. 	25.13) 	was 	ar-
ranged 	as 	a 	curved 	belt of buildings 	around 	a 	pool 	with
giant 	vertical 	cylinders 	containing 	the 	circulation, 	in 	a
manner 	similar 	to 	his 	earlier 	Marine 	City' 	studies.
Arata 	Isozaki's numerous buildings 	in 	the town of Oita,
particularly 	the 	bank 	(1966-8) 	and 	the 	Girls' 	High
School 	(1963-4). 	employed 	equally 	dramatic 	con-
trasts 	of 	structure 	and 	mechanical 	servicing.
Yokoyama's 	Taisekiji 	Temple 	of 	1966 	was 	a 	clumsy
pastiche 	of traditional 	religious 	forms, 	but 	the 	nearby
lodging-house 	was 	a 	virtual 	manifesto 	of 	pre-cast
concrete construction. 	Everything possible was done to
express changes 	of function 	and 	the 	'kit-of-parts' 	of the
structural 	system, 	including 	the 	curious 	cylindrical
volumes of the 	individual 	shower-rooms. 	The 	architect
also 	endeavoured 	to 	give 	the 	impression 	that 	these
elements 	were 	plugged 	into a 	larger 	infrastructure.
In 	the 	aforementioned 	designs 	there 	was 	the 	ever
present 	danger 	that 	architecture 	might 	simply 	degen-
erate into 	an 	arid 	technological 	fetishism. 	Tange seems
to 	have 	sensed 	this 	danger, 	while 	still 	realizing 	that 	the
new 	Japan 	was 	releasing 	energies 	that 	the 	architect
must 	try 	to 	express. 	In 	the 	Yamanashi 	Press 	and 	Radio
Centre 	at 	Kofu 	(fig. 	25.14), 	close 	to 	Mount 	Fuji
(designed 	between 	1964 	and 	1967) 	he 	managed 	to
give 	images 	of a 	Metabolist 	character 	a 	dignified 	and
monumental 	form. 	A 	variety 	of 	functions 	had 	to 	be
accommodated 	- 	offices, 	shops, 	printing-works, 	broad-
casting 	studios 	and 	distribution 	points 	- 	so 	that 	the
programme 	itself 	seemed 	to 	imply 	the 	notion 	of 	a
building 	as 	a 	small 	city. 	The 	main 	elements 	of Tange's
design 	were 	a 	grid 	of 	cylindrical 	service 	shafts
containing 	air-conditioning, 	stairs 	and 	lifts, 	and 	acting
as 	a 	primary 	structural 	system: 	and 	large 	horizontal
beams 	containing 	studios, 	offices, 	etc. 	set 	down 	in 	a
secondary 	system 	of 	movable 	partitions. 	In 	plan 	the
building 	gave 	the 	distinct 	impression 	of total 	flexibility
within 	a 	fixed 	framework, 	and 	the 	division 	between
'serving' 	towers, 	and 	'served' 	spaces 	inevitably recalled
Kahn's 	Richards 	Medical 	Laboratories: 	indeed, 	the 	use
of grand 	service 	towers 	and 	horizontal 	floors 	became 	a
virtual 	leitmotif of the 	mid-sixties 	in 	many 	parts 	of the
world. 	Something 	of the 	same 	idea 	of open-endedness
was 	hinted 	at in 	the 	elevations 	of the building 	as 	well,
as some of the 	beams 	were 	'left out', 	thus 	implying 	that
they 	might 	be 	clipped 	on 	at 	some 	other 	time. 	The
Yamanashi 	building 	flirted 	with 	the 	idea 	of 	total
change, 	while 	still 	retaining 	the 	elemental 	dignity 	of a
finite 	composition: 	it 	suggested 	the 	character 	of 	a
modern 	technological 	mechanism, 	while 	still 	recalling
traditional 	post 	and 	beam 	construction. 	It 	held 	the
forces 	of 	traditionalism 	and 	futurism 	so 	basic 	to 	post-
war japan 	in 	an 	anxious 	equilibrium.
25.15 	Nona 	Kurokawa.
Yamagata 	Hawaii
Dreamland. 	1968.
25.14 	(riflfiO 	Kenzo
Tange. Yamanasiii 	Press
and 	Radio 	Centre. 	Kofu,
1964-7-

-- 344 of 420 --

\"^
•-— 	^~*y.
T"- 	;

-- 345 of 420 --

26. 	Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	1960s
I 	like 	complexity 	and 	contradiction 	in 	architecture 	. 	. 	. 	based 	on 	the 	richness
and 	ambiguity 	of modern 	experience, 	including 	that 	experience 	which 	is
inherent 	in 	art. 	. 	.
.
Architects 	can 	no 	longer 	afford 	to 	be 	intimidated 	by 	the 	puritanically 	moral
language 	of orthodox 	modern 	architecture
R. 	Venturi, 	1966
However 	diverse 	their 	approaches, 	however 	varied
their 	personal 	styles, 	the 	architects 	who 	came 	to
maturity 	in 	the 	early 	1 960s 	had 	certain 	broad 	features
in 	common. 	Their 	birth-dates 	tended 	to 	fall 	between
1910 	and 	1930, 	so 	their 	early 	years 	were 	strongly
impressed 	by 	the 	Second 	World 	War. 	Their 	vocabu-
laries 	were 	established 	against the 	background 	of 	the
declining 	International 	Style, 	and 	they 	turned 	to 	the
late 	works 	of 	the 	masters 	in 	their 	own 	search 	for 	an
architecture 	of greater 	robustness 	and 	complexity. 	But
while 	they 	respected 	some 	of 	the 	guiding 	tenets 	of
modern 	architecture, 	they 	did 	not 	advocate 	a 	slavish
orthodoxy. Their position 	was characterized 	by 	tension
between 	allegiance 	to 	the 	founding 	fathers 	and 	the
need 	for self-expression. 	Faith 	and 	scepticism 	were 	held
in 	balance ; 	dogma 	and 	schism 	were 	equally 	avoided.
Looking 	back 	at 	the 	early 	1960s 	from 	a 	distance 	of
twenty 	years, 	one 	is 	struck 	by 	the 	genuine 	optimism
surrounding 	the 	production, 	criticism 	and 	even 	the
public 	reception 	of modern 	architecture. 	The crises 	and
introversions 	of 	the 	1970s 	were 	far 	away 	indeed.
Singling 	out 	the 	work 	of 	men 	like 	Utzon 	and 	Tange,
and 	pointing 	to 	the 	emergence 	of 	new 	civic 	monu-
ments 	like 	the 	Japanese 	town 	halls 	or the 	Sydney 	Opera
House, 	Sigfried 	Giedion 	even 	saw 	fit 	to 	announce 	the
presence 	of 	a 	'third 	generation', 	as 	if 	his 	Grand
Tradition 	was 	now 	safely 	on 	its 	way. 	The 	idea 	was 	a
typical 	Giedionism 	in 	that 	it 	assumed 	the 	continuing
movement of an 	inner 	spirit 	of modern 	design 	with 	the
torch 	of 	inspiration 	being 	handed on 	from 	father 	to
son. 	I5ut 	the 	post-war 	development 	lacked 	linear
simplicity, 	and 	the 	individual 	architects 	within 	it 	did
not 	stagger 	their 	birth-dates 	at 	convenient 	twenty-
year 	intervals. 	Men 	like 	Sert. 	Lasdun, 	the 	young
Stirling, 	Tange, 	Utzon 	and 	Kahn 	may 	have 	shared 	a
certain 	consciousness, 	and 	even 	have 	exhibited 	some
stylistic 	similarities 	in 	their 	search 	for 	sculptural
enrichment, 	but 	they 	stopped 	far 	short 	of constituting
any 	unified 	movement. 	Even 	the 	architects 	who 	rallied
behind 	the 	banner of Team 	X 	had 	widely ditferent 	ways
of 	interpreting 	the 	rough 	concensus 	of 	ideas 	when 	it
came 	to 	making 	forms. 	Leitmotifs of the 	period, 	such 	as
the 	raised 	platform, 	the 	directly 	expressed 	service
tower, 	the sprawling, 	organic 	plan, 	the 	rough 	concrete
surface, 	never 	amounted 	to 	a 	coherent 	latterday
version 	of the 	International 	Style.
But 	in 	the 	field 	of 	general 	construction 	a 	banal
international 	formula 	did 	triumph. 	The 	resultant 	dull
reductivism 	was 	a 	mockery of the passionate 	simplicity
of 	the 	seminal 	works 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Func-
tional 	discipline 	became 	confused 	with 	the 	instru-
mental 	purposes 	of real 	estate; 	planning 	bureaucracies
took 	over 	tabula 	rasa 	images 	of 	the 	modern 	city 	and
applied 	them 	with 	a 	confident, 	moralizing 	and 	stupid
sense 	of certainty; 	what 	had 	started 	as 	an 	alternative
dream 	was 	absorbed 	by 	an 	all 	too 	dreary 	status 	quo.
The 	pioneer 	modern 	masters 	had 	had 	no 	difficulty
identifying 	their 	enemy; 	it 	had 	been 	the 	'corrupt
revivalism' 	of the 	nineteenth 	century. 	But 	by 	the 	early
19608 	good 	and 	evil 	were 	harder 	to 	label 	and
eclecticism 	was 	no 	longer 	a 	major 	issue. 	Now 	the
enemy 	was 	cheapened 	modern 	architecture, 	and 	the
critical 	exercise 	of distinguishing 	the 	genuine 	from 	the
fake 	required 	greater 	subtlety; 	good 	and 	bad 	might

-- 346 of 420 --

Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	i g6os 	34
5
26. 1 	Pier 	Luigi 	Nenn.
Exhibition 	Hall. 	Turin.
1962.
even 	share 	the 	same 	features 	(simple 	geometrical
forms, 	concrete 	frames, 	flat 	roofs). 	Thus 	the 	young
architect 	committed 	to 	quality 	was 	confronted 	with 	a
series 	of dilemmas: 	should 	he 	pretend 	that 	there 	was 	a
core 	of 	modern 	architectural 	principles 	which 	he
ought 	to 	uphold 	to 	get 	modern 	architecture 	back 	on 	its
true 	path.' 	Should 	he maintain 	that 	the 	modern 	spirit
required 	a 	constant 	quest 	for 	innovation 	in 	relation-
ship 	to 	changing 	technologies 	and 	values.' 	Or 	should
he 	perhaps 	abandon 	the 	operation 	of 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	as 	one 	which 	was 	failing, 	and 	turn 	to 	other
traditions 	in 	his 	formulation 	of a 	language.'
The 	full 	force 	of these 	doubts 	would 	not 	be 	felt 	until
the 	early 	1970s. 	In 	the 	two 	decades 	after 	the 	war 	they
were 	entertained 	by 	few. 	European 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	still 	held 	out 	the 	promise 	of 	a 	hygienic 	brave
new 	world, 	rising 	out 	of 	the 	ruins, 	and 	proclaiming 	a
new 	esperanto 	which would 	gloss 	over 	the 	nationalist
evils 	of 	the 	1930s. 	Each 	country 	had 	its 	own
preoccupations. 	In 	Germany, 	for 	example, 	the 	main
tasks 	continued 	to 	be 	related 	to 	urban 	and 	economic
reconstruction. 	Cultural 	questions 	concerning 	the
meaning 	of 	architecture 	in 	contemporary 	society,
which 	plagued 	avant-gardes 	in 	Holland. 	England 	and
Japan, 	were 	notably 	lacking: 	so 	were 	regionalist
explorations, 	as 	they 	recalled 	Nazi 	obsessions 	with
national 	identity. 	American 	influences 	supplied 	a 	safe
middle way 	- 	a 	bland 	and 	rather uniform 	technocracy.
As 	before 	the 	war. 	some 	of 	the 	best 	buildings 	were
constructed 	for the 	large 	industrial combines. 	Hentrich
and 	Petschnigg's 	Phonix 	Rheinrohr 	skyscraper 	in
Diisseldorf was 	an 	elegant 	affair, 	even 	compared 	with
the 	best 	of its 	cousins 	in 	the 	USA. 	with 	its 	three 	slabs,
each 	a 	structural 	bay 	deep, 	linked 	by 	transparent
corridor 	sleeves. 	The 	Interbau 	exhibition 	in 	Berlin 	of
1957 	had 	something 	of 	the 	function 	of 	the 	pre-war
Weissenhofsiedlung: 	Aalto. 	Niemeyer 	and 	Le 	Cor-
busier 	making 	their 	contributions 	alongside 	Germans
like 	Luckhardt 	and 	Schwippert. 	Berlin 	acquired 	a
museum 	of modern 	architecture, 	and 	its 	own 	version
of the 	Unite d'Habitation. 	The 	New 	National 	Gallery 	by
Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	(1963) 	unapologetically 	asserted
the 	German 	Classical 	spirit, 	while 	the 	Berlin 	Philhar-
monic 	by 	Hans 	Scharoun 	( 	196 5 1, 	brought 	to 	fruition
some of the Expressionist fantasies 	of forty years 	before.
But 	such 	poetic 	creations 	were 	rare: 	the 	strength 	of
German 	modern 	architecture 	lay 	in 	a 	second-rate
design 	of 	a 	consistently 	high 	order, 	rather 	than 	in
works 	of 	philosophical 	intensity. 	An 	exception 	to 	this
sweeping 	generalization 	was 	the 	Free 	University 	of
Berlin 	by 	Josic. 	Candilis 	and 	Woods 	(1963-74). 	a
virtual 	manifesto 	of their 	urban 	ideas. 	Like 	most 	of the
architects 	linked 	to 	Team 	X 	in 	the 	fifties, 	this
partnership 	had 	to 	wait 	until 	the sixties 	to carry 	out 	its
theories.
Italy 	after 	the 	war 	also 	had 	problems 	disentangling
its 	architecture 	from 	the 	totalitarian 	taint 	of 	the
thirties, 	but 	the 	production 	was 	far 	richer 	and 	more
diverse 	than 	in 	Germany. 	'Neo-realists' 	such 	as 	M.
Ridolfi 	and 	L. 	Quaroni 	attempted 	to 	produce 	an
imagery 	rooted 	in 	proletarian 	consciousness 	and
'everyday 	urban 	reality'. 	In 	the 	I.N. A. 	Casa 	planning
for 	the 	Tiburtino 	district 	of 	Rome, 	blocks 	of 	flats 	were
laid 	out 	on 	an 	irregular 	plan 	and 	crowned 	with 	tiled

-- 347 of 420 --

346 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
sloping 	'Mediterranean' 	roofs. 	Calini 	and 	Montuori's
Termini 	Station 	in 	Rome 	(1948-^0) 	extended 	the
lessons 	of 	pre-war 	Rationalism 	in 	an 	honorific 	mode,
while 	Bruno 	Zevi. 	the 	historian, 	baptized 	an 	'organic'
architecture, 	to 	steer 	between 	arid 	technology 	and 	the
confectionery 	of historicism.
Italian 	diversity 	was 	well 	represented 	by 	two
skyscrapers 	that 	rose 	above 	Milan 	in 	the 	late 	fifties : 	the
Pirelli 	building 	by 	Gio 	Ponti 	(fig. 	26.2) 	and 	the 	Torre
Velasca 	by 	Ernesto 	Rogers 	and 	Enrico 	Peressutti 	(fig.
26. 3 1. 	The 	first was 	thirty-three 	storeys 	high 	and 	stood
alongside 	the 	railway 	station. 	The 	plan 	was 	shaped 	to
accommodate 	lifts 	at 	the 	core, 	and 	the 	structure 	was
designed 	by 	Nervi 	on 	a 	double 	vertebrate system 	rather
than 	a 	steel 	cage. 	These 	considerations 	led 	to 	a 	finely
tapered 	form 	which 	was 	clad 	in 	an 	elegant, 	if 	slightly
stylized, 	metallic 	cladding. 	The 	result 	was 	a 	unique
prestige 	office 	building 	which 	mirrored 	the 	high
technical 	standards 	of the 	company, and 	showed 	that
not 	all 	high-rise 	designs 	in 	Europe 	had 	to 	ape 	the
American 	models. 	By 	contrast 	the 	Torre 	Velasca 	stood
close 	to 	Milan's 	Gothic 	cathedral 	and 	contained both
office 	space 	and 	apartments. 	It 	rose 	to 	twenty-six
storeys, 	but 	the 	top 	six 	(containing 	the 	domestic
accommodation) 	were 	expressed 	as 	a 	deep 	overhang
supported 	on 	splayed 	buttresses. 	Considerable 	variety
was 	created 	in 	the 	fac^ades 	by 	the 	straightforward
revelation 	of different 	interior 	needs. 	The 	verticality 	of
the 	concrete 	structural 	frame 	was 	stressed 	on 	the
outside of the building to 	rhyme 	with 	the vertical shafts
of the 	cathedral, 	and 	a 	stone 	cladding 	ensured 	that 	the
tower 	did 	not 	depart 	too 	dramatically 	from 	its 	lower
neighbours. 	The 	overall 	image 	was 	vaguely 	reminisc-
ent 	of 	the 	tower 	of 	a 	medieval 	Palazzo 	Pubblico 	-
indeed, 	the 	Torre 	Velasca 	caused 	something 	of a 	furore
in 	the 	international 	press 	because 	of 	its 	'historicism'.
As 	the 	pre-war 	Rationalists 	had 	asserted 	in 	the
1930s, 	tradition 	was 	unavoidable 	for 	the 	Italian
architect, 	who 	did 	not 	necessarily 	have 	to 	strain 	for
references 	to 	the 	past 	to 	incorporate 	its 	lessons. 	Even
an 	engineer 	like 	Pier 	Luigi 	Nervi. 	who 	took 	pride 	in 	the
purity 	of his 	intuitive 	and 	inductive 	methods 	of design,
achieved 	buildings 	which 	seemed 	happy 	descendants
of the 	grand 	constructions 	of antiquity. 	His 	numerous
stadia, 	exhibition 	halls, 	factories 	and 	even 	autoroutes
demonstrated 	how 	engineering discipline 	and 	rigorous
sculptural expression 	might 	achieve 	a 	high 	synthesis of
an 	almost 	natural 	character 	(fig. 	26.1 	). 	Working 	at 	a
.ill 	""ILliMii 	"• 	.
ib.zljarleft) 	Gio 	Ponti.
Pirelli 	building, 	Milan.
1957-
26.3 	ikft) 	Ernesto
Rogers 	and 	Enrico
Peressutti. 	Torre
Velasca. 	Milan. 	1958.
26.4 	(flboir 	right) 	Aldo
Van 	Eyck, 	orphanage 	at
Ysbaanpad. 	near
Amsterdam, 	I96i,plan.
26. s 	(ri(//iO 	Aldo Van
Eyck. 	Arnhem 	Pavilion.
1 964, 	view of interior.

-- 348 of 420 --

tiny 	and 	intricate 	scale. 	Carlo 	Scarpa 	was 	another
designer 	whose 	work 	implied 	that 	tradition 	and
modernity 	were 	capable 	of 	fruitful 	interaction. 	His
finesse 	in 	abstract 	patterns 	of 	detail 	recalled 	Wright,
but 	also 	fitted 	into 	traditions 	of 	Italian 	masonry 	and
craftsmanship. 	Again. 	Giancarlo de Carlo, 	in his design
for 	the 	University 	of 	Urbino 	(lyds-. 	see 	Chapter 	21).
Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	1960s 	347
demonstrated 	how 	mass 	production 	and 	a 	sense 	of
place, 	a 	modern 	programme 	and 	ancient 	images 	of
community 	might 	be 	brought 	together.
Of course 	de 	Carlo 	was 	yet 	another 	affiliate 	of Team
X. 	and 	Team 	X 	had 	been 	preoccupied 	with 	issues 	of
identity, 	scale 	and 	meaning 	which 	required 	a 	recon-
sideration 	of 	modern 	architectural 	principles 	in 	the
light 	of 	regional 	traditions. 	Team 	X 	was 	never 	the
source 	of a 	unified 	or 	rigid 	dogma, 	and 	each 	individual
in 	the 	group 	had 	his 	own 	private 	concerns 	and
background. 	The 	Dutchman 	Aldo 	Van 	Eyck, 	for
example, 	was 	acutely 	conscious 	of the 	high 	social 	and
spiritual 	aims, 	and 	outstanding 	formal 	qualities, 	of the
Dutch 	modern 	movement 	between 	the 	wars. 	He
attempted 	to 	inject 	into 	his 	work 	a 	humanism 	which
was 	a 	respectable 	(though 	less 	extreme) 	descendant 	of
the 	Utopianism 	of 	the 	pre-war 	period. 	Van 	Eyck 	was
preoccupied 	with 	the 	degradation 	brought 	about 	by
technology 	('mile 	upon 	mile 	of 	nowhere') 	and 	sought
to 	counter 	this 	with 	an 	architecture 	founded 	on
spiritual 	values 	and 	(what he 	took 	to 	be) 	archetypal
meanings 	(see 	Chapter 	21). 	His 	design 	for 	an 	or-
phanage 	at 	Ysbaanpad. 	Amsterdam 	(1961). 	avoided
the 	usual 	oppressive 	institutional 	image 	by 	making 	the
building 	into 	a 	web 	of 	small 	pavilions 	looking 	into
private 	courts, 	expressed 	as 	a 	repetitive 	but 	variable
pattern 	(tig. 	26.4). 	It 	was 	an 	order 	loosely 	reminiscent
of an 	early 	Mondrian 	(rather than 	the hard-line 	images
which 	had 	influenced 	De 	Stijl). 	or 	of 	the 	layout 	of 	a
North 	African 	village: 	the 	intention 	was 	clearly 	to
create 	a 	sort 	of field 	of spaces 	of different 	human 	pitch
and 	intensity. 	Van 	Eyck 	detailed 	the 	orphanage 	so that
the 	elements 	flowed 	ambiguously 	into 	one 	another:
the 	regimentation 	of a 	systems 	building 	was 	avoided 	in
a 	building 	which 	nonetheless 	employed 	standardizat-
ion. 	The 	orphanage 	design 	was 	not 	so 	far 	in 	spirit 	from
Lasdun's 	slightly 	later 	University 	of East 	Anglia. 	which
also 	generated 	richness 	from 	repetition. 	Van 	Eyck
wrote:
Whatever space 	and 	time 	mean, 	place 	and occasion
mean 	more. 	For 	space 	in 	the 	image 	of man 	is 	place,
and 	time 	in 	the 	image 	of man 	is 	occasion 	. 	.
.
Provide 	that 	place, 	articulate 	the 	in 	between 	. 	.
.
make 	a 	welcome 	of each 	door 	and 	a 	countenance 	of
each 	window 	... 	get closer 	to 	the 	shifting 	centre 	of
human 	reality 	and 	build 	its 	counterform 	- for 	each
man 	and 	all 	men 	. 	.
.
Similar 	preoccupations 	inspired 	the 	Arnhem
Pavilion 	design 	of 	1 964 	(fig. 	26. 5 ). 	Simple 	straight 	and
semicircular partitions were set into an overall circular
plan 	in 	such 	a 	way 	that 	the 	observer 	was 	forced 	into 	a
sequence 	of 	events 	and 	encounters 	which 	were
nonetheless 	held 	together 	by 	a 	firm 	geometrical

-- 349 of 420 --

348 	Transformation 	and Dissemination 	after 	1940

-- 350 of 420 --

The caption 	stated 	that 	There 	will 	be 	no further reason
for 	roads 	or 	squares'. 	The 	forms 	and 	spaces 	of 	earlier
architecture were to be 	rejected as so many 	pretensions
towards 	an 	absolute 	order, 	which 	really 	masked
oppressive 	social 	systems 	of 	power. 	Thus 	a 	curiously
sensual 	attitude 	to 	technology 	was 	combined 	with 	the
badinage 	of radical 	chic.
In 	the 	United 	States 	between 	1955 	and 	the 	late
1960s, 	architecture 	pursued 	some 	parallel 	courses
with 	Europe, 	though 	patronage 	conditions 	required
different 	reactions. 	Skidmore. 	Owings 	and 	Merrill
evolved 	a 	standardized 	big 	business 	heraldry 	in-
corporating 	a 	somewhat 	glib 	version 	of Micsian 	purity,
the 	steel 	frame, 	tinted 	glass 	and 	refined 	finishes 	of
chrome 	and 	marble. 	The 	engineer 	R. 	Buckminster
Fuller 	succeeded 	in 	popularizing 	the 	geodesic 	dome
and 	stimulated 	a 	school 	of 	technological 	wizardry
which 	even 	came 	up 	with 	the 	fantastic 	notion 	of
covering 	Manhattan 	with 	a 	giant 	environmental
bubble. 	American 	confidence 	in 	high 	technology 	was
also reflected in 	a 	megastructure compulsion 	which 	hit
the 	profession 	in 	the 	mid-sixties 	(influenced 	in 	part 	by
Archigram and 	the 	Metabolists). 	This 	prompted 	Paul
Rudolph 	to 	envisage 	a 	linear 	city 	of 	stepped 	section
running 	for 	miles 	across 	the 	edge 	of 	New 	York. 	A
scientific 	approach 	to 	the 	design 	process 	was 	argued
forcibly 	by 	Christopher 	Alexander 	(Notes 	on 	the
Synthesis 	of 	Form, 	1963). 	who 	restated 	some 	of 	the
traditional 	functionalist 	arguments 	but 	with 	the 	help
of mathematical 	models. 	And 	a 	certain 	admiration 	for
social 	science 	was 	reflected 	in 	the 	foundation 	of
numerous 	university 	departments 	with 	such 	titles 	as
'School 	of 	Environmental 	Studies'. 	The 	danger 	in 	all
this 	was 	obvious: 	the 	role 	of 	intuition, 	imagination,
and 	tradition 	in 	the 	genesis 	of 	forms 	could 	become
severely 	demoted. 	The 	later 	self-conscious 	and
strenuous 	assertion 	of the 	primacy 	of aesthetic 	values
which 	would 	bedevil 	the 	American 	avant-garde 	in
the 	1970s 	probably needs 	to 	be 	understood 	against the
background 	of this 	quasi-scientific 	methodology.
But 	the 	emulation 	of 	the 	processes 	and 	images 	of
technology 	was 	only 	one 	strand 	of 	the 	complex
American 	development. 	At 	another 	extreme 	was 	the
wilderness romanticism 	of Bruce Goff. 	who delighted in
ad 	hoc 	combinations 	of 	natural 	materials 	and 	found
objects 	from 	industrial 	waste. 	The 	Bavanger 	House 	of
1957, 	near 	Norman. 	Oklahoma, 	was 	organized
around 	a 	central 	mast 	with 	a 	swirling 	wooden 	roof,
and 	an 	idiosyncratic 	cable 	structure; 	the 	whole 	was
fashioned 	from 	bits 	and 	pieces 	found 	close 	to 	the 	site. 	It
is 	not 	surprising 	that 	Goff should 	have 	been 	adopted 	as
a 	sort 	of hero 	of the 	counter-culture 	of the 	late 	1960s,
for his 	buildings 	implied 	a 	critique 	of total 	design 	and 	a
rejection 	of 	the 	corporate 	values 	that 	were 	associated
with 	it 	in 	the 	American 	context.
Crises 	and Critiques 	in 	the 	1 960s 	•	
349
Although 	there 	was 	no 	direct 	equivalent 	to 	Team 	X
in 	America, 	the 	ideas 	of 	the 	group 	did 	filter 	in 	by 	a
number 	of 	routes. 	J. 	Bakema, 	S. 	Woods 	and 	J. 	Soltan
taught 	in 	American 	architecture 	schools, 	while 	J. 	L.
Sert 	(who 	was 	not a 	member, 	but 	whose ideas 	were 	not
dissimilar! 	preached 	a 	new 	unity 	of 	architecture 	and
town 	planning 	at 	Harvard 	Graduate 	School 	of 	Design
(of which 	he 	was 	Dean) 	in 	the 	late 	fifties. 	In 	his 	design
for 	Peabody 	Terraces 	(see 	Chapter 	2 1 ) 	he 	gave form 	to
his 	theories. 	Holyoke 	Center 	and 	Boston 	University
(1 	964 1 	dealt 	with 	similar 	ideas: 	the 	subtle 	linkage 	of
townscaped 	spaces, 	tall 	towers, 	interior 	streets,
intermediary 	buildings 	of 	transitional 	scale, 	the
articulation 	of 	different 	uses 	through 	highly 	textured
facades 	of 	louvers 	and 	balconies, 	the 	delicate 	com-
position 	of 	concrete 	frames 	and 	bright 	colours. 	As 	in
Europe, 	these 	urban 	demonstrations 	remained 	the
property 	of 	well-to-do 	universities, 	having 	little 	effect
on 	the increasingly brutal development of the capitalist
city. 	The 	sixties 	witnessed 	the 	wholesale 	destruction 	of
vast 	areas 	of 	historical 	fabric 	in 	the 	interests 	of
'economic 	development'. 	Earlier 	modern 	movement
platitudes 	concerning 	the 	value 	of 	space 	and 	light
(though 	rarely 	greenery) 	were 	co-opted-to 	rationalize
financial 	motives, 	to 	justify 	the 	construction 	of
freeways, 	or 	else 	to 	support 	grotesque 	civic 	monu-
ments 	with 	compulsory 	piazzas. 	The 	American 	archi-
tect 	was 	constantly 	demoted 	to 	a 	sort 	of 	exterior
decorator 	for 	business 	interests. 	Those 	housing
agencies 	which 	existed 	encouraged 	simplistic, 	grand-
slam 	solutions 	of 	an 	insensitive 	kind, 	and American
architects 	had 	little 	tradition 	of 	radical 	criticism. 	The
artist 	architect 	was 	thus 	forced 	into 	the 	gilded 	cage 	of
upper-crust 	patronage: 	museums, 	prestigious 	univer-
sity 	buildings, 	villas 	on Long 	Island. 	The 	aspirations
towards 	an 	integrated 	society 	implicit 	in 	Team 	X
thinking 	seemed 	foreign 	indeed.
If 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	dominated 	the 	early 	fifties 	in
America, 	late 	Le 	Corbusier dominated 	the 	early 	sixties.
Curiously 	enough 	his 	one 	American 	building 	the
Carpenter 	Center 	at 	Harvard, 	was 	little 	understood,
but 	replicas 	of La Tourette 	popped 	up 	all 	over 	the 	place
as city 	halls or even department 	stores. 	Rough 	concrete
piers, 	heavy 	crates of brise-soleil and 	rugged 	overhangs
were 	the 	order 	of 	the 	day. 	An 	elephantine 	tendency
seems 	to 	have 	gripped 	America 	in 	the 	early 	sixties 	in
any 	case : 	veneers 	of 	hrisc-soleil 	or 	coatings 	of 	marble
were 	laid 	over 	massive 	steel 	frames 	and 	trusses. 	Scully
coined 	the 	phrase 	'paramilitary 	dandyism' 	to 	describe
it: 	one 	thinks 	of 	the 	grand 	monumentality 	of 	Roche
and 	Dinkeloo's 	Knights 	of 	Columbus 	Headquarters 	at
New 	Haven 	(1968) 	or 	of 	the 	huge 	piers 	coated 	in
expensive 	stone 	of their 	Ford 	Foundation 	in 	New 	York
( 	1967). 	or 	again 	of the 	eerie 	surrealism 	of their 	sliced
glass 	pyramids 	for 	College 	Life 	Insurance 	in 	Indiana

-- 351 of 420 --

350 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
(1969). 	where 	high 	tech' 	and 	the 	pristine 	visions 	of
Boullee 	seemed 	to 	come 	together 	(fig. 	26.7). 	As 	always
in 	American 	luxury 	commissions, 	the 	craftsmanship
and 	detailing 	were 	of 	the 	highest 	level: 	I. 	M. 	Pei's
Hancock 	Tower 	in 	Boston 	(designed 	by 	Henry 	Cobb I
used 	reflecting 	glass 	and 	a 	slender 	steel 	mullion 	system
of 	a 	precision 	unthinkable 	in 	Europe 	(fig. 	26.8 1.
American 	corporations 	needed 	to 	express 	their 	power,
their 	efficiency, 	their 	belief 	in 	advanced 	technology,
their 	preoccupation 	with 	styling: 	the 	sharp-edged
minimalist 	creations 	of the 	aforementioned 	firms 	were
able 	to 	supply 	them 	with 	just 	the 	right 	imagery.
The 	rugged 	concrete 	tradition 	in 	monument 	build-
ing was 	best 	represented 	by 	Kallmann 	and 	McKinnell's
Boston 	City 	Hall 	(see 	Chapter 	23) 	or 	by 	Paul 	Rudolph's
works 	of 	the 	mid-sixties. 	These 	buildings 	were 	surely
part 	of 	a 	robust 	reaction 	against 	the 	spindly 	Inter-
national 	Style 	of 	the 	fifties. 	Rudolph 	had 	been 	trained
under 	Gropius 	at 	Harvard, 	and 	had 	soon 	rejected 	the
reductivism 	of 	his 	mentor. 	The 	Jewett 	Arts 	Center 	at
Wellesley 	( 	1 9 S 3 1 	was coated 	with 	references to 	its 	neo-
Gothic 	setting, 	and 	highly 	mannered 	in 	its 	use 	of
ornamental 	sunscreens, 	but 	it 	still 	represented 	a 	quest
for 	formal 	richness. 	The 	late 	works 	of Le 	Corbusier. 	the
spatial 	dramas 	of 	the 	Italian 	Baroque, 	and 	the
complexities 	in 	section 	of 	Wright's 	works 	helped
Rudolph 	to 	find 	his 	way. 	By 	the 	time 	he 	designed 	the
Art 	and 	Architecture 	building 	at 	Yale 	(1964). 	his
personal 	style 	was 	assured: 	violent 	contrasts 	of 	scale
and 	colossal 	piers 	in 	rough 	corduroy 	concrete 	gave 	the
whole 	building 	a 	vaguely 	primitive 	air 	(fig. 	2(1.9).
Silhouettes 	and 	sequences 	were 	expressed 	in 	an
exaggeratedly 	irregular 	external 	volume. 	The 	same
vigorous 	style 	was 	taken 	still 	further 	in 	the 	buildings
for 	Boston's 	Government 	Center 	( 	i 	^)h4^. 	where 	curved
stairs 	and 	cascades 	of 	platforms 	were 	linked 	to
spiralling 	towers. 	But 	Rudolph's 	expressionism 	seemed
overdone, 	giving 	the 	feeling 	that 	all 	these 	displays 	of
virtuosity 	perhaps 	contained 	no 	social 	content. 	Once
again, 	an 	American 	artist 	resorted 	to 	formalist
gestures, 	albeit 	of considerable 	aesthetic 	interest.
Against 	this 	setting 	of 	the 	mechanistic 	at 	one 	end,
and 	of dandyism 	at 	the 	other, 	the 	sober 	figure 	of Kahn
stood 	out 	like 	a 	sentinel 	of ancient 	sense 	and 	principle.
As 	well 	as 	being 	the 	major 	talent 	of the 	post-war 	years
in 	America, 	he 	was 	also 	an 	inspiring 	teacher. 	In 	the
1950s 	he 	taught 	regularly 	at 	the 	University 	of
Pennsylvania 	School 	of 	Architecture 	in 	Philadelphia,
where 	he was 	a 	living 	link to the 	enlightened 	aspects 	of
Beaux-Arts 	discipline. 	He 	encouraged 	a 	respect 	for 	the
past 	and 	an 	understanding 	for 	the 	role 	of 	ideas 	in
architectural 	expression. 	His 	pupils 	were 	presented
with 	a 	very 	difl'erent 	diet 	from 	their 	Harvard 	contem-
poraries, 	who 	still 	laboured 	under 	the 	inheritance 	of
Gropius, 	Most 	notable 	of the younger men 	to 	be 	taught
2h.y 	[iibovei 	Kevin
Roche 	and 	John
Dinkeloo, 	College 	Life
Insurance 	building,
Indiana, 	1969.
26.8 	(/e/() 	I.M. 	Peiand
Associates 	(designer H.
Cobb). 	Hancock Tower.
Boston, 	1969.

-- 352 of 420 --

26.9 	Paul 	Rudolph, 	Art
and 	Architecture
building. 	Yale
University. 	New 	Haven,
Connecticut. 	1966.
by 	Kahn 	was 	Robert 	Venturi. 	who 	won 	a 	scholarship
to 	the 	American 	Academy 	in 	Rome, 	and 	then 	went
into 	private 	practice 	in 	the 	late 	fifties. 	He 	received 	few
commissions 	and 	devoted 	much 	time 	to 	teaching 	and
writing. 	His 	book 	Complexitfi 	and 	ContiMlution 	in
Architecture 	{ 	1466) 	pulled 	together 	the 	reflections 	of a
decade, 	and functioned 	as 	both 	a 	personal 	Towards an
architecture' 	and 	a 	handbook 	of 	sensibility 	for 	a
generation 	bored 	by 	the 	blandness 	of what 	they 	called
'orthodox 	modern 	architecture',
'Orthodox 	modern 	architecture' 	turned 	out 	to 	mean
not 	so 	much 	the 	entire 	architectural 	production 	of the
previous 	half 	century 	(Venturi 	singled 	out 	both 	Ix
Corbusier 	and 	Aalto 	for 	special 	praise) 	as 	the 	simplistic
and 	skin-deep 	version 	of modern 	design 	that 	had 	been
prevalent 	in 	America 	for 	the 	previous 	twenty 	years.
Venturi 	took 	the 	well-known 	Miesian 	jingle 	'I.ess 	is
more' 	and 	parodied 	it 	with 	the 	retort 	'Less 	is 	a 	bore':
however, 	he was quick to 	point 	out that the 	complexity
he 	sought 	could 	not 	be 	found 	by 	simply 	sticking 	on
more 	ornamental 	details. 	Rather 	he 	was 	in 	favour 	of a
tension 	bred 	by 	perceptual 	ambiguity 	- 	a 	richness 	of
both 	form 	and 	meaning 	- 	which 	should 	affect 	the
overall 	form 	of a 	design:
The 	tradition 	'either-or' 	has 	characterized 	orthodox
modern 	architecture 	- 	a 	sun 	screen 	is 	probably
nothing 	else: 	a 	support 	is 	seldom 	an 	enclosure: 	a
wall 	is 	not 	violated 	by 	window 	penetrations 	but 	is
totally 	interrupted 	by 	glass: 	program 	functions 	are
exaggeratedly 	articulated 	into 	wings 	or 	segregated
pavilions 	. 	. 	. 	Such 	manifestations 	of articulation
Crises 	and Critiques 	in the 	1 9 60s 	• 	351
and 	clarity 	are 	foreign 	to 	an 	architecture 	of
complexity 	and 	contradiction, 	which 	tends 	to
include 	'both-and' 	rather 	than 	exclude 	'either-
or'.
If the 	source 	of the 	both-and 	phenomemon 	is
contradiction, 	its 	basis 	is 	hierarchy, 	which 	yields
several 	levels 	of meanings 	among 	elements 	with
varying 	values. 	It 	can 	include 	elements 	that 	are
both 	good 	and 	awkward, 	big 	and 	little, 	closed 	and
open, 	continuous 	and 	articulated, 	round 	and
square, 	structural 	and 	spatial. 	An 	architecture
which 	includes 	varying 	levels 	of meaning 	breeds
ambiguity 	and 	tension,
Venturi 	supported 	his 	case 	with 	numerous 	il-
lustrations of buildings 	and 	plans 	from 	past 	periods 	in
history, 	Lutyens. 	Hawksmoor, 	Le 	Corbusier 	or 	a
humble 	stone 	building 	might 	all 	be 	used 	to 	illustrate 	a
certain 	quality 	of 	complexity. 	The method 	was 	thus
loosely similar 	to 	that 	pursued 	in 	Vers 	une 	architecture,
but 	where 	the 	lesson 	of this 	earlier 	work 	had 	been 	the
integration 	of 	certain 	underlying 	essentials 	of 	Classi-
cism 	with 	an 	imagery 	for 	the 	machine 	age. 	Venturi's
approach 	seemed 	to 	imply 	a 	less 	profound 	synthesis
and 	a 	inore 	fragmented 	aesthetic. 	He 	claimed 	that 	his
'both-and' 	approach 	to 	architectural 	elements 	and
meanings 	was 	more 	in 	tune 	with 	the 	complexity 	of
modern 	experience 	than 	the 	sterilities 	of the 	preceding
generation, 	but 	gave 	little 	evidence 	of 	an 	underlying
social 	vision 	or 	ideal. 	Clearly 	his 	sensibility 	had 	some
loose 	links 	with 	contemporary 	painters 	like 	Jasper
Johns 	or 	Robert 	Rauschenberg. 	who 	deliberately
confronted 	the 	spiritual 	heroics 	of 	the 	abstract
expressionists 	with 	banalities 	drawn 	from 	everyday
life: 	but 	there 	was 	no 	automatic 	step 	from 	such 	a
sensibility 	to 	a 	set 	of 	architectural 	forms. 	Positive
reviewers 	of 	Venturi 	claimed 	that 	he 	was 	all 	for
enriching 	the 	language 	of 	modern 	design: 	detractors
suggested 	that 	his 	forms 	were 	arbitrary 	and 	that 	he
was 	simply 	opening 	the 	doors 	to 	eclecticism 	again.
Whichever way 	you 	looked 	at 	it, 	it was obvious 	that 	he
was 	avoiding 	the 	arid 	sociological 	and 	technical
definitions 	of 	architecture 	then 	prevalent, 	in 	favour 	of
a 	discussion 	in 	which 	issues 	of 	form 	(and 	even
meaning) 	did 	at 	least 	play 	a 	part.
Towards 	the end 	of the 	book 	Venturi 	applied 	some 	of
his 	arguments 	to 	the 	American 	urban 	scene, 	claiming
that 	'Main 	Street 	is 	nearly 	all 	right' 	and 	that 	official
planning 	(he 	might 	have 	called 	it 	orthodox 	modern
urbanism' ) 	in 	the 	USA 	had 	done 	much 	to destroy 	street
life 	and 	to 	subdue 	the 	vitality 	of the 	flashing 	signs 	and
advertisements. 	This 	mood 	of 	reaction 	against 	over-
discrete 	and 	over-simple 	categories 	was 	in 	tune 	with
the 	age: 	sociologists 	like 	Richard 	Sennett 	would 	soon
write 	in 	favour 	of 	'disorder' 	and 	Jane 	Jacobs 	(in 	Death

-- 353 of 420 --

352 	Transformation 	and Dissemination 	after 	1 940
26.10 	Robert 	Venturi,
house in 	Cliestnut 	Hill.
Philadelphiia.
Pennsylvania. 	1963.
ami 	Life 	of 	Great 	American 	Cities) 	would 	praise 	the
complex 	weave 	of 	meanings 	of 	the 	most 	'ordinary'
urban 	places. 	Venturi 	and 	his 	partners 	Denise 	Scott-
Brown 	and 	Steven 	Izenour 	expanded 	on 	this 	point 	of
view 	in 	Learning from 	Las 	Vegas 	(1973). 	in 	which 	they
claimed 	that 	the 	coloured 	street 	signs 	in 	front 	of 	the
casinos 	were 	some 	native, 	indigenous 	form 	of 	ex-
pression 	of 'ordinary 	American 	people'. 	Thus 	populism
and Pop 	Art 	sensibility 	came 	together 	in 	the 	curious
illusion 	that 	products 	of 	Madison 	Avenue 	should 	be
seen 	as 	a 	grass-roots, 	public, 	'low 	art'.
There 	was 	a 	regionalist 	flavour 	to 	Venturi 's 	ideas
which 	was 	related 	to 	his 	feeling 	that 	a 	truly 	American
architecture 	should 	be 	created. 	The 	'vernacular' 	to
which 	he 	turned 	to 	find 	appropriately 	popular 	and
reassuring 	images 	was 	artificial 	and 	mass-produced: 	it
was 	provided 	by 	the 	commercial 	strip 	and 	the
suburban 	crackerbox 	house, 	both 	areas 	traditionally
despised 	by 	elitist 	planners 	with 	European 	pretensions.
In 	his 	design 	for 	a 	house 	for 	his 	mother 	in 	Chestnut
Hill. 	Philadelphia 	(1963). 	Venturi 	had 	evaded 	the
fifties 	'orthodox 	modern' 	cliche 	of 	the 	glass 	box
pavilion, 	in 	favour 	of 	an 	elusive 	image 	of 	the 	home
replete 	with 	gable, 	sloped 	roof 	attached 	mouldings,
facade, 	back 	porch, 	etc. 	(fig. 	26.10). 	However, 	this 	was
no 	mere 	replica 	of the 	standard 	suburban 	image, 	since
the 	allusions 	to 	the 	humble 	American 	home 	were
combined 	with 	witty 	and ambiguous 	quotations 	from
Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Palladio. 	The 	facade 	had 	a 	de-
liberately 	dead-pan 	character 	which 	disguised 	the
welter 	of 	internal 	complexities 	and 	contradictions 	of
the 	plan: 	Venturi 	praised 	the 	billboard 	character 	of
American 	urban 	streets 	and 	coined 	the 	term 	'de-
corated shed' 	to 	describe 	the type : 	this 	he 	contrasted 	to
the 	concrete 	sculptural 	buildings 	of 	the 	early 	sixties,
which 	he 	referred 	to 	contemptuously 	as 	'ducks'.
Despite 	Venturi's 	populist 	stance, 	his 	architectural
jokes 	were 	obviously 	directed 	at 	the 	initiated. 	His
buildings 	were 	even 	provided 	with 	the 	artist's 	own
elaborate 	explanatory 	texts. 	Of 	the 	small 	house 	just
described 	he 	wrote:
This 	building 	recognizes 	complexities 	and
contradictions: 	it 	is 	both 	complex 	and 	simple, 	open
and 	closed, 	big 	and 	little: 	some 	of its 	elements 	are
good 	on 	one 	level 	and 	bad 	on 	another: 	its 	order
accommodates 	the generic 	elements 	of the 	house 	in
general, 	and 	the 	circumstantial 	elements 	of a 	house
in 	particular. 	It 	achieves 	the 	difficult 	unity 	of a
medium 	number 	of diverse 	parts 	rather 	than 	the
easy 	unity 	of few 	or 	many 	motival 	parts.
In 	the 	Guild 	House, 	an 	old 	people's 	home 	in
Philadelphia 	of 	1962-66 	(fig. 	26.11), 	Venturi
extended 	the same 	approach 	on 	a 	larger scale 	and 	for 	a
function 	where 	his 	interest 	in 	'commonly 	understood
imagery' 	might 	be 	tested. 	The 	building 	had 	to 	include
ninety-one 	apartments 	of 	varying 	types 	with 	a
common 	recreation 	room ; 	it 	was 	to 	house 	elderly 	folk
from 	the 	neighbouring 	area. 	Venturi 	disposed 	the
rooms 	in 	a 	symmetrical 	plan 	with 	a 	facade 	that 	came
up 	to 	the 	street 	line. 	This 	elevation 	was 	also
symmetrical, 	with 	the 	entrance 	doors 	placed 	tantaliz-
ingly either 	side 	of 	the 	axis 	at 	the 	base. 	A 	large 	arch

-- 354 of 420 --

Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	1 	960s 	353
2(i.ii 	(nV//it) 	Robert
Venturi. 	tJuild 	House.
Philadelphia. 	I4h2-(ifi.
26.12 	(/)('/ou') 	Charles
Moore. 	Faculty 	Club.
University of California
at 	Santa 	Barbara, 	i'-)hH.
interior.
was 	cut 	through 	the top 	of the 	facjade 	perhaps 	to try to
give 	the 	building 	an 	image 	of 	openness 	and 	shelter.
Finally, 	on 	the 	very 	top 	was 	placed 	an 	anodized 	gold
television 	aerial, 	which 	(according 	to 	the 	artist) 	could
be 	interpreted 	as 	a 	symbol 	of 	the 	aged, 	who 	spend 	so
much 	time 	looking 	at 	TV.
The 	Guild 	House 	was 	constructed 	from 	cheap 	bricks
and 	simple 	standardized 	windows, 	and 	detailed 	so 	that
a 	planar 	character 	was 	emphasized. 	The 	windows
were 	chosen 	to 	rhyme 	with 	those 	in 	the 	area 	and 	were
commonplace, 	standardized sashes 	of the kind 	found in
the 	cheapest 	housing 	schemes. 	In 	the 	context 	of such 	a
self-conscious 	architectural 	composition 	they 	recalled
Venturi's 	observations 	on 	Pop 	artists 	who 	employed
'old 	cliches 	in 	new 	settings' 	and 	so 	gave 	'uncommon
meaning 	to 	common 	elements 	by 	changing 	their
context 	or 	increasing 	their 	scale 	. 	.
.' 	One 	scarcely
needs 	to 	emphasize 	at 	this 	point 	the 	contrast 	between
Venturi's 	approach 	and 	vocabulary, 	and 	those 	of
Rudolph. 	Kallmann. 	Roche 	and 	Ilinkeloo.and 	Pei 	at
the 	same 	time, 	fiowever, 	his 	ideas 	were 	usually 	more
convincing 	in 	writing 	than 	when 	built. 	The 	agonized
self-consciousness 	betrayed 	the 	lack 	of 	an 	instinctive
feeling 	for 	form, 	space 	or 	even 	proportion. 	Venturi 	set
the 	tone 	for 	a 	literary 	conception 	of 	architecture 	in
which 	more 	emphasis 	was 	put 	on 	imagery 	and
quotation 	than 	on 	formal 	integration.
Another 	American 	architect 	to 	react 	against 	the
blandness 	of 	cliched 	modern 	architecture 	of 	the 	fifties
was 	Charles 	Moore, 	who 	was 	based 	in 	California,
where 	the 	weight 	of imported 	European 	modernism 	of
the 	Gropius 	variety 	was 	far 	less. 	Moore 	and 	Lyndon's

-- 355 of 420 --

354 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
'Sea 	Ranch' 	on 	the 	Pacific 	coastline 	north 	of 	San
Francisco 	was 	a 	somewhat 	routine 	essay 	in 	redwood
cabin 	regionalism. 	But 	by 	the 	late 	sixties 	Moore 	had
gone beyond 	this 	folksiness 	and 	absorbed 	some 	of 	the
lessons 	of Pop 	Art. 	The 	interior 	of his 	Faculty 	Club 	for
the 	University 	of California 	of 	1968 	(fig. 	26.12) 	was
designed as a 	sort of stage set of thin 	planes 	and screens
(planarity 	was 	once 	again 	in 	fashion), 	evoking
simultaneously 	modern 	architectural 	icons 	(e.g., 	van
Doesburg's 	forms 	of 	the 	twenties), 	the 	image 	of 	a
baronial 	hall 	(replete 	with 	electric 	neon 	'banners'), 	the
standard efl'ects of the American 	faculty club 	(portraits,
stuffed 	animal 	heads, 	etc) 	and 	Spanish 	Colonial
touches 	(a sort of tongue-in-cheek regionalism). 	In 	this
case 	it 	has 	to 	be 	said 	that 	too 	much 	complexity 	and
contradiction 	ended 	up 	being 	simply 	a 	witty 	hotch-
potch 	without 	underlying 	order 	or 	tension. 	But
Moore's 	design, 	despite 	its 	lack 	of 	formal 	resolution,
was 	still 	symptomatic 	of an 	increasingly 	eclectic 	mood
in 	which 	all 	periods 	of the 	past 	(including 	the 	modern
movement) 	were 	regarded 	as 	'game' 	for 	quotations.
Venturi's 	and 	Moore's 	positions 	suggested 	that 	at
least 	some 	of 	the 	guiding 	principles 	of 	modern
architecture 	were 	losing 	hold, 	although, 	of 	course,
their 	attitudes, 	styles 	and 	strategies 	would 	have 	been
inconceivable 	without 	the 	numerous 	intellectual 	and
formal 	inventions 	of the 	previous 	fifty 	years. 	Nonethe-
less 	they 	could 	be 	portrayed 	as 	iconoclasts 	who 	were
deliberately 	playing 	mannerist 	games, 	and 	who 	were
undermining 	some 	of 	the 	hard-won 	battles 	of 	the
pioneers. 	In 	the circumstances, 	it 	was 	not 	surprising 	to
find 	shrieks 	against 	their 	heresy, 	related 	to 	attempts 	at
returning 	to 	'the 	fundamentals 	of the 	faith'. 	This 	led to
the 	curious 	situation 	of 	theorists 	arguing 	for 	a 	return
to some 	mythical 	and crystalline 	principles 	of 'modern-
ism', 	and 	of 	practitioners 	reviving 	some 	of 	the 	white
forms 	of the 	1920s.
Most 	of the 	architects 	involved 	in 	this 	exercise 	were
linked 	to 	East 	Coast architecture 	schools 	like 	Princeton
and 	Cornell. 	Chief among 	them 	were 	five 	(briefly 	called
the 	'New 	York 	5'): 	Peter 	Eisenman, 	Richard 	Meier,
Charles 	Gwathmey, 	John 	Hejduk, 	and 	Michael 	Graves.
In 	the 	late 	sixties 	most 	of these 	men 	were 	in 	their 	mid-
thirties, 	and 	therefore 	grew 	up 	with 	modern 	art 	and
architecture 	as 	entirely 	established 	facts. 	They 	were
loosely 	united by a 	strong 	feeling 	for the 	seminal 	works
of 	the 	inter-war 	years, 	like 	the 	Schroeder 	House, 	the
Villa 	Stein 	or 	the 	Casa 	del 	Fascio: 	by 	an 	obsession 	with
formal 	issues 	at 	the 	expense 	of 	content 	and 	function
(their 	formalist 	definitions 	of 	'modernism' 	parroted
those 	used 	by 	defenders 	of the 	American 	'hard-edged'
abstraction 	of the 	late 	sixties); 	and 	by 	their 	allegiance
to 	the 	opinions 	of Colin 	Rowe. 	who 	taught 	in 	America
from 	the 	sixties 	onwards, 	and 	who 	seems 	to 	have
conveyed 	the 	twenties 	to 	his 	acolytes 	as 	some 	lost
Golden 	Age. 	But 	reviving 	the 	forms 	of 	the 	early
International 	Style 	in 	the 	late 	sixties, 	forty 	years
afterwards, 	was 	by 	no 	means 	a 	simple 	exercise: 	it 	was
every 	bit 	as 	dangerous 	as 	reviving 	any 	other 	set 	of
forms 	of the past. 	The 	problem 	of pastiche 	hovered 	over
the 	endeavour: 	and 	there 	was 	little 	evidence 	that 	the
'New 	York 	5' 	were 	in 	any 	position 	to 	supply 	a 	cogent
new 	content 	in 	their 	renaissance 	of earlier 	forms.
Despite 	the 	insubstantiality 	of 	their 	philosophical
positions, 	some 	of the 	New 	York 	5 	architects 	achieved
buildings of a 	dainty elegance. 	The 	Benacerraf addition
by 	Graves 	(1969) 	may 	stand 	as 	an 	example 	(tig.
26.1 	3). 	This 	was 	a 	sort 	of pavilion 	attached 	to 	a 	house
in 	Princeton. 	Its 	architectural 	language 	was 	com-
pounded 	from 	a 	variety 	of 	modern 	architectural
sources, 	but 	elements 	were 	put 	in 	unexpected 	juxta-
positions 	which 	challenged 	expectations 	concerning
their 	usual 	role. 	Thus 	the 	knowledgeable 	observer
might 	note 	that 	cylindrical 	pilotis 	turned 	up 	as
horizontal 	handrails: 	or 	he 	might 	sense 	that 	coloured
struts 	and 	exploding 	spatial 	effects 	derived 	from 	the
Schroeder 	House 	were 	being 	deliberately 	collided 	with
free-plan 	curves 	recalling 	Le 	Corbusier's 	villas. 	Giulio
Romano 	had 	relied, 	in 	the 	Palazzo 	del 	Te 	( 	i 	S34). 	on
the 	knowledge of his 	audience, 	so 	that 	they 	might 	react
with 	a 	frisson 	of shocked 	delight 	when 	they 	noticed 	his
dropped 	keystones, 	and 	other 	breaks 	with 	the 	Classical
rules of the 	High 	Renaissance: 	in 	thesame way 	Graves
relied 	on 	a 	historical 	perspective 	which 	made 	of 	the
twenties 	a 	classic 	age, 	and 	on 	an 	audience, 	who,
knowing 	this, 	would 	admire 	his 	virtuosity 	in 	breaking
the 	rules. 	This 	was 	complexity 	and 	contradiction, 	but
applied 	to 	revered 	prototypes 	of 	the 	modern 	move-
ment, 	rather 	than 	to 	American 	domestic 	sources 	as
with 	Venturi. 	It 	was 	an 	architect's 	architecture 	aimed
at a 	profession 	thoroughly 	acquainted 	through 	coffee-
table 	books 	and 	college 	art-history 	courses 	with 	the
monuments 	of 	modernism. 	Philip 	Johnson 	character-
ized 	the 	Benacerraf 	rather 	aptly 	as 	'a 	wonderfully
sporty 	piece 	of 	lawn 	sculpture'. 	Indeed, 	it 	is 	arguable
that 	the 	Graves 	style, 	with 	its 	interest 	in 	delicate
coloured 	struts 	and 	a 	sort 	of 	backyard 	pastoralism,
may 	have owed something 	to 	the 	abstract sculptures of
Anthony 	Caro.
In 	the 	broad 	context 	of 	the 	1960s 	in 	the 	United
States 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	see 	the 	New 	York 	5's 	self-
conscious 	interest 	in 	formal 	issues 	as a 	reaction 	against
the 	technological 	school 	on 	the 	one 	hand, 	and 	the
preoccupation 	with 	social 	scientific 	methodologies 	on
the 	other. 	In 	turn 	their 	stylistic 	emphasis 	on 	thinness,
planarity 	and 	transparency 	may 	perhaps 	be 	seen 	as 	a
formal 	reaction 	against the 	brutalist 	antics 	in 	heavy
concrete 	of some 	of their 	predecessors. 	It 	is 	interesting,
in 	retrospect, 	how 	little 	attention 	they 	devoted 	to 	late
Le 	Corbusier. 	and 	how 	much 	they 	concentrated 	on 	the

-- 356 of 420 --

26. 1 	5 	Michael Graves.
Benacerraf addition.
Princeton, 	New Jersey.
1969.
villas 	of 	the 	1920s 	as 	sources. 	However, 	where 	the
exemplars 	were 	often 	made 	of 	stuccoed 	concrete, 	and
indulged 	in 	machine 	quotations, 	the 	replications 	were
often 	made 	of 	wood, 	were 	related 	to 	the 	American
timber 	frame 	tradition, 	and 	were 	even 	more 	spindly 	in
appearance. 	But 	it 	is 	not 	appropriate 	to 	treat 	the
group's 	work 	monolithically. 	Clwathmey. 	for 	example,
rehed 	on 	bold 	contrasts 	of 	volume 	and 	dumpy
proportions 	for 	his 	aesthetic 	effects. 	Meier 	was
preoccupied 	with 	the 	contrast 	and 	resolution 	of
vertical 	and 	horizontal 	layering 	in 	his 	house 	designs 	(a
concern 	which 	he 	claimed 	deriv'ed 	from 	the 	inherent
properties 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Dom-ino 	skeleton 	and
Maison 	Citrohan 	respectively). 	Hejduk 	built 	rarely 	and
expressed 	his 	ideas 	through 	crisp geometrical 	exercises
based 	on 	a 	somewhat 	academic 	view 	of 	Purism.
Eisenman. 	a 	theorist 	as 	well 	as 	a 	practitioner, 	modelled
his style extensively 	on 	that 	of Terragni. 	but 	disclaimed
Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	1 	960s 	•	
355
any 	cultural 	significance 	in 	this 	choice 	of prototype 	or
in 	the resultant analogies between 	his work 	and 	Italian
Rationalism 	of the 	1930s. 	Instead 	he argued 	that 	such
buildings 	as 	'House 	11' 	(1969) 	were 	explorations 	of
basic 	formal 	syntax 	and 	the 	logical 	structure 	of space.
It 	seemed 	to 	matter 	little 	to 	the 	New 	York 	s 	architects
that 	the 	forms 	they 	imitated 	had 	been 	the 	outward
expression 	of 	Utopian 	philosophies 	and 	social 	visions.
Discussions 	of 	moral 	content 	were 	displaced 	by
concentration 	on 	issues 	of 	a 	purely 	formal 	kind. 	In
their 	revulsion 	against 	sociology 	they 	perhaps 	neglec-
ted 	the 	dilTerent 	question 	of the 	idealization 	of a 	way 	of
life 	in 	symbolic 	form. 	In 	that 	respect 	they 	followed 	in
the 	Greenbergian 	critical 	tradition, 	or 	even 	the
formalist 	version 	of 	the 	International 	Style 	set 	by
Hitchcock 	and 	Johnson 	forty 	years 	before.
Indeed, 	the 	International 	Style 	revival 	was 	cloaked
in 	smoke-screens 	of 	verbal 	rhetoric 	implying 	that 	it
was 	throwing 	aside 	false 	doctrines 	of 	functionalism 	in
favour, 	once 	again, 	of the 	'art 	of architecture'. 	Venturi
and 	Moore 	tended 	to 	be 	rejected 	for 	their 	slumming 	in
Americana, 	and 	it 	became 	customary 	by 	the 	early
seventies 	to 	contrast 	the 	'whites' 	(the New 	York 	s ) 	and
the 	'greys' 	(Venturi 	et 	al. ) 	in 	rather the 	same 	way 	that
critics 	had 	contrasted 	pure 	geometrical 	abstraction
with 	Pop 	Art, 	namely 	as 	a 	contest 	between 	modernism
and 	realism, 	or 	as a 	battle 	between 	exclusiveness 	and
inclusiveness. 	In 	fact 	the 	architectural 	movements 	had
a 	good 	deal 	in 	common: 	both 	placed 	a 	high 	value 	on
complex 	formal 	manipulations 	of screens 	and 	planes;
both 	were 	involved 	with 	quotations 	and 	overt 	revival;
both 	were 	conceived 	(in 	part) 	as 	reactions 	against
debased 	modern 	design; 	and 	neither 	had 	much 	to 	say
about 	the 	general 	state 	of American 	society. 	Both 	were
precious 	flower 	architectures, 	conceived 	and 	con-
cocted 	in 	the 	hothouses 	of 	the 	elite 	American
universities; 	and 	both 	were 	prone 	to 	a 	bloodless 	and
over-intellectualized 	academicism.
Broadly speaking 	the 	path 	between 	19SS 	and 	1975
in 	Western 	Europe 	and 	the 	United 	States 	was 	one 	from
a 	loosely 	felt 	consensus (which 	nonetheless 	took 	many
forms) 	to 	a 	position 	of 	greater 	scepticism 	in 	which
various 	spectral 	versions 	of mythical 	orthodoxy 	came
under 	attack. 	The 	quest 	for 	deeper 	meanings 	in 	the
fifties 	avant-garde 	gave 	way 	to 	a 	brittle 	formalism
proud 	to 	announce 	that 	it 	had 	no 	social 	polemic, 	and
dubiously 	supported 	by 	intellectualizations 	derived
from 	linguistics 	and 	formalist 	criticism. 	The 	age 	of
conviction 	gave 	way 	to 	an 	era 	of broken 	faiths, 	where
no 	strong, 	new 	generating 	ideas 	seemed 	to 	emerge,
leaving 	the 	architect 	in 	a 	sort 	of 	suspension, 	free 	to
stick 	together fragments, 	but uncertain 	of the 	meaning
of their combination. 	It was symptomatic of the change
that, 	by 	the 	late 	seventies, 	one 	could 	find 	the 	word
'revolutionary' 	applied 	to 	revivals 	of earlier 	styles.

-- 357 of 420 --

2 	7. 	Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing
Countries 	since 	i960
Every 	people 	that 	has 	produced 	architecture 	has 	evolved 	its 	own 	favourite
forms, 	as 	peculiar 	to 	that 	people 	as 	its 	language, 	its 	dress, 	or 	its 	folklore. 	Until
the 	collapse 	of cultural 	frontiers 	in 	the 	last 	century, 	there 	were 	all 	over 	the
world 	distinctive 	local 	shapes 	and 	details 	in 	architecture, 	and 	the 	buildings 	of
any 	locality 	were 	the 	beautiful 	children 	of a 	happy 	marriage 	between 	the
imagination 	of the 	people 	and 	the 	demands 	of the 	countryside.
H. 	Fathy, 	1973
Modern 	architecture 	was 	created 	in 	industrialized
countries 	where 	a 	progressivist 	world 	view 	flourished
temporarily, 	and 	where 	avant-garde 	cliques 	attempted
to 	produce 	an 	authentic 	modern 	style 	appropriate 	to
rapidly 	changing 	social 	conditions. 	This 	curious
pattern 	was 	not 	repeated 	elsewhere, 	but 	its 	results
were 	copied 	all 	around 	the 	world, 	and 	were 	often
misapplied. 	Moreover, 	as 	has 	been 	emphasized, 	it 	was
not 	until 	the 	1940s 	and 1950s 	that 	modern 	forms 	had
any 	appreciable 	impact 	on 	the 	'less 	developed 	coun-
tries', 	and 	these 	forms 	were 	usually 	lacking 	in 	the
poetry 	and 	depth 	of 	meaning 	of 	the 	master-works 	of
the 	International 	Style. 	The 	dissemination 	of 	this
degraded 	version 	of 	modern 	design 	occurred 	in 	a
number 	of 	ways: 	through 	rapid 	economic 	develop-
ment 	of a 	kind 	which 	fostered 	functions, 	technologies
and 	urban 	circumstances 	in 	which 	some 	sort 	of
modern 	architecture 	seemed 	either 	relevant 	or 	un-
avoidable: 	through 	continuing 	colonization, 	in 	which
case 	images 	of 	modernity 	functioned 	as 	emblems 	of
foreign 	economic 	or 	political 	control: 	and 	through 	the
brainwashing 	of 	post-colonial 	elites 	(native-born 	but
foreign-educated 1 	with 	Western 	images 	and 	ideas
which 	were 	upheld 	as 	'progressive' 	counter-agents 	to
an 	earlier 	era 	of 'backwardness 	and 	stagnation'.
Some 	sense 	of 	the 	problems 	following 	from 	rapid
modernization 	has 	been 	given 	already 	with 	the
example 	of 	Japanese 	architecture 	in 	the 	twentieth
century 	(see 	Chapter 	25). 	In 	the 	1960s 	and 	1970s
many 	other 	parts of the world, 	especially 	in 	Africa, 	the
Far and 	Middle East, 	were afflicted 	by similar difficulties
of cultural 	identity. 	The 	arrival 	of modern 	architecture
was 	usually 	linked 	to 	foreign businesses, 	and 	while 	the
multi-storey, 	air-conditioned 	offices 	and the expensive-
ly 	clad 	airports 	may 	have 	served 	as 	instant 	status
symbols 	for 	those 	intent 	on 	attracting 	international
capital, 	the 	results 	were 	usually 	crude 	and 	lacking 	in
sensitivity 	to 	local 	traditions, 	values, 	and 	climate. 	Even
had 	there 	been 	architects 	keen 	on 	reinterpreting
national 	traditions, 	they 	would 	have 	had 	difficulty
finding relevant 	local 	precedents 	for such 	functions. 	As
it was. 	cultural introspection 	was 	not 	high 	on 	the list of
priorities 	of the 	typical 	patron.
This 	collision 	of old 	and 	new 	was 	another 	version 	of
the 	crisis 	of industrialization 	which 	Western 	European
countries 	and 	the 	United 	States 	had 	themselves 	begun
to 	experience 	in 	the 	nineteenth 	century. 	But 	there
were 	at 	least 	two 	major 	differences: 	the 	'advanced'
nations 	had 	themselves 	invented 	the 	Industrial
Revolution : 	and 	they 	had had 	over 	a 	century 	to 	adjust
to 	the 	far-reaching 	social 	and 	cultural 	changes 	it
brought 	with 	it. 	The 	rapidly 	developing Third 	World
country 	of 	the 	1960s 	or 	1970s 	(e.g., 	Iran 	or 	Nigeria)
could 	find 	itself 	passing 	from 	a 	rural 	and 	agricultural
economy 	to 	an 	urban 	and 	industrial 	one 	in 	the 	course
of a 	single 	generation. 	Moreover, 	the 	tools 	(including
buildings) 	with 	which 	this 	rapid 	change 	was 	achieved
were 	imported 	ones: 	little 	wonder 	that 	a 	form 	of
cultural 	schizophrenia 	should 	have 	emerged 	at 	the
same 	time.
Pleas 	on 	the 	part 	of 	'sensitive' 	Western 	observers
that 	national 	and 	rural 	traditions 	be 	preserved 	or 	used
as 	the 	basis 	of a 	new 	regionalism 	were 	liable 	to 	fall 	on
deaf 	ears 	in 	these 	circumstances, 	since 	peasant

-- 358 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing 	Countries 	since 	i960 	•	
357
vernaculars 	could 	easily 	be 	identified 	with 	backward-
ness 	and 	the 	exploitation 	of 	rural 	labour. 	The 	case 	in
favour 	of 	preserving 	fine 	nineteenth-century 	colonial
buildings 	(which 	might 	also 	possess 	subtle 	adjust-
ments 	to 	local 	traditions 	and climates I 	was even 	harder
to 	make. 	The 	new 	nrriviste 	classes 	seemed 	to 	wish 	to
disassociate 	themselves 	from 	the 	weight 	of their 	recent
history 	and 	to 	experience 	nothing 	less 	than 	the
consumer 	'freedoms' 	of the 	West. 	They 	grew 	greedy for
glossy 	images 	with 	technological 	and 	international
overtones 	which 	could 	affirm 	their 	own 	position. 	Skin-
deep 	modern 	building 	(rather 	than 	any 	substantial
form 	of modern 	architecture) 	was 	waiting 	in 	the 	West,
all 	too 	ready 	to 	overwhelm 	yet 	another 	area 	of 	the
international 	market. 	The 	irony 	was 	that 	so 	many
countries, 	at 	last 	liberated 	from 	overt 	colonial 	rule,
should 	so 	quickly 	have 	been 	persuaded 	to 	adapt 	vulgar
versions 	of Western 	architectural 	dress.
By 	the 	early 	l9f)Os 	city 	centres 	were 	springing 	up
around 	the 	world 	which 	seemed 	closer 	in 	spirit 	to
Manhattan 	or 	modern 	London 	than 	to 	local, 	national,
or 	colonial 	precedents. 	The 	new 	ersatz 	international
modern design 	with 	its standard cliches 	- 	the glass-slab
hotel 	with 	balconies 	and 	kidney-shaped 	pool, 	the 	air
conditioned 	lobby 	with 	tinted 	plate-glass 	windows, 	the
whitewashed 	concrete 	frame, 	etc. 	- 	was 	not 	just 	the
face 	of 	'Western 	economic 	imperialism', 	for 	parallel
developments 	occurred 	in 	countries 	under 	Soviet
influence 	at 	the 	same 	time. 	Perhaps 	Le 	Corbusier 	had
been 	right 	when 	he 	had 	suggested 	that 	the 	machine
caused 	a 	revolution 	of 	its 	own 	transcending 	political
ideologies. 	Some of the 	same 	distressing 	features 	which
had 	crept 	up 	on 	the 	cities 	of 	the 	West 	during 	the
nineteenth 	century, 	and to which modern 	architecture
had 	been 	an 	attempted 	answer, 	now 	impinged 	on
places 	where 	there 	was 	the 	added 	problem 	of a 	split
between 	adapted 	Western 	models 	and 	native 	values.
The 	safety 	valve 	of an 	avant-garde, 	or 	at 	least 	an 	elite
intent 	on 	visual 	quality 	and 	symbolic 	depth, 	was
usually 	missing 	or 	else 	a 	pale 	shadow 	of 	its 	Western
relatives.
One 	way 	out 	of 	the 	impasse 	was 	to 	try 	and 	put
together 	some 	combination 	of 	the 	indigenous 	and 	the
imported. 	Here 	fake 	regionalism 	- 	with 	a 	few
gingerbread 	'historical' 	attachments 	over 	an 	ill-
conceived 	modern 	structural 	box 	- 	was 	a 	constant
danger. 	A 	sounder 	approach 	lay 	in 	the 	sort 	of modern
regionalism 	mentioned 	in 	Chapters 	21 	and 	2^. 	in
which 	an 	attempt 	was 	made 	to 	unearth 	fundamental
lessons 	in 	local 	tradition 	and 	to 	blend 	them 	with 	an
already 	evolved 	modern 	language. 	The 	problem 	came
in 	translating 	these 	basic 	features 	expressing 	regional
adaptation 	and 	meanings 	of 	the 	past 	into 	a 	form
appropriate 	to 	changing 	social 	conditions: 	no 	set
recipes 	existed 	which 	could 	guarantee 	success, 	and
les,ser talents 	ran 	the 	risk 	of producing 	buildings 	which
were 	pastiches 	of both 	modern 	and traditional 	forms.
In 	the 	transactions 	between 	industrialized 	and
industrializing 	nations 	there 	were 	also 	collisions 	in 	the
ways 	buildings 	were 	designed 	and 	put 	up. 	Modern
architecture 	presupposed 	a 	division 	of labour 	between
architects, 	manufacturers, 	engineers 	and 	construction
workers, 	but 	in many 	'underdeveloped' 	countries there
were 	fewer 	steps 	in 	the 	process 	between 	conception
and 	construction. 	Thus 	a 	building 	conceived 	on 	a
Parisian 	drawing-board 	might 	require 	imported 	and
expensive 	mass-produced 	components 	which 	entirely
ignored 	local 	patterns 	of 	construction 	and 	labour
when 	built 	in 	the 	Persian 	Gulf. 	The 	resultant 	forms
were 	immediately 	at 	odds with 	centuries-old 	traditions
of 	craftsmanship 	in 	which 	methods 	had 	been 	evolved
to 	handle 	local 	materials. 	The 	practical 	logic 	behind
regional 	style 	was 	undermined, 	and 	the delicate details
and 	intuitions 	of 	handicraft 	were 	replaced 	by 	tatty
industrial 	building 	components.
The 	problems 	attached 	to 	importing 	foreign 	tech-
nologies 	were 	compounded 	by 	others 	related 	to 	the
imposition 	of alien 	social 	theories, 	especially 	in 	the 	field
of housing. 	What were conceived in 	Europe 	as 	low-cost
models 	might 	be 	inappropriate 	when 	built 	elsewhere.
In 	Egypt, 	for 	example, 	the 	philosopher/architect
Hassan 	Fathy 	discovered 	that 	concrete-frame 	housing
schemes 	w'ere 	liable 	to 	be 	far 	more 	expensive 	in 	terms
of 	money, 	transport 	costs, 	and 	salaries, 	than 	local,
traditional, 	self-build 	methods, 	and 	that 	they 	were 	at
odds 	with 	non-Western 	ways 	of 	life. 	In 	his 	book.
Architecture for 	the 	Poor, 	an 	Experiment 	in 	Rural 	Egypt
(1973). 	he 	suggested 	that 	labour-intensive 	con-
struction 	methods 	using 	local 	materials 	were 	the
obvious 	answer. 	He 	conducted 	an 	experiment 	at 	New
Gourna. 	close 	to 	Luxor 	in 	the 	Nile 	valley, 	in 	which 	he
schooled 	the 	local 	peasantry 	in 	Nubian 	techniques
using 	mud-brick 	vaults 	and 	simple 	domes 	(fig. 	27.1).
These elements had stood the test of time and 	were well
attuned 	to 	the 	resources 	and 	climate 	of the 	region: 	by
contrast 	'modern' 	solutions 	were 	often 	unfunctional
and 	ill-fitted 	to 	the 	particular 	environment. 	Fathy
expressed 	his 	scepticism 	of 	modern 	architecture
succinctly:
Modernity 	does 	not 	necessarily 	mean 	liveliness, 	and
change 	is 	not 	always 	for 	the 	better 	. 	. 	. 	Tradition 	is
not 	necessarily 	old 	fashioned 	and 	is 	not
synonymous 	with 	stagnation 	. 	. 	. 	Tradition 	is 	the
social 	analogy 	of personal 	habit, 	and 	in 	art 	has 	the
same 	effect of releasing 	the 	artist 	from 	distracting
and 	inessential 	decisions 	so 	that 	he 	can 	give 	his
whole 	attention 	to 	the 	vital 	ones.
Fathy's 	critique 	of industrialization 	and 	its 	accom-

-- 359 of 420 --

358 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 	94"
panying 	Unms 	w 	,is 	thus 	quite 	basic. 	He 	simply 	refused
to 	accept 	the 	myths 	of 	progress 	and 	claimed 	that 	in
most 	Third 	World 	circumstances 	the 	peasant 	could
build 	better 	for 	himself than 	any 	architect. 	He 	argued
that each 	individual 	family 	should 	build 	to 	suit 	its 	own
needs, 	employing 	the 	wisdom 	of tradition 	rather 	than
the 	expensive 	whims 	of 	professionals. 	There 	can 	be
little 	doubt 	that 	romanticization 	of 	the 	peasant 	was
part 	of a 	larger 	ideological 	quest 	for 	national 	roots ; 	his
philosophy 	would 	have 	particular 	appeal 	wherever the
rural 	past 	was 	idealized 	and 	treated 	as 	a 	source 	of
cultural 	mythology.
Fathy's 	experiments 	were 	conducted 	in 	a 	country
whose 	vernacular 	had, 	in 	fact, 	suffered 	severe 	disrupt-
ion 	under 	Ottoman 	rule, 	and 	his 	programme 	involved
something 	of 	a 	self-conscious 	revival 	of 	indigenous
craft 	(fig. 	27.2). 	In 	many 	Third 	World 	rural 	areas 	no
such 	revival 	was 	necessary, 	as 	local 	traditions 	endured
on 	their own. 	But even 	in 	these cases 	mechanization 	of
materials 	and 	of 	the 	means 	of 	production 	might
eventually 	affect 	the 	remotest 	countryside 	by 	drawing
peasants 	to 	the 	city 	in 	search 	of 	jobs 	and 	by
introducing 	labour-saving 	tools 	which 	interfered 	with
the 	continuity 	of rural 	craft 	traditions. 	The 	intricate
fabric 	of 	myths 	behind 	genuine 	vernacular 	forms
would 	be 	disrupted 	by 	a 	new 	spirit 	of rationality. 	The
uprooted 	urban 	proletariat 	would 	be 	cut 	off 	from 	its
countryside 	origins, 	but 	at 	the 	same 	time 	hard 	put 	to
adjust 	to 	the 	chaos 	of industrial 	urban 	life.
A 	crisis 	of 	this 	kind 	was 	felt 	acutely 	in 	places 	as 	far
apart 	as 	India 	and 	Brazil 	by 	the early 	1 960s. 	Architects
were 	powerless 	in 	the 	face 	of it. 	Neither 	bland 	low-cost
housing 	slabs, 	nor 	agrarian 	romanticism 	of 	the 	type
espoused 	by 	Fathy 	were 	much 	use 	in 	dealing 	with 	this
urban 	poverty 	and 	overcrowding. 	Vast 	new 	self-built
slums 	made 	of 	tin 	cans, 	cardboard 	and 	industrial
wastes 	grew 	around 	the 	urban 	fringe. 	In 	these
circumstances, 	'Architecture' 	- 	whether 	glass-boxed
or 	regionally 	sensitive 	- 	was 	a 	luxury. 	It 	is 	scarcely
surprising 	that 	urban 	theories 	should 	have 	reflected 	a
feeling of hopelessness 	in 	the 	face of such 	chaos. 	Indeed
the 	argument 	was 	put 	forth 	that 	the 	squatter 	and
satellite 	forms 	did 	at 	least 	provide 	shelter 	for 	the 	poor,
which 	the 	official 	housing 	agencies 	were 	unable 	to 	do.
Around 	Cairo 	the 	illegal 	settlements 	even 	hinted 	at 	the
shape of a 	new. 	half-industrialized vernacular, 	employ-
ing 	a 	rough-shod 	concrete 	frame 	with 	a 	flat 	roof, 	a
courtyard, 	and 	infill 	walls 	of 	pot-tile 	and 	brick 	(fig.
By 	the 	early 	1970s 	in 	any 	case, 	concepts 	of 	total
planning 	were 	under 	attack. 	This 	anti-absolutist
attitude 	was 	well 	reflected 	in 	an 	experiment 	conducted
in 	Peru 	for 	'Barriada' 	housing 	in 	1970. 	in 	which
a 	variety 	of 	well-intentioned 	international 	architects
supplied 	a 	rational 	plan 	based 	on 	the 	patterns
of 	life 	which 	had 	emerged 	in 	the 	slums 	themselves,
and 	left 	each 	family 	free 	to 	alter 	the 	individual
house 	at 	will. 	In 	Papua 	New 	Guinea, 	in 	towns 	like
Port 	Moresby, 	native 	inhabitants 	who 	had 	recently
arrived 	from 	the 	country 	were 	encouraged 	to 	trans-
form 	rural 	vernacular 	patterns 	which 	coped 	well 	with
27.1 	{left) 	Hassan 	Fathy
and 	the citizens of
Gouma. 	New 	Gouma.
near Luxor. 	Egypt.
1947-70: the mosque.
27.2 	[above] 	Hassan
Fathy. 	house 	near
Luxor. 	Egypt.

-- 360 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing Countries 	since 	1 960 	359
a 	tropical 	climate 	(fig. 	27.4). 	rather 	than 	following 	the
earlier 	way 	of 	dreary, 	ill-adapted, 	imported 	house-
types. 	One 	theorist. 	Z. 	Plocki. 	even 	went 	so 	far 	as 	to
propose a 	'New 	Guinea' 	architectural style, 	advocating
a 	sort 	of 'modern 	regionalist' 	approach 	and 	arguing 	in
favour 	of 	a 	new 	vernacular 	applicable 	to 	the 	broad
range 	of building 	tasks, 	large 	and 	small
:
Most 	architectural 	styles 	were 	the 	products 	of their
own 	societies. 	Its 	religious 	values, 	climate,
technology, 	social 	and 	political 	structures 	dictated
the 	need 	and 	style 	of buildings. 	Shapes, 	proportions
and 	decorations 	were 	symbolic 	and had 	meaning,
often 	ending 	up 	with 	strict 	architectural 	orders.
This 	'internal 	stimulus' 	created 	cultures 	and
architectural 	expressions 	that 	differed 	greatly 	from
each 	other 	. 	. 	. 	Many 	of the 	better 	examples 	are
being 	preserved, 	but 	rarely 	copied, 	and 	when 	they
are 	it's 	apparent 	they 	have no 	meaning 	. 	. 	. 	Today,
with 	jet 	travel, 	intercontinental 	news 	media,
cinema, 	political 	structures 	and 	cultural
exchanges, 	the 	world 	is 	smaller 	and 	the 	bulk 	of the
influences 	which 	dictate 	a 	style 	are 	international,
based 	on 	technology 	and 	economics 	. 	. 	. 	But. 	even
accepting 	the 	International 	Style, 	technology 	and
the 	stimulus 	from 	the 	outside, 	and 	not 	copying 	the
27.3 	[above) 	Cairo.
Egypt, 	the 	'industrialized
vernacular' 	of the
outskirts. 	n.)70s.
27.4 	{right] 	Urban
village. 	Hahuabada. 	Port
Moresby. 	Papua 	New
Guinea, 	mid 	1970s.

-- 361 of 420 --

360 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
traditional, 	rules 	can 	be 	formulated 	within 	which
architects 	can 	create 	architecture 	and 	a 	character
that 	can 	become 	the 	Niuginian 	style.
Here 	it 	was 	admitted 	that 	new 	urban 	patterns
required 	a 	new 	architecture 	aping 	neither 	traditional
tribal 	nor 	imported 	forms. 	The 	pretensions 	of 	the
modern 	movement 	towards 	universality' 	showed 	up
with 	embarrassing 	clarity, 	as 	did 	the 	limitations 	of a
superficial and nostalgic 	regionalism. 	Moreover, 	Plocki
extended 	his 	arguments 	to 	simple 	and 	self-built
structures, 	not 	just 	to 	the 	creations 	of 	the 	well-to-do.
The 	few 	touches 	of local 	colour 	required 	by 	the 	tourist
industry 	were 	scarcely 	adequate 	to 	the 	problem 	of
defining 	a 	new 	post-colonial 	style. 	This 	would 	have 	to
come 	partly 	from 	'within' 	and 	be 	a 	direct 	expression 	of
new 	life 	patterns.
Where 	basic 	shelter 	was 	the 	concern, 	regionalist
sensitivities 	may 	have 	seemed 	a luxury, 	but 	it 	was 	still
possible 	to 	treat 	middle-class 	commissions 	as 	a
laboratory 	for 	general 	formulations. 	As 	always,
architectural 	value 	would 	reside 	in 	the 	convincing
synthesis 	of 	the 	practical, 	the 	aesthetic 	and 	the
symbolic, 	and 	in 	the 	creation 	of 	a 	unity 	in 	harmony
with 	the setting. 	Vernacular structures 	provided 	many
basic 	clues 	in 	achieving such ends by 	revealing age-old
patterns 	of 	adaptation. 	In 	India 	both 	Kahn 	and 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	turned 	to 	this 	source 	in 	originating
elements 	for 	handling 	the 	extremes 	of 	climate: 	the
former's 	Ahmadabad 	Institute 	of Management 	( 	1 	^j(i4)
was 	built 	in 	a 	rugged, 	handmade 	brick 	vocabulary
with 	ingenious 	shading 	and 	ventilating 	apertures 	(fig.
27.5). 	while 	the 	latter's 	buildings 	in 	the 	same 	city 	and
in 	Chandigarh 	revealed the 	relevance 	of 	the 	concrete
frame, the 	parasol 	and 	the 	brise-soleil 	to 	Indian 	needs.
Among 	the 	Indians 	to 	take 	these 	hints 	were 	Charles
Correa 	and 	Balkrishna 	Doshi. 	Doshi's 	housing 	and
university 	schemes 	of 	the 	1960s 	extended 	the 	im-
ported 	language 	and 	blended 	it 	still 	further 	with
indigenous 	realities. 	He 	established 	simple 	standard-
ized 	systems 	of 	construction 	and 	patterns 	of 	plan
arrangement 	adapted 	to 	climate 	and 	use. 	and 	laid
these 	out 	in 	variations 	which 	enlivened 	the 	spaces
between. 	His 	housing 	at 	Hyderabad 	of 	the 	1970s
employed 	terraces 	and 	overhangs 	derived 	from 	the
vernacular 	of the 	region ; 	careful 	thought 	was 	given 	to
orientation, 	shading, 	and 	natural 	cross-ventilation, 	as
well 	as 	to 	gradations 	between 	public 	and 	private 	space
(fig. 	27.6). 	Doshi 	tried 	to 	avoid 	the 	gaping 	spaces
between 	buildings 	that 	had 	been 	made 	at 	Chandigarh,
and 	to 	create 	something 	closer 	to 	the 	tight-knit 	and
dense 	street 	patterns 	of 	traditional 	Indian 	towns. 	He
was 	acutely 	aware 	of the 	irrelevance 	of indulging 	in 	a
merely 	romantic 	peasanlism. 	especially 	in 	a 	country
where 	the 	peasant's 	lot 	was 	anything 	but romantic.
27.5 	l/e/n 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Ahmadabad 	Institute of
Management. 	India.
1964-
2j.b 	(below) 	Balkrishna
Doshi. 	mixed 	income
housing 	at 	Hyderabad.
India. 	1976.
27.7 	[right] 	J.F. 	Zevaco.
holiday 	housing. 	Agadir.
Morocco. 	19(15: 	an
attempt 	at 	cross-
breeding 	traditional 	and
modern 	forms.

-- 362 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing 	Countries 	since 	1960 	361
His buildings 	were 	usually 	constructed 	for 	an 	emerg-
ent 	bourgeoisie 	and 	were 	rigorously 	designed 	to 	meet
the 	demands 	and 	habits 	of 	a 	new 	India 	where 	values
reflected 	Western 	mores. 	Forms 	were 	needed 	which
crystallized 	this 	situation. 	After 	all. 	much 	of the 	finest
architecture 	in 	Indian 	history 	had 	emerged 	from 	the
cross-breeding of foreign 	and 	local 	influences. 	Even 	the
hardest-boiled 	nationalist might 	have to admit that not
all 	the 	best 	things 	were 	entirely 	home-grown.
A 	satisfactory 	blend 	of 	old 	and 	new 	was 	also
achieved 	by 	J. 	F. 	Zevaco 	in 	his 	design 	for 	courtyard
houses 	in 	Agadir. 	Morocco 	(1965). 	Here 	the 	social
context 	was 	positively 	luxurious 	compared 	with 	that
which 	had 	confronted 	Fathy 	in 	Egypt 	as 	these 	were
holiday 	dwellings 	(fig. 	27.7). 	Nonetheless, 	the 	archi-
tectural 	strategy 	was 	one 	which 	was 	transposible 	to
somewhat 	less 	expensive 	situations. 	Zevaco's 	solution
drew 	together the concrete technology, 	planning 	logic,
and 	simple 	volumes 	of 	a 	modern 	architectural
vocabulary, 	with 	the 	traditional, 	inward-looking,

-- 363 of 420 --

362 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	19 40
North 	African 	courtviird 	dwelling. 	Thf 	approach 	was
similar 	to 	that 	which 	Bodiansky 	and 	Woods 	had
suggested 	in 	their 	ATBAT 	scheme 	of 	the 	early 	1950s
(see 	Chapter 	2i|. 	Like 	its 	predecessors, 	the 	Zevaco
design 	was 	valuable for its straightforwardness 	and the
way 	in 	which 	it 	abstracted 	underlying 	social 	and
climatic features 	from 	a 	local 	tradition 	and 	rephrased
them 	in 	a 	new 	context. 	A 	certain 	formal 	elegance 	was
assured 	by 	the 	fine 	handling of proportions 	and 	details,
the play 	of light 	and 	the 	control 	of scale 	and 	greenery.
Agadir 	was 	a 	city 	already 	undergoing 	drastic
modernization: 	it 	was 	a 	resort 	which 	had 	been 	largely
rebuilt 	after 	a 	major 	earthquake. 	Mopti 	in 	Mali 	was 	a
traditional 	sub-Saharan 	city 	with 	one 	of 	the 	most
splendid 	mud 	mosques 	in 	North 	Africa. 	The 	Medical
Centre, 	by 	Andre 	Ravereau 	(completed 	in 	1976), 	had
to 	be 	inserted 	between 	this 	major 	symbolic 	monu-
ment 	and 	the 	river 	Niger 	(fig. 	27.8). 	The 	solution
was 	to 	distribute 	the 	functions 	in 	low, 	well-pro-
tected 	volumes, 	linked 	one 	to 	another 	by 	shaded 	walk-
ways, 	and 	disposed 	to 	maximize 	cross-ventilation. 	The
style 	was 	simple 	and 	unadorned, 	and 	in 	tune 	with
the 	abstraction 	of 	the 	local 	Saharan 	vernacular:
the 	typical 	rectangular 	geometries 	and 	flat 	roofs 	of the
region, 	gashed 	by 	deep 	shadows 	and 	enlivened 	by 	rep-
etitions 	and 	variations 	of 	simple 	themes, 	might have
been 	designed 	with 	a 	Cubist 	sensibility 	in 	mind. 	The
technique 	of 	construction 	was 	also 	a 	happy 	blend 	of
the regional 	and 	the 	imported, 	since 	concrete 	and 	mud
were 	both 	materials 	cast 	in 	a 	wooden 	form-work. 	In
the 	Medical 	Centre, 	the 	traditional 	mud 	walls 	were
strengthened 	(and 	given 	a 	longer 	life 	than 	usual) 	by
2 7.S 	irt/imri 	.Andre
Ravereau. 	Medical
Centre. 	Mopti. 	Mali.
1976. 	with 	ttie
traditional 	mosque 	in
the 	background.
27.9 	[above right)
Minoru 	Yamasaki.
Dharan 	airport. 	1961.
27.10 (right) 	Alison 	and
Peter Smithson. 	project
for Royal 	National
Pahlavi 	Library, 	Tehran.
19 77-

-- 364 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing 	Countries 	since 	i960 	• 	^63
tlic 	citlJihoii 	ul 	cement. 	The 	contextual 	sensitivity 	of
the 	scheme 	extended 	from 	its 	colour, 	materials, 	and
shape 	(which 	blended with 	the 	neighbouring 	mosque),
to 	the 	overall 	arrangement, 	which 	restated 	traditional
urban 	alleyways 	and 	pedestrian 	links 	in 	the 	building
itself. 	Arguably 	these 	were 	strategies 	of 	a 	kind 	which
had 	originated 	in 	the 	West 	(e.g., 	with 	Team 	X) but 	in
Ravereau's 	design, 	the 	ideas 	were 	carried 	through 	to
create 	a 	subtle 	blend 	of 	the 	old 	and 	the 	new, 	of 	the
African 	and 	the 	FAiropean. 	Part 	of of the 	richness 	of the
building 	came 	from 	the 	use 	of 	local 	handicraft
methods, 	which 	gave 	the 	forms 	a 	sensitive 	touch
lacking 	in 	most 	industrialized 	buildings. 	To 	have
achieved 	similar 	effects 	in 	the 	West 	would 	have 	been
extremely 	expensive, 	as 	such 	craftsmanship 	was
altogether rare. 	Ravereau 	attempted 	to 	incorporate 	the
best 	qualities 	of both 	worlds 	( Plate 	15).
FA'idently 	the 	Mopti 	Medical 	Centre 	was 	a 	context
which 	demanded 	a 	quiet, 	almost 	anonymous, 	solution.
But 	Western 	architects 	might 	also 	be 	called 	upon 	to
design 	prestige 	buildings. 	Among 	the 	competitions
held 	in 	the 	1970s 	for 	grand 	new 	buildings 	in 	the
wealthier 	developing 	countries 	were 	numerous 	ones
for 	'cultural 	centres', 	museums 	and 	state 	palaces,
where 	issues 	of 	representation' 	were 	paramount. 	One
of 	these 	was 	held 	in 	1977 	for 	the 	Royal 	National
Pahlavi 	Library 	to 	stand 	in 	Tehran 	and 	embody
(presumably) 	the 	munificence 	of 	the 	Shah's 	imperial
court. 	Architects 	from 	all 	parts 	of 	the 	world 	made
entries 	and 	indulged 	in 	confused 	efTorts 	at 	'cultural
SOUTH 	€L€VRTIOn
m"iff
i 	f 	Hj^RrW*^ 	»t" 	U 	X 	V 	\ 	^'U''

-- 365 of 420 --

364 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
expression'. 	Alison 	and 	Peter 	Smithson, 	for 	example,
departed 	drastically 	from 	the 	safe 	path 	of 	their 	usual
vocabulary 	(no 	doubt 	sensing 	that 	it 	lacked 	sufficient
'rhetoric' 	to 	deal 	with 	the 	symbolic 	requirements 	of 	a
state 	building 	which 	should 	be 	identifiable 	by 	the
populace), 	and embarked on 	a 	perilous 	road 	involving
an 	imagery 	based 	on 	the 	'Peacock 	Feather' 	(a 	motif
from 	the 	Shah's 	heraldry) 	and 	the 	dome 	(a 	traditional
Persian 	symbol 	of authority). 	The 	result 	was 	a 	fussy
orientalism 	which 	failed entirely 	to capture 	the 	spirit 	of
traditional 	monumentality 	(fig. 	2 7. 10). 	The mannered
attempt 	at 	aping 	Islamic 	ornamental 	patterns 	recalled
the 	Baghdad 	University 	scheme 	of over 	a 	decade 	before
by 	Gropius 	and TAC, 	in 	which 	a 	bogus 	historicism 	had
come 	very 	close 	to 	the 	spirit 	of a 	Hollywood 	production
of 	the 	Arabian 	Nights. 	Minoru 	Yamasaki's 	Dharan
airport 	for 	Saudi 	Arabia, 	of the early 	1960s, 	also 	came
dangerously 	near 	kitsch 	in 	its 	pre-cast 	supports
emulating 	palm 	trees, 	and 	its 	tracery 	screens 	sup-
posedly modelled on traditional fenestration 	(fig. 	27.9).
However, 	the 	Western 	architect 	intent 	on 	even 	a
genuine 	regionalism 	might 	find 	himself 	faced 	by 	a
client 	or 	an 	advisory 	body 	keen 	to 	have 	the 	latest 	from
New 	York 	or 	London. 	In 	this 	scenario 	the 	theorist
armed 	with 	his 	arguments 	about 	'locale' 	and 	'genius of
place' 	might 	be 	rejected 	as 	an 	agent 	of the 	West 	intent
on 	holding 	the 	developing 	world 	back from 	'progress'.
There 	were 	some 	situations 	in 	which 	the 	Western
architect 	might 	be called 	upon 	to 	design 	for 	religious or
state 	institutions 	with 	highly 	defined 	traditional 	types
of building 	such 	as 	mosques. 	In 	these cases 	the 	conflict
between new and old. 	imported 	and indigenous, 	was at
its 	most 	extreme. 	If 	the 	designer 	simply 	followed 	the
formula 	of 	the 	traditional 	type 	he 	ran 	the 	risk 	of
producing 	a 	sham, 	for 	his 	vocabulary 	and 	structural
systems 	were 	not, 	in 	fact, 	traditional, 	and 	his 	forms
lacked 	symbolic 	conviction. 	If 	he 	stuck 	to 	his 	own.
modern 	vocabulary, 	he 	might 	fail 	to 	adhere sufficiently
to 	the 	traditional 	elements 	and 	conventional 	mean-
ings, 	and 	end 	up 	with 	a 	design 	that 	failed 	to 	com-
municate 	its 	purpose. 	The 	problem 	was 	not 	so 	very
different 	in 	kind 	from 	that 	facing 	an 	architect 	in 	the
West 	when 	presented 	with 	a 	cathedral: 	what 	was
needed 	was 	an 	imaginative 	transformation 	of proto-
types. 	However, 	it 	was 	rare 	that 	a 	Western 	architect
grasped 	the 	spirit 	of 	the 	culture 	for 	which 	he 	was
designing, 	and 	the 	employment 	of 	a 	native 	architect
was 	no 	sure 	guarantee 	of 	authenticity 	either. 	At 	one
extreme 	one 	might 	have 	a 	mosque 	that 	was 	indistin-
guishable 	from 	an 	office 	building; 	at 	the 	other, 	a 	bogus
version 	of 	dome 	and 	minaret 	clumsily 	coated 	in
industrial 	tiles 	and 	related 	uneasily 	to 	an 	entirely
foreign 	constructional 	system 	in 	concrete.
Thus 	a 	major 	element 	of 	the 	architectural 	crisis 	of
developing 	nations 	arose 	from 	a 	failure 	to 	establish 	an
architectural 	language 	suitable 	to 	both 	modern 	and
traditional 	tasks. 	It 	was 	no 	good 	pretending 	that
modernization 	was 	not 	occurring, 	and 	hoping 	that 	the
clock 	would 	stand 	still 	or 	even 	go 	backwards 	to 	some
(entirely 	illusory) 	'pure 	period', 	when 	foreign 	in-
fluences 	and 	chaotic 	changes 	were 	held 	not 	to 	have
occurred. 	Nonetheless, 	these 	sentimental 	traditionalist
emotions 	were 	often 	rehearsed 	in 	the 	confused 	search
for 	'cultural 	identity', 	whether 	this 	was 	defined 	in
nationalist 	or 	pan-cultural 	terms. 	The 	architectural
tradition 	in 	question 	might 	involve 	Islamic 	monu-
ments 	or 	Melanesian 	wooden 	huts, 	but 	the 	traditional-
ist 	still 	shared 	all 	the 	predicaments 	of 	his 	revivalist
counterpart 	in 	nineteenth-century 	Europe: 	even 	once
a 	cultural 	essence' 	had 	been 	divined 	and 	linked 	to
some 	'golden 	age' 	or another 	in 	the 	past, 	there was still
the 	problem 	of 	representing 	this 	core 	identity 	archi-
tecturally. 	One 	could 	not 	simply 	imitate 	the 	earlier
forms: 	precedents 	needed 	transforming 	into 	meaning-
ful 	images 	in 	the 	present.
1973 	was 	a 	crucial 	year 	for 	the 	economies 	of 	the
West 	because 	it 	was 	then 	that 	the 	'oil 	crisis' 	came 	to 	a
head. 	The revenue which 	flowed 	into 	the 	oil-producing
countries 	was 	exchanged 	for 	Western 	expertise,
including 	the 	talents 	of the 	architectural 	profession. 	A
lull 	in 	Western 	production 	(often 	filled 	with 	paper
projects 	and 	theoretical 	researches) 	corresponded 	with
a 	boom 	in 	construction 	in 	previously 	undeveloped
parts of the 	world 	which 	had 	usually 	been 	ignored 	by
the 	West. 	It 	was 	not 	a 	happy 	contract 	of 	forces: 	get-
rich-quick 	clients 	had 	little 	time 	to 	spend 	on 	niceties 	of
architectural culture, 	and 	Western 	architects intent on
financial 	gain 	were 	abysmally 	ignorant 	of 	local
customs 	and 	traditions. 	An 	epidemic 	of 	technological
brashness 	hit 	the 	shores 	of 	the 	Persian 	Gulf 	and 	the
fringes 	of 	the 	desert. 	The 	matter 	was 	further 	com-
plicated 	by 	the 	relative 	lack 	of monumental 	and 	urban
examples 	in 	a 	primarily 	nomadic 	region. 	Relevant
models 	were 	few. 	What 	was 	needed 	was 	a 	thorough
assessment 	from 	first 	principles, 	of 	the 	formal 	sug-
gestions 	inherent 	in 	climate, 	materials, 	social 	patterns
and 	the 	like. 	Unfortunately, 	such 	rigour 	was 	not
usually 	applied, 	and 	the 	new 	buildings 	of Saudi 	Arabia
or Kuwait 	looked 	as 	if they could 	have stood 	anywhere,
A 	possible 	exception 	was 	the 	Intercontinental 	Hotel
designed 	for 	Mecca 	by 	Frei 	Otto, 	the 	West 	German
architect/engineer. 	In 	his 	Olympic 	Games 	structures
for 	Munich, 	Otto 	had 	employed 	delicate 	high-tension
nets 	and webs 	of 	irregular 	geometry 	to 	cover 	huge
spaces. 	His 	forms 	were 	derived 	from 	a 	careful
assessment 	of 	function 	and 	materials, 	but 	were 	also
partly 	inspired 	by 	natural 	structures 	and 	by 	nomadic
tents. 	His 	hotel 	design 	incoporated 	the 	basic 	principles
of a 	Bedouin 	tent 	but 	at 	a 	much 	larger 	scale 	and 	using
steel 	cables 	and 	wooden 	slats 	instead 	of rope 	and 	cloth.

-- 366 of 420 --

2 7.11 	Ministry of
Building, 	Peking, 	igsos.
The 	building 	was 	laid 	out 	as 	a 	sequence 	of 	small
pavilions in 	a 	lush 	garden 	and 	the 	tent 	was drawn 	over
the 	whole 	thing 	as 	a 	minimal 	shading 	device, 	open 	at
the 	edges 	for 	the 	flow 	of 	air. 	A 	similar 	concept 	of 	the
'high-tech' 	tent 	was 	employed 	by 	Skidmore, 	Owings,
and 	Merrill 	in 	their 	design 	for 	the 	airport 	at 	Mecca, 	a
building 	of 	some 	symbolic 	importance 	as 	the 	modern
arrival 	point 	for 	Muslims 	from 	all 	over 	the 	world
making 	their 	pilgrimage 	to 	the 	Holy 	City.
The 	international 	resurgence 	in 	the 	cultural 	power
and 	confidence 	of 	Islam 	was 	another 	major 	force 	to
influence 	relationships 	between 	industrialized 	and 	less
industrialized 	nations 	in 	the 	mid-1970s. 	This 	coin-
cided 	with 	a 	period 	of soul-searching 	in 	the 	West, 	well
reflected 	in 	a 	sort 	of 	architectural 	introversion 	and
mannerism 	which 	replaced 	any 	serious 	attempt 	at
expressing 	human 	values. 	'Islamic 	revival' 	took 	many
forms 	and 	was 	fuelled 	by 	many 	fires, 	among 	them 	a
revulsion 	against 	the 	materialism 	which 	(it 	was 	held)
could 	be 	traced 	to 	'Western 	modernizing 	influences'.
Architecture 	could 	not 	remain 	immune 	Ibr 	long: 	the
images 	of 	the 	debased 	International 	Style 	were 	soon
condemned 	as 	emblems 	of demonic 	secularism.
The 	backlash 	against 	'modern 	values' 	implied
nothing 	distinct 	beyond 	a 	greater 	reverence 	for
traditional 	moral 	and 	aesthetic 	forms. 	Once 	again, 	the
issue 	of 	identity 	was 	at 	stake, 	but 	Pan-Islamic
sentiments 	could 	even 	be 	manipulated 	to 	imply 	a
community 	of 	culture 	between 	Morocco 	and 	Manila;
with 	the wave of a 	wand 	they 	conveniently 	overlooked
schisms, 	national 	boundaries 	and 	centuries 	of change.
It 	was 	a 	mood 	which 	was 	hard 	to 	translate 	into 	an
architectural 	philosophy, 	let 	alone 	architectural 	forms.
The 	traditionalist 	designer 	who 	pretended 	that
modern' 	and 	'Western' 	models 	should 	be 	expunged
Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Developing 	Countries 	since 	i960 	• 	365
courted 	a 	number 	of 	teasing 	difficulties. 	He 	had 	to
decide 	on 	the 	common 	denominators 	of 	'Islamic
architectural 	identity' 	(a 	tall 	order 	when 	one 	included
the 	whole 	Muslim 	world, 	and 	when 	one 	admitted 	that
many 	other 	factors 	than 	religion 	influenced 	forms). 	He
felt 	compelled 	to 	believe 	that 	'the 	nature 	of Islam' 	was
some fixed 	and 	unchanging entity, 	which 	it 	clearly 	had
not 	been. 	And, 	like 	any 	other 	revivalist, 	he 	had 	to
decide 	which 	period 	of 	the 	arts 	was 	closest 	to 	the
'essential 	Islam', 	then 	to 	restate 	these 	forms 	without
debasing 	them. 	There 	were 	other 	tricky issues 	arising
from 	real 	changes 	in 	functions 	and 	needs: 	what, 	for
example, 	was 	an 	'Islamic 	railway 	station' 	supposed 	to
look 	like.' 	The fundamentalist architect had 	the 	further
theoretical 	difficulty 	of 	deciding 	whether 	or 	not
architectural 	quality 	might 	transcend 	religious
dogmatism.
Such 	dilemmas 	were 	not. 	of 	course, 	uniquely
Muslim 	property, 	but 	were 	shared 	by 	most 	countries
confronting 	rapid 	change. 	After its 	revolution 	in 	1 949.
China 	embarked upon 	a 	tricky 	path 	of 	cultural 	self-
definition 	which 	had 	to 	steer 	its 	way 	between 	Soviet
influence 	and 	its 	own 	quest 	for 	modernization. 	Grand
State 	buildings 	such 	as 	the Great 	Hall 	of the 	People 	and
the 	Museum 	of 	Chinese 	History 	and 	the 	Revolution
built 	in 	the 	1950s 	in 	Peking 	reflected 	a 	Classicizing 	line
from 	Moscow, 	with 	mild 	touches 	here 	and 	there 	of
bland 	ornament 	abstracted 	from 	the 	Imperial 	tradit-
ion. 	The 	Building 	Ministry, 	erected 	in 	the 	1950s 	(fig.
27.1 	1 	). 	had 	more 	overtly 	nationalist 	overtones, 	but 	its
oriental 	touches 	were 	still 	skin-deep. 	Most 	matters 	of
visual 	culture 	in 	China 	have 	been 	highly 	controlled 	by
the 	Ministry 	of Culture 	and 	by 	the 	propaganda 	arm 	of
the 	Chinese 	Communist 	Party. 	A 	dogmatic 	framework
of 	this 	sort 	has 	done 	little 	to 	encourage 	visual
excellence. 	Indeed, 	it 	is 	an 	ideological 	premiss 	of 	the
system 	that 	social 	function 	should 	always 	be 	con-
sidered 	before 	formal 	quality. 	Evidently 	the 	idea 	that
life-enhancing 	formal 	arrangements 	might 	have 	an
elevating 	role 	to 	play 	in 	the 	formulation 	of 	a 	new
society 	has 	not 	yet 	penetrated 	the 	official 	platitudes
which 	stress 	realism 	and 	obvious 	propaganda 	devices.
It 	is 	interesting 	to 	conclude 	an 	all 	too 	brief survey 	of
emergent 	world 	architecture 	with 	a 	monument 	which
seems 	as 	if it 	may 	succeed 	on 	the 	social, 	symbolic, 	and
formal 	levels 	simultaneously, 	and 	which 	has 	been
conceived 	within 	a 	complex 	weave 	of 	cultural
influences. 	This 	is 	the 	Hurva 	Synagogue, 	designed 	by
Denys 	Lasdun 	between 	[978 	and 	1981 	(fig. 	27.1 	2) 	for
the 	old 	city 	of 	Jerusalem 	on 	the 	site 	of 	a 	synagogue
shelled in the 	1967 war. The 	rebuilding 	( including part
of the 	ruin) 	obviously 	has 	a 	significance 	of renewal 	for
international 	Jewry 	as 	well 	as 	ardent 	local 	Zionists.
Originally 	Louis 	Kahn 	was 	employed 	to 	prepare 	a
design, 	but 	this 	was 	left 	incomplete 	at 	his 	death. 	His

-- 367 of 420 --

366 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
sketches 	suggested 	a 	large 	symmetrical 	building 	of
almost 	fortified 	appearance 	towering 	above 	the
neighbouring 	flat 	roofs 	of the 	old 	city.
Lasdun 	sought 	a 	less 	forbidding 	but 	no 	less
monumental 	solution. 	In 	accord 	with 	his 	urban
landscape 	philosophy 	he 	thought 	of the 	main 	chamber
of 	the 	synagogue 	as 	a 	piece 	of 	the 	city, 	and 	of 	the
building 	as a 	whole 	as 	a 	more 	intensified 	form 	of 	the
surrounding 	urban 	patterns 	of streets, 	squares, 	and 	Hat
roofs. 	A 	synagogue 	is 	not 	a 	building 	type 	of fixed 	form.
although 	Middle-Eastern 	variants 	have 	often 	used
domes. But 	even 	if 	there 	had 	been 	a 	firm 	convention,
the 	architect 	would 	still 	have 	had 	the 	problem 	of
injecting 	the 	standard 	image 	with 	a 	new 	meaning 	and
vitality. 	Lasdun 	envisaged 	a 	central 	room 	of 	great
formality 	on 	a 	clearly 	defined 	main 	axis 	running 	from
the small 	access 	street to 	a 	square at the 	rear of the site.
Galleries 	were 	placed 	at 	the 	middle 	levels 	for 	the
women, 	and 	were 	focused 	towards 	the 	arc 	and 	the
bema. 	This 	main 	space 	was 	surmounted 	by 	a 	grand
parasol 	roof 	- 	a 	much 	enlarged 	version 	of 	his 	usual
strata 	- 	supported 	on 	polygonal 	towers 	containing
stairs 	and 	providing 	natural 	ventilating chimneys. 	The
deep 	overhangs 	sheltered 	the 	interior 	from 	the 	glare
and 	gave 	a 	feeling 	of enclosure 	to 	the 	room. 	The 	light,
filtering 	in 	from 	the 	edges, 	added 	to 	the 	mysterious
character 	of 	the 	space. 	The 	lowest 	portion 	of 	the
synagogue 	was 	enclosed 	by 	the 	walls 	of 	the 	ruin. 	No
attempt 	was 	made 	at 	employing 	domes 	or 	other
elements 	of local 	usage, 	because 	they 	were 	not 	specific
to 	synagogues 	as 	a 	type, 	and 	because 	they 	were 	not
part 	of 	the 	Lasdunian 	conviction 	and 	language.
Nonetheless, 	the 	lighting 	system 	under 	the 	parasol
gave 	a 	hooded 	character 	to 	the 	interior, 	while 	the 	roof
itself 	restated 	the 	meaning 	of a 	sacral 	umbrella 	and
gave an 	almost 	primeval 	feeling of shelter. 	The rhetoric
of 	the 	Hurva 	scheme 	arose, 	not 	from 	the 	spurious
attachment 	of devalued 	symbols, 	but 	from 	an 	imagery
and 	a 	mood 	associated 	with 	the 	basic 	meaning 	of a
place 	of 	dignified 	assembly 	in 	a 	city-space. 	Lasdtm
'rethought' 	the 	significance 	of the 	synagogue 	in 	terms
of 	an 	authentic 	language 	(the 	strata 	and 	towers)
already 	attuned 	to 	the 	idea 	of 	congregation. 	This 	he
managed 	to 	do 	without 	any 	frantic 	search 	for 	'Jewish
essences'.
The 	obsession 	with 	cultural 	representation 	which
came 	into 	focus 	in 	the mid- 	1 9 70s was ever in 	danger of
ignoring 	issues 	of 	architectural 	quality 	and 	authen-
ticity. 	A 	building 	that 	fitted 	some 	passing 	prescription
or 	dogma, 	that 	illustrated 	values 	that 	were 	noisily
proclaimed 	as 	'Islamic'. 	'Jewish'. 	'Melanesian',
'Communist' 	(or 	whatever I. 	was 	not 	necessarily
architecture 	of 	lasting 	quality. 	Indeed, 	too 	facile 	an
acceptance 	of 	conventional 	iconography 	could 	lead
quickly 	to 	kitsch. 	The 	post-Second 	World 	War 	era
began 	with 	the 	emancipation 	of various 	architectural
cultures 	from 	a 	debased 	international 	formula: 	this
was 	desirable 	and 	inevitable. 	But 	regionalism 	could
easily 	become 	the 	facile 	tool 	of religious 	and 	nationafist
dogmatism 	of 	a 	sort 	which 	left 	no 	room 	for 	the
universal 	aspects 	of both 	the 	human 	condition 	and 	the
language 	of 	art. 	What 	was 	needed 	was 	a 	blend 	of the
local 	and 	the 	universal 	which 	avoided 	the 	limitations
of each 	and 	led 	to 	forms 	of lasting 	symbolic 	resonance.
Skin-deep 	modernism 	and 	glib 	traditionalism 	were
evils 	to 	be 	avoided 	in 	every 	part 	of the 	world.
27.12 	Denys Lasdun.
Hurva 	Synagogue.
Jerusalem. 	1978-81.
project.

-- 368 of 420 --

28. 	The 	Traditions 	of 	Modern
Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past
I 	dislike 	a 	sentimental 	antiquarian 	attitude 	towards 	the 	past 	as 	much 	as 	I
disliive 	a 	sentimental 	technocratic 	one toward 	the 	future. 	Both 	are 	founded 	on
a 	. 	. 	. 	clockwork 	notion 	of time.
A. 	VanEyck, 	1967
It 	is 	a 	standard 	part of 	art 	historical 	folklore 	that 	one
should 	never 	attempt 	to 	write 	the 	history 	of the 	recent
past. 	The 	reason 	given 	is 	that 	one 	is 	liable 	to 	be 	biased.
Why 	this 	should 	not 	be 	true 	of 	studies 	of 	the 	more
distant 	past too 	is 	not explained. 	It tends to be taken 	for
granted 	that 	the 	true 	shape 	of 	recent 	history 	will
emerge 	on 	its 	own.
Caution 	is 	obviously 	required 	in 	describing 	contem-
porary 	developments, 	but 	it 	is 	misleading 	to 	imagine
that 	an 	acceptable 	consensus 	will 	come 	about
naturally. 	If the 	historian 	steps 	back, 	the 	propagandist
with 	an 	axe 	to 	grind 	steps 	in, 	usually 	with 	his 	own
polemical 	version 	of 	what 	is 	'salient'. 	This 	danger
seems 	greater 	than 	ever 	in 	the 	past 	ten 	years 	when 	so
much 	emphasis 	has 	been 	placed 	on 	the 	printed 	word
and 	the 	photograph: 	movements 	and 	'isms' 	have 	been
fervently 	discussed 	on 	the 	basis 	of 	a 	few 	drawings 	in
glossy 	magazines 	without so much 	as 	a brick 	being 	laid
or 	a 	concrete 	slab 	poured. 	Factions 	of the 	avant-garde
have 	grappled 	for 	control 	over 	the 	media 	and 	over
university 	departments 	to 	assert 	that 	their 	own 	ideas
(rather than 	someone 	else's) 	are 	the 	'right' 	ones 	for 	the
times. 	Architects 	have 	even 	developed 	the 	habit 	of
writing 	their 	own 	histories 	(sources 	and 	all), 	thus
leaving 	the 	impression 	that 	the 	most 	signiticant
features 	of 	the period 	must 	be 	the 	ones 	that 	are 	most
published 	and 	discussed.
The 	problem 	of 	examining 	the 	recent 	past 	dispas-
sionately 	is 	compounded 	by 	the 	repeated 	refrain 	that
modern 	architecture 	is 	dead'. 	This 	emotive 	slogan 	has
encouraged 	the 	view 	that 	one 	period 	is 	in 	its decadence
and 	that 	another 	one 	may 	be 	dawning, 	though 	its
character 	remains 	unclear 	to 	all 	concerned. 	Those
who 	contribute 	to 	this 	view 	will 	obviously 	play 	down
continuities 	with 	the 	modern 	tradition 	and 	do 	all 	they
can 	to 	inflate 	the 	originality 	of architects 	selected 	to 	fit
a 	'post-modern' 	label. 	Those 	who 	find 	the 	idea
unsavoury 	will 	hang 	on 	tenaciously 	to 	the 	habits 	of
their 	upbringing 	and 	claim 	that 	they 	stem 	from 	some
core 	identity 	of 	'modernism'. 	Neither 	position 	is 	based
on 	a 	subtle 	view 	of 	the 	genesis 	of 	forms 	within
traditions, 	and 	each 	tends 	to 	posit 	a 	simplistic 	and
monolithic 	version 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Neither 	is
willing 	to 	admit 	that 	the 	most 	profound 	innovations
tend 	to 	blend 	together 	old 	and 	new. 	and 	that 	the
seminal 	works of the 	modern 	movement 	have 	value 	for
the 	future 	precisely 	because 	their 	principles 	transcend
period 	limitations. 	In 	fact, 	both 	views 	seem 	too
concerned 	with 	changes 	of 	architectural 	dress. 	The
'newest' 	(and 	rarest) 	thing 	that 	one 	can 	hope 	for 	is 	a
building 	that 	is 	simply 	very 	good, 	whatever 	its
relationship 	to 	traditions 	near 	and 	far, 	however 	it 	tits
the 	prescriptions 	of 	the 	fashion-mongers 	or 	the
yearnings 	of the 	old 	guard.
There 	are 	probably 	two 	extremes 	which 	should 	be
avoided 	when 	dealing 	with 	the recent 	past. 	The 	first 	is
identification 	with 	the 	values 	of one 	school 	or 	clique:
the 	second 	is 	a 	lofty 	pretence 	at 	knowing 	what 	is
'essential' 	about 	recent 	development. 	Both 	positions
are too exclusive 	and 	amount 	to 	forecasting 	in 	disguise
rather 	than 	to 	history. 	Perhaps 	one 	should 	adopt 	a
different 	strategy 	and 	pretend 	that 	one 	is 	looking 	back
at 	the 	1 9 70s 	at 	a distance 	of a 	few 	decades. 	From 	such
a 	vantage-point 	movements 	that 	claim 	opposition 	to

-- 369 of 420 --

368 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	19 40
one 	another 	reveal 	underlying 	similarities. 	Events.
ideas 	and 	personalities 	blend 	into 	longer 	temporal
perspectives, 	including 	the 	developments 	described
earlier 	in 	this 	book. 	Claims 	to 	originality 	made 	by
younger 	architects 	appear excessive, 	and 	the 	weight 	of
the 	modern 	tradition 	may 	seem 	more 	insistent 	than
some 	would 	like. 	Even 	styles 	of criticism 	and 	rejection
may 	be 	seen 	to 	have 	a 	pedigree. 	Such 	a 	description 	is
bound 	to 	be 	lopsided 	and 	incomplete, 	but 	I 	can 	at 	least
claim 	that 	I 	have 	set 	out 	to 	portray 	the 	complexities 	-
and 	contraditions 	- 	of 	recent 	pluralism. 	If 	1 	have, 	on
occasion, 	adopted 	a 	critical 	position 	with 	regard 	to 	an
idea 	or a 	building, 	I 	have 	attempted 	to 	lay 	bare 	the
basis 	of 	the 	judgement. 	In 	case 	there 	is 	any 	doubt, 	I
have 	reserved the 	next chapter 	- the 	conclusion 	- 	for 	a
statement 	of critical 	principle.
It 	is 	as 	well 	to 	begin 	by 	bearing 	in 	mind 	that 	the
1970s 	was 	not 	a 	self-sealed 	episode 	exactly 	ten 	years
long. 	Its 	preoccupations 	and 	problems, 	its 	crises 	and 	its
critiques, 	were 	rooted 	in 	previous 	decades. 	Underlying
the 	period 	as 	a 	whole 	was 	an 	increasingly 	vocal
scepticism 	about 	the 	tenets of modern 	architecture, 	or,
to 	be 	precise, 	what 	were 	thought 	to 	have 	been 	the
tenets. 	In 	fact 	wholesale 	rejections 	of 	one 	aspect 	of
modern 	architecture 	were 	often 	accompanied 	by
unconscious 	continuations 	of 	another. 	One 	of 	the
striking 	features 	of the styles 	of the 	1 9 70s 	is 	the 	way 	in
which 	they 	were 	mostly 	continuations 	of 	the 	earlier
modern 	movement 	tradition. 	In 	some 	cases 	(e.g.. 	the
designs 	of 	the 	New 	York 	5 	or 	those 	of 	Aldo 	Rossi), 	a
revival 	of 	inter-war 	forms 	was 	even 	involved. 	It 	could
be 	argued 	that 	those 	happy 	to 	be 	called 	'post-
modernists' 	themselves 	drew 	on 	devices 	such 	as
fragmentation, 	planarity 	and 	collage 	with 	an 	obvious
modern 	pedigree. 	We 	should 	be 	on 	the 	look-out. 	then,
for 	a 	certain 	divergence 	between 	rhetoric 	and 	actual
production, 	between 	words 	and 	forms. 	Strong 	pro-
testations 	are 	only 	to 	be 	expected 	when 	a 	younger
generation 	emerges 	in 	the 	shadow 	of 	the 	likes 	of 	Le
Corbusier. 	Aalto 	or 	Kahn. 	Nor 	is 	it 	surprising 	to 	come
across 	the 	oedipal 	scenario 	in 	which 	the 	repressive
father-figures 	of 	'modernism' 	are 	cast 	aside 	to 	allow
young 	minds 	to 	engage 	with 	the 	luxuries 	of 	more
distant 	traditions. 	After 	all, 	the 	previous 	generation
also 	crusaded 	for 	greater 	richness, 	also 	turned 	to 	the
past, 	also 	portrayed 	its 	predecessors 	through 	a
demonology.
Having 	said 	this, 	it 	must 	be 	admitted 	that 	the
atmosphere of the early 	1 	970s 	was 	altogether different
from 	that 	surrounding 	the 	rallying of 	Team 	X 	in 	the
early 	1960s. 	There 	was 	little 	of 	the 	optimism 	of 	a
decade earlier. 	The well-meaning 	frameworks 	supplied
by 	Europe's 	welfare 	states 	or 	by 	wealthy 	patronage 	in
the 	United 	States 	for 	modern 	architecture 	had 	exposed
too 	many 	of 	their 	contradictions 	for 	their 	adopted
architecture 	to 	go 	unscathed. 	Too 	many 	oppressive
housing 	schemes, 	too 	many 	clumsy 	skyscrapers, 	too
many 	acres 	of windswept 	concrete, 	too 	many 	alienat-
ing 	and 	gaunt 	arrangements 	of 	form 	had 	been
insinuated 	into 	the 	programme 	of 	urban 	and 	social
renewal, 	and 	in 	the 	late 	1960s 	there 	was 	a 	backlash
which 	took 	many 	shapes. 	One 	recurrent 	theme 	was
that 	modern 	architecture 	should 	blend 	more 	apolo-
getically with 	its 	historical context: 	another demanded
a 	greater 	participation 	of 	users: 	another 	required
obvious 	signs of 	identity 	and 	association. 	An 	extreme
critique 	claimed, 	of 	course, 	that 	modern 	architecture
was 	merely 	the 	face 	of 	a 	decaying 	and 	contradictory
capitalism, 	but 	this 	did 	little 	to 	help the 	designer 	make
his 	necessarily 	piece-meal 	improvements 	more
effective. 	The 	counter-culture 	of 	the 	late 	1960s
perhaps 	did 	its 	bit 	to 	undermine 	modern 	movement
pretensions 	towards 	universality, 	while 	a 	concurrent
populism 	implied 	the 	extent 	to 	which 	architects'
palliatives 	were 	class-bound. 	Ideas 	derived 	from 	the
theory 	of 	signs 	were 	drawn 	in 	to 	reveal 	the 	supposed
'arbitrariness' 	and 	'conventionality' 	of 	architectural
forms, 	while 	relativism 	mounted 	its 	attacks 	on 	the
sociological 	and 	functional 	determinism 	which 	so
mattered 	to 	one 	wing 	of 	the 	modern 	movement.
Perhaps 	the death 	of the 	modern masters 	had 	a 	further
corrosive effect 	within 	the 	fold, 	by 	removing 	charisma-
tic 	leaders. 	Even 	tame 	scholarship 	may 	have 	had 	a 	role
by 	undermining 	the 	notion 	of a 	simple 	grand 	tradition
of modernism. 	With 	progressive 	fervour 	dowsed and 	a
profession 	increasingly 	uncertain 	of 	its 	aims, 	it 	is
scarcely 	surprising 	that 	the 	word 	'crisis' 	should 	have
occurred 	in 	numerous 	book 	titles 	and 	articles. 	For
some 	it 	was 	a 	'crisis' 	of consumer 	society, 	for 	others 	a
'crisis' 	of 	identity 	for 	architects, 	for 	others 	again 	a
'crisis' 	of 	'modernism'. 	Increasingly 	one 	encountered
the 	suggestion 	that 	the 	way 	forward 	lay 	in 	going 	back:
whether 	it 	was 	to 	the 	golden 	days 	of 	radiant 	modern
architectural 	faith 	or 	to 	some earlier phase 	of supposed
certainties.
But 	this 	is 	to 	speak 	of 	only 	one 	revisionist 	mood
among 	many 	in 	the 	seventies. 	As 	in 	most 	periods, 	the
myths, 	preoccupations, 	and 	problems 	of 	a 	number 	of
generations 	and 	individuals 	existed 	side 	by 	side. 	Men
like 	Utzon, 	Kahn, 	and 	Lasdun 	produced 	mature 	works
of 	a 	high 	order 	which 	evaded 	changing 	fashion:
obviously 	this 	did 	not 	mean 	that 	they 	should 	be
regarded 	as 	'out 	of date'. 	Philip Johnson 	changed 	like 	a
chameleon 	in 	an 	effort 	to 	keep 	his 	architecture
adjusted 	to 	the 	latest 	hem-lines: 	evidently 	this 	did
nothing 	to 	give 	his 	work 	a 	depth 	it 	perhaps 	needed.
James 	Stirling's 	style 	altered 	drastically 	as 	he 	at-
tempted 	to 	incorporate 	overt 	references 	to 	urban
contexts 	and 	to 	historical 	precedent, 	and 	a 	new,
younger 	generation, 	devoted 	to 	a 	self-conscious

-- 370 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent Past 	• 	369
28.1 	Ralph 	Erskine.
Bylcer 	Wall. 	Newcastle.
I969-7S-
manipulation 	of formal 	language 	(e.g.. 	Graves. 	Isozaki)
began 	to 	receive 	major 	commissions. 	Whatever 	else
one 	may 	say 	about 	the 	seventies, 	it 	entirely 	lacked
uniformity. 	It 	would 	be 	futile 	to 	suggest 	a main-line:
preposterous to attempt 	an 	equation 	between 	style 	and
quality ; 	parochial 	to fix 	one movement 	as the key one. 	I
have decided 	to 	avoid 	'isms' 	as 	much 	as possible, 	and 	to
describe 	broader 	tendencies 	on 	the 	basis 	of 	a 	few
individual 	case 	studies. 	To 	make 	this 	easier, 	I 	have
grouped 	together 	buildings 	of 	analogous 	function, 	as
this 	provides 	some 	basis 	for 	comparison.
One 	may 	begin 	with 	housing. 	An 	earlier 	chapter
traced 	reactions 	to 	the 	Unite 	and 	various 	critiques 	of it.
unfolding 	around 	the 	need 	to 	give 	dwellings 	a 	greater
sense 	of 	identity. 	Following 	the point 	of 	view 	that 	a
major 	problem 	of post-war 	housing 	had 	been 	a 	failure
of communication 	between 	architects 	and 	users, 	it was
understandable 	that 	various 	forms 	of 	advocacy
planning, 	in 	which 	the 	future 	inhabitants 	of public
housing 	schemes 	were 	involved 	in 	the 	design 	process,
should 	have 	been 	attempted 	in 	the 	sixties. 	Indeed, 	the
radical 	critiques 	of that 	period 	even 	went 	so 	far 	as 	to
discount 	the 	role 	of 	formal 	planning 	altogether, 	as 	if
good 	moral 	intentions 	were on 	their 	own 	sufficient 	for
the 	creation 	of a 	decent 	home.
One 	architect 	who 	attempted 	to 	bridge 	these difficult
currents 	was 	the 	Scandinavian 	Ralph 	Erskine 	(yet
another 	member 	of 	Team 	X). 	With 	the 	Byker 	Wall
housing scheme for 	Newcastle 	( 	1 9(-)9-75 ), 	Erskine and
his 	team 	immersed 	themselves 	in 	the 	needs 	and 	hopes
of 	the 	eventual 	users 	before 	proposing 	design 	hypo-
theses, 	which 	were 	in 	turn 	open 	to 	criticism 	by 	the
inhabitants 	(fig. 	28.1). The task was made easier by the
fact 	that 	most 	of the 	population 	were 	already 	living 	in
the 	neighbouring 	area. 	But 	it 	has 	to 	be 	admitted 	that
even 	the 	most 	democratic 	design 	process 	could 	not
decide 	on 	an 	overall 	form, 	whatever 	it 	might 	do 	to
make 	interiors 	and 	thresholds 	more 	accommodating.
The 	architects' 	job. 	as 	ever, 	was 	to 	translate 	social
aspirations 	into 	a 	suitable 	three-dimensional
organization.
The 	resultant 	Byker 	Wall 	thus 	bore 	the 	imprint 	of
the 	Erskinian 	architectural 	style. 	The 	site 	was 	close 	to
the 	path 	of 	an 	intended 	motorway 	and 	sloped 	down
gently 	to 	rows 	of 	nineteenth-century 	houses: 	the
solution 	was 	to 	make 	a 	long 	serpentine 	wall 	of varying
height 	as a 	barrier 	against 	noise, 	and 	to 	place 	smaller
terrace houses 	with 	gardens 	in 	the 	resultant 	enclosure.
The 	idea 	of a 	protective 	wall 	of 	housing 	had 	occurred
already 	in 	Erskine's 	coUege 	design 	for 	Clare 	Hall.
Cambridge, 	but 	stretched 	back 	much 	further 	to 	his
schemes 	of 	the 	sixties 	for 	settlements 	north 	of 	the
Arctic 	circle, 	where 	barriers 	against 	cold 	winds 	and 	a
rugged, 	hostile 	landscape 	had 	been 	essential: 	the
strategy 	was 	even 	reminiscent 	of 	Aalto's 	perimeter
walls 	and 	serpentine 	slabs 	(one 	thinks 	particularly 	of
Baker 	House I. 	At 	Byker, the 	collective 	wall 	was 	mated
with 	other 	typical 	Erskinian 	images: 	the 	shed 	roof 	(to
suggest 	domesticity 	and 	to 	protect 	against 	rain),
sprawling 	stick 	balconies 	in 	bright 	colours 	(to 	add
human 	touch 	and 	variety), 	interwoven 	bricks 	of
different colours 	(to break down the mass), 	and delicate
entrance 	structures 	(to 	ensure 	a 	gradual 	transition
from 	public 	to 	private 	worlds). 	Erskine's 	interest 	in
defining 	territory 	and 	responding 	to 	local 	patterns 	of
life obviously 	reflected 	Team 	X 	ideas: 	but of the 	various
'anti-heroic' 	housing 	schemes 	of 	the 	seventies, 	Byker
Wall 	was 	perhaps 	the 	most 	successful 	socially 	and
architecturally.
Despite 	the 	attempts 	of champions 	of Byker 	to 	argue
that 	the 	good 	folk 	of Newcastle 	had 	virtually 	generated

-- 371 of 420 --

370 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
the 	architecture 	on 	their 	own. 	it 	was 	obvious 	that the
imagery 	had 	resulted 	from 	the 	interpretation 	of 	an
architect 	intent 	on 	form 	and 	symbol-making. 	The 	most
extreme 	left-wing 	critiques 	rejected 	the 	strategy 	for
precisely 	this 	reason, 	claiming 	that 	housing 	should 	be
left 	to 	individuals, 	and 	not 	'monumentalized' 	by
architects 	with 	'imposing 	concepts'. 	One 	brand 	of this
anti-elitist 	opinion 	suggested 	that 	it 	would 	be 	better 	to
imitate 	the types of existing 	'vernaculars' 	than 	to 	allow
any 	further 	housing 	schemes 	on 	the 	Unite 	model, 	but
remained 	unclear 	about 	which 	vernaculars 	should 	be
used 	as 	examples. 	As 	a 	result 	of 	this 	passive 	mood, 	it
became 	morally 	respectable 	in 	the 	mid-seventies
(especially 	in 	housing 	agencies 	in 	Western 	Europe) 	to
ape 	hip-roofs 	and 	mouldings 	in 	the 	belief that 	this 	was
an 	automatic 	guarantee 	of 	a 	'humane 	image' 	of 	the
home.
The 	linear 	apartment 	block 	for 	the 	dallaretese
district 	of 	Milan 	(1969-76) 	by 	Aldo 	Rossi 	was 	in
strong 	contrast 	to 	both 	the 	Byker 	Wall 	and 	to 	the
vernacular 	revival 	(fig. 	28.2). 	The 	contrived 	complex-
ities 	of 	Byker 	were 	replaced 	by 	a 	gaunt 	and 	repetitive
simplicity: 	its 	serpentine 	and 	picturesque 	accents 	were
superseded 	by 	an 	obsessive 	Unearity: 	the 	nooks 	and
crannies 	were 	replaced 	by 	a 	monotonous 	street 	gallery
running from 	one end 	to the other. 	It seems that Rossi's
design 	strategy 	was 	situated 	between 	what 	he 	called
'inventory 	and 	memory' 	and 	involved 	the 	deliberate
fusion 	of earlier types. 	In 	the 	Modena 	Cemetery 	(1971)
the 	ancient 	mausoleum 	had 	been 	cross-bred 	with 	the
abstract 	visions 	of 	BouUee 	or 	Ledoux 	from 	the 	late
eighteenth 	century ; 	in 	the 	Gallaretese, 	Rossi 	seemed to
pull 	together the 	organization 	of the 	Unite, 	the 	street-
deck, 	melancholy 	reminiscences 	of 	Northern 	Italian
arcades 	(with 	some 	help 	from 	Giorgio 	de 	Chirico's
metaphysical 	cityscapes) 	and 	images 	of 	modern
engineering:
there 	is 	an 	analogical 	relationship 	with
certain 	engineering 	works 	that 	mix 	freely 	with both
the 	corridor 	typology 	and 	a 	related 	feeling 	1 	have
always 	experienced 	in 	the 	architecture 	of the
traditional 	Milanese 	tenement 	where 	the 	corridors
signify 	a 	life 	style 	bathed 	in 	everyday 	occurrences,
domestic 	intimacy 	and 	varied 	personal
relationships.
In 	1966 	Rossi 	had 	published 	a 	book 	entitled
I/Airhitettitra 	della 	Cilia, 	which 	had 	tried 	to 	establish
the 	case 	for 	a 	set 	of 	urban 	archetypes, 	founded 	on
'basic' 	institutions, 	which 	were 	held 	to 	have 	existed
before 	the 	chaos 	of industrialization. 	His 	idea 	was 	that
one 	should 	transcend 	functionalism 	by 	an 	analogical
mode of design, 	blending 	the earlier types 	with 	present-
day 	needs 	in 	a 	language 	of 	simple 	geometries. 	Rossi's
»!?
iriri
theory 	of 	urban 	types 	recalled 	Terragni's 	earlier
reflections 	on 	the 	ancient 	beginnings 	of 	architecture,
and 	there 	can 	be 	little 	doubt 	that 	Rossi's 	style, 	with 	its
dead-pan 	rows 	of 	windows 	punched 	through 	simple
white 	surfaces, 	owed 	a 	good 	deal 	to 	the 	prototypes 	of
the 	Italian 	International 	Style. 	It 	was 	not 	entirely
misleading 	then 	that 	the 	term 	'neo-Rationalist' 	should
have 	been 	coined 	to 	describe 	the 	work 	of Rossi 	and 	his
movement 	named 	'Tendenza'. The stripped forms of the
thirties 	were 	purged 	of 	their 	Fascist 	associations 	and
given 	an 	almost 	nostalgic 	character. 	Neo-Rationalist
sensibility 	delighted 	in 	axial 	composition 	and 	in
reduction 	to 	the 	most 	primary 	geometries. 	Rossi's
numerous 	evocative 	sketches 	of 	beach 	cabins, 	light-
houses, 	barns 	and 	vernacular 	structures 	in 	the
Po 	valley 	suggested 	a 	wistful 	involvement 	with
northern 	Italy's 	past, 	and 	even 	a 	latent 	classicism. 	His
influence 	was 	considerable, 	especially 	in 	the Ticino 	in
southern 	Switzerland 	(e.g.. 	Mario 	Botta), 	where 	a
mood 	of 	revulsion 	against 	the 	technological 	aridity 	of
so 	much 	modern 	design 	set in 	during 	the 	early 	1970s.
Rossi's 	ideas 	were 	also 	popularized 	in 	the 	United 	States
where 	their 	classical 	undertones 	were 	rather 	wilfully
linked 	to 	Italophile 	obsessions 	with 	Terragni 	and
Palladio.
Ricardo 	Bofill's 	Walden 	Seven 	housing 	in 	Barcelona
(1975) 	supplies 	another 	example 	of 	an 	architectural
philosophy 	concerned 	with 	the 	allusive 	transform-
ation 	of 	images 	from 	the 	past. 	In 	this 	case 	the 	formal
emphasis 	is 	primarily 	vertical, 	the 	building 	being
formed 	from 	tall 	cliffs 	of 	walls 	clad 	in 	red 	tile, 	with
variations 	on 	cylinders 	being 	attached 	as 	balconies. 	A
front 	entrance 	to 	the 	complex 	is 	formed 	by 	a 	vertical
slit 	over 	forty 	feet 	high, 	and 	the 	general 	theme 	of
28.2 	Aldo 	Rossi.
Gallaretese 	housing,
near 	Milan. 	1969-76.

-- 372 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent Past 	•	
371
28.3 	Norman 	Foster,
Willis. 	Faber 	and 	Dumas
building. 	Ipstt'ich, 	1974.
faceted 	interpenetrations 	is 	carried 	through 	where
gaping 	openings 	twelve 	stories 	high 	are cut 	into 	the
blocks. 	The 	result 	is 	not 	unlike 	a 	fortress 	which 	has
been 	turned 	over 	to 	habitation, 	and 	Walden 	Seven
even 	has 	mildly 	Surrealist 	overtones 	in 	its 	bizarre
jumps 	in 	scale. 	Perhaps 	the 	influence 	of 	Gaudi's
curious 	chimney 	designs 	can 	be 	sensed 	in 	the
anthropomorphic 	character 	of 	the 	balconies. 	In 	any
event. 	Walden 	Seven, 	and 	Botill's 	other 	designs 	of the
period, 	stemmed from 	an 	interest 	in 	the 	transformation
of 	simple 	geometries 	into 	complex 	arrangements 	and
metaphors 	with 	a 	power 	to 	evoke 	castellated 	images
from 	the 	past.
The 	three 	aforementioned 	examples 	suggest 	differ-
ent 	ways 	in 	which 	the 	inheritance 	of modern 	architec-
ture 	has 	recently 	been 	extended 	into 	new 	expressive
territories. 	A 	similarly 	broad 	range 	of 	ideological
commitments 	and 	vocabularies 	emerges 	if 	one 	ana-
lyses 	architectural 	solutions 	to 	the 	work-place 	in 	the
1970s, 	particularly 	office 	buildings. 	By 	the 	late 	sixties,
of 	course, 	the 	standard 	modern 	types 	were 	the 	glass-
box 	skyscraper 	and 	its 	suburban 	relative, 	the 	glass-box
on 	its side. 	It is scarcely surprising that attempts should
have 	been 	made 	to 	enrich 	these 	bald 	formulae 	by
incorporating 	atria, 	gardens, 	balconies, 	etc.: 	the
luxurious 	Ford 	Foundation 	by 	Roche and 	Dinkeloo 	in
New 	York 	of 	1967 	was 	one 	example 	which 	in-
corporated 	all 	these 	devices 	and 	also 	tried 	to 	open 	the
building 	to 	the 	street 	visually. 	Another 	strategy 	was
represented 	by 	the 	Willis, 	Faber 	and 	Dumas 	building
in 	Ipswich. 	England 	(1974), 	by 	Norman 	Foster
Associates (fig. 	28.3). 	In 	this case no critique of modern
technology 	was 	implied: 	quite 	the 	contrary, 	the
imagery 	of the 	building 	rejoiced 	in 	the 	appearance 	of a
precision 	mechanism. 	However, 	the 	partitioning 	and
rigid 	grid 	of 	the 	usual 	type 	were 	broken 	open 	on 	the
interior 	to 	create 	an 	entirely 	continuous 	work 	space
(the 	free 	plan 	taken 	to 	its 	logical, 	and 	not 	completely
practical, 	conclusion): the 	floors 	were 	also 	linked 	by 	a
large 	central 	space 	with 	moving 	staircases 	passing
through 	it. 	The 	finishes 	of 	chrome 	and 	stainless 	steel
were 	matched 	by 	the 	highly 	polished 	glazed 	cladding,
which 	embodied 	a 	similar 	ethos. 	The 	reflecting 	glass
was 	clipped 	on 	without 	any 	intervening 	struts 	or
muUions 	and 	the 	resultant 	taut 	curtain-wall 	skin
mirrored 	the 	setting. 	The 	building 	was 	curved 	in 	plan
to 	tit 	the 	shape 	of the 	site, 	and 	this 	maximized 	the 	play
of 	reflections. 	Obviously 	the 	plan 	strategy 	was 	a
descendant 	of 	Mies 	van 	der 	Kobe's 	'universal 	space':
the 	imagery 	also 	drew 	on 	both 	the 	minimalist
skyscrapers 	of 	the 	American 	sixties 	and 	the 	original
crystalline 	fantasies 	of 	the 	twenties. 	The 	Willis. 	Faber
and 	Dumas 	building, 	and 	Foster's 	other 	designs 	of the
period 	(e.g., 	the 	Sainsbury 	Art 	Centre 	at 	the 	University

-- 373 of 420 --

3 72 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
of 	East 	Anglia) 	thus 	represented 	an 	extension 	of
the 	technological 	wing 	of 	the 	modern 	movement.
However, 	with 	their elegant 	and 	crisp styling, 	they 	had
an 	entirely 	different 	character 	from 	their 	'first 	machine
age' 	ancestors 	like 	the 	Van 	Nelle 	factory. 	The 	Utopian
driving 	force 	was 	not 	recoverable: 	perhaps 	inevitably,
there 	was 	a 	loss 	of intensity 	and 	resonance 	in 	the 	later
version 	of mechanistic 	imagery.
The 	Centraal 	Beheer 	office 	building 	at 	Apeldoorn 	in
Holland 	(1974) 	by 	Herman 	Hertzberger 	(fig. 	28.4)
represented 	quite 	a 	different 	human 	position, 	which
embodied 	scepticism 	about 	the 	values 	of 	a 	tech-
nocracy. 	Where 	the 	Willis, 	Faber 	building 	celebrated
the 	continuous, 	open 	work 	space, 	the 	Centraal 	Beheer
concentrated 	on 	the 	private 	domain 	of 	the 	individual
worker; 	where 	the 	former 	worked 	inwards 	from 	a
uniform 	envelope, 	the 	latter 	was 	assembled 	inside 	to
out 	on 	the 	basis 	of small 	standardized 	units 	related 	to
activity 	and 	human 	scale. 	The 	Hertzberger 	design 	was
like 	a 	higgledy-piggledy 	kasbah 	of alleyways, 	tortuous
streets, 	and 	level 	changes, 	but 	it 	was 	still 	based 	on 	a
module. 	Where 	the 	high-tech 	position 	implied 	a 	total
control 	of image 	and 	finish 	by 	designers 	and 	manage-
ment, 	the 	rough 	concrete 	blocks, 	pre-cast 	beams 	and
irregular 	trays 	of 	the 	'workers' 	village' 	embodied an
ideal 	of 	participation 	and 	implied 	that 	the 	structure
would 	be 	incomplete 	until 	dressed 	in 	each 	individual's
knick-knacks, 	plants 	and 	place-making 	symbols. 	The
Centraal Beheer was a worthy descendant of Van Eyck's
orphanage 	of ten 	years 	earlier, 	and. 	like 	its 	prototype,
sought 	to 	create 	a 	variety 	of ambiguous 	spaces 	on 	the
basis 	of a 	small-scaled 	standardized 	kit 	of 	parts. 	The
idea 	of interior 	galleries 	and 	trays 	was 	perhaps 	a 	long-
range 	descendant 	of 	Wright's 	Larkin 	building 	or
Johnson 	Wax: 	However, 	the 	Centraal 	Beheer 	lacked
the 	coherence 	of its 	great 	prototypes, 	especially 	on 	the
exterior, 	where 	the 	forms 	were 	somewhat 	mute 	and
confused 	(fig. 	28.5).
By 	contrast, 	Lasdun's 	European 	Investment 	Bank
outside 	Luxembourg 	(1974) 	presented 	a 	clear 	and
dominant 	gestalt 	without 	destroying 	a 	sense 	of human
scale 	(fig. 	28.6). 	The 	building 	had 	to 	be 	a 	ceremonial
headquarters 	as 	well 	as 	an 	office 	space, 	and 	the 	site,
close 	to 	the 	ravines 	of 	the 	Val 	des 	Bons 	Malades,
virtually 	demanded 	a 	scheme 	attuned 	to 	landscape,
Lasdun 	modified 	the 	typology 	of 	strata 	and 	towers 	to
create 	a 	sort 	of 	pin-wheel 	plan 	with 	four 	low 	wings 	of
horizontal emphasis cascading to meet the 	land 	masses
at 	various 	levels. 	Where 	the 	four wings 	came 	together,
the 	ceremonial 	zones 	were 	situated, 	traversed 	by 	a
diagonal 	axis 	from 	the 	porte-cochere 	at 	the 	entrance 	to
the 	document-signing 	room 	at 	the 	other 	end under 	a
low 	.soffit on 	piers 	standing 	in 	a 	pool. 	The entrance 	way
was 	clearly 	signalled 	by 	directional 	piers 	and 	towers
which 	set 	up 	a 	strong 	forty-five 	degree 	axis; 	the

-- 374 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	• 	373
28.4 	(/('/() 	Herman
Hertzberger. 	Centraal
Beheer oftice 	building.
Apeldoorn, 	1974.
interior.
28.5 	(abovr) 	Herman
Hertzberger, 	Centraal
Belieer office 	building.
Apeldoorn, 	1974, 	aerial
view.
sequence 	as 	a 	whole 	recalled 	the 	College 	of Physicians
or 	the 	National 	Theatre, 	if 	not 	Lasdun's 	fascination
with 	compressed 	and 	expanding 	spaces 	in 	Baroque
architecture. 	The 	office 	wings 	were 	designed 	on 	the
same 	system 	of 	horizontal 	floors 	and 	soffits 	but 	their
treatment 	was 	less 	intense 	sculpturally. 	The slabs 	were
designed 	to 	incorporate 	natural 	cooling 	and 	heating,
and 	each 	office 	was 	given 	an 	opening 	window
protected 	from 	glare 	with 	a 	view over nearby trees. 	The
result 	was 	a 	building 	which 	countered 	the 	anomie 	of
the 	glass 	box 	with 	both 	humanity and 	dignity. 	The
Huropean 	Investment 	Bank 	was 	a 	palace 	among 	office
buildings, 	but 	its 	forms 	were 	closely 	related 	to 	human
purposes 	and 	to 	the 	richness 	of a 	natural 	setting. 	Here
the 	work-place 	was 	given 	a 	monumental 	character
with 	devices 	which 	descended 	in 	the 	long 	run 	from 	the
horizontality 	and 	stratification 	of both 	Wrightian 	and
Corbusian 	prototypes.
Skyscraper 	design 	in 	the 	1970s 	also 	reveals 	a 	search
for 	varied 	solutions 	on 	the 	basis of the discoveries of the
previous 	decades. 	Yamasaki's 	two 	enormous 	slabs 	for
the 	World 	Trade 	Center 	at 	the 	base 	of Manhattan 	were
an 	extreme statement of the 	elegant, 	minimalist notion
of 	the 	parallel-piped 	box 	standing 	in 	a 	plaza. 	In 	the
early 	1 9 70s 	two 	areas 	of 	skyscraper design 	seem 	to
have 	come 	in 	for 	particular scrutiny : 	the top 	(either 	for
practical 	reasons 	to 	do 	with 	servicing 	or 	solar 	energy,
or 	else 	for 	symbolic 	purposes!, 	and 	the 	bottom 	(which
was 	more 	frequently 	opened 	out 	as 	an 	atrium
connected 	to 	the 	street). 	The 	Citicorp 	headquarters 	in
Manhattan 	(1978) 	by 	Hugh 	Stubbins 	was 	one 	variant
on 	this 	scheme. 	Stylistically 	it 	was 	a 	sort 	of 	'high 	tech'
revival 	of 	the 	International 	Style, 	replete 	with 	strip
windows 	and 	taut 	volumes 	clad 	in 	a 	reflecting 	metallic
skin. 	Another 	approach 	to 	the 	dull 	glass 	box 	formula
was, 	of 	course, 	to 	adorn 	it 	but 	without 	severely
challenging 	its 	interior 	limitations. 	This 	dubious 	form
of 	'enrichment' 	was 	pursued 	in 	the 	context 	of 	the
Manhattan 	skyscraper 	by 	Philip 	Johnson, 	in 	his 	design
28.6 	Denys 	Lasdun,
European 	Investment
Bank. 	Luxembourg.
1974-q. 	view 	past
document 	signing 	room
towards 	landscape.

-- 375 of 420 --

3 74 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
for the American Telephone 	and Telegraph building on
Madison 	Ave.. 	1978 	(fig. 	28.7). 	Johnson 	rejected 	the
glass-box 	formula 	and 	revived the 	tripartite 	division of
the 	tall 	building 	so 	often 	used 	in 	the 	American
twenties. 	He 	emphasized 	the 	entrance 	way 	with 	an
arch (intended to be reminiscent of Brunelleschi's 	Pazzi
Chapel), 	the 	lobby 	with 	grand 	columns 	(supposedly
based 	on 	a 	hypostyle). 	and 	the 	top 	with 	a 	broken
pediment 	(which 	journalists 	compared 	to 	Chippendale
furniture). 	When 	the 	design 	was 	published 	it 	was
proclaimed 	as 	a 	wholesale 	rejection 	of modernism 	and
linked 	to 	so-called 	'Post-Modernisf 	tendencies. 	In 	fact
Johnson 	had 	done 	little more 	than stick some 	historical
quotations 	on 	to 	a 	standard 	office 	space ; 	most 	of what
was 	called 	'Post-Modern' 	tended 	to 	be 	cosmetic.
A 	comparison 	of 	museums 	in 	the 	seventies 	also
offers 	a 	rich 	variety 	of 	architectural 	approaches. 	The
Pompidou 	Centre, 	in 	the 	Place 	Beaubourg, 	Paris, 	by
Renzo 	Piano 	and 	Richard 	Rogers 	(i974) 	took 	the
image 	of 	the 	flexible 	machine 	a 	cultiver 	to 	the 	extreme
(fig. 	28.8). 	The 	programme 	required 	a 	mixed 	use
'cultural 	centre' 	incorporating 	the 	old 	Musee 	de 	I'Art
Moderne. 	a 	public 	library, 	an 	audio-visual 	centre, 	and
a 	vast 	amount 	of exhibition 	space. 	The 	site 	was 	to 	one
side 	of the 	Marais, 	facing 	on 	a 	square 	not 	far 	from 	the
old 	Market 	sheds 	(demolished 	just 	previously) 	of 	Les
Halles. 	Evidently 	the 	aim 	was 	to 	make 	a 	'popular'
institution 	rather 	than 	a 	'palace of culture', 	and 	it 	was
this 	aspect 	of the 	brief which 	clearly 	appealed 	to 	Piano
and 	Rogers 	(who 	were 	chosen 	by 	competition). 	They
designed 	the 	building 	as 	a 	vast, 	serviceable 	hangar
supported 	by 	a 	megastructural 	steel-tubed 	frame. 	The
floor 	slabs 	were 	made 	to 	span 	adjustable 	interior
spaces, 	and 	the 	elevations 	were 	entirely 	glazed. 	An
appropriate 	ornament 	was 	provided 	by 	festoons 	of
mechanical 	tubes, 	including 	a 	long 	glass 	canister
enclosing 	a 	moving 	staircase 	up 	the 	main 	facade. 	The
imagery 	was 	obviously 	prompted 	by 	Archigram
fantasies 	of half a 	decade 	earlier, 	and 	was 	supposed 	to
imply 	'openness' 	and 	'social 	pluralism'. 	The 	stylized
play 	with 	technological 	effects, 	and 	the 	honest
expression 	of 	tubes 	and 	ducts 	placed 	the 	Pompidou
Centre 	in 	yet 	another 	tradition: 	the 	Futurist 	revival 	of
the 	1960s in England, 	with Reyner Banham, 	apostle of
the 	architecture 	of mechanical 	services, 	at 	its 	head.
The 	contrast 	with 	the 	Roman 	severity, 	gravitas 	and
restraint 	of 	Louis 	Kahn's 	Kimbell 	museum 	at 	Fort
Worth, 	Texas 	(1972) 	could 	scarcely 	have 	been 	more
complete 	(fig, 	28,9). 	Kahn's 	design 	was 	arranged 	as 	a
series 	of parallel 	bays 	surmounted 	by curved 	concrete
vaults 	with 	light 	filtering 	through 	the 	top. 	The
repetitive 	system 	was 	overlaid 	by 	a 	symmetrical
armature 	of 	circulation 	implying 	a 	hierarchy. 	The
interiors 	were 	finely 	scaled 	to 	complement 	the
individual 	works 	of 	art 	but 	not 	overwhelm 	them.

-- 376 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	•	
37s
28.7 	(;</() 	Philip
Joiinson. 	American
Telephone 	and
Telegraph 	building. 	New
York. 	1978. 	model.
2<S.8 	{cihovc) 	Richard
Rogers 	and 	Renzo 	Piano.
Pompidou 	Centre. 	Paris.
1 9 74-6.
Architectural effects 	arose 	from 	the dignified 	rhythm 	of
spaces 	and 	the 	refined 	treatment 	of 	materials; 	the
silver-grey 	concrete, 	the 	panels 	of 	travertine, 	the
stainless 	steel 	reflectors 	at 	the 	peak 	of 	each 	vault.
Technology 	was 	here 	employed 	in 	the 	service 	of 	a
controlling 	idea, 	and 	not 	as 	some 	extravagance 	in 	its
own 	right. 	Once 	again 	Kahn 	succeeded 	in 	producing 	a
design 	of a 	timeless 	character.
The 	third 	museum 	example 	houses 	the 	Getty
collection 	on 	the 	coast 	of California 	and 	was 	designed
in 	197^ 	by 	Langdon. 	Wilson 	and 	others 	(Rg. 	28.10).
The 	building 	was 	modelled 	on 	the 	example 	of 	an
antique 	Roman 	villa 	of a 	type 	Paul 	Getty 	had 	admired
in 	ruins 	at 	Herculaneum 	as 	a 	young 	man. 	The
museum 	spaces 	were 	arranged 	en 	suite 	around 	a
sequence 	of 	pools 	containing 	antique 	statuary. 	Class-
ical 	orders, 	pilasters 	and 	pediments 	were 	used
throughout, 	but 	in 	a 	way 	which 	suggested 	more 	some
Disneyland 	scenario 	than 	a 	serious 	attempt 	at
transforming 	Classicism: 	indeed. 	Kahn's 	gaunt 	con-
crete 	vaults 	had 	more 	of 	antiquity 	about 	them 	(Plate
16I.
One 	might 	have 	thought 	that 	the 	Getty 	Museum
would 	have 	received 	an 	automatic 	rejection 	by 	critics

-- 377 of 420 --

^76 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	194"
as 	an 	obvious 	example 	of kitsch. 	But 	in 	the 	changing
intellectual 	atmosphere 	of 	the 	mid-seventies 	the
opposite 	was 	as 	likely 	to, 	and 	did 	occur. 	For 	it 	was
about 	then 	that 	revulsion 	against 	the 	supposed 	lack 	of
recognizable 	imagery 	in 	modern 	architecture 	came
under 	attack. 	The 	argument 	was 	put 	forth 	that 	the
architect 	must 	make 	it 	a 	prime 	responsibility 	to
communicate 	to 	his 	public 	through 	popularly 	es-
tablished 	conventions. 	This 	resembled 	the 	usual
'realist' 	complaint 	against 	abstraction, 	but 	in 	this
instance 	the 	position 	was 	bolstered 	by 	a 	smattering 	of
ideas 	from 	semiology 	and 	by 	a 	Pop 	sensibility 	perhaps
derived 	from 	Venturi. 	From 	this 	standpoint 	the 	Getty
Museum 	was 	evidently 	acceptable 	because 	its 	garish
imagery 	was 	'evocative' 	of 	a 	wealthy 	collector's
museum. 	Architects 	and 	critics 	were 	invited 	to 	climb
down 	from 	the abstruse 	plane 	of formal 	concerns 	and
to 	occupy 	themselves 	instead 	with 	easily 	legible
images.
It 	was 	in 	the 	late 	seventies 	too 	that 	the 	curious
phrase 	'Post-Modern' 	began 	to 	be 	used, 	especially 	by
the 	architectural 	critic 	Charles 	Jencks. 	Once 	again
earlier 	modern 	architecture 	was 	rammed 	together 	in
a 	simplified 	demonology. 	The 	target 	of 	the 	post-
modernist 	animus 	emerged 	as 	a 	composite 	caricature
combining 	functionalism', 	simple 	forms, 	truth 	to
structure, 	mute 	imagery 	and 	a 	belief 	in 	the 	Zeitgeist.
Even 	at 	the 	theoretical 	level 	it 	was 	hard 	to 	be 	sure 	just
what 	'Post-Modernism' 	proposed 	instead. 	One 	gath-
ered 	that 	multivalence 	of 	meaning 	had 	some 	part 	to
play 	and 	that 	buildings 	ought 	to 	be 	regarded 	as
communications 	devices 	employing 	well-known 	and
easily 	understood 	'codes'. 	Historical 	quotations 	were
also, 	apparently, 	to 	be encouraged 	on 	the 	grounds 	that
these 	would 	enrich 	architectural 	vocabulary. 	Eclec-
ticism 	was 	no 	longer 	to 	be 	sneered 	at, 	indeed
mannerized 	commentaries 	on 	earlier 	architecture
were 	to 	be considered 	valuable 	as a 	source 	of meaning.
But 	like 	its 	predecessor 	'the 	New 	Brutalism', 	Post-
Modernism 	was 	more 	a 	vague 	cluster 	of 	aspirations
(or. 	at 	any 	rate, 	rejections) 	than 	a 	blueprint 	for 	a 	clear-
cut 	style. 	In 	a 	book 	on 	the 	subject 	of 	Post-Modern
architecture, 	jencks 	pulled 	together 	an 	odd 	assortment
of 	buildings 	to 	illustrate 	the 	new 	tendencies. 	Kitsch
neo-classical 	hotel 	lobbies 	appeared 	close 	to 	the
buildings of men 	like 	Moore 	and 	Kurokawa ; 	Gaudi was
brought 	in 	as 	historical 	support 	because 	of 	the
'multivalence' 	of 	his 	imagery, 	and 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe
was 	castigated 	for 	designing 	buildings 	which 	did 	not
'signify' 	their 	uses 	clearly: 	garish 	images 	were 	gleaned
from 	the 	commercial 	strip, 	and 	the 	illustrations 	were
mostly 	in 	colour to 	reinforce 	the 	contrasts 	employed 	in
28.9 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn.
Kimbell 	Museum. 	Fort
Worth, 	Texas, 	1972.
interior.

-- 378 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	•	
377
28.10 	Landgoii.
Wilson 	and 	others.
Getty 	Museum.
California. 	1974.
the 	building.s. 	Most 	of 	the 	visual 	terminologies
illustrated 	were 	simply 	extensions 	of 	movements
which 	had 	started 	in 	the 	sixties, 	many 	of them 	of quite
divergent 	appearance 	and 	ideology, 	and 	many 	of 	the
ideas 	had 	been 	rehearsed by 	Venturi a few years 	before.
However, 	one 	thing 	was 	entirely 	clear: 	neither 	the
author 	nor 	his 	examples 	showed 	much 	concern 	for
questions 	of 	expressive 	authenticity 	- 	the 	buildings
illustrated 	shared 	a 	tendency 	towards 	superficiality
which 	took 	earlier 	architectural 	precedents 	as 	a
sounding-board 	for 	references 	and 	quotations, 	but 	for
little 	more.
The 	Post-Modern 	mood 	(perhaps 	it 	is 	best 	to 	call 	it
that) 	was 	one 	of 	a 	number 	of 	revisionist 	tendencies
which 	came 	to 	the 	fore 	from 	the 	mid-seventies
onwards; 	ostensibly, 	these 	too 	were 	in 	favour 	of
aesthetic 	and 	symbolic 	enrichment. 	The 	increase 	in
historical 	self-consciousness 	was 	undoubtedly 	related
to 	an 	erosion 	in 	faith 	concerning 	the 	validity 	and
relevance 	of an 	abstract 	and 	unadorned 	aesthetic, 	and
the 	cliches 	of the 	critique 	made 	no 	distinction 	between
bland 	simplicity 	and 	the 	intense 	formal 	purification 	of
the best 	modern 	architecture. 	However, 	this 	wholesale
rejection 	fitted 	a 	public 	mood of dissatisfaction 	with 	the
debased 	modern 	movement, 	and 	it 	served 	the 	polemic
not 	to 	attempt fine distinctions, 	fn 	a 	similar 	manner, 	an
immense 	literature 	flowed 	lorth 	m 	the 	late 	1970s 	of
which 	the 	avowed 	aim 	was 	the 	undermining 	of
'modern 	movement 	assumptions'. 	Many 	of 	these
'assumptions' 	turned 	out 	to 	be 	illusory. 	One 	found
anti-functionalist 	arguments 	rehearsed 	ad 	nauseam
when 	modern 	architecture 	had 	been 	anything 	but
functionalist. 	One 	found 	history 	being 	proudly 	rein-
stated 	when 	the 	best 	modern 	architects 	had 	remained
rooted 	in 	tradition. 	One 	found 	the 	idea 	of 	a 	single
monolithic 	style 	for 	the 	twentieth 	century 	being
rejected 	when 	the 	notion 	had 	long 	before 	been
abandoned. 	Utopianism 	also 	came 	under 	attack
despite 	the 	fact 	that 	it 	too 	had 	been 	gradually
undermined 	in 	the previous 	three decades. 	Very little of
this 	intellectual 	noise 	penetrated 	anywhere 	near 	the
sources 	of 	inventive 	power 	which 	had 	led 	to 	Le
Corbusier, 	Wright. 	Aalto, 	Kahn. 	and the rest: 	and most
of 	it 	was 	shooting 	at 	intellectual 	bodies 	which 	were
already 	dead.
Theories 	and 	the 	productions 	of 	artists 	are 	inter-
woven 	in 	complex 	ways. 	Sometimes 	a 	theory 	emerges
which 	is 	then 	taken 	up 	and 	translated 	in 	a 	personal
terminology 	of 	form: 	sometimes 	it 	is 	the 	other 	way
round, 	and 	a 	theory 	is 	invoked 	as 	a 	post-
rationalization. 	The 	free-wheeling 	eclecticism 	of
Charles 	Moore 	may 	have 	encouraged 	Jencks's 	formu-

-- 379 of 420 --

378 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
lation 	of 	post-modernism: 	equally 	the 	critical 	writing
may 	have 	prompted 	further 	architectural 	licence, 	hi
the 	Piazza 	d'ltalia, 	New 	Orleans. 	1479. 	Moore 	erected
a 	fountain 	from 	a 	series 	of 	brightly 	coloured 	curved
screens 	of classical 	columns, 	entablatures 	and 	arches,
including 	capitals 	made 	from 	reflecting 	materials 	and
insets 	bearing 	the 	self-portrait 	of 	the 	architect. 	The
result 	was 	scarcely 	a 	serious 	transformation 	of
classical 	order, 	having 	more 	the 	atmosphere 	of a 	piece
of fairground equipment 	or a 	stage-set 	assembled out of
literal 	quotations. 	Moore's 	building 	was 	greeted 	by 	the
criticism 	that 	it 	was 	a 	shallow 	joke, 	and 	a 	self-
indulgent 	one 	at 	that. 	The 	riposte 	was 	that 	it 	was 	a
suitable 	piece of festivalia 	to 	celebrate 	the 	Ttalianness'
of 	one 	of 	the 	city's 	ethnic 	neighbourhoods. 	This 	was
not 	very 	convincing 	since 	it 	seemed, 	in 	this 	instance,
that 	little 	of sustaining 	power 	was 	left 	once 	the 	shock
or 	amusement 	had 	worn 	off. 	However, 	self-
consciousness 	in 	the 	use 	of 	precedent 	was 	not
automatically 	doomed 	to 	glibness: 	all 	depended 	on 	the
imaginative 	synthesis 	of 	sources 	into 	a 	new 	unity
bearing conviction 	and expressing 	a 	new 	meaning. 	It 	is
interesting 	in 	this 	connection 	to 	refer 	to 	yet 	another
museum 	design, 	this 	time 	by 	James 	Stirling 	for
Stuttgart (1 977), 	as this 	seems 	to 	incorporate 	elements
of 	the 	positions 	just 	outlined 	in 	a 	building 	of 	some
formal 	power 	(fig. 	28.11). 	In 	the 	early 	seventies.
Stirling 	had 	employed 	increasingly 	overt 	metaphors
and 	historical 	references 	in 	his 	designs, 	and 	a 	sort 	of
'collage' 	method 	of composition 	involving 	the 	collision
and 	articulation 	of separate 	fragments. 	In 	the 	plan 	for
Derby 	Civic 	Centre 	(1971) 	he 	had 	already 	demon-
strated 	a 	fascination 	with 	'figure/ground' 	relationships
between 	urban 	spaces 	and 	solids. 	The 	juxtaposition 	of
outdoor 	rooms 	and 	free-standing 	objects 	was 	cont-
inued 	in 	the 	scheme 	for 	Cologne 	Mu.seum, 	and 	in 	this
case 	the 	ground 	plan 	of 	the 	neighbouring 	cathedral
was 	restated 	as 	a 	sunken 	piazza 	along 	a 	sequence 	of
vaguely 	surreal 	incidents. 	Evidently. 	Stirling 	was 	also
seeking inspiration 	from such things 	as ancient 	Roman
plans 	with 	their 	sequences 	of 	curved 	rooms 	flowing
into 	one 	another 	(the 	assumed 	collage 	character 	of
Hadrian's 	'fragmented' 	villa 	plan 	was 	much 	discussed
at 	the 	time), 	and 	in 	the 	Stuttgart 	Museum 	design 	all
these 	features 	seem 	to 	have converged.
The 	plan, 	with 	a 	large 	circular 	well 	cut 	out 	of it, 	was
perhaps 	modelled 	on 	the type 	of the 	Altes 	Museum 	by
Schinkel, 	while 	the 	subtleties 	of the 	cross-axis 	relation-
ship 	between 	this 	cylindrical 	form 	and 	the 	auditorium
suggested 	a 	possible 	Piranesian 	model. 	The 	inflections
of 	the 	main 	fagade, 	with 	serpentine 	curves 	indicating
the 	presence 	of 	the 	entrance 	and 	ramps 	pointing 	the
way 	along 	the 	ensuing 	sequence, 	recalled 	earlier
Stirling devices for handling 	analogous 	conditions, 	just
as 	the 	giant 	cylindrical 	space 	was 	as 	much 	a 	relative 	of
the 	piston 	shapes 	of 	the 	Siemens 	scheme 	as 	it 	was 	a
28.11 	James Stirling.
Museum 	for Stuttgart.
1977. 	model.

-- 380 of 420 --

28.12 	Michael 	Craves.
Fargo-Moorhead
Cultural 	Centre. 	North
Dakota 	and 	Minnesota,
1978. 	project.
The Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	3 79
derivative 	from 	Classical 	planning. 	Thus 	•modern' 	and
ancient 	were 	deliberately 	confronted 	but 	without
being 	fused, 	in 	a 	technique 	of 	'bricolage'. 	Curiously
enough. 	Stirling 	still 	insisted 	on 	speaking of his 	designs
in 	terms 	of their 	programmatic 	logic.
Another 	museum 	will 	serve 	to 	complete 	the
sequence, 	and 	perhaps 	to 	illustrate 	the 	changing
aspirations 	of young 	architects 	in 	the 	late 	seventies. 	In
this 	case 	the 	designer 	was 	once 	again 	Michael 	Graves
(mentioned 	in 	Chapter 	26 	in 	connection 	with 	the 	New
York 	s). 	and 	the 	design 	was 	the 	Fargo-Moorhead
Cultural 	Center 	between 	North 	i:)akota 	and 	Minnesota
of 	1978 	(fig. 	28.12). 	During 	the 	1970s 	the 	other
members 	of 	the 	New 	York 	5 	had 	continued 	to 	extend
their 	pure 	geometrical 	vocabularies 	without 	drastic
breaks. 	But 	Graves's 	development 	in 	the 	satne 	period
illustrated 	an 	increasing 	preoccupation 	with 	natural-
istic 	metaphors 	and 	with 	quotations 	from 	history, 	but
transformed 	into 	his 	own 	elusive 	and 	fragmented
terminology. 	In 	the 	Crooks 	House 	(1976). 	pieces 	of
Corbusian 	vocabulary 	confronted 	elements 	of 	some
Renaissance 	villa 	garden dream, 	replete 	with 	wedge-
shaped 	topiary 	hedges. 	By 	the 	late 	seventies. 	Graves
was 	revealing 	an 	increasing 	preoccupation 	with 	late
eighteenth-century 	sources, 	especially 	the 	metaphor-
ical 	language 	of Ledoux. 	These 	influences 	were 	evident
in 	his 	Fargo-Moorhead 	project. 	The 	building 	had 	to
stand 	on 	each 	side 	of a 	river 	which 	was 	also 	the 	State
line, 	and 	the 	bridge 	between 	was 	obviously 	pregnant
with 	symbolic 	possibilities. 	Graves 	took 	his 	cue 	from
Ledoux's 	architecture 	parhwtc. 	particularly 	from 	the
protect 	for 	a sluice-house 	over 	the 	River 	Loue : 	a 	shape
which 	blended 	a 	semi-circular 	abstraction, 	an 	arch,
and 	the 	iinage 	of a 	sluice. 	This 	motif 	was 	adapted 	for
the 	Fargo bridge, 	and Graves 	then 	assembled the 	rest of
the building 	in 	geometrical 	overlays 	and 	fragments 	on
each 	side. 	In 	other 	schemes 	in 	the 	same 	period, 	he
organized 	entire 	plans 	around 	the 	'reference' 	of 	the
Classical 	keystone. 	It 	must 	remain 	for 	history 	to 	decide
whether this 	was 	simply 	a 	facile 	game of quotation 	and
private 	day-dreaming, 	or 	some 	deeper 	replay 	of
Classical 	values. 	One 	thing 	was 	certain, 	Graves's
designs 	placed 	a 	personal 	lyricism 	high 	in 	the 	scale 	of
values, 	and 	cocked 	a 	snook 	at 	'functional
appropriateness'.
Indeed, 	the 	new 	traditionalist 	mood 	was 	not 	much
troubled 	by 	a 	search 	for 	rigour, 	and 	for 	that 	reason
often 	degenerated 	into 	eclectic 	candyfloss, 	hiiagery
was 	high 	in 	its 	priorities; 	functional 	resolution 	was
low. 	Formal 	sophistication 	was 	praised: 	social 	concern
was 	denigrated. 	Conceptual 	exploration 	was 	prized;
structural 	necessity 	was 	sneered 	at. 	In 	the 	circum-
stances, 	it 	was 	not 	surprising 	that 	some 	critics
attempted 	to link 	the 	more 	facile 	aspects 	of revivalism
to 	the 	values 	of 	consumerism. 	Although 	the 	new
trends 	were 	not 	restricted 	to 	the 	United 	States, 	they
were 	strongest 	there 	and 	seemed 	to 	mirror 	a 	pre-
occupation 	with 	colourful 	packaging 	and 	bright
imagery. 	A 	less 	far-fetched 	connection 	could 	be 	made
with 	American 	nineteenth-century 	eclecticism 	of 	the
type 	which 	had 	treated 	historical 	elements 	as 	a 	kit-of-
parts 	to 	be 	stuck 	together 	in a 	new 	'instant 	tradition'.
Despite 	the 	populist 	arguments 	that 	were 	used 	to
launch 	'radical 	eclecticism' 	(to 	use 	lencks's 	term)
i

-- 381 of 420 --

38o 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1 940
against 	the 	haughtiness 	of 	earlier 	modern 	archi-
tecture, 	the 	evidence 	was 	slight 	that 	buildings
employing 	historical 	references 	were 	any 	less 	obscure
to the 	public 	than 	their 	'modern' 	predecessors. 	It 	could
even 	be 	argued 	that 	the 	manipulation 	of 	quotations
required 	an 	in-crowd 	of 	savants 	for 	its 	full 	communi-
cative 	effect. 	It 	was 	in 	architecture 	schools 	that 	the
devices 	of 	commentary 	and 	allusion 	were 	most
entertained, 	since these 	were 	places 	where the 	ground-
rules 	for 	communication 	could 	be 	learned 	or 	even
enforced. 	A 	further 	area 	of difficulty 	was 	that 	of craft:
columns 	and 	entablatures 	of 	plywood 	scarcely 	pos-
sessed 	the 	presence 	of 	the 	originals, 	and 	traditional
links 	between 	historical 	vocabularies 	and 	the 	building
industries 	were 	long 	since 	dissolved. 	Robert 	Stern, 	a
New 	York 	architect 	interested 	in 	historical 	quotation
as 	a 	means 	of 	expression, 	had 	to 	resort 	to 	thin
appliques 	of 	mouldings 	and 	coloured 	paint 	in 	his
domestic 	designs 	of 	the 	mid-1970s 	(tig. 	28.13).
However 	photogenic 	they 	may 	have 	been, the 	results
had 	a 	certain 	thinness. 	Kahn. 	Wright. 	Aalto 	or 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	attempted 	to 	translate 	core 	principles 	of
the 	Classical 	tradition 	into 	modern 	terminologies
rigorously 	disciplined 	by 	constructional 	and 	structural
capabilities. 	But 	the 	'radical 	eclectics' 	ran 	the 	risk 	of
producing 	work 	of 	symbolic 	and 	material 	insub-
stantiality. 	Not 	even 	the 	craft 	of 	their 	nineteenth-
century 	forebears 	was 	available 	to 	them 	in 	their
attempts 	at 	a 	new 	ornamentation. 	It 	was 	no 	accident
in 	this 	milieu 	that 	the 	architectural 	drawing 	should,
on 	occasion, 	have 	been 	praised 	more 	highly 	than
actual 	realized 	buildings, 	since 	historical 	commentary
was 	much 	more 	easily 	done 	in 	graphics 	than 	in 	three
dimensions 	using 	real 	building 	materials. 	By 	the 	late
1970s 	it 	was 	even 	possible 	to 	enter 	prestigious
architecture 	schools 	in 	the 	United 	States 	and 	to 	come
across 	drawings 	showing 	white 	cubes 	perforated 	by
plane 	rectangular 	openings, 	and 	preceded 	by 	axes 	of
topiary 	hedges, 	being 	discussed 	earnestly 	as 	ab-
stractions of 	Palladio. 	The 	social 	science 	jargon 	of 	the
architectural conferences of the 	late sixties 	gave way to
a 	gossipy 	acquaintance 	with 	Renaissance 	villas 	and
French 	hotels particuliers.
However, 	eclecticism 	was 	by 	no 	means 	uniquely
American 	property, 	as 	was 	well 	demonstrated 	by 	two
events 	in 	the 	Western 	architectural 	world 	of 	1 	980. 	The
first 	was 	an 	exhibition 	held 	at 	the 	Venice 	Biennale 	in
the 	summer 	of that 	year 	and 	entitled 	'The 	Presence 	of
the 	Past'. 	The 	centre-piece 	of the 	show 	was 	an 	interior
street 	lined 	with 	variations 	on 	Classical 	facades 	in 	the
form 	of large 	painted 	wooden 	models, 	designed 	by 	a
selection 	of architects 	I'rom 	various 	European 	centres,
as 	well 	as 	the 	United 	States. 	The 	other 	public 	gesture 	of
the 	new 	eclecticism 	was 	a 	re-run 	of the 	1922 	Chicago
Tribune 	Competition. 	The 	entrants 	had 	a 	fleld-day 	of
revivalism 	alongside 	which 	the 	original 	event 	seemed
relatively 	restrained. 	As 	in 	the 	1960s 	the 	well-
organized 	publishing 	industry 	saw 	to 	it 	that 	the 	new
28. n 	Robert 	Stern.
'House for 	an
Acaileinical 	Couple'.
Connecticut. 	1974-6.

-- 382 of 420 --

L
28.14 	(Iii/'l 	Romaldn
Giurgola. 	Mitchell 	and
Thcirp. 	I'arliainonl
building. 	Canberra.
Australia. 	1980.
competition 	winner,
view 	of model.
28. 1 	5 	Leon 	Krier.
project 	for revitalization
ofKingston-upon-Hull.
1977-
vogues 	and 	buzz 	phrases 	were 	transported 	quickly. 	In
the 	mid-i<-)7()s 	the 	lapanese 	architect 	.Arata 	Isozaki
(mentioned 	briefly 	in 	Chapter 	25) 	caught 	the 	manner-
ist 	mood 	and 	expressed 	it 	in 	designs 	which 	played
deliberate 	games 	of contrast 	between 	'traditional' 	and
'modern' 	elements. 	Rather 	ingeniously 	he 	argued 	that
Japanese 	architecture 	had 	always 	borrowed 	from 	the
outside 	and 	that 	eclecticism 	therefore 	lay 	near 	the
heart 	of 	the 	national 	genius: 	he 	felt 	justified 	in
combining 	elements 	from 	the 	Western 	Renaissance
The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	381
with 	others 	from 	the 	International 	Style, 	and 	others
from 	Japanese 	tradition. 	This 	reflected 	a 	shift 	in
approach 	from 	the 	era 	of 	Tange's 	and 	Mayekawa's
monumental 	works. 	They 	had 	sought 	a 	more 	disci-
plined 	abstraction 	in 	their 	assimilation 	of 	prototype.
Isozaki. 	on 	the 	other 	hand, 	was 	interested 	in 	achieving
meaning 	through 	collision 	and 	collage. 	Once 	again
Venturi's 	influence 	is 	sensed, 	and. 	like 	some 	of 	his
American 	contemporaries, 	Isozaki 	also 	drew 	on
popularized 	semiology 	to 	support 	his 	self-conscious
manipulation 	of architectural 	language.
As 	the 	trends 	of the 	late 	1 	970s 	were 	so 	varied, 	there
was 	no 	single 	architect 	who 	encompassed 	them 	all.
But 	there 	were 	some 	projects 	which 	combined 	a
number 	of approaches. 	Among 	these 	was 	the 	entry 	to
the 	competition 	for 	a 	new 	Australian 	Parliament
building 	(1980) 	by 	Romaldo 	Giurgola 	and 	his 	as-
sociates 	Mitchell 	and 	Thorp 	(Kg. 	28.14). 	The
programme 	required 	two 	main 	chambers, 	a 	residence
for 	the 	prime 	minister, 	and 	the 	usual 	array 	of 	press-
rooms, 	conference 	areas, 	offices, 	etc. 	The 	site 	was 	the
one 	left 	for 	the 	Parliament 	in 	Walter 	Burley 	Griffin's
original 	plan 	for the 	city 	of Canberra, 	made 	over 	a 	half-
a-century 	before: 	it 	was 	the 	low 	hill 	at 	the 	ape.x 	of the
triangular 	main 	streets. 	Giurgola's 	scheme 	made 	the
greatest 	effort 	to 	preserve 	the 	character 	of 	this 	hill 	as
seen 	from 	the 	direction 	of 	the 	War 	Memorial 	and 	the
lake. 	He buried some of the 	functions 	in 	the ground and
placed 	the 	two 	main 	chambers 	equidistant 	from 	the
centre 	point 	on 	a 	cross 	axis, 	and 	inserted 	them 	into
curved residual spaces carved out of the sides of the 	hill.
These 	spaces 	- 	which 	were 	shared 	by 	the 	building 	and
its 	context 	- 	were 	backed 	by 	screen 	walls 	whose
curvature 	attempted 	to 	draw 	together 	and 	resolve 	the
main 	geometries 	of the 	setting 	with 	the 	idea 	of a 	quasi-
centralized 	monument, 	journalists 	who 	saw 	the 	plan
inevitably 	compared 	the 	concave 	shapes 	to 	boomer-
angs 	laid 	back 	to 	back, 	while 	more 	erudite 	critics
suggested 	the 	image 	of a 	human 	figure 	with 	its 	arms
and 	legs 	outstretched. 	The 	architect's 	attempt 	at
interpreting 	the 	democratic 	ideal 	was 	probably 	most
clearly 	reflected 	in 	his 	placement 	of the 	public 	forum 	at
the heart 	of the 	building, 	between 	the 	main 	chambers.
Above 	this 	point, 	the 	Australian 	flag, 	which 	had
traditionally 	always 	flapped 	above 	the 	hill, 	was
maintained 	on 	a 	somewhat 	awkward 	mast 	supported
on 	four 	splayed 	legs. 	The 	legs 	traced 	out 	a 	pyramidical
form 	- a 	sort 	of monument 	of thin 	air 	- 	and 	this 	shape
was 	probably 	intended 	to 	recall 	Griffin's 	original
proposal 	that 	the 	Parliament 	should 	be 	surmounted 	by
a 	transparent 	pyramid 	to 	reflect 	its 	openness 	to 	the
people. 	The 	vocabulary 	of the 	lower 	part 	of the 	scheme
used 	the 	device 	of 	parallel 	screens 	of 	slender 	profile.
The 	main 	facade 	was 	low 	in 	key 	and 	designed 	to 	be
seen 	from 	a 	distance 	behind 	the 	old 	Parliament.

-- 383 of 420 --

382 	• 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	194'^'
standing 	close 	to 	the 	lake. 	Indeed, 	the 	shapes 	of the 	old
(undistinguished! 	building 	were 	reflected 	in 	those 	of
the 	new 	structure.
Regarding 	the 	Ciurgola 	proposal 	in 	terms 	of 	its
relationship 	to 	the trends 	of the 	preceding 	years, 	it 	can
be 	argued 	that 	it 	was 	a 	virtual 	inventory 	of 	contem-
porary 	preoccupations. 	The 	interest 	in 	blending 	the
building 	with 	its 	context 	was 	typical 	of 	a 	reaction
against 	the 	heavy-handed 	and 	often 	free-standing
monuments 	of a 	decade 	before. 	The 	mawkish 	attempt
at 	populism 	implied 	by 	the 	flag 	and 	its 	supporting
armature 	had 	a 	Venturiesque 	flavour. 	The 	vocabulary
of 	screens 	suggested 	possible 	neo-Rationalist 	sources,
while 	the 	Beaux-Arts 	order 	of 	the 	plan 	was 	certainly
sanctioned 	by 	eclectic 	fashion, 	though 	it 	might 	be
traceable 	to 	Giurgola's 	Beaux-Arts 	training. 	Modern
prototypes 	were 	also 	represented, 	especially 	(one
guesses) 	in 	the 	recall 	of 	the 	concave 	geometries 	of 	Le
Corbusier's 	Palace 	of 	the 	Soviets 	scheme. 	To 	com-
mentators convinced 	that 	a 	new 	richness 	was 	in 	the
making, 	the 	building 	had 	an 	appealing 	collagist
aspect : 	but 	to 	cooler 	critics 	the 	sources 	seemed 	not 	to
be 	adequately 	blended, 	while 	the 	forms 	seemed 	loosely
resolved 	and 	lacking 	in 	expressive 	conviction. 	It 	was
as 	though 	complexity 	and 	contradiction 	had 	become
recipes 	of 	an 	all-too-simple 	sort, 	without 	the tension
and 	ambiguity 	to 	which 	Venturi 	had 	referred 	in 	his
book 	tifteen 	years 	before.
A 	mood 	of 	increasing 	respect 	for 	historical 	context,
and 	even 	of 	nostalgia, 	was 	not 	restricted 	to 	archi-
tecture: 	it 	extended 	to 	town-planning 	theories 	as 	well.
By 	the 	late 	sixties, 	the 	destruction 	of 	city 	centres
around 	the 	world 	by 	motorways, 	skyscrapers, 	and
financial 	greed 	had 	reached 	the 	dimensions 	of a 	major
crisis. 	While 	the 	causes 	were 	complex, 	it 	became
common 	to 	lump 	such 	destruction 	together 	as 	the
result 	of 'modern 	architecture', 	and 	to 	point 	the 	finger
at 	such 	Utopian 	schemes 	of 	the 	1920s 	as 	the 	Ville
Contemporaine 	because 	they 	happened 	to 	contain
skyscrapers 	and 	because 	they 	seemed 	to 	imply 	clean-
sweep 	methods. 	The 	Team 	X 	attempts 	at 	humanizing
modern 	architecture 	also 	came 	under 	attack 	on 	the
grounds that they 	too were 	oppressive 	and 	too 	abstract
to 	be 	understood 	by 	the 	general 	public. 	One 	learned
that 	salvation 	must 	now 	lie 	in 	a 	sentimental
revivalism.
One 	result 	of 	the 	reaction 	against 	modernization
was 	preservationism, 	and 	by 	197 s 	there 	were quarters
where 	anything 	old 	was 	valued 	over 	anything 	new.
Another 	result 	was 	an 	obsession 	with 	street-scapes 	at
the 	expense 	of 	individual 	buildings. 	This 	emerged 	in,
for 	example, 	the 	writings 	and 	proposals 	of 	Leon 	and
Robert 	Krier 	(e.g.. 	Sladtraum 	in 	Thcoric 	unci 	Praxis,
1975) 	in 	which 	a 	morphological 	index 	of 	street 	and
square 	types 	(e.g., 	boulevards, 	circuses, 	piazzas)
was 	assembled 	as 	an 	antidote 	to 	the 	CIAM 	version 	of
the 	city 	as 	a 	park 	filled 	with 	objects. 	Where 	Le
Corbusier 	had 	posited 	the 	health 	of 	the 	city 	on 	the
death 	of the 	old, 	choking 	'corridor 	street', 	the 	opposite
now 	happened. 	The 	Kriers returned 	to 	the street 	with 	a
nostalgic 	revenge 	(any 	street 	type 	would 	do) 	and
treated 	it 	as 	a 	virtual 	fetish, 	as 	if 	the 	refined 	design 	of
open 	spaces 	and 	outdoor 	rooms 	would 	on 	its 	own
guarantee 	life 	to 	the 	badly 	mauled 	urban 	body. 	They
inveighed 	against 	zoning 	and 	praised 	the 	mixed 	living
and 	working 	arrangements 	of 	traditional 	European
cities. 	Their 	images 	had 	a 	vaguely 	eighteenth-century
air 	(fig. 	28.15), 	while 	their 	utterances 	suggested 	a
somewhat 	impractical 	nostalgia 	for 	an 	era 	of
handicraft.
Another statement of urban 	philosophy to emerge 	in
the 	late 	seventies 	was 	the 	book 	Colhjje 	City 	by 	Colin
Rowe 	and 	his 	follower 	F. 	Koetter. 	Here 	the 	arguments
were 	more 	sophisticated. 	The 	authors 	attacked 	the
determinism 	basic 	to 	Utopianism 	(with 	some 	help 	from
The 	Open 	Society 	and 	its 	Enemies 	by 	Karl 	Popper), 	by
exposing 	the 	totalitarianism 	implicit 	in 	holistic 	urban
.schemes. 	Against 	such 	large-scale 	social 	engineering
they 	proposed 	a 	piecemeal 	and 	democratic 	metaphor
which 	relied 	a 	great 	deal 	on 	the 	principles 	of 	'collage'
and 	'bricolage' 	in 	its 	implementation 	and 	visual 	style.
As 	a 	sort 	of 	allegory 	of 	this 	position 	they 	used 	such
examples 	as 	Hadrian's 	villa 	at 	Tivoli 	with 	its 	infor-
mality, 	its 	sprawling 	picturesque 	character, 	and 	its
quotations 	from 	numerous 	places 	and 	times. 	They 	too
emphasized 	the 	importance 	of 	'spaces 	between' 	and
criticized 	the 	object 	fixation 	of early 	modern 	urbanism
- 	indeed, 	a 	'figure/ground 	conception 	of 	the 	city,
which 	treated 	urban 	spaces 	with 	the 	same 	weight 	as
buildings, 	was 	proposed 	as 	a 	more 	textured 	and
complex 	antidote. 	The modern 	building was to 	blend 	in
with 	the 	patterns 	of the 	historical 	city.
In 	retrospect 	it 	is 	possible 	to 	see 	that 	Collage 	City
relied 	for 	its 	full 	impact 	on 	the 	acceptance 	of 	a
caricature 	of 	modernist 	sensibility 	as 	something
holistic, 	teleological 	and 	essentially 	forward-looking. 	It
did 	not 	do 	justice 	to 	the 	ideological 	and 	formal
complexities 	of 	earlier 	twentieth-century 	utopianism
in 	urban 	design, 	let 	alone 	to 	the 	variegated 	role 	of
tradition 	in 	the formation 	of Utopian 	images of the 	city:
even 	the 	'Ville 	Contemporaine'. 	after 	all. 	had 	been 	a
'collage' 	of 	sorts, 	drawing 	together 	bits 	of 	Paris, 	New
York, 	monasteries, 	ships, 	and 	boulevards. 	Nonethe-
less, 	Collage 	City 	was 	a 	symptom 	of a 	state 	of scepticism
in 	which 	irony 	was 	a 	basic 	requirement 	and 	any 	too
positive 	or 	gushing 	a 	prosposal 	was 	treated 	with
dismay. 	As 	to 	its 	possible 	intentions 	in 	influencing 	the
formulation 	of 	an 	urbanistic 	or 	architectural 	lan-
guage, 	the 	book 	was 	circumspect. 	The 	plates 	and
drawings 	encouraged 	admiration 	for 	complex 	urban

-- 384 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent Past 	383
tissues, 	a 	figure/ground 	view 	of spaces 	and 	forms 	in 	the
city, 	and 	reverence 	for 	certain 	ttcy 	Renaissance
squares. 	The 	fragmentation 	and 	ambiguity 	of Cubism
were 	somehow 	iinlced 	to 	Camillo 	Sitte's 	love 	of outdoor
rooms. 	'Object 	buildings' 	(i.e.. 	some 	of those 	within 	the
modern 	tradition) 	were 	severely 	castigated. 	However,
even 	those 	who 	agreed 	with 	the 	rhetoric 	still 	had 	the
problem 	of translating 	the 	book's 	insights 	into 	a 	three-
dimensional 	vocabulary, 	and 	it 	was 	noticeable 	that
some 	of 	Rowe's 	acolytes 	took 	the 	allegory 	all 	too
literally 	by 	spicing 	their 	plans 	with 	Uffizi 	corridors.
Piazza 	Navonas 	and 	antique 	theatres. 	At 	his 	most
facile 	the 	collagist 	could 	be 	as 	vapid 	as 	the 	simple-
minded 	adherent 	of radical 	eclecticism 	in 	architecture.
But 	sticking 	little 	bits 	of history 	here 	and 	there 	into 	the
modern 	urban 	fabric 	was 	scarcely 	a 	guarantee 	of
environmental 	quality 	or 	even 	of 	spatial 	enrichment.
Rowe's 	intentions 	were 	obviously 	more 	serious 	than
those 	of 	his 	facile 	imitators, 	but 	even 	his 	own 	text
positively 	encouraged 	flippancy:
... 	a 	collage 	technique, 	by 	accommodating 	a 	whole
range 	oiaxi's 	inuudi 	(all 	of them 	vest 	pocket 	Utopias 	-
Swiss 	canton. 	New 	England 	village. 	Dome 	of the
Rock, 	Place 	Vendome, 	Campidoglio. 	etc) 	might 	be 	a
means 	of permitting 	us 	the 	enjoyment 	of Utopian
poetics 	without 	our 	being 	obliged 	to suffer 	the
embarrassment 	of Utopian 	politics. 	. 	. 	. 	collage 	is 	a
method 	deriving 	its 	virtue 	from 	its 	irony 	... 	it
seems 	to 	be 	a 	technique 	for 	using 	things 	and
simultaneously 	disbelieving 	in 	them 	. 	. 	.
The 	tone 	is 	knowledgeable, 	acutely 	self-conscious,
and 	aware 	of 	both 	the 	dissolution 	of a 	past 	system 	of
beliefs 	and 	the 	lack of any 	alternative 	which 	rings 	true;
the 	result 	seems 	to 	be 	an 	elegant 	parlour 	despair 	that
makes the most of erudition 	by 	manipulating the outer
shells 	of 	past 	kernels 	of 	meaning; 	the 	assumption 	is
that 	greater 	conviction 	is 	not 	for 	the 	moment 	possible.
A 	similar 	mood 	of 	chic 	cynicism, 	and 	a 	suggestion
(unwarranted 	but 	assumed) 	that 	this 	is 	the 	only
possible 	viable 	one 	for 	the 	moment, 	is 	to 	be 	found 	in 	an
essay 	by 	Jorge 	Silvetti 	written 	in 	1977:
... 	we 	find 	ourselves 	looking 	back 	on 	the 	Modern
Movement 	itself from 	a 	real 	historical 	perspective.
Its 	'classicism' 	has 	now 	been 	experienced, 	its 	effects
sensed, 	and 	its 	postulates 	questioned; 	yet 	with 	all
this 	nothing 	seems 	to 	have 	appeared 	to 	replace 	it.
Like 	the 	Mannerist 	architect, 	we 	can 	only
manipulate 	the 	known. 	Such 	is, 	in 	my 	view, 	all 	that
can 	be 	said 	in 	general 	terms 	about 	the 	state 	of
architecture 	today.
It 	can 	be 	seen 	from 	this 	survey 	of 	the 	past 	decade
that 	a 	variety 	of 	beliefs 	have, 	in 	fact, 	been 	operative,
and 	that 	the 	traditions 	of 	modern 	architecture 	have
continued 	to 	be 	effective 	and 	influential. 	As 	Silvetti
points 	out, 	nothing 	has 	yet 	emerged 	to 	replace 	the
modern 	movement 	as 	the 	most 	relevant 	source 	of
paradigms. 	Even 	the 	convinced 	revivalist 	nowadays
finds 	that 	he cannot see 	the 	past 	in 	the 	same way 	as 	his
nineteenth-century 	predecessors, 	for 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	itself has 	become 	a 	filter 	through 	which 	history
is 	perceived. 	But 	a 	great 	deal 	of 	the 	rhetoric 	sur-
rounding 	recent 	attempts 	at 	're-invoking 	the 	past' 	has
relied 	on 	a 	grotesquely 	simple 	view 	of 	modern
architecture 	as 	something 	essentially 	anti-historical.
In 	the 	process 	useful allies 	in 	the 	quest 	for architectural
essentials 	have 	been 	unfairly 	overlooked; 	those
outstanding 	buildings 	within 	the 	modern 	tradition
itself 	which 	re-tapped 	some 	of 	architecture's 	funda-
mental 	roots.
That 	is 	why 	it 	may 	be 	relevant 	to 	draw 	this 	book 	to 	a
close 	with 	a 	recent 	building 	conceived 	outside 	the
realms of fashionable doubt, 	yet 	which 	has 	managed 	to
blend 	in 	a 	single entity 	qualities 	of ancient 	and 	modern
traditions; 	the 	Church 	at 	Bagsvaerd 	outside 	Copenha-
gen, 	designed 	by 	jfirn 	Utzon 	between 	1969 	and 	1975
(fig. 	28.16). 	The 	Church 	is 	formed from 	three 	main
spaces, 	an 	atrium 	at the entrance; 	a 	main 	meeting-hall
with 	an 	altar; 	and 	an 	ancillary 	garden 	space 	sur-
rounded 	by 	small 	offices. 	These 	are 	contained 	by
parallel 	cloisters 	running 	the 	entire 	length 	of 	the
building 	and 	expressed 	as slender walls surmounted 	by
triangular 	skylights. 	On 	the 	exterior 	the 	dominant
church 	space 	is 	clearly 	visible 	towards 	the 	centre, 	and
all 	parts 	of 	the 	building 	step 	up 	gradually 	towards 	it.
However, 	unity 	is 	assured 	by 	a 	uniform 	structural
treatment; 	a 	concrete 	frame 	with 	pre-cast 	infill 	slabs 	of
silver-grey 	colour. 	The 	interior 	ceiling 	of 	the 	building
makes 	a strong contrast with this stratified system, 	as it
is 	formed 	from 	a 	curved 	concrete 	surface 	which
protrudes 	over 	the 	entrance, 	then 	flows 	gradually
upwards 	in 	a 	wave 	motion 	which 	reaches 	its 	peak 	over
the 	main 	church 	space, 	to 	descend 	out 	of 	sight 	to 	the
rear. 	This 	extraordinary 	organic 	shape 	modulates 	the
light 	and 	contains 	the 	community 	within 	(figs.
28.17-19).
The 	aesthetic 	effects 	of the 	church 	are 	thus 	based 	on
the 	simplest 	of 	means; 	fine 	proportions, 	contrast
between 	similar 	elements, 	finesse 	in 	joints 	and
craftsmanship, 	the 	play 	of 	light 	over 	plain 	materials.
There 	is 	an 	elusive 	and 	quiet 	imagery 	which 	is 	at 	one
with 	the 	idea 	of a 	religious 	'meeting-house'. 	This 	is
suggested 	by 	the 	small 	glass 	gables 	atop 	the 	parallel
walls 	and 	by 	the 	stepping 	silhouette 	of 	the 	whole,
which 	recalls 	the 	typical 	Zeeland 	country 	church 	with
its 	characteristic 	stepped 	gables. 	The 	corrugated
aluminium 	attached 	to 	the 	tower 	introduces 	a 	bizarre

-- 385 of 420 --

384 	Transformation 	and 	Dissemination 	after 	1940
28.i7(;f/l) 	JiSrnUtzon.
church 	at Bagsvaerd.
1969-75. 	section.

-- 386 of 420 --

The 	Traditions 	of Modern 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past 	• 	385
28.18 	(above) J^m
Utzon, 	church 	at
Bagsvaerd. 	1969-75.
interior.
28.19 	{above 	right) 	]()rn
Utzon. 	church 	at
Bagsvaerd, 	1969-75.
detail.
but 	enriching 	note, 	and 	associations 	that 	perhaps
evoke 	the 	simplicity 	and 	sharpness 	of 	the 	modern
agricultural 	vernacular. 	It 	is 	a 	house, 	a 	hall, 	a 	church,
all 	in 	one. 	and 	its 	shapes 	recall 	one 	aspect 	more 	than
the 	t)ther 	in 	different 	parts.
However, 	imagery 	is 	not 	overplayed 	and 	is 	sup-
ported 	by 	form. 	Form 	in 	turn 	arises 	directly 	from 	a
simple 	structural 	means 	attuned 	to 	serve 	ideas. 	The
driving 	concepts 	of 	the 	design 	are 	rooted 	in 	Utzon's
own 	earlier 	solutions, 	and 	in 	a 	style 	rich 	in 	metaphors
and 	abstract 	images. 	The 	theme 	of the 	curved 	interior
ceiling 	recalls 	the 	wave 	motion 	of the 	intended 	ceiling
for 	the 	Sydney 	Opera 	House 	(which 	in 	turn 	relied 	on
Aaltoesque 	precedent); 	the 	preoccupation 	with 	pre-
cast, 	modular 	discipline 	also 	takes 	one 	back 	to
experiments 	like 	the 	Kingo 	Houses. 	As 	before, 	the
opposition 	and 	coalescence 	of 	the 	stratified 	and 	the
curved 	imply 	two 	primary 	kinds 	of 	order 	and 	other
layers 	of 	polarity 	- 	the 	rational 	and 	the 	organic, 	the
supporting 	and 	the 	supported, 	the 	stable 	and 	the
dynamic. 	The 	frame 	seems 	to 	be 	a 	descendant 	of both
the 	concrete 	trabeated 	tradition 	stretching 	back 	to
Perret. 	and 	of 	the 	wooden-frame 	tradition 	of 	the
Scandinavian 	vernacular. 	However, 	all 	such 	allusions
are 	tightly 	held 	in 	check 	in 	a 	design 	characterized 	by
intellectual 	crispness 	and 	clarity.
Whatever 	the 	sources 	of Utzon's 	building, 	they 	have
been 	transmuted 	into 	a 	new 	terminology, 	a 	genuine
style, 	based 	on 	private, 	intuitive rules. 	A 	guiding 	image
informs 	all 	the 	parts 	and 	brings 	them 	into 	a 	tense
unity. 	Without 	pretension 	or 	show, 	the 	lessons 	of 	the
modern 	tradition, 	of 	the 	vernacular, 	and 	of 	old
ecclesiastical 	types 	have 	been 	fused. 	Surely 	this 	was
what 	Van 	Eyck 	had 	in 	mind 	when 	he 	rejected 	'the
sentimental 	technocracy 	of 	the 	future' 	and 	'the
sentimental 	antiquarianism 	of the 	past' 	and 	suggested
that 	past, 	present, 	and 	future 	must 	be 	active 	in 	the
mind's 	interior 	as a 	continuum'.

-- 387 of 420 --

Conclusion 	: 	Modernity, 	Tradition 	and
Authenticity
Every 	artist 	finds 	certain 	visual 	possibilities 	before 	him, 	to 	which 	he 	is 	bound.
Not 	everything 	is 	possible 	at 	all 	times.
H. 	Wolfflin, 	19 1
5
The 	early 	propagandists 	of 	modern 	archiitecture 	were
convinced 	that 	a 	century-old 	problem 	had 	been 	solved
in 	their 	own 	times, 	that 	a 	genuine 	modern 	style 	rather
than 	a 	revival 	of past 	forms 	had 	at 	last 	been 	achieved.
They 	may 	have 	been 	wrong 	in 	treating 	this 	style 	as
monolithically 	as 	they 	did. 	and 	they 	certainly 	over-
simp.itied 	its 	relationship 	to 	tradition, 	but 	they 	were
probably 	right 	in 	stressing 	its 	epic 	significance. 	The
present-day 	pundit 	with 	his 	feeble 	post-modernist
construct denies 	this 	and 	treats 	the 	past 	eighty years 	as
a 	passing 	phase, 	about 	to 	be 	replaced 	by 	another. 	The
historian 	with 	a 	longer view 	tries to argue the 	opposite:
that 	the revolution 	in 	sensibility, 	which 	affected 	all 	of
the 	arts 	soon 	after 	the 	turn 	of this 	century, 	constituted
a 	break 	as 	drastic 	as 	the 	Renaissance, 	and 	that 	we 	are
closer 	to 	the 	beginning 	of a 	tradition 	than 	the 	end 	of it.
Thus 	the 	present 	is 	defined 	by 	sweeping 	assertions.
none 	of 	which 	are 	provable 	and 	none 	of 	which 	ring
entirely 	true.
That 	the 	creation 	of 	modern 	architecture 	con-
stituted 	a 	major 	development 	must 	be 	beyond 	doubt.
I'eriods 	with 	the 	creative 	intensity 	of 	the 	1920s 	are
altogether 	rare 	in 	the 	history 	of architecture. 	They 	rely
on 	uncommon 	coincidences 	of talent, 	patronage, 	and
luck, 	and on phases of cultural transition 	in 	which 	new
world-views 	strive 	for 	expression. 	The 	generation
which 	came 	to 	maturity 	after 	the 	First 	World 	War
happened 	to 	contain 	individuals 	of 	the 	calibre 	of 	Le
Corbusier. 	Walter 	Gropius 	and 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe.
each 	of them 	obsessed 	with 	the 	problem 	of defining 	an
architectural 	language 	appropriate 	to 	industrialized
society. 	They 	inherited 	this 	problem, 	and 	some 	of the
means 	for 	solving 	it. 	from 	an 	earlier 	generation
containing 	artists 	of the 	order 	of 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Charles 	Rennie 	Mackintosh, 	Peter 	Behrens 	and
Auguste 	Ferret. 	But 	the 	protagonists 	of 	the 	modem
movement 	of 	the 	1920s had 	other 	ideas 	in 	common.
They 	shared 	a 	commitment 	to 	social 	improvement
through 	design 	and 	a 	feeling 	for 	the 	progressive
potential 	of modern 	technology. 	They 	were 	fascinated
by 	the 	spatial 	possibilities 	inherent 	in 	Cubism 	and 	in
steel 	and 	concrete 	construction. 	They 	were 	united 	in
their 	belief 	in 	a 	universal 	and 	international 	language
of 	form, 	and 	in 	their 	hope 	that 	lessons 	might 	be
abstracted 	from 	the 	past 	without 	facile 	imitation.
Despite 	a 	degree 	of 	alienation 	intrinsic 	to 	their 	avant-
garde 	position, 	they 	thought 	of 	themselves 	as 	the
prophets 	of 	a 	new 	society 	and 	as 	preservers 	of 	higher
values: 	their 	Utopias 	combined 	apocalyptic 	expecta-
tion 	with 	a 	vein 	of nostalgia. 	The 	bringing 	of art 	to 	life,
of 	form 	to 	industrialism, 	seemed 	a 	worthwhile 	and
meaningful 	cultural 	programme 	in 	the 	service 	of
human 	betterment. 	And 	while 	each 	artist 	chose 	to
express 	these 	euphoric 	sentiments 	in 	his 	own 	way. 	the
results 	had 	certain 	broad 	features 	in 	common.
This 	happy 	coincidence 	of 	historical 	circumstance
and 	aesthetic 	intentions 	was 	brief, 	but 	it 	still 	changed
many 	of 	the 	formal, 	spatial, 	structural, 	and 	symbolic
bases 	of 	architecture. 	Since 	the 	early 	years 	of 	this
century 	conditions 	and 	intentions 	have 	continued 	to
change and 	the 	conventions 	of 	modern 	architecture
have 	been 	stretched 	and 	agitated 	into 	new 	com-
binations, 	but 	they 	have 	not 	been 	fundamentally
revised. 	The 	architects 	who 	first 	inherited 	the 	modern
tradition 	in 	the 	I93()s. 	Aalto. 	Terragni. 	Martienssen,
Niemeyer. 	Lubetkin 	and 	the 	rest, 	absorbed 	the
principles 	of the 	seminal 	buildings 	and 	extended 	their
lessons. 	Even 	the 	reformulations 	necessitated 	by 	the

-- 388 of 420 --

cataclysmic 	event 	of 	the 	Second 	World 	War 	did 	not
dislodge 	the 	majority 	of 	the 	premisses 	laid 	out 	in 	the
heroic 	period. 	The 	modern 	masters 	themselves
extended 	their 	vocabularies 	on 	some 	levels, 	while
maintaining 	core 	qualities 	from 	their 	earlier 	works.
Lesser 	figures 	built 	the 	skyscrapers 	and 	housing
schemes 	envisaged 	on 	paper 	in 	the 	twenties 	in 	a 	much
debased 	form 	three 	decades 	later. 	Probing 	inheritors 	of
the 	tradition 	took 	over 	some 	concepts 	and 	rejected
others: 	the 	ideas of Team 	X 	or of artists 	as 	individual 	as
Kahn. 	Van 	Eyck. 	Tangc. 	Lasdun 	and 	I'tzon 	were
characterized 	by 	a 	tense 	recognition 	of the 	continuing
relevance 	of 	modem 	architectural 	schemata, 	com-
bined 	with 	a 	feeling 	that 	new 	expressive 	territories
should 	be 	discovered. 	This 	is 	not 	to 	denigrate 	such
figures 	for 	a 	lack 	of originality : 	it 	is 	rather 	to emphasize
that 	an 	inventor's 	task 	may 	vary 	according to 	the 	point
at 	which 	he 	enters 	a 	tradition, 	and 	to 	stress 	that
creative 	individuals 	and 	traditions 	need 	one 	another 	if
they 	are 	to 	stay 	alive.
Despite 	the 	noisy 	proclamations 	of 'post-modernists'
about 	the 	end 	of an 	era. 	their 	actual 	vocabularies 	have
involved 	little 	more 	than 	the 	sticking-together 	of 	pre-
existing pieces of modern 	architecture, 	with 	appliques
here 	and 	there, 	of skin-deep 	historicism. 	This 	scarcely
amounts 	to 	a 	basic 	critique; 	it 	is 	rather 	a 	change 	of
clothes. 	By 	contrast, 	the 	inventions 	of the 	masters, 	of
Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Wright 	in 	particular, 	altered 	the 	very
spatial 	anatomy 	of 	design 	and 	constituted 	a 	funda-
mental 	reorganization'of the deep structures 	(so 	to 	say)
of the 	mediimi 	itself 	As 	f'icasso. 	Braque, 	Matisse, 	and
Kandinsky 	had 	for 	painting, 	they 	made 	available 	new
expressive 	languages 	of vast range 	and 	applicability 	on
which 	others, 	whether 	faint-hearted 	or 	intensely
intelligent, 	could 	build. 	The 	worldwide 	production 	of
the 	past 	half 	century 	tends 	to 	confirm 	this. 	There 	are
airport 	buildings 	in 	remote 	parts of Africa 	which 	would
not 	have 	their 	present 	appearance 	without 	the
prototypes 	of Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	and 	recent 	buildings
of 	high 	poetic 	intensity, 	such 	as 	Lasdun's 	European
Investment 	Bank, 	which 	rely 	on 	the 	formulations
inherent 	in 	the 	Dom-ino skeleton 	of sixty-six 	years 	ago.
For 	better 	or 	for 	worse, 	the 	modern 	movement 	has
become 	the 	dominant 	tradition 	of our 	time.
But 	this 	tradition 	is 	neither 	monolithic 	nor 	static. 	It
is 	composed 	from 	the 	creations 	of 	individual 	artists 	of
varying 	belief 	and 	from 	buildings 	which 	each 	have 	a
unique 	life: 	it 	encompasses 	considerable 	regional
variety 	and 	a 	very 	broad 	spectrum 	of 	quality. 	The
architect 	of the present 	inherits 	this 	tradition 	whether
he 	likes 	it 	or 	not, 	but 	the 	way 	in 	which 	he 	sees 	it 	will
depend 	on 	the 	obsessions 	dominant 	in 	his 	time 	and
even 	on 	the 	filters 	created 	by 	historians. 	What 	he
chooses 	to 	do 	with 	his 	inheritance 	will 	in 	turn 	vary
according 	to 	his 	temperament, 	the 	possibilities 	made
Modernity. 	Tradition 	and 	Authenticity 	387
available 	by 	patronage, 	and 	the 	relevance 	of 	proto-
types 	to 	new 	situations. 	The 	average 	talent 	will 	take
over 	a 	little 	piece 	and 	trot 	out 	an 	imitation 	of it: 	that 	is
what 	average 	artists 	have 	always 	done 	throughout
history 	whether 	they 	built 	with 	pointed 	arches,
columns or steel 	frames. 	But 	the 	original 	mind 	is 	bound
to 	grapple 	with 	his 	version 	of 	his 	tradition, 	rejecting
some 	of it, 	welcoming 	part of it, 	and 	taking 	a 	good 	deal
of it 	for granted. 	Gradually 	he 	will 	move 	from 	imitation
of 	his 	forefathers 	to 	the 	crystaUization 	of 	a 	personal
style, 	blending 	his 	own 	preoccupations 	with 	solutions
appropriate 	to 	the 	new 	problems 	which 	face 	him. 	The
quality 	of his 	results 	will 	depend 	in 	some 	degree 	on 	his
ability 	to 	avoid 	repeating 	the 	mere 	surface 	effects 	of his
predecessors, 	and 	on 	his 	capacity 	to 	inject 	new
meaning 	into 	the 	basic 	formulations 	of his 	tradition.
If 	the 	available 	style 	is 	beginning 	to 	show 	signs 	of
fatigue, 	to 	become 	irrelevant, 	or 	to 	stand 	in 	the 	way 	of
a 	valid 	or 	vital 	interpretation 	of 	reality, 	then 	it 	may
have 	to 	be 	cast 	away. 	Surely 	this 	is 	the 	combination 	of
reasons 	which 	led 	to 	the 	formulation 	of 	modern
architecture 	in 	the 	first 	place: 	the 	existing 	forms 	were
inadequate to the 	task of containing 	the new 	functions,
materials, 	aspirations, 	and 	ideologies 	fostered 	by 	the
Industrial 	Revolution. 	There 	are 	those 	who 	claim 	that
modern 	architecture 	is 	also 	in 	a 	period 	of 	profound
malaise. 	The 	introverted 	mannerism 	and 	symbolic
devaluation 	portrayed 	in 	the 	last 	third 	of this 	book 	are
scarcely 	signs 	of 	health. 	But 	alongside 	these 	jaded
versions 	of 	modern 	design 	(really 	no 	worse 	than 	the
decadent versions of earlier styles) 	are buildings of high
quality: 	as 	ever 	they 	are 	in 	a 	minority 	and 	their
excellence 	transcends 	mere 	period 	concerns. 	It 	seems
that 	the 	schemata 	of modern 	architecture 	are 	firmly 	in
control 	and 	that 	they 	will 	continue 	to 	support
inventions 	of considerable 	richness.
The 	architect 	who 	is 	convinced 	otherwise 	still 	has
the 	problem 	of formulating 	an 	architectural 	language.
Perhaps 	he 	will 	attempt 	(as 	some 	have 	attempted) 	to
turn 	back 	to 	earlier 	phases 	in 	history 	for 	support. 	If so
he 	will 	have 	the 	problem 	of 	reviving 	an 	earlier 	style
without 	pastiche. 	He 	must 	rethink the 	past 	in 	terms 	of
present-day 	tasks, 	techniques 	and 	meanings. 	Along
the 	way 	he 	may 	discover 	that 	superficial 	mimicry 	of
past 	forms 	is 	really 	no 	better 	than 	skin-deep 	modernity
and 	that 	past 	forms 	had 	their 	own 	reasons 	for 	being,
most 	of which no 	longer 	apply. 	If the 	resolution 	to 	this
problem 	is 	found 	in 	an 	intuition 	of past 	principles, 	then
the 	artist 	will 	still 	need 	a 	language 	in 	the 	present
through 	which 	he 	can 	abstract 	precedent. 	He 	will 	then
be 	face to face with 	the problem 	of modern 	architecture
again 	and. 	perhaps, 	with 	the 	realization 	that 	its 	formal
and 	spatial 	conceptions 	are 	closer 	to 	present 	functions
and 	meanings 	than 	he 	had 	hoped. 	There 	is 	a 	solid 	core
of 	wisdom 	to 	.Malraux's 	observation 	that 	no 	man

-- 389 of 420 --

388 	• 	Conclusion
builds 	on 	a 	void, 	and 	a 	civilization 	that 	breaks 	with 	the
style at 	its 	disposal 	soon 	finds 	itself empty-handed.'
The 	problems 	that 	the 	inventors 	of 	modern 	archi-
tecture 	set 	out 	to 	solve 	are 	still 	very 	much 	with 	us. 	As
the 	whole 	world 	gradually 	industrializes 	it 	confronts
difficulties similar to the ones 	which 	first 	faced 	the 	West
a 	century 	ago. 	some 	of 	which 	remain. 	New 	building
problems 	emerge 	to 	which 	pre-existing 	traditions 	have
no 	adequate 	solution: 	changing 	techniques 	under-
mine 	the 	reason 	for 	traditional 	forms 	and 	the 	craft
systems 	in 	which 	they 	were 	made: 	new 	patterns 	of life
lead 	to 	new 	needs 	and 	values 	which 	cry 	out 	for 	an
adequate 	architectural 	home. 	Neither 	regressive
sentimentalism 	nor 	slick 	technocracy 	hold 	out 	ade-
quate 	answers 	ideologically 	or 	architecturally. 	Evi-
dently 	forms 	have 	to 	be 	found 	which 	are 	equal 	to 	the
new 	problems 	but 	which 	embody 	lasting 	values 	as
well. 	Muthesius's 	observation 	made 	just 	after 	the 	turn
of the 	century 	continues 	to 	ring 	true:
Far 	higher 	than 	the 	material 	is 	the 	spiritual: 	far
higher 	than 	function, 	material 	and 	technique
stands 	Form. These 	three 	material 	aspects 	might 	be
impeccably 	handled 	but 	- 	if Form 	were 	not 	- 	we
would 	still 	be 	living 	in 	a 	merely 	brutish 	world.
Since 	the 	loss 	of 	authority 	of Classical 	norms 	in 	the
eighteenth 	century, 	architects 	have 	lacked 	a 	vocabu-
lary 	which 	appeared 	to 	have 	a 	universal 	sanction. 	This
remains 	the 	position 	today. 	But 	where 	the 	architect 	at
the 	turn of the 	century 	had 	to battle to 	formulate 	a 	new
style, 	the 	architect 	of 	the 	present 	has 	the 	intervening
chain 	of discoveries 	of the 	modern 	tradition 	to rely 	on.
It 	seems 	sensible 	to 	build 	on 	the 	wisdom 	embodied 	in
works 	of 	quality 	in 	this 	tradition 	and 	to 	avoid 	the
mistakes of the 	lesser creations. 	This 	does 	not 	imply 	the
imitation 	or 	mannerization 	of 	earlier 	architectural
forms, 	but 	the 	rigorous 	redefinition 	of 	the 	principles
behind 	them 	in 	the 	context 	of new 	problems. 	Modern
architecture 	is 	intrinsically 	neither 	better 	nor 	worse
than 	past architectures : 	all depends on 	how it is used in
any 	one 	case. 	There 	is 	no 	short 	cut 	in 	the 	creation 	of
quality: 	no 	recipes 	will 	do: 	and 	a 	preoccupation with
passing 	fads 	will 	only 	result 	in 	work 	of transient 	value.
Indeed, 	'modernity' 	can 	become 	a 	distraction 	since
what 	really 	counts 	is 	authenticity.
Authenticity 	suggests 	genuineness 	and 	probity 	- 	the
opposite 	of the 	fake. 	It 	implies 	forms 	based 	on 	principle,
forms 	which 	avoid 	arbitrariness, 	and 	which 	are
appropriate 	on 	a 	number 	of 	levels. 	Whether 	it 	uses
pilntis 	or 	piers, 	rectangles 	or 	curves, 	the 	authentic
building 	transcends 	the 	convention 	in 	which 	it 	was
conceived. 	It 	possesses 	a 	sublime 	unity subsuming 	part
and 	whole, 	revealing 	different 	aspects 	of a 	dominating
image, 	and 	suggesting 	a 	character 	of 	almost 	natural
inevitability. 	Through 	a 	marvellous 	abstraction, 	its
materials, 	details, 	spaces, 	and 	forms 	reveal 	the
hierarchy 	of 	intentions. 	It 	is 	never 	merely 	a 	rational
structural 	solution, 	nor 	merely 	an 	elegant 	play 	with
shapes, 	but 	an 	embodiment 	of 	a 	social 	vision, 	an
intuitive 	interpretation 	of 	a 	human 	institution. 	Its
forms 	may 	conform 	to 	the 	regulations 	of 	a 	period, 	a
style, 	or 	a 	building 	type, 	but 	the 	authentic 	work 	will
cut 	through 	the 	customary 	to 	reveal 	new 	levels 	of
significance.
Such 	authenticity 	is 	inconceivable 	without 	the 	basis
of 	a 	genuine 	personal 	style. 	In 	the 	vocabularies 	of
Wright, 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	Aalto, 	Kahn
(and 	a 	few 	others) 	one 	recognizes 	some 	of 	the
necessary 	features: 	a 	limited 	family 	of forms 	capable 	of
rich 	variation 	on 	the 	foundation 	of consistent 	patterns
of 	thought: 	a 	system 	of 	type-forms 	blending 	the
practical, 	the 	aesthetic, 	and 	the 	symbolic: 	shapes
pregnant 	with 	meaning 	embodying 	a 	mythical 	inter-
pretation 	of the world. 	The genuine style 	is the 	opposite
of 	a 	cliche: 	it 	is 	a 	vital 	formula 	and 	a 	source 	of
discipline, 	and it functions as a 	filter through 	which 	the
artist 	draws 	experience 	and 	translates 	it 	into 	form : 	it
places 	limits 	on 	any 	new 	problem 	and 	provides 	the
shape 	of 	hypotheses 	while 	reflecting 	the 	artist's 	most
obsessive 	themes.
When 	a 	style 	possesses 	this 	prodigious 	power 	of
abstraction, 	it 	becomes 	a 	tool 	for 	transforming
precedent. 	Its 	external 	physiognomy 	may 	relate 	to
contemporary 	relatives, 	but 	its 	inner 	life 	will 	rely 	on
nourishment 	from 	tradition. 	A 	single 	abstract 	shape
may 	derive 	simultaneously 	from 	a 	dome, 	a 	funnel, 	a
cooling-tower, 	an 	Indian 	observatory, 	a 	syntax 	for
concrete, 	a 	favourite 	form 	in 	painting 	and 	a 	particular
institutional 	interpretation, 	as 	happened 	with 	the
curved 	volume 	at 	the 	heart 	of 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Parlia-
ment 	at 	Chandigarh. 	A 	modern 	solution 	to 	the 	roof
may 	blend 	the 	wisdom 	of the 	Classical 	cornice 	with 	an
intuition 	about 	a basic 	order 	in 	nature, 	and 	even 	with
the 	shape 	of 	a 	Froebel 	block, 	as 	happened 	in 	the
architectural 	system 	of Wright. 	And 	as 	each 	new 	task
is 	faced, 	the 	range 	of a 	style 	is 	extended 	a 	little, 	but
without 	a 	loss 	of 	consistency: 	the 	chemistry 	of 	a
genuine 	poetic 	language 	continues 	to 	fuse 	new 	unities
out 	of well-tried 	parts.
The 	Robie 	House, 	the 	Villa 	Savoye. 	the 	Barcelona
Pavilion, 	the 	town 	centre 	at 	Saynatsalo. 	the 	Kimbell
Art 	Museum, 	the 	church 	at 	Bagsvaerd 	- 	these 	are
among 	the 	buildings 	in 	the 	modern 	tradition 	to 	possess
such 	extraordinary 	depth. 	To 	slot 	them 	into 	the
modern 	movement 	is 	to 	miss 	much 	of 	their 	value, 	for
they 	are 	also 	relatives 	of past 	works 	of 	excellence. 	,It
was 	this 	timeless 	character 	to 	which 	Le 	Corbusier
referred 	in 	1923 	when 	he 	wrote: 	'Architecture 	has
nothing 	to 	do 	with 	the 	various 	styles.'

-- 390 of 420 --

3«9
Bibliographical 	Note
It 	would 	be 	quite 	impossible 	to 	include 	even 	a 	fair
representation 	ol'the 	vast 	and 	ever-growing 	bibliography 	on
architecture 	this 	century without 	writing 	another, 	separate
volume. 	The 	reader 	who 	seeks 	a 	more 	detailed 	coverage 	is
referred 	to 	Dennis 	Sharp 	(ed.l. 	Sauries 	oj 	Modern 	Arcliitatiirf
(Architectural 	Association. 	London, 	Paper 	no. 	2: 	New 	York.
Wittenborn. 	1967). 	and 	to 	Muriel 	Kmanuel 	(ed.). 	Conteinpor-
(irfi 	ArchiUrts {New 	York. 	St. 	Martins 	Press. 	1980).
Like 	architecture, 	scholarship 	has 	its 	traditions. 	Mono-
graphs 	and 	articles 	are 	referred 	to 	(where 	relevant! 	in 	the
notes. 	The 	present 	note 	is 	reserved 	for 	general 	works which
have 	helped 	me 	form 	a 	picture 	of 	the 	overall 	development,
even 	when 	I 	have disagreed 	with 	the 	point 	of view or have 	felt
that 	crucial 	material 	was missing.
The picture 	is 	necessarily 	less complete the earlier one goes.
One 	might 	begin 	with 	the 	modern 	movement's 	first 	attempts
at 	understanding 	itself, 	such 	as 	Walter 	Gropius's 	Intvrnat-
kvialc 	Arf/i/trt(i/r 	(Munich. 	1925) 	or 	Ludwig 	Hilbersheimer's
Intfrnatiomik 	ncuc 	Baukuust 	(Stuttgart, 	1927). 	Perhaps 	these
intluenced 	the 	formulations 	and 	title 	of 	Henry-Russell
Hitchcock 	and 	Philip 	Johnson's 	The 	Inteniatkmul 	Style.
Architecture 	Since 	7922 	(New 	York. 	1932). 	This 	book
attempted to explain the visual 	principles behind 	a 	selection of
modern 	architectural 	works, 	and 	to 	relate 	these 	to 	structural
effects of concrete and steel. 	As the title suggests, 	the emphasis
was stylistic: 	ideological 	aspects 	of the 	new 	architecture were
ignored, 	as 	were 	buildings 	which 	did 	not 	conforin 	visually.
In 	1952 	P. 	Morton 	Shand 	published 	a 	series 	of 	articles 	in
the 	Architectural 	Review 	(London) 	dealing 	with 	the 	evolution
of 	modern 	architecture 	in 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	and 	early
twentieth 	centuries. 	These 	may 	have 	intluenced 	the 	picture
given 	by 	Nikolaus 	Pevsner 	in 	his 	better-known 	Pioneers 	of
Modern 	Desiiinfrom 	WiUiom 	Morris to 	Wudter Gropius ( London.
19 36). 	Pevsner traced the 	impact 	of Morris's 	moral 	ideas 	and
of 	nineteenth-century 	engineering 	on 	the 	formulations
around 	the 	turn 	of the 	century. 	He 	examined 	Art 	Nouveau,
the 	work 	of 	Perret, 	Behrens, 	Hofl'mann 	and 	Wright, 	and
brought 	his 	story 	to 	a 	close 	in 	1914, 	with 	buildings 	like
Gropius's 	Werkbund 	Pavilion 	at 	Cologne 	of 	that 	year. 	The
implication 	seemed 	to 	he 	that 	these 	individual 	buildings 	were
part 	of a 	saga, 	resulting 	in 	what 	Pevsner 	felt 	was 	the 	true,
rational 	style 	of the twentieth 	century.
Sigfried 	(liedion's 	Space, 	Time 	and 	Architecture 	(Cambridge,
Mass., 	1941) 	had 	something 	of 	this 	character 	too. 	Perhaps
influenced 	by 	historicists 	like 	Heinrich 	Wolfflin, 	he 	believed 	it
was 	the 	historian's 	task 	to 	characterize the 	'constituent' 	facts
of a period 	which 	truly 	represented 	the 	'spirit 	of the 	age' 	and
to 	ignore 	the 	rest. 	As 	he 	wrote, 	his 	new 	Grand 	Tradition 	of
modern 	architecture 	was 	under 	threat 	of 	extinction 	in
Europe: 	his 	tone 	was 	lofty 	and 	apostolic. 	His 	view 	of 	the
origins of modern 	architecture did much 	to emphasize the role
of 	new 	materials 	like 	iron, 	glass, 	steel 	and 	concrete 	in 	the
nineteenth 	century, 	and 	of 	a 	new 	'space 	conception'
stemming 	from 	Cubism 	and 	culminating 	in 	the 	rich 	spatial
ambiguities 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	His 	treatment 	went
further 	than 	Pevsner's 	in 	that 	it 	covered 	urbanism 	and
architecture 	in 	the 	1920s 	and 	1930s. 	Expressionist 	ten-
dencies 	were 	played 	down: 	rationalist 	ones 	emphasized:
extensions 	of 	nineteenth-century 	revivalism 	ignored. 	Even
the 	later editions of the 	book, 	which 	included 	buildings of the
1940s 	and 	1 9 SOS. 	were 	selective 	tracts 	in 	favour 	of a 	cause
with 	which 	Ciiedion 	was directly involved.
The 	perspective 	altered 	drastically 	after 	the 	war 	as 	a 	new.
younger 	generation 	of 	historians 	looked 	back 	at 	the 	'heroic'
years 	as 	a 	separate 	period 	of 	history, 	and 	became 	more
conscious 	of 	the 	symbolic 	and 	ideological 	flavour 	of modern
architecture. 	The 	most 	notable 	products 	were 	the 	fragmen-
tary essays of Colin 	Rowe 	written 	in 	the 	late 	1940s 	(e.g.. 	'The
Mathematics 	of 	the 	Ideal 	Villa: 	Palladio 	and 	Le 	Corbusier
Compared'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	1947I 	and 	the 	remarkable
Theory 	and 	Design 	in 	the 	First 	Machine 	.^ge 	(London. 	1960) 	by
Reyner 	Banham. 	This 	was 	on 	a 	sounder 	documentary
foundation 	than 	its 	predecessors, 	as 	it 	was 	based 	on
theoretical 	texts 	of the 	tirst 	three 	decades 	of this 	century. 	It 	is
probably 	pointless 	to 	blame 	Banham's work 	for 	its 	cursory
treatment 	of 	Wright, 	its 	Europocentrism 	and 	its 	near-
avoidance 	of 	politics, 	as 	these 	were 	not 	close 	to 	its 	central
aims. 	However, 	the 	book 	did 	draw 	to 	a 	close 	around 	1930.
and 	analysed 	texts 	more 	than 	it 	did forms.
Banham's 	book 	was 	conceived 	in 	parallel 	with 	Henry-
Russell 	Hitchcock's 	magisterial 	.Architecture. 	!^ineteentli 	and
Twentieth 	Centtiries. 	which 	appeared 	in 	the Pelican 	History 	of
Art 	series 	in 	19SS. 	This 	was 	sound 	scholarship 	of 	an
undaring 	kind 	belonging to that tradition of art history which
concentrates 	on 	the 	description 	of stylistic 	movements. 	Only
the last third of the book was devoted to the twentieth century
and 	it 	closed 	in 	the 	early 	1950s. 	There 	was 	little 	.sense 	of the
.social 	role 	of 	architecture 	and 	even 	individual 	artistic
personalities 	were 	blended 	into 	'phases' 	and 	'developments'.
However, 	the 	treatment 	of 	Art 	Nouveau 	was 	extensive, 	and
the book retains its function as 	a 	weighty 	reference work 	with
a 	good 	bibliography 	and 	useful notes.
Leonardo Benevolo's 	History of Modern .Architecture ( 2 	vols..
Cambridge. 	Mass., 	1971: 	original 	Italian 	edition, 	i960)
amplified 	Giedions 	treatment 	of 	the 	nineteenth 	century. 	It
stressed 	the 	reformist 	roots 	of 	modern 	architecture 	and
urbanism, 	and 	the 	crises 	following 	from 	industrialization.
Volume 	2. 	dealing 	with 	the 	twentieth 	century, 	took 	a 	broad
view 	and 	included 	political 	debates 	surrounding 	the 	modern
movement, 	and 	the impact of Nazi and 	Fascist critiques. 	As he
was 	writing 	in 	the 	late 	19SOS. 	his 	treatment 	of the years 	after
the 	Second 	World 	War was cursory: 	he 	also 	abstained 	from 	a
close analysis of individual 	works.
Peter 	Collins's 	Changing 	Ideals 	in 	Modern 	.Architecture
( London. 	1 9(1 s ) 	must be counted 	among the seminal 	works of
modern 	architectural 	scholarship. 	In 	this 	case 	the 	emphasis
was 	on 	the 	intellectual 	history 	of the 	nineteenth 	century 	and
on the emergence of the idea, rather than the forms, 	of modern
architecture. 	This 	was 	.seen 	against 	the 	background 	of 	the
various 	philosophical 	debates underlying 	nineteenth-century
styles. 	Collins 	provided 	the 	most 	succinct 	treatment 	of
Rationalism, 	an 	attitude 	to design 	which 	would 	be 	rethought
in 	the 	modern 	movement 	of the 	twentieth 	century.
For 	coverage 	of the 	period 	since 	i960, 	one 	has 	to 	resort 	to
lesser 	works 	than 	those 	mentioned 	so 	far. 	Charles 	Jencks's
Modern 	Movements 	in 	.4rr/ii(C((i(re (Doubleday 	Anchor. 	1973)
was 	written 	by 	a 	critic 	who 	has 	made 	no 	bones about 	the
propaganda 	value 	of 	'history' 	writing. 	The 	book 	reflects 	the
agonies 	and 	hesitations of the convinced 	pluralist. 	Jencks 	was
determined 	to 	avoid 	the 	'single strand' 	method of Ciedion 	and
Pevsner, 	and 	implied 	instead 	(with 	the 	aid 	of 	charts 	and
diagrams) 	a 	series 	of 	'discontinuous 	movements', 	six 	in 	all.
These 	had 	names 	like 	'The 	Idealist', 	'The 	Intuitive' 	and 	'The
Activist'. 	Architecture 	covering 	half 	a 	century 	or 	more 	was

-- 391 of 420 --

3 go 	Bibliographical 	Note
thus parcelled rather uncomfortably into arbitrary categories.
The 	result 	of all 	the 	straining 	after 	relativism 	was 	a 	confused
picture 	which 	clearly 	acknowledged 	the 	difficulty 	of selection
and 	the 	need 	to 	avoid 	presenting 	modern 	architecture 	as 	a
monolithic entity.
In 	the 	mid-i47i)s 	the 	publications 	on 	'Modern 	Architec-
ture 	and 	Design' 	of 	the 	BBC 	Open 	University 	course 	A-?os.
run 	by 	Tim 	and 	Charlotte 	Benton, 	began 	to 	appear. 	The
eighteen 	'units' 	on 	architecture from 	1890 to 	1959 	presented
some 	previously 	unpublished 	facts, 	sources, 	images 	and
opinions. 	Most 	useful 	too 	were 	the 	two 	anthologies 	of source
material: 	Architecture 	and 	Design, 	iS')o-iq^<). 	An 	Internat-
ional 	AnthohfUi 	of Original 	Articles 	(New 	York. 	1975 1, 	leds.
Benton 	and 	Benton, 	with 	D. 	Sharp) 	and 	Documents 	(ed. 	C.
Benton I. 	A 	curious 	habit 	seems 	to 	have 	developed 	in 	the
architectural 	history 	confraternity, 	of not 	acknowledging 	the
'units' 	as 	publications; 	I 	have 	avoided 	this 	in 	my 	own
references.
More 	recently 	Manfredo 	Tafuri 	and 	Francesco 	Dal 	Co
published 	Modern 	Architecture 	(New 	York, 	1979) - translated
from 	the 	Italian 	edition 	of 	1 976. 	The 	emphasis 	of this 	lavish
book 	was on 	the evolution 	of the 	modern 	industrial 	city 	more
than 	on 	individual 	buildings 	or 	artists. 	The 	authors 	were
proud 	to 	announce 	their 	Marxist 	affiliations 	and 	to 	mar 	any
pretence 	at 	objectivity 	in 	a 	social 	polemic. 	Even 	so 	their
treatment 	of 	American 	and 	Soviet 	city 	planning 	was 	most
useful. 	However, 	the 	years 	after 	19 so 	were 	given 	little
coverage 	and 	next 	to 	nothing 	was 	said 	about 	architecture
outside 	Europe 	and 	the 	United 	States. 	Another 	book 	which
emphasized ideology 	at the expense of other matters 	appeared
in 	1980. 	too 	late 	to 	infiuence 	the 	present 	work 	one 	way 	or
another. This was 	Kenneth 	Frampton's 	Modern 	Architecture, 	a
Critical 	Historif 	(New 	York, 	1980). 	nearly 	half of which 	was
devoted 	to 	architecture 	before 	19 14. 	I 	have 	recorded 	my
reactions 	to 	the 	strengths 	and 	weaknesses 	of these 	two 	most
recent 	studies 	in 	a 	review 	in 	the 	lournal 	of 	the 	Society 	of
Architectural 	Historians. 	40. 	no, 	2. 	May 	198 1, 	pp. 	168-170.
Books 	referred 	to 	in 	shortened 	form 	in 	notes
Banham. 	Reyner. 	The 	Sew 	Brutalisni 	- 	Ethic or 	Aesthetic?,
New 	York. 	Reinhold. 	1966.
Banham. 	Reyner, 	Theorg 	and Design 	in 	the First 	Maclhne 	Age.
London, 	Architectural 	Press, 	i960.
Benevolo. 	Leonardo, 	A 	History 	of Modern 	Architecture.
Cambridge, 	Mass.. 	MIT 	l^ress. 	1971. 	2 	vols., 	translated
from 	Storia deW archilettura 	moderna. 	i960,
Benton, 	Charlotte 	(ed.). 	Documents, 	a 	Collection of Source
Material on 	tlie 	Modern 	Movement. 	Milton 	Keynes, 	Open
University. 	197s-
Benton, 	Tim and Charlotte 	(eds.), 	with 	Dennis Sharp,
Architecture and 	Design. 	I X90- 1 93 9 ; 	/In International
Anthology of Original .Articles. 	New 	York. 	Whitney. 	1975:
also 	published 	as 	Form 	and 	Function: 	A 	Source 	Book on 	the
History of Architecture and Design 	1 fi()0~i<)^ 9. 	Milton
Keynes, 	Open 	University, 	1 97s. 	1 	have followed 	the
Benton's translations 	unless otherwise stated.
Collins. 	Peter, 	Changiijg 	Ideals 	in 	Modern 	.Architecture. 	London,
Faber 	and 	Faber, 	196s.
Curtis. 	William, 	and Sekler, 	F.duard 	(ed,), 	Lc 	Corbuswr at
Wiirf;, 	tite 	Genesis of the 	Carpenter Center for 	the 	Visual .Arts,
Cambridge, 	Mass., 	Harvard 	University 	Press, 	1978,
Drew, 	Philip, 	The 	Third Generation: 	Changing 	Meaning 	in
Architecture. 	London, 	Praeger, 	1972,
Egbert. 	Donald 	Drew. 	Social 	Radicalism 	and 	the 	.Arts. 	New
York. 	Knopf 	1970.
Giedion. 	Sigfried, 	Space. 	Time and 	Architecture, 	Cambridge.
Mass., 	Harvard 	University 	Press, 	1941 	: 	sth 	edn.. 	1967.
Hitchcock, 	Henry-Russell, 	Architecture. 	Nineteenth 	and
Twentieth 	Centuries, 	Harmondsworth. 	Penguin, 	19S8.
Hitchcock. 	H. R.. 	and 	Johnson. 	Philip. 	Tlie 	International Style:
Architecture Since 	l<)22. 	New 	York. 	Museum 	of Modern
Art. 	1932.
]encks. 	Charles. 	Modern 	Movements in 	Architecture, 	New
York, 	Doubleday 	Anchor, 	1973.
Jcncks, 	Charles, 	The 	Language of Post- Modern 	Architecture,
New 	York, 	Rizzoli, 	1977,
Jordy, 	William 	H., 	Anwrican 	Buildii^gs and their Architects.
volume 	5, 	Progressive and Academic 	Ideals at 	the 	Turn of the
Twentieth 	Century. 	New 	York. 	Doubleday 	Anchor, 	1972,
Jordy, 	William 	H., 	American 	Buildings and 	Their Architects.
volume 	4, 	The Impact of European 	Modernism 	in 	the 	Mid
Twentieth 	Century. 	New 	York, 	Anchor 	Doubleday, 	1972.
Lc 	Corbusicr (Jeannerct. 	Charles Edouard). 	Vers 	une
architecture. 	Paris. 	1923. 	Translated 	by 	Frederick 	Etchells
as 	Towards 	a 	New Architecture. 	London, 	1927, 	and
frequently 	republished 	thereafter,
Le Corbusier and 	Pierre Jeanncret. 	Oeiivrc complete 	in 	8
volumes: 	1910-1929: 	1929-1934: 1934-1938:
1938-1946: 	I94fi-I95^: 	1952-1957: 1957-1965;
volume 	8: 	editors, 	W. 	Boesiger. 	M. 	Bill. 	0. 	Stonorov.
Zurich, 	Editions Girsberger or Editions 	d'Architecture,
1 929-70, 	These have 	been 	translated 	as 	the 	Complete
Works, 	and 	into 	numerous other languages 	than 	English.
Pevsner, 	Nikolaus, 	Pioneers of Modern 	Design 	from 	William
Morris 	to 	Walter Gropius. 	London, 	Faber 	and 	Faber, 	1936,
Smith, 	Norris Kelly. 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	a 	Study 	in
Architectural Content. 	Englewood 	Clill's. 	N.J.. 	Prentice 	Hall.
1966.
Smithson. 	Alison 	(ed.). 	Team 	10 	Primer, 	Cambridge, 	Mass,,
MIT 	Press, 	1968.
Tafuri. 	Manfredo, 	and 	Dal 	Co, 	Francesco, 	Modern
.Architecture, 	New 	York, 	Abrams, 	1979: 	translated 	from
Archilettura 	conteniporanea, 	Milan, 	Electa 	Editrice, 	1976.
Viollet-le-Duc, 	Eugene, 	Dictionnaire 	raisonnede 	I'architecture,
Paris, 	I8S4-68.
Viollet-le-Duc, 	Eugene, 	Fntretiens sur I'architecture, 	Paris,
1865-72. 	Translated 	as Discourses on 	Architecture, 	Boston,
1876,
Von 	Moos, 	Stanislaus. 	Le 	Corbusier: 	Elemente einer Synthese,
Frauenfeld 	and 	Stuttgart, 	1968; 	translated 	as Le 	Corbusier,
I'architecte et 	son 	mythc 	( 	1 974) 	and 	as 	Le 	Corbusier.
Elements 	of a Synthesis. 	Cambridge, 	Mass.. 	MIT. 	1979.
Walden. 	Russell 	(ed.). 	The 	Open 	Hand. 	Essays on 	Le 	Corbusier.
Cambridge, 	Mass.. 	MIT Press. 	1977.
Notes
Introduction
p. 	8 	Motto: 	Ernst 	Kris. 	Psychoanalytic 	Explorations 	in 	.Art.
New 	York 	and 	London. 	1952. 	p. 	21.
Modern 	Age: 	the 	conception 	of history as a sequence of ages.
each 	with 	a 	dominating spirit, 	owes a 	good 	deal 	to 	the
theories of Hegel, 	See 	Norris 	Kelly 	Smith, 	On 	Art 	and
Architecture in 	the 	Modern 	WorM, 	Victoria, 	B.C.. 	1971. 	Also,
Chapter 	I 	below.
Forms, 	Meanings, 	Moralities: 	for new 	aspirations 	in 	the
nineteenth 	century, 	see Collins, 	Changing 	Ideals.

-- 392 of 420 --

Notes 	391
Propagandists: 	particularly 	Henry-Russell 	Hitchcock.
Sigfried 	Ciedion 	and 	Nikolaus 	Pevsner. 	See 	Bihliographical
Note. 	Also 	David 	Watkin. 	MoraliUi 	mid 	AirlnUrtinr. 	Oxford.
i<.)77for 	an 	attempted 	refutation 	of thedeterminist
underpinnings 	of these 	historians.
p. 9 	Pioneers: 	Pevsner's title 	of 14?''. 	Pic'iccr.s- of \hntern
Dcsiqnlrom 	William 	Morris 	to 	W'liher Gropius.
Earlier 	Histories: 	see 	Bibliographical 	Note.
p. 	1 	1 	Origins: 	a 	distinction 	is 	deliberately 	drawn 	between
ideas of modern 	architecture, 	and 	forms. 	As 	1 	suggest 	in
Chapter 	I. 	the 	notion 	of modern 	architecture 	is 	traceable in
the 	long 	run 	to 	progressive 	theories of history 	with 	their
roots in 	the 	late eighteenth 	century. 	But 	the emphasis 	of the
present 	work 	is on 	architecture as a 	visual 	and 	symbolic 	art
and 	it 	is 	not 	reasonable 	to 	speak of a 	new 	style, 	distinct 	from
overt 	revivalism, 	until 	the 	iStjos. 	(See Chapter 	I 	below.) 	It
only 	confuses 	matters to 	give 	the title 	The 	First 	Moderns to 	a
work 	on 	1 	7th- 	and 	1 8th-century 	architecture, 	as 	Joseph
Rykwert 	has 	recently 	done 	1 	1 980). 	This conforms 	to 	the
present 	fashion 	of nostalgia 	for the 	18th 	century 	and 	no
doubt extends 	all 	too 	crudely 	some of the 	subtle 	parallelisms
suggested 	by 	Emil 	Kaufmann. 	Von 	Ledoiix 	his 	Le 	Corbusier.
Vienna. 	19? V
If one 	wished 	to 	take the 	'sources' 	further back 	and
confuse 	the 	matter still 	more, 	one could 	show 	that 	I.e
Corbusier drew 	crucial 	lessons 	from 	the 	Parthenon, 	and 	that
the 	'first 	moderns' 	therefore 	existed 	in 	the 	sth 	century 	B.C.!
Like 	any 	complex 	imaginative 	phenomenon, 	modern
architecture 	drew 	on 	a 	number of past 	eras 	simultaneously.
Tradition: 	the 	avant-garde 	mythos 	tends 	to 	imply 	a 	constant
rejection of the 	past, 	but 	modern 	architecture, 	like 	any 	other
gradual 	development 	in 	time, 	has 	relied 	on 	exemplars 	and
gradual 	transformations, 	as well as 	on 	the 	restrictive 	bonds
of slowly 	changing stylistic conventions. 	The 	view 	of
tradition 	presented 	in 	this 	book 	undoubtedly 	owes
something 	to 	Ernst 	Ciombrich. 	Art 	and 	Illusion. 	London,
igfio. 	and 	to George 	Kubler. 	The Shape ojTime. 	Yale. 	1962.
However, 	in 	describing a 	tradition 	it 	is 	also crucial 	to 	be
aware of the 	unique character of individual 	works 	within 	it.
and 	of the 	interplay 	between 	private 	artistic 	fantasy 	and 	the
shared 	rules' 	of period or regional 	styles.
Chapter 	i 	. 	The 	Idea 	of a 	Modern 	Architecture 	in
the 	Nineteenth 	Century
p. 	14 	Motto: 	Viollet-Le-Duc. 	Dietionnaire 	raisonne. 	vol. 	i. 	p.
ix.
Modern: 	Collins. 	Chanijinij 	Ideals, 	see 	particularly 	chapter 	i 	^
'The 	Demand 	for a 	New 	.\rchitecture'. 	pp. 	i 	28 	ff. 	This
chapter 	is 	heavily 	indebted 	to 	Collins's 	treatment. 	For an
extremely 	.subtle 	analysis 	of the 	significance of 'modernity'
culturally 	and 	psychologically 	in 	a 	particular 	milieu, 	.see 	Karl
E. 	Schorske. 	Fin de 	Siecle 	Vienna. 	Politics and 	Cultmr. 	New
York. 	1 48 1.
Spiritual 	Core: 	for a discussion 	of determinist 	theories 	in
historiography, 	see 	Karl 	Popper. 	The 	Open 	Societii 	and 	Its
Enemies. 	London. 	1 94s. 	also 	R. C. 	Collingwood. 	The 	Idea of
Historii. 	Oxford. 	1946. 	and 	M. 	Bury. 	The 	Idea 	of Froffress.
London. 	1920. 	For the 	concept 	of the 	Zeitjieist 	('spirit 	of the
times' ) 	in 	art 	historiography, 	see 	&nst 	Gombrich. 	.Art 	Historii
and the 	Social Sciences. 	Oxford. 	1 97S. 	For the 	relationship of
determinism 	to 	modern 	architecture, 	see 	N. 	K. 	Smith. 	On 	Art
and 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Modern 	World. 	Victoria. 	B.C.. 	1971
and 	D. 	Watkin. 	Morality 	and 	Arcliitectiire. 	Oxford. 	I977- 	It
needs 	to 	be stressed that 	a 	belief in 	determinism 	does 	not
determine 	forms.
Absolute 	Authority: 	see John 	Summcrson. 	The Case 	for a
Theory 	of Modern 	Architecture'. 	RIHA 	lournal. 	64 	(June
1957). 	pp. 	^"7-1 	V 	See 	also 	Rudolf Wittkower. 	Architectural
Principles 	in 	the 	.hie of Himumism. 	London. 	1949 	for 	an
attempt 	at explaining 	the 	idealist 	world-view 	underlying
Renaissance 	forms.
New 	Methods: 	Collins. 	Changing 	Ideals. 	Ch. 	20. 	'New
Planning 	Problems' : 	also 	Giedion. 	Space, 	Time and
Architecture, 	and 	Benevolo. 	Historii of Modern 	Architeitiire.
Vol. 	I. 	for the 	impact 	of industrialism 	on 	architecture and
engineering 	in 	the 	19th 	century. 	Also. 	Francis 	D.
Klingender. 	.Art 	and 	the 	Industrial 	Revolution. 	London. 	1947-
p. 	1 5 	Nineteenth-century 	Moralists: 	see 	Paul Thompson.
The 	Work oj 	William 	Morris. 	London. 	1 960 and 	Edward 	P.
Thompson. 	William 	Morris: 	Romantic to 	Revolutionary.
London. 	1955- 	Also: 	John 	Ruskin. 	The Stones of Venice.
London. 	185 1-3. 	For 	Morris's role 	in 	the 	evolution 	of
modern 	architectural 	ideas: 	Pevsner. 	Pioneers, 	and 	Watkin.
Morality and .Architecture.
p. 	16 	Alternative Social and 	l^rban 	Structures: 	see 	Egbert.
Social 	Radicalism, 	especially 	pp. 	i 	1 7 H- 	f»i" Saint-Simon.
pp. 	n 	3 	IT. 	for Fourier, 	and 	pp. 	S 7 IT. 	for 	Karl 	Marx. 	The
Utopian 	character of modern 	architecture 	is discussed 	more
fully 	in 	Chapters 	1 2 	and 	i 	s 	below. 	The 	ideological 	roots of
any 	single 	modern 	architect 	vary 	considerably.
Theorists of modern 	Architecture: 	For 	a 	fuller discussion, 	see
Collins. 	ClumiiiiHi 	Ideals, 	pp. 	1 	28 It
Greek, 	Gothic. 	Egyptian: 	for 	a 	detailed 	account 	of the 	various
style 	pha,ses of nineteenth-century 	European 	architecture see
Hitchcock. 	Architecture, 	and 	Stefan 	Muthesius and 	Roger
Dixon. 	Victorian 	Architecture. 	New 	York. 	I979-
Gothic: 	see. 	for example, 	the 	polemics employed 	by 	A. 	W.
Pugin 	in 	.4/1 	Apology for 	the 	Revival 0) 	Christian 	.Architecture in
Fngland. 	London, 	i 	843.
p. 	1 7 	Primitive 	Hut: 	M. 	A. 	Laugier. 	Essai sur Varchilecture.
Paris. 	175.3; 	W. 	Herrmann. 	Laugier and Eighteenth-Century
French 	Theory. 	London. 	1962; 	J. 	Rykwert. 	On 	Adam's 	House
in 	Paradise: 	the 	Idea of the 	Primitive 	Hut 	in 	Architectural
History. 	New 	York. 	1972.
Rationalism: 	sec chapter 	1 9 	of that 	title, 	in 	Collins. 	Changing
Ideals. 	For 	a critique 	of functional 	determinism 	see 	Alan
Colquhoun. 	'Typology 	and 	Design 	Method'. 	Perspecta. 	1
2
(19(19). 	PP- 	71-4-
p. 	1 8 	Truth 	to 	Programme and Structure: 	the 	most 	succinct
discussion 	of Viollet-le-Duc's 	rationalism 	is 	to 	be 	found 	in
John 	Summerson. 	Heavenly 	Mansions. 	London. 	1949-
pp. 	I 	35 	IT. 	For 	Viollet's 	own 	arguments see particularly.
Fntretiens sur I'architecture. 	Chapter 	to.
p. 	19 	Beaux-Arts: 	for a 	somewhat 	fragmented 	treatment 	see
Arthur Drexler 	(ed.). 	The Architecture of the 	Ecole des 	Beaux-
.Arts. 	New 	York. 	1977. 	Modern 	architects 	like 	Le Corbusier
and 	Walter Gropius 	lumped 	the 	Ecole 	together unfairly 	and
monolithically. 	Their principal 	objections were 	against 	a
formulaic 	use 	of precedent, 	axial 	plans of a 	decorative sort,
the 	extensive 	use 	of ornament, 	and 	an 	ignorance of modem
technologies. 	In 	short 	they took 	the 	Beaux-Arts to 	exempfify
traditionalism 	in 	the 	worst 	sense of the word. 	However, 	as
Banham 	( Theory and 	Design. 	Chapter 	i ) 	has shown, 	ideas of
.'\cademic 	extraction 	infiuenced 	the 	pioneers 	of modern
architecture 	much 	more than 	they 	would 	have 	adinitted.
Abstraction 	of Tradition: 	it 	is 	instructive 	that 	the 	original
French 	title of Le 	Corbusier's 	Towards a 	New .Architecture of
192 ? 	was 	I'cr.s' 	une architecture 	(without 	the 	'New'). 	While he

-- 393 of 420 --

392 	Notes
was concerned 	to produce 	a vocabularj' 	appropriate to 	the
industrial 	age. 	he was equally 	concerned 	to 	purge
architecture of faker>- 	and 	bogus 	historicism 	so as to
recapture essentials 	which 	underlay 	past 	styles. 	Viollet-le-Duc
had 	also 	made the distinction 	between 	'styles' 	(as 	passing
conventions of a 	superficial sort I 	and 	the character of 'style'
which 	implied 	a 	far deeper quality of genuineness. 	Walter
Gropius 	concluded 	The 	New Architecture and the 	Bauhaus.
1926 	with 	the following 	thoughts: 	'... 	my 	conception 	of the
role of the 	New 	.-Xrchitecture is 	nowhere 	and 	in 	no sense 	in
opposition 	to 	"Tradition" 	properly so 	called. 	"Respect 	for
Tradition" 	does 	not 	mean 	the 	complacent 	toleration 	of
elements 	which 	have been 	a 	matter of fortuitous chance or
of individual 	eccentricity: 	nor does it 	mean 	the 	acceptance of
domination 	by 	bygone 	aesthetic forms. 	It 	means and 	always
has 	meant, 	the 	preservation 	of essentials 	in 	the 	process of
striving to 	get 	at 	what 	lies 	at 	back 	of all 	materials 	and 	every
technique, 	by 	giving 	semblance to 	the 	one with 	the
intelligent 	aid of the 	other.'
Universal 	Formal 	Values: 	see 	Adolf von 	Hildebrand. 	Das
Problem der Form 	in der hildenden 	Kimst. 	Strasbourg. 	189?
and 	Heinrich 	W'olfflin. 	Die 	kkssische 	Kimst. 	Munich. 	1899.
Analogies: 	Collins. 	Changing 	Ideals. 	If. 	one day. a 	subtle
psychology of style 	is 	vTOtten. 	it 	may demonstrate 	that 	all
architectural 	vocabularies 	may 	be 	thought 	of as 	abstract
symbolic 	forms which 	incorporate 	analogical 	references 	to
the 	artittcial 	and 	natural 	worlds.
Chapter 	2. 	The 	Search 	for 	New 	Forms 	and 	the
Problem 	of Ornament
p. 	2 1 	Motto: 	Otto 	Wagner. 	Moderne 	Architel;tur. 	Vienna.
189s. 	from 	the preface. 	The expanded 	version 	of this 	book.
entitled 	Die 	Baiikunst 	unserer Zeit. 	Dcm 	Baukunstjumjer ein
Fiihreraufdicsem 	Kunstgebeit. 	4th 	edn.. 	Vienna. 	I9I4.
contains 	the quotation, 	on 	p. 	76.
Hitchcock: 	Architecture, 	p. 41b. 	Hitchcock's Chapters 	16 	and
1 7 	offer a 	concise 	history 	of the 	spread 	of Art 	Nouveau.
Pevsner: 	Pioneers, 	p. 	90.
p. 	22 	Ornament: 	Owen 	Jones. 	The Grammar of Ornament.
London. 	i8s6. 	The special 	appeal 	of this 	book 	to 	artists of
the 	rSgos 	probably lay 	in 	its abstraction 	of vegetal 	and 	plant
motifs 	into 	simple geometrical 	forms.
p. 24 	Maison du 	People: 	Victor Horta. 	'Reminiscences of the
Maison 	du 	Peuple' 	(undated), 	Benton 	and 	Benton,
Architecture and Design, 	p. 	65.
p. 	2 5 	Horta : 	'Reminiscences of the 	Maison 	du 	Peuple'.
Van de 	Vclde: 	for 	a 	concise assessment 	see 	P. 	Morton-Shand.
'Van 	de Velde 	to 	Wagner'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	October.
1934- 	PP- 	143-5-
Van de 	Velde: 'A 	Chapter on 	the 	Design 	and 	Construction 	of
Modern 	Furniture'. 	1897: 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	Architecture
and Design, 	pp. 	17-18.
p. 	26 	Turin 	Art 	Nouveau: 	Silvius 	Paoletti. 	'For the 	Workers'.
L'Arte 	Decorativa 	Moderna. 	year 	1. 	no. 	2. 	February 	1902.
Gaudi : 	for 	neo-Gothic 	antecedents see T. G. 	Beddall. 	'Gaudi
and 	the Catalan 	Gothic', 	journal ofSocietg of Architectural
Historians. 	34. 	no. 	i. 	March 	197s. 	P- 	48. 	Also George
Collins. 	Antoni 	Gaudi. 	New York 	and 	London. 	1 960 	for an
interpretation 	of the architect's guiding principles.
Dragons: 	see 	Jencks. 	language, 	p. 	99-100 	for an
idiosyncratic 	interpretation 	of the roof shape.
p. 	30 	Mackintosh: 	see T. 	Howarth, 	Charles 	Rennie
Mackintosh and 	the 	Modern 	Movement. 	London. 	l9Si-
p. 	33 	Spatial 	Effects ofLibrary : 	Pevsner. 	Pioneers, 	p. 	167.
August 	Endell: 	The 	Beauty 	of Form 	and 	Decorative 	Art'.
1897-8; 	cited 	by 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	Architecture and
Design, 	p. 	21.
Wagner: 	for 	Moderne 	Architektur see 	note 	to 	Motto of this
chapter.
p. 	34 	Stoclet: 	Eduard 	F. 	Sekler. 	The 	Stoclet 	House 	by 	Josef
Hoffmann'. 	Essags 	in 	the 	History of .Architecture 	Presented to
Rudolf Witlkower. 	London. 	1967.
p. 	36 	Ornament: 	Adolf Loos. 	'Ornament 	und 	Verbrechen'.
may 	be found 	in 	the original 	in 	A. 	Loos. 	Trotr.dem. 	Innsbruck.
1930. 	1 	have 	followed 	Banham's 	translation 	in 	Theory and
Design, 	p. 	93.
Chapter 	3. 	Rationalism, 	The 	Engineering
Tradition, 	and 	Reinforced 	Concrete
p. 	37 	Motto: 	from 	the 	preface 	of the 	tirst 	issue of the
periodical 	L'. Architecture 	vivante. 	Paris. 	1923. 	ed. 	Morance.
Viollet-le-Duc: 	Entretiens. 	vol. 	i. 	p. 	186.
AugusteChoisy: 	See 	Banham. 	Theory and Design, pp. 	23 	ff.,
for a concise 	discussion 	of Choisy's 	ideas. 	The role of
nineteenth-century 	engineering 	in 	the 	formation 	of modern
archtecture 	is 	discussed 	most 	obsessively 	by 	Giedion. 	Space.
Time and Architecture, 	but 	he 	has 	insufficient to 	say 	about 	the
symbolic 	transformation 	of these sources 	into 	architecture 	in
the 	modern 	movement. 	See also. P. 	Morton-Shand.
'Architecture 	and 	Engineering'. 	Architectural 	Review.
November 	19 	32.
p. 	38 	Louis Sullivan: 	The 	Fall 	Office 	Building 	Artistically
Considered'. 	189(1: 	cited 	by 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	Architecture
and 	Design, 	p. 	1 	1. 	Arguably 	the 	'Chicago 	School', 	to 	which
Sullivan 	belonged, 	played 	a 	considerable 	role 	in 	the 	creation
of forms deemed 	appropriate 	to 	modern 	techniques. 	I 	have
not 	meant 	to 	diminish 	this 	contribution 	by 	singling out
Sullivan 	as 	a 	representative. 	Were there more 	space 	I 	would
have discussed 	Burnham. 	Root. 	|enney 	as 	well. 	For a 	lengthy
analysis of Sullivan's 	philosophy, 	see 	Jordy. 	American
Buildings and 	their .Architects, 	vol. 	3. 	especially Chapter 	2.
'Functionalism 	as 	Fact 	and 	Symbol: 	Louis 	Sullivan's
Commercial 	Buildings. 	Tombs 	and 	Banks'.
p. 	39 	Concrete: 	see 	Peter Collins. 	Concrete, 	the 	Vision of a
New Architecture. 	A 	Study of Auguste 	Ferret and His 	Precursors,
London. 	1959.
p. 40 	Reinforced 	Cement: 	Collins. 	Concrete, 	the 	Vision of a
New 	.Architecture, 	pp. 	1 	1 	3 	ff.
Julicn 	Guadet: 	Elenwnts et 	theories de 	I'architecture. 	Paris.
1 904.
p. 43 	Auguste 	Pcrrct 	on 	Ornament: 	Collins. 	Concrete, 	the
Vision of a 	New Architecture, 	p. 	1 99.
Kahn: 	see 	Grant 	Hildebrand. 	Designing for 	Industry: 	the
Architecture of Albert 	Kahn. 	Cambridge, 	Mass.. 	MIT. 	1974,
p, 45 	Tony 	Gamier: 	L'lii' 	Cite Industrielle : 	Etude pour la
construction des 	villes, 	Paris, 	19 17: see also 	Dora Wiebenson,
Tony 	Garnier: 	The 	Cite 	Industrielle. 	New 	York. 	1969.
p. 46 	Dom-ino: 	see 	Paul 	Turner. 	Romanticism. 	Rationalism
and 	the 	Domino 	System', 	in 	Walden 	(ed.). 	The 	Open 	Hand:
also 	Eleanor Gregh. 	The 	Dom-ino 	Idea'. 	Oppositions 	15-16.
Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	MIT. 	1979. 	pp. 	61 	ff.
p. 47 	Le Corbusier"s copy of Viollet-le-Duc: 	Dictionnaire
raisonne. 	Vol. 	i. 	p. 	6fi. 	is 	covered with 	notes. 	The 	page
illustrates 	the 	principle of the 	flying 	buttress 	in 	Gothic
architecture, 	a 	'skeleton' 	of sorts.

-- 394 of 420 --

Notes 	393
Chapter 	4. 	Arts 	and 	Crafts 	Ideals 	in 	England 	and
the 	USA
p. 48 	Motto: 	Hermann 	Muthesius, 	'The 	Meaning of the 	Arts
and 	Crafts'. 	1 407. from 	his speech 	given 	at 	the 	Berlin
commercial 	academy 	in 	spring of that 	year.
Pevsner: 	Pioneers: 	see 	also 	'William 	Morris 	and
Architecture'. 	K/B,'\ 	laiirml. 	64. 	I9S7. 	by 	same 	author.
p. 49 	Pevsner: 	Pioneers, 	p. 	i 	so. 	See 	also 	David 	Gebhard.
'The 	Vernacular Transformed'. 	K/B.\ 	lowmil 	"H. 	March
1 471. 	pp. 	48tT.
p. 	S.2 	Lutyens: The 	best 	treatments 	of Lutyens 	are to 	be
found 	in 	A. 	S. G. 	Butler 	and 	Christopher 	Hussey. 	The
Anhilectiire oj 	Sir 	Edwin 	Liitfiens. 	London. 	lys". 	and 	L.
Weaver. 	Houses and Gardens 	bif 	I'.. 	Lutiiens. 	London. 	191 3.
p. 	54 	Hermann 	Muthesius: 	Das 	enqlische 	Hans. 	Berlin.
1 402- s: 	quotation 	from 	the conclusion 	of vol. 	II. 	'The
Development 	of the 	English 	House'.
p. 	S5 	W. R. 	Lethaby: 	'Modern 	German 	Architecture 	and
What 	we 	may 	Learn 	from 	it', 	a 	talk 	given 	at 	the
.Architectural 	Association. 	London. 	191s: 	cited 	by 	Benton
and 	Benton, 	.^reliiteeture and Desiijn. 	p. 	5 s.
Vincent Scully: 	The 	Shingle 	Stfile and the Stick Stfile. 	Yale.
New 	Haven. 	Conn.. 	1471-
p. 	55 	American 	Architecture: 	The 	most 	probing study 	of late
14th-century 	American 	architecture 	is 	still 	Lewis
Mumford's. 	The 	Brown 	Decades: 	,A 	Studif oftlic 	Arts 	in 	America
1X65-1S9S. 	New 	York. 	1951-
p. 	56 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright: 	The 	.Art 	and 	Craft 	of the
Machine', 	a 	talk 	given 	to 	the Chicago 	.Arts 	and 	Crafts
Society, 	at 	Hull 	House, 	on 	6 	March 	1 40 1 	: 	cited 	by 	Edgar
Kaufmann. 	Frank 	Uoyd 	Wriciht: 	Writings 	and 	BuiMings. 	New
York. 	1460. 	p. 	SS.
The 	Craftsman : 	ran 	from 	1 40 1 	to 	1 9 1 ^ 	and 	bore the 	sub-
title 	an 	illustrated 	monthly 	magazine 	for the 	simplification
of life'.
Greene 	Brothers: 	see Jordy. 	.\merican 	Buildings and 	iheir
Architects, 	vol. 	3. 	Chapter 	4. 	p. 	2 1 	7 IT., 	for detailed 	analysis of
the 	Gamble House.
p. 	sS 	Maybeck: 	jordy. 	American 	Buildings and 	their
.Architects, 	vol. 	?. 	Chapter 	s.
Irving Gill : 	T/ic 	Craftsman, 	vol. 	?(> 	May 	1 4 1 6. 	pp. 	1 4^ ff- 	for
both 	quotations. 	For 	further treatment 	of Gill's 	ideas see
Esther 	McCoy. 	Five 	Cahfornia 	Architects. 	New 	York. 	1460;
Jordy. 	American 	Buildings and 	their Architects, 	vol. 	3,
pp. 	246 ff.
Chapter 	5. 	Responses 	to 	Mechanization: 	The
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	and 	Futurism
p. 	60 	Motto: 	Antonio 	Sant' 	F.lia. 	'Messagio'. 	1414: 	see
Banham. 	Theorg 	and 	Design, 	p. 	i 	28. 	Banham 	is 	to 	be 	praised
for 	having 	given 	Futurism 	its due 	role 	in the evolution 	of
modern 	architecture.
p. 	61 	Hermann 	Muthesius: 	Wo 	stehen 	wir?'. 	a 	speech 	given
at 	the 	Werkbund 	congress. 	1 4 1 	1 	: 	cited 	and translated 	by
Banham. 	Theorg 	and 	Design, 	p. 	7 3. 	For 	further di.scussion 	of
Werkbund 	ideology 	see ]. 	Campbell. 	The 	German 	Werkbund:
The 	Politics 	0) 	Reform 	in 	the 	.Afplied 	.Arts. 	Princeton. 	147^:
Tilmann 	Buddensieg. 	/i!rfi/stric(;ii/Inr: 	Peter 	Bchrens 	u.d.
A. E.G. 	1907-1914. 	Berlin. 	1479; 	Stanford 	.Anderson.
Modern 	Architecture 	and 	Industry: 	Peter 	Behrens and the
Cultural 	Policy 	of Historical 	Determinism'. 	Oppositions 	11.
Winter 	1977. 	These 	three 	works 	were 	unknown 	to 	me 	when
this chapter was 	formulated 	but 	seem 	to 	square 	with 	my
interpretation.
p. 	64 	Walter Gropius: 	Die 	Entwicklung moderner
Industriebaukunst'. 	Deutscher 	Werkbund lahrlnich. 	|ena.
191 	3. 	pp. 	14-20. 	translated 	by 	Benton 	and 	Benton.
.Architecture and 	Design, 	p. 	s 	3. 	as 	The 	Development of
Modern 	Industrial 	Architecture'.
p. 	f>5 	Werkbund 	Debate 	19 14: 	excerpts are 	published 	in
English 	translation 	in 	Benton. 	Documents, 	pp. 	S 	T-
p. 66 	Fagus Factory: 	for 	a 	detailed 	discussion 	of the design
process see Tim 	Benton. 	Stefan 	Muthesius 	and 	Bridget
Wilkins. 	Europe 	1900-1914. 	Open 	Liniversity. 	Units 	5-6.
1475-
p. 	70 	Paul 	Scheerbart. 	G/(i.sflrf;ii(('(;(»r. 	Berlin. 	1414. 	See also
Dennis Sharp 	(ed.). 	Glass 	.Architecture 	by 	Paid Schcerbart 	and
.\lpine Architecture 	bg 	Bruno 	Taut. 	London. 	1972.
p. 	71 	Futurism: 	see 	Banham. 	Theory 	and Design, 	pp. 	99 ff- 	for
the 	most 	incisive treatment 	of Futurism; 	I 	have followed
Banham's 	translations of the 	various manifestoes. 	The
Manifesto 	of Futurist 	architecture 	is 	reproduced 	in 	full 	in
Ulrich 	Conrads. 	Programmes and 	Manifestoes on 	20th-Centiiry
Architecture. 	Lund 	Humphries. 	1970. 	See 	also 	M. 	Martin,
Futurist 	An 	and 	Theory 	1909-1915- 	Oxford. 	1968 	and U.
Apollonio. 	Futurist 	Manifestoes. 	London. 	1973 	for 	further
analysis of texts.
Chapter 	6. 	The 	Architectural 	System 	of Frank
Lloyd 	Wright
p. 	75 	Motto: 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	'In 	the 	Cause of
Architecture'. 	Architectural 	Record. 	23. 	March 	1908. 	p. 	158.
Historical 	Views of Wright: 	Pevsner. 	19 36 	was content to
treat 	Wright 	as 	a 	pioneer of modern 	design. 	Hitchcock 	{In 	the
Nature of Materials: 	The 	Buildings of Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright
1887-1941. 	New 	York. 	1942). 	simply 	described 	the
externals of Wright's 	style; 	in 	.Architecture 	Nineteenth and
Twentieth 	Centuries, 	he 	slotted 	early 	Wright 	into 	a 	chapter
entitled 	'The 	Detached 	House 	in 	England 	and 	America', 	and
abstained 	from 	generalizing 	about 	his 	historical 	significance.
Norris 	Kelly 	Smith. 	Frank 	Uoyd 	Wright: 	A 	Study 	in
Architectural 	Content. 	1966. 	forcibly 	removed 	Wright from
any 	simplistic 	evolutionary 	scheme 	by 	concentrating 	on 	the
institutional 	metaphors of his 	buildings and 	their 	suburban
cultural 	context. 	Banham. 	in 	Theory and Design, 	treated
Wright 	only 	in 	so 	far as 	he 	was 	relevant 	to 	the 	European
modern 	movement. 	More 	recently 	David 	Handlin. 	The
.American 	Home. 	Architecture and Society. 	1^25-1915.
Boston. 	1979. 	has 	placed 	Wright's domestic 	architecture 	in
a 	long 	American 	tradition 	of home-building 	and 	has
emphasized 	some of the 	Classical 	influences on 	his
architectural 	grammar. 	Mention 	should 	also 	be 	made of
Grant 	Manson. 	Fran*: Lloyd 	Wright 	to 	1910: 	the 	First 	Golden
Age. 	New 	York. 	1958. 	for its 	precise 	and 	evocative 	analyses
of Wright's 	houses, 	and 	of Jordy. 	American 	Buildings and Their
.Architects, 	vol. 	3. 	for 	its detailed 	account of the 	Robie 	House.
This 	by 	no 	means exhausts the 	Wright 	literature, 	but 	it
serves 	to demonstrate 	the range 	of views 	about 	him.
Wright's 	Biography: 	see 	R. 	Twombley. 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
.An 	Interpretive 	Biography. 	New 	York. 	1973: 	also 	the
inaccurate 	but 	gripping 	.Autobiography. 	New 	York. 	1932 	by
Wright 	himself
p. 	77 	William Channing Gannett. 	The 	House 	Beautihtl 	River
Forest. 	III.. 	1897.
Institutional 	Metaphor: 	Smith. 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright.
Winslow 	House: 	quotation 	from 	R. 	Spencer. 	'Work 	of Frank

-- 395 of 420 --

394 	Notes
Uoyd 	Wright'. 	Architectural Review. 	7. 	Boston. 	June 	igoo.
p. 	65.
p. 	78 	Tripartite 	Division: 	Handlin. 	The 	American 	Home.
discusses the 	relationship 	to Classical 	base, 	shaft 	and 	cornice.
pp. 	30 sir.
Clients: 	Leonard 	K. 	Eaton. 	Two 	Chicago 	Architects aiul tlieir
chems. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	MIT. 	1969. 	p. 	62.
Abstraction: 	see 	Frank 	Uoyd 	Wright. 	The Japanese 	Prim: 	An
Interpretation. 	Chicago. 	1912.
p. 	79 	Home 	in 	Prairie Town: 	Ladies' Home lournal. 	February
1901.
p. 	80 	Frank 	Lloyd Wright: 	The 	Cardboard 	House'. 	193 1
:
cited 	by 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	Architecture and Design, 	p. 	60.
p. 	83 	Robie: 	for reminiscences 	by the client 	of his intentions
see Eaton. 	Two 	Chicago 	,4r(/»(C((s and 	Their Chents: 	for the
climatic 	functions of the 	roof see 	R. 	Banhara. 	'Frank 	Lloyd
Wright 	as Environmentalist'. 	Architectural 	Design. 	April
1967: 	for detailed 	analysis 	of house. 	Jordy. 	American
Buildings 	and 	Their 	Architects, 	vol. 	3. 	p. 	180.
p. 	88 	Unity 	Temple: 	Wright. 	Autobiography, 	pp. 	i 	^8 (I.: 	0.
Kakuzo. 	The 	Book of Tea. 	Rutland. 	Vt. 	and Tokyo. 	1906.
p. 	89 	Schinkel: 	see Handlin. 	The American 	Home. 	pp. 	^ 1 7 ff.
VVasmuth 	Volumes: 	.^usgetiihrte 	Bauten 	tmd 	Bntwiirfe 	von
h'rank 	Llogd 	Wright. 	Berlin. 	Exnst 	VVasmuth. 	1910. 	with
introduction 	by 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright: 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright
Ausgefiihrie 	Bauten. 	BerUn: 	Ernst 	Wasmuth. 	191 	1.
introduction 	by 	W. 	R. 	Ashbee.
p. 90 	Prairie School : 	see H. A. 	Brooks. 	The 	Prairie School.
Toronto. 	1972.
Chapter 	7. 	Cubism 	and 	New 	Conceptions 	of
Space
p. 	9 1 	Motto: 	T. 	van 	Docsburg. 	G. 	Rietveld. 	C. 	van 	Eesteren.
'Vers 	une construction 	collective', 	de Stijl 	VI 	( 	1924).
columns 	91. 92.
p. 92 	Avant-Garde: 	see 	Renato 	Poggioli. 	The Theory of .Avant-
Garde, 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1968.
p. 92 	VV. 	Kandinsky : 	L'ber das 	Geistige in der 	Kimst. 	Munich.
1912.
Spirit of Times: 	see 	notes on 	'modern 	age' 	and
'propagandists' 	in 	Introduction 	and on 	'spiritual 	core' 	in
Chapter 	I. 	It 	is evident 	that 	Le Corbusier. 	for example, 	saw
himself as 	a 	revealer of the 	'true 	nature' 	of his own 	'epoch'.
See Chapters 	8 	and 	t s 	below.
p. 93 	Geoffrey 	Scott: 	The .Architecture oj 	Huntanism. 	London.
19 14. 	p. 	210.
Cubism. 	Abstract 	Art. 	Architecture: 	Banham. 	Theory 	and
Design, 	pp. 	ro6-2 1 	3 	contains 	a 	subtle 	analysis of the
interrelations between 	painting, 	sculpture 	and 	architecture.
and 	theories 	about 	all 	three. 	See 	also Giedion. 	Space. 	Time and
Architecture 	for a 	different emphasis 	which 	makes 	much 	of
the so-called 	'space-time' 	conception 	intrinsic 	to 	Cubism 	and
modern 	architecture.
p. 	94 	H. P. 	Berlage: 	lecture 	given 	in 	Zurich. 	March 	1 9 1 2.
cited 	in 	H. 	dc 	Fries. 	Frank 	Lloyd Wright. 	Berlin. 	1926. 	and 	by
Banham. 	Theory and 	Design, 	p. 	i45-f>. 	Sec 	note on 	'Wasmuth
volumes' 	at end 	of last 	chapter.
p. 	97 	DeSlijhseeH. 	L. C. 	Jaffe. 	de Stijl 	191 7-1 927.
Amsterdam. 	i'-}^h.
p. 97 	The 	Machine: 	see Banham. 	Theory and Design,
pp. 	I 	S I 	ff.
p. 98 	Number and 	Measure: 	]. 	P. 	Oud. 	'Der Einfluss 	von
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	auf die 	Architektur Europas'. 	in
HoUdndische 	.4rc/i/(('J:(Hr (Bauhausbuch 	10) 	Munich. 	192(1.
p. 99 	Schroeder 	House: 	T. 	Brown. 	The 	Work ofGerrit
Rietveld. 	Architect. 	Utrecht 	and Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	igs8.
contains a 	useful 	discussion 	of the design 	process of the
house.
p. 	loi 	Barren 	Rationalism: ]. 	P. 	Oud. 	Uber die 	zukiinftige
Baukunst 	und 	ihre 	architektonischen 	Moglichkeiten'. 	1 92 1
.
eventually 	published 	in 	Oud. 	HoUdndische 	.Architektur. 	1926.
Chapter 	8. 	Le 	Corbusier's 	Quest 	for 	Ideal 	Form
p. 	104 	Motto: 	Le Corbusier. 	Towards a 	.Vfu' .Architecture.
p. 	31. 	1 	have 	altered 	Etchell's translation 	of the 	French
'volumes' 	to 	'volumes', 	rather 	than 	'masses', 	as this seems
more 	precise.
International Style: 	see 	below. 	Chapter 	i 	3. 	for 	a 	more
intricate discussion 	of 'this 	shared 	language of expression'.
While 	internationalist 	cultural 	tendencies 	were 	influential 	in
the 	1920s, 	the 	term 	'International 	Style' 	did 	not 	gain
general 	currency 	until 	the 	1 9 30s. 	particularly 	after 	Alfred
Barr 	used 	it 	in 	connection 	with 	the 	Museum 	of Modern 	Art
show on 	modern 	architecture in 	1932; 	see Chapter 	i 	3.
Le Corbusier Formative Years: 	the 	number of books and
articles 	on 	Le Corbusier 	is vast. 	Von 	Moos. 	Le 	Corbusier:
Elemente einer Synthese. 	provides 	a 	useful 	overall
introduction. 	Peter Serenyi. 	Le 	Corbusier in 	Perspective.
Englewood 	CliU's. 	N.J.. 	197s. 	supplies 	an 	anthology 	of
writings on 	him. 	and 	an 	extensive 	bibliography. 	For the
architect's formation 	see: 	M. 	Gauthier. 	Le 	Corbusier - ou
I'architecture au 	service de I'homme. 	Paris. 	1934; 	Paul Turner.
'The 	Beginnings of Le 	Corbusier's 	Education. 	1902-7'. 	Art
Bulletin. 	S3. 	June 	1 971. 	pp. 	214-24. 	For the 	gradual
emergence of Le Corbusier's 	architectural 	system 	see 	William
Curtis. 	'Le Corbusier: 	the 	Evolution 	of his 	Architectural
Language 	and 	its Crystallization 	in the 	Villa 	Savoye 	at
Poissy'. 	U- 	Corbusier; English 	Architecture 	ig ?os. 	Open
University. 	197s. 	Throughout 	this chapter 	it 	is 	useful 	to
consult 	the 	O^in'rc (Wiip/ctc 	1910-1929.
p. 	105 	Travels: 	Charles 	Edouard )eanneret, 	Le 	Voyage
d'Orient. 	Paris. 	196(1.
p. 	106 	Own 	Antiquity: 	James 	.Ackerman 	is the 	historian 	in
question.
p. 	107 	AmedeeOzenfant: 	Foundations of Modern 	.Art. 	New
York. 	1952.
Amedee 	Ozenfant 	and 	Charles 	E. 	Jeanneret. 	Apres le 	Cubisme.
Paris. 	19 1 9. 	See 	also 	Christopher Green 	and 	John 	Golding.
Leger and 	Purist 	Paris. 	London. 	1970.
Platonism: 	see 	Banham. 	Theory and Design, 	p. 	21 	1.
p. 	1 08 	L'Esprit 	Nouveau. 	Paris. 	1919-25. 	The quotation 	is
from 	no. 	i . 	October 	1 920. 	Reproduced. 	Towards a 	New
.Architecture, 	p. 	83.
p. 	108 	Le Corbusier: 	Towards a New Architecture, 	pp. 	16. 	31.
p. 	109 	Le Corbusier: 	Towards a 	New Architecttire. 	pp. 	1 24-5.
p. 	1 10 	VVyndham 	Lewis: 	Time and 	Western 	Man. 	New 	York.
1929. 	for 	'upper middle 	class 	bohemia'.
Le Corbusier: 	Towards a 	New .Architecture, 	p. 	92. 	For details of
Maison 	La 	Roche, 	see 	R. 	Walden's 	article 	In 	Walden 	(ed.).
The 	Open 	Hand.
Type: see 	A. 	Ozenfant 	and 	C. 	E. 	Jeanneret. 	Ixi 	Peinture
moderne. 	Paris. 	192(1. 	passage 	cited 	by 	Banham. 	Theory and
Design, 	p. 	2 1 	1
.
Plan: 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Towards a 	New Architecture, 	p. 	i hh.
p. 	113 	LeCorbusier: 	Oeuvre complete. 	1910-1929. 	p. 	i 	30.
p. 	1 	16 	LeCorbusier: 	(\'uvre complete. 	1910-1929. 	p. 	140:

-- 396 of 420 --

Notes 	395
Towards ii 	Nt'w AirJuti'itiire. 	p. 	89.
p. 	1 	17 	Palladio: 	Colin 	Rowe. 	The 	Mathematics 	of the 	Ideal
Villa : 	Palladio 	and 	Le Corbusier Compared'. 	,\rchiurtitr(il
Rfi'ifiv. 	loi. 	March 	1947. 	pp. 	101-4.
Chapter 	9. 	Walter 	Gropius. 	German
Expressionism, 	and 	the 	Bauhaus
p. 	1 	18 	Motto: 	Cropius. 	The 	Development 	of Modern
Indu,strial 	Architecture'. 	191?; 	the 	same 	sentiments were
expressed 	in 	almost 	exactly 	the 	same 	words 	by Gropius in
Idee 	uiid AuPmui dcs StcmtUchcn 	Haidiaiissfs 	Weimar. 	Weimar.
1925.
Walter Gropius: 	essay 	in ]a Stiminen des 	Arheitsrates fiir 	Kimst
in 	Berlin. 	Berlin. 	19 19. 	p. 	32.
Bruno Taul : 	Alpine 	.\rchitcktur. 	1 9 1 9 ; 	tor translation 	see 	D.
Sharp 	(ed. I. 	Glass 	Architecture 	Ini 	Paul Scheerhart 	and Alpine
.Architecture 	hji 	Bruno 	Taut. 	London. 	1972: 	Die Stadtkrone.
)ena. 	1919.
p. 	1 	19 	Bauhaus 	Proclamation: 	Walter Gropius. 	Ideeund
Aulbau 	. 	.
.' 	I'Programme 	ofthc 	Staatliche 	bauhaus 	in
Weimar' ). 	April 	1919: 	cited 	by 	Banham. 	Theory and 	Desiijn.
p. 	277. 	The 	best 	analysis 	of the ideas 	and 	events 	leading to
the 	Bauhaus 	is to 	be 	found 	in 	Marcel 	Franciscono. 	Walter
Gropius and 	the 	Creation oj 	the 	Bauhaus 	hi 	Weimar: 	The 	Ideals
and 	.Artistic 	Theories of its 	Foundiucj 	Years. 	Urbana. 	III.. 	1971.
p. 	120 	.\dolf Bchnc : 	review of Scheerbart's 	Glas-
architektur. 	1918-19; 	see 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	.-Irr/i/tcfturc
and 	Uesifin. 	p. 	77.
p. 	121 	Expressionism: 	for 	a 	simple 	introduction. 	Dennis
Sharp. 	Modern 	.Architecture and Expressionism. 	London,
ighh: 	see 	also 	W. 	Pehnt. 	Expressionist 	Architecture. 	London,
1973; 	J. 	M. 	Richards 	and 	N. 	Pevsner 	(ed. I. 	The Anti-
Rationalists. 	London. 	1973. 	While 	'Expressionism' 	is 	not 	a
happy 	historical 	label, 	it 	should 	be 	mentioned 	that 	architects
of an 	'expressionist' 	tendency 	were 	played 	down 	by Giedion
and 	Hitchcock 	particularly, 	in 	their 	major books on 	2()th-
century 	architecture. 	The 	answer to 	this 	neglect 	is 	not 	to
overplay 	the 	importance 	of an 	'ism' 	but 	to 	delve deeper into
the 	ideas 	and 	inspirations 	of each 	architect.
p. 	122 	Mendelsohn: 	see Arnold 	Whittick. 	Eric 	Mendelsohn.
Leonard 	Hill. 	1964: 	0. 	Beyer 	(ed.), 	Erich 	Mendelsohn: 	Letters
of .An 	.Architect. 	New 	York, 	19(17: 	E. 	Mendelsohn. 	Das
Gesamtschaffen des .Architekten—Skizzen. 	Entwiirfe. 	Bauten.
Berlin. 	1950.
Ein.stein Tower: 	Erich 	Mendelsohn, 	lecture 	given 	to
Architeclura 	et 	Amicitia. 	1925. 	cited 	by 	Banham. 	Theory 	and
Desiyn. 	p. 	182. 	and 	reproduced 	in 	original 	in 	Mendelsohn.
Das 	Gesamtschaffen des Architekten.
p. 	123 	Mies: 	Philip 	Johnson. 	Mies 	van der 	Rohe. 	New 	York.
1947: 	P. 	Westheim. 	'Mies 	van 	der Rohe: 	Entwicklung eines
Architekten'. 	Das 	Kunstblatt. 	2. 	Eebruary 	1927. 	pp. 	S2fl'.
Utopian 	Content 	in 	Glass Skyscrapers: 	William 	Curtis, 	'Der
Wolkenkratzer— Realitat 	und 	Utopie', 	in 	Die Zwanziyer Jahre
Kontraste eines jahrzehnts, 	Zurich. 	1973. 	pp. 	44-7.
p. 	124 	Mies. 	Skyscrapers: 	see 	Mies van 	der 	Rohe.
Hochhaus— projekt 	fiir 	Bahnhof Friedrichstrasse 	in Berlin',
in 	Enihlicht. 	ed. 	B. 	Taut. 	1922: 	translated 	in 	Johnson, 	Mies
van der 	Rohe. 	p. 	182. 	as 	'Two 	Glass Skyscrapers 	of 	1922'.
Le 	Corbusier: 	Towards a 	New 	Architecture, 	p. 	28.
Mies van der Rohe: 'Working Theses 	192 V. 	G, 	vol. 	i. 	1923:
translated 	in 	Uhlrich 	Conrads. 	Proyrams and Manifestoes of
20th 	Century 	Architecture, 	London. 	1970. 	p. 	74.
p. 	126 	Walter Gropius: 	Idee 	und .Aufbau des Staatlichen
Baiilmusses 	Weimar. 	1 92 	3: 	1 	have 	followed 	Banham's
translation. 	Theory 	and Desiyn. 	pp. 	279 IT.
p. 	127 	Bauhaus Criticisms: 	K. 	.Nonn. 	The State Garbage
Supplies 	(The 	Staatliche 	Bauhaus 	in 	Weimar)'. 	1924: 	cited
by 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	.Architecture and Desiyn. 	p. 	129. 	For
further discussion 	of the 	Bauhaus 	see 	Hans 	Wingler. 	Das
Baidmus. 	79^9-1935. 	Cologne. 	1962: 	for political 	debates
see Barbara 	Miller-Lane. 	Architecture and 	Politics 	in 	Germany.
I9IS-I94S. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1968.
p. 	129 	Golden 	.\ge: 	see particularly 	L. 	Moholy-Nagy. 	Von
Material zu .Architektur. 	Munich. 	1 92S: 	0. 	Schlemmer. 	L.
Moholy-Nagy 	and 	F. 	Molnar. 	The 	Theatre ofthc 	Baidtaus.
Middletown. 	Conn., 	i 	964: 	G. 	Adams. 	'Memories of a
Bauhaus 	Student'. 	.Architectural 	Review. 	September 	1968.
pp. 	192 	IT. : 	V\'. 	Kandinsky. 	Punkt 	und 	Linie zu 	Eldche. 	Munich.
1925: 	P. 	Klee. 	Padayoyisches Skizzenbuch. 	Munich, 	1926: 	W.
Gropius. 	1. 	Gropius 	and 	H. 	Bayer. 	Bauhaus 	1919-1928. 	New
York, 	1938; 	W. 	Gropius. 	Internationale 	Architektur. 	Munich.
1925 ; 	W. 	Gropius. 	The 	New .Architecture and the 	Bauhaus.
London. 	193 s.
p. 	1 3 1 	Mies 	van der Rohe, 	Objectivity: 	see 	Banham. 	Theory
and Desiyn. 	p. 	271 	: 	see 	also 	F. 	Schmalenbach. 	'The Term
Neue 	Sachlichkeit'. 	Art 	Bidletin. 	22. 	September 	1940.
Weissenhofsiedlung as 	Kasbah: 	postcard 	reproduced 	in
Benton 	and 	Benton. 	.Irc/iitccdiri' and 	Desiyn. 	ill. 	2 3.
Hannes 	Meyer: 	C. 	Schneidt. 	Hannes 	Meyer. 	Builduiys,
Projects and 	Writinys. 	London. 	1965.
Chapter 	10. 	Architecture 	and 	Revolution 	in
Russia
p. 	132 	Motto: 	A. 	and 	V. 	Vesnin. 	from 	Sovreniennaya
Archilektura 	(Conteinporary 	Architecture). 	1926. 	This
chapter is 	indebted 	to 	Anatole 	Kopp. 	Town and Revolution,
Soviet 	.Architecture and 	City 	Plaiuiiny 	1917-Z935. 	New 	York..
1970. 	originally 	published 	as 	Ville et 	Revolution. 	Paris. 	1967.
Prolecult: 	see 	El 	Lissitzky. 	i^iis.sia: 	.An 	Architecture for 	World
Revolution. 	London. 	1970 	(originally 	published 	as 	Russland:
Die 	Reconslruktion der Architektur 	in der Sowjetunion. 	Vienna,
1930). 	pp. 	I4ff.. 	'Translator's 	Introduction', 	by 	Eric
Dluhosch: 	see 	also Camilla 	Gray. 	The Great 	Experiment:
Russian 	.Art. 	iS6^-i()22. 	London. 	1962.
p. 	135 	Tatlin's 	Monument: 	N. 	Punin. 	Tatlin's Monument'.
1922: 	cited 	by 	Benton 	and 	Benton, 	.4rc/ii!i'c(Hn' and Desiyn.
p. 	86: 	for further discussion 	of the symbolic 	implications of
spirals see 	Berthold 	Lubetkin. 	'.Architectural 	Thought 	since
the 	Revolution'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	May 	1932.
pp. 	201-14.
p. 	138 	F. 	Yalovkin: 	'OSA 	[Association of Contemporary
Architects] 	Vopra 	and 	0S.'\'. 	1929. 	cited 	by 	Benton.
Documents, 	p. 	30. 	For an 	incisive discussion 	of different
ideological 	positions 	in 	the 	1920s 	in 	the Soviet Union, 	see
Lubetkin. 	Architectural 	Thought 	since 	the 	Revolution':
also. 	Tafuri 	and 	Dal 	Co. 	Modern 	.Architecture, 	pp. 	204 IT
p, 	143 	Palace 	of Soviets: 	for 	a 	discussion 	of the change 	in
official 	policy 	see 	Hans Schmidt. 	'The Soviet 	Union 	and
Modern 	.Architecture'. 	1932: 	in 	English 	edition 	of Lissitzky.
Russia: 	.Architecture lor a 	World 	Revolution, 	p. 	218.
Chapter 	1 1. 	Skyscraper 	and 	Suburb: 	America
between 	the 	Wars
p. 	144 	Motto: 	Sullivan, 	'The 	Tall Office 	Building 	Artistically

-- 397 of 420 --

396 	Notes
Considered'. 	Lippincotts 	Magazine. 	March 	1896.
'291': 	this 	was the 	name of the 	gallery opened 	by 	Alfred
Stieglitz in 	1908. 	in 	which 	he 	showed 	the 	avant-garde 	work
of the 	'Photo Secessionist' 	movement.
Marsdcn 	Hartley: 	'Art - and 	the 	Personal 	Life'. 	Creative 	Art.
2. June 	1928.
Lewis 	Mumford: 	The 	Brown 	Decades: 	A 	Study of the 	Arts in
America. 	1S65-1S95. 	New 	York. 	1931.
p. 	1 46 	Le 	Corbusier: 	Towards a 	New Architecture, 	p. 	42.
Skyscrapers: 	see 	Carl 	Condit. 	The 	Chicago 	School of
Architecture. 	Chicago. 	1 964. 	specially 	for the early stages of
the 	type: 	Vincent Scully. 	American 	Architecture and 	Urbanisrn.
London. 	1969 	is a 	useful 	over\'iew. 	as is J. 	Burchard 	and
Bush 	Brown. 	.American 	.Architecture: a Social and 	Cultural
History. 	Boston. 	1961 : 	see 	also 	W. 	Weisman. 	'A New 	View
of Skyscraper History', 	in 	The 	Rise of an 	American 	Architecture.
ed. 	Edgar 	Kaufmann. 	Jr.. 	New 	York. 	1970.
Tribune: 	Chicago 	Tribune 	Competition. 	Chicago Tribune.
1922. 	contains illustrations of the entries 	and 	the
programme sent 	to competitors.
p. 	147 	Glass Skyscrapers: 	for 	the contrast 	in 	ideology
between 	Europe 	and 	USA. 	see Curtis. 	'Der 	Wolkenkratzer—
Realitat 	und 	Utopie' 	I see 	note to p. 	123). 	and 	Manfredo
Tafuri. 	'La 	Dialectique de 	I'absurde 	Europe-USA: 	les 	avatars
de 	I'ideologie du 	gratte-ciel 	1918-1974'. 	L' Architecture
d'.Aujourd'hui. 	178. 	March/April 	1975. 	pp. 	1-16.
p. 	149 	Reliance Building: 	see Giedion. 	Space. 	Time and
Arcliitecture. 	p. 	38fi.
New 	York 	Skyscrapers: 	see 	Rosemary 	Bletter and 	Cervin
Robinson. 	Skyscraper Style - 	.Art 	Deco 	New 	York. 	New 	York.
1975: 	alsojordy. 	American 	Buildings and Their 	Architects, 	vol.
4. 	and 	W. 	A. 	Starrett. 	Skyscrapers and 	the 	Men 	who 	Built
Them. 	New 	York. 	1928.
p. 	1 5 1 	Louis Sullivan: 	Kindergarten 	Chats and Other 	Writings,
New 	York. 	1947. 	p. 	77: 	written 	in 	1918.
Skyscraper as Tool : 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Quand les cathedrales etaient
blanches: 	voyage aux pays des 	timides. 	Paris. 	1937, 	p. 	62.
author's translation.
p. 	1 53 	Hugh Ferris: 	The 	Metropolis of Tomorrow. 	New 	York.
1929.
Rockefeller Center: 	see Jordy. 	American 	Buildings and 	Their
Architects, 	vol. 	4. 	and C. 	Krinsky. 	Rockefeller Center. 	London
and 	New 	York. 	1978.
p. 	1 54 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright: 	A 	Testament. 	New 	York. 	1972,
p. 	III.
p. 	1 55 	Schindler: 	see E. 	McCoy. 	Five 	California Architects.
New 	York, 	i960; 	David 	Cebhard. 	Schindler. 	London. 	1971
:
Reyner 	Banham. 	Los 	Angeles. 	The 	.Architecture of Four
Ecologies. 	Harmondsworth. 	1971.
p. 	157 	Richard 	Neutra: 	Wic 	Bni/t 	/lmfnS:fl.^ Stuttgart. 	1927.
p. 	I 	58 	PSFS: 	George 	Howe, 	cited 	by 	|ordy 	in 	American
Buildings and Their Architects, 	vol. 	4. 	pp. 	47-83.
Hitchcock 	and Johnson: 	The 	International Style, 	p. 	20.
Chapter 	12. 	The 	Ideal 	Community: 	Alternatives
to 	the 	Industrial 	City
p. 	1 59 	Motto: 	Karel Teige. 	'Contemporary 	International
Architecture'. 	1928. 	in 	Benton 	and 	Benton. 	.Architecture and
Design, 	p. 	200.
Industrial 	City: 	see L. 	Benevolo. 	Le Origini deU'Vrbanistica
Moderna. 	Bari. 	1963. 	translated into 	English 	as 	The 	Origins of
Modern 	Town-Planning. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1967. 	Franfoise
Choay. 	The 	Modern 	City. 	Planning in 	the 	i<)th 	Century. 	New
York. 	1969.
Friedrich 	Engels: 	The 	Condition 	of the 	Working 	Classes 	in
England 	in 	i S44 	(tr. 	Wischnewetzky I. 	London. 	1952. 	p.49.
Critiques of Industrial City: 	see 	Benevelo. 	History 	of Modern
Architecture, 	pp. 	1 27 IT., 	and Egbert, 	Social Radicalism.
pp. 	1 3 3-43 	for Fourier, 	pp. 	67-77 	ft"" Marx. 	p. 	104 	for
Engels. 	also 	pp. 	1 1 7-19. 	For Fourier's phalanstere 	see
Benevelo. 	The 	Origins of Modern 	Town-Planning. 	p. 	s6. 	and
Charles 	Fourier. 	Traitede Vassociation domestiguc-agricole in
Oeuvrc completes. 	Paris. 	1841. 	vol. 	4. 	pp. 	500-2.
p. 	160 	CamilloSitte: 	Der Stddtehau 	nach 	seinem 	kiinstlerischen
Grimdsdtzen. 	Vienna. 	1889. 	translated 	as 	City 	Planning
According 	to 	.Artistic Principles. 	London. 	1965. 	See G. 	and C.
Collins. 	Camillo Sitte and the 	Birth of Modern 	City 	Plaiming.
London. 	196 s. 	For Soriay 	Mata 	and 	the linear city 	seeG.
Collins. 	'Linear 	Planning Throughout 	the 	World', 	journal of
Society 	of Architectural 	Historians. 	18. 	October 	I9S9.
pp. 	74-9 V
Ebenezer 	Howard: 	Tomorrow: a 	Peaceful 	Path 	to Real Reform.
London. 	1898. 	re-issued with 	slight 	changes 	as 	Garden 	Cities
of Tomorrow in 	1902.
p. 	161 	John 	Ruskin: 	Sesame and Lilies. 	London. 	1 865.
Gamier: 	Vne 	Cite 	Industrielle. 	Paris. 	19 17; 	see 	also D.
Wiebenson. 	Tony 	Gamier: 	the 	Cite 	Industrielle. 	New 	York.
1969.
p. 	162 	Tafuri 	and 	Dal 	Co: 	Modern 	.Architecture, 	p. 	1 10.
P. 	164 	LeCorbusier City 	Planning: 	see 	Le Corbusier.
Urbanisme. 	Paris. 	1925. 	translated 	as 	The City of Tomorrow.
Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1971 : 	Norma 	Evanson. 	The 	Machine aitd
the 	Grand 	Design. 	New 	York. 	1969: 	Robert 	Fishman. 	Urban
Utopias 	in 	the 	twentieth 	Century. 	New 	York. 	1977: 	P. 	Boudon.
Lived-In 	Architecture. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1972: 	Brian 	Taylor.
Le 	Corbusier at 	Pessac. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1972.
p. 	166 	Monastery: 	see 	Peter Serenyi. 	Le Corbusier. 	Fourier.
and 	the 	Monastery 	of Ema'. 	Art 	Bidletin. 	49. 	1967.
pp. 	277-86.
Frankfurt: 	see B. 	Miller-Lane. 	Architecture and 	Politics in
Germany. 	1919-1945. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1968. 	Tafuri 	and
Dal 	Co. 	Modern 	Architecture, 	and 	G. 	Uhlig. 	'Town 	Planning in
the 	Weimar 	Republic'. 	Architectural .Association 	Quarterly.
II. 	no. 	I. 	1979. 	pp. 	24(1".
p. 	1 70 	Oud : 	Hitchcock. 	/. /. P. 	Oud. 	Paris. 	1931-
Soviet 	Urbanisrn: 	see 	Berthold 	I.ubetkin. 	'Recent
Developments 	of Town-Planning 	in 	the 	LISSR'. 	Architectural
Review. 	May 	1 9 	?2. 	pp. 	2 1 	s 	IT. : 	K. 	Frampton. 	'Notes on 	Soviet
Urbanism 	1917-32'. 	.-Irf/jita-ts' 	Vcar 	Boot'. 	12. 	1968.
pp. 	238-S2.
El 	Lissitzky: 	Russia: 	an 	Architecture 	for 	World 	Revolution.
London. 	197(1. 	p. 	59.
p. 	1 71 	N, A. 	Milyutin: 	Sotsgorod: 	The 	Problem 	of Building
SociaUst 	Cities. 	Cambridge, 	Mass.. 	1974.
Karl 	Marx 	Hof: 	Tafuri 	and 	Dal 	Co. 	Modern 	.Architecture.
p. 	193.
C.LA.M.: 	'Declaration of Aims'. 	La 	Sarraz. 	Switzerland.
1928: 	see Benton 	and 	Benton. 	.Architecture and Design, 	for
excerpts; 	also 	Benevelo. 	History 	of Modern 	.Architecture, 	vol.
2, 	p. 	497.
p. 	173 	Charter of Athens: 	see 	Benevelo. 	History 	of Modern
.Architecture, 	vol. 	2. 	p. 	s 	?9: 	fof Gropius 	on 	high-rise
dwellings see 	'Flach. Mittel- oder 	Hochbau.-'. 	Rationelle
Bcbauungsweisen. 	Stuttgart, 	19 s i . 	p. 	26. 	the doctrines of the
Athens 	Charter 	later appeared 	as 	Jose Luis 	Sert. 	Can 	Our
Cities Survive.^. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	194-

-- 398 of 420 --

Chapter 	i 	3. 	The 	hiternational 	Style, 	The
hidividual 	Talent, 	and 	The 	Myth 	of
Functionalism
p. 	I 	74 	Motto: 	(lombrich. 	Art 	and 	lUusiou. 	London. 	iq6o,
p. 	7,S.
Hitchcock 	and 	|ohnson. 	The 	iMcnmtional Style, 	p. 	1
9
p. 	1 77 	El 	Lissitzkv. 	Russia: 	An Architecture for a 	World
Revchition. 	London, 	1970, 	p. 	32.
Van 	Nelle: 	for 	Le Corbusier's panegyric 	sec 	Plans. 	1 2.
February 	1952, 	p. 	40.
p. 	180 	Kenneth 	Franipton: 	The 	Humanist 	versus the
Utilitarian 	Ideal'. 	Architectural 	Desicjn. 	?8. 	19(18. pp. 	i 	M-b.
Hannes 	Meyer and 	VVittwer: 	Report 	on 	League of Nations
Entry, 	cited 	by 	Franipton, 	The 	Humanist 	versus 	the
Utilitarian 	Ideal'.
R. 	Buckminster 	Fuller: 	passage cited 	by 	Banham. 	Theorij and
Uesiijn. 	p. 	325. 	See also 	R. 	W. 	Marks. 	The 	Dijiuaxion 	World of
Buckminster 	Fidler. 	New 	York. 	1 9(i<). 	Evidently 	Banham
shared 	Fuller's sentiments, 	since 	he 	concluded 	his 	book 	(pp.
329-301: 	'It 	may 	well 	be 	that 	what 	we 	have 	hitherto
understood 	as architecture, 	and 	what 	we 	are 	beginning to
understand 	of technology 	are 	incompatible 	disciplines. 	The
architect 	who 	proposes 	to 	run 	with 	technology 	knows 	that
he 	will 	be 	in 	fast 	company, 	and 	that 	in 	order 	to 	keep 	up. 	he
may 	have to 	emulate 	the 	Futurists 	and 	dump 	his 	whole
cultural 	load.' 	This 	seems 	to 	be 	a 	classic case of the confusion
of means 	and 	ends: 	by 	what 	law 	should 	art 	keep 	abreast 	of
technical 	change.' 	Moreover. 	Fuller's own 	Dymaxion 	House
was 	scarcely 	without 	symbolic overtones, 	however
functional 	it 	may 	have 	appeared. 	As an 	aesthetic
arrangement, 	admittedly, 	the 	building 	was 	scarcely
inspiring.
p. 	1 82 	William Jordy : 	on 	objectivity' 	in 	American 	Biiildintjs
and 	Their Architects, 	vol. 4. 	p. 	182: 	by 	the saine author, 	see
'The 	Symbolic 	Essence 	of Modern 	European 	Architecture of
the Twenties 	and 	its Continuing 	Influence', 	journal of the
Society of .Architectural 	Historians. 	11. 	October 	196 	3.
pp. 	177-87. 	While 	'pure 	functionalism' 	may 	be an
impossibility, 	it 	would 	be 	wrong to 	suggest 	that the 	leading
architects of the modern 	movement 	were 	in 	favour of
aesthetic 	wilfulness 	or 	arbitrariness. 	A rigorous 	functional
and 	structural 	rationale 	was 	used 	as 	a 	starting-point 	for
aesthetic 	and 	symbolic expression. 	See 	Le 	Corbusier. 	Towards
a 	New Architecture, 	p. 	187: 	'By 	the use of inert 	materials and
startiny from 	conditions 	more or 	less 	utilitarian, 	you 	have
established certain 	relationships 	which 	have aroused 	my
emotions. 	This 	is 	Architecture.'
p. 	183 	Henri 	Focillon, 	The Life of 	i'orms 	in 	.Art. 	trans. G.
Kubler. 	C. 	Hogan. 	New 	York. 	I9S8. 	p. 	74.
p. 	185 	Mies van dcr Rohe: 	The 	passage 	was 	written 	in
1928. 	but 	is clearly 	relevant 	to 	the 	Barcelona 	Pavilion. 	See
also J. 	Bier. 	'Mies 	van 	der 	Rohes 	Reichspavillon 	in
Barcelona'. 	Die 	Form. 	August 	1929. 	pp. 	23-30. 	For detailed
analysis 	of critical 	and 	historical 	reactions to 	the 	Barcelona
Pavilion 	sec 	]. 	Bonta. 	.Anatoniia de 	la 	interpretacion 	in
arquitectura : 	rcsegne semiotica de 	la critica de 	la 	Pabellon de
Barcelona de 	Mies 	van der 	Rohe. 	Barcelona. 	I975-
Chapter 	14, 	The 	Image 	and 	Idea 	of Le
Corbusier's 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy
p. 	186 	Motto: 	Le 	Corbusier, 	Towards a 	New Architecture,
p. 	165. 	For detailed 	discussion 	of the 	Villa, 	see 	Curtis, 	'Le
Corbusier: 	the Evolution 	of his 	Architectural 	Language and
Notes 	397
its 	Crystallization 	in 	the 	Villa 	Savoye 	at 	Poissy'. in 	IjC
Corbusier/English 	.Architecture 	igsos. 	Open 	University 	197s.
p. 19 1 	Fresh 	Air: 	for Le Corbusier's own 	description 	of the
Villa 	Savoye. 	see 	Precisions sur 	un etat present de 	I'architecture
et 	de 	I'urhanisme. 	Paris. 	1 9 30. pp. 	1 36 	ff. 	'Air circulates
freely, 	light 	abounds 	and 	penetrates everywhere.'
p. 	192 	Standards: 	Le Corbusier. 	Towards a 	New Architecture.
p. 	123.
Design 	Process: 	see Tim 	Benton. 	Radiovision. 	Villa 	Savoye:
Preliminary 	Drawings'. 	Open 	University 	:97s. 	and 	Max
Risselada. 	'Le Corbusier and 	Pierre Jeanneret. 	Ontwerpen
voor de 	woning 	19 19-1929'. 	exhibition 	catalogue. 	School
of Architecture. 	Delft. 	1980.
p. 	194 	Le 	Corbusier: 	Towards a New .Architecture, 	p. 	1 89.
p. 	195 	Idealism, 	Rationalism: 	see 	P. 	Turner, 	The
Beginnings 	of Le Corbusier's Education', 	.4rt 	Bulletin. 	June
1971. 	and 	Curtis. 	'Le 	Corbusier: 	the 	Evolution 	of his
Language 	and 	its 	Crystallization 	in 	the 	Villa 	Savoye at
Poissy'.
Chapter 	15. 	Wright 	and 	Le 	Corbusier 	in 	the
1930s
p. 	196 	Motto: 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	'Broadacre 	City, 	A New
Community 	Plan', 	.Architectural 	Record, 	yy. 	no. 	4. 	April
193s. 	pp. 	243-4.
p. 	199 	Edgar 	Kaufmann Jr.: 	introduction', 	to D. 	Hoffmann.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wrir//i!'.'i 	Fallinywater. 	the 	House and its 	History.
New 	York, 	1978.
p. 	200 	Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	The 	Cardboard 	House', 	1931:
Benton 	and 	Benton, 	.Architecture and 	Design, 	p. 	(1 1
.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright: 	cited 	by 	Olgivanna 	Lloyd 	Wright. 	Frank
Lloyd 	Wright: 	his Life, 	his 	Work, 	his 	Words. 	New 	York. 	1966.
p. 	159.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	on 	rock 	ledges. 	The 	Meaning of
Materials - 	Stone', 	.Architectinal 	Record. 	63, 	April 	1928.
pp.350. 	3s6.
Falling Water and Johnson 	Wax: 	for ingenious
interpretations of these 	buildings 	see Smith. 	Frank 	Lloyd
Wright.
p.202 	Usonian 	Houses: 	see 	|. 	Sergeant. 	Frank 	Lloyd Wright's
Vsonian 	Houses. 	New York. 	1976-
p,203 	Heat 	Gain: 	see 	Reyner 	Banham, 	The 	.Architecture of the
Well 	Tempered Environment. 	London, 	1 969, 	for discussion 	of
Le Corbusier's 	glazing.
p. 204 	Formal Changes: 	see 	Peter Serenyi. 	'Le Corbusier's
Changing 	Attitude toward 	Form', 	journal of Society of
Architectural 	Historians. 	24. 	March 	1965. 	pp. 	15-^3-
p.205 	Pavilion Suisse: 	for extensive discussion 	of design
process 	and 	meaning see 	W. 	Curtis. 	'Ideas 	of Structure 	and
the Structure 	of Ideas: 	Le Corbusier's 	Pavilion 	Suisse,
1930-193 :'. 	Journal of Society of Architectural 	Historians. 	40,
December 	1981.
p.2o6 	Maurin: 	in 	Oeuvre complete 	l<)2')-^4, 	p. 	84, 	caption
to illustration of pi/otis. 	For 	'a 	redent' 	housing, 	see 	Le
Corbusier, 	Ville 	radieuse. 	Paris 	1933, 	p. 	i 	s8.
Le Corbusier: 	in 	Oeuvre complete 	1929-^4. 	p. 	19.
p. 	207 	Syndicalism 	and the 	Ville 	Radieuse: 	see 	Kenneth
Frampton, 	'The City of Dialectic', 	Architectural 	Design, 	39,
October 	1969, 	pp. 	515-4^'; 	also R. 	Fishman. 	Vrban 	Utopias
in 	the 	Twentieth 	Century. 	New 	York. 	1977. 	for a discussion 	of
Le Corbusier's 	politics 	in the 	thirties; 	and 	Serenyi, 	'Le
Corbusier. 	Fourier and the 	Monastery of Eraa'. 	Art 	Bidletin.
1967.

-- 399 of 420 --

398 	Notes
p. 208 	Reyner 	Banham: 	for extensive discussion 	ol'CIAM
doctrines and 	reactions 	against 	them 	see 	The 	New 	Brutalism.
especially 	pp. 70IT.
Algiers: 	Stanislaus 	Von 	Moos. 	'Von den 	Keninies d'Alger zum
Plan 	Obus'. 	Archilbese. 	I. 	1971. 	pp. 	25-57: 	see 	also
unpublished essay by 	Catherine ]. 	Dean 	on 	the 	various
Algiers 	schemes, 	their political 	context, 	and 	Le Corbusier's
sensitivity to 	the pre-existing site 	and culture. 	MIT. 	School of
Architecture. 	1978 : 	for a syndicalist 	reading of Algiers, 	see
M. 	Macleod, 	'Le 	Corbusier's 	Plans 	for 	Algiers 	1 930-1 936'.
Oppositions 	16/17. 	19S0.
p. 	209 	Manhattan: 	see 	W. 	Curtis. 	'Le 	Corbusier, 	Manhattan
el 	le 	revc 	de 	la ville 	radieuse'. 	Archithesc. 	17. 	1976. 	pp. 	23-8.
1^ Corbusier: 	When 	the 	Ctilhedmls 	Were 	While. 	New 	York.
1947. 	the English 	translation 	ofQiiand les eathedrales etaient
l>kmehes: 	voycuje mix pays des 	tiiiiiiles. 	Paris. 	1957-
p. 210 	BroadacreCity: 	for 	a 	flavour of Wright's 	urban
thinking, 	see 	Frank Lloyd 	Wright. 	The 	Disappeariiuj 	Citii. 	New
York. 	1932; 	also 	Fishman. 	Urban 	Utopias 	in 	tlie 	Twentielli
Century.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright: 	When 	Deinoeracy 	Builds. 	Chicago.
194s. 	P(i7-
Chapter 	i6. 	Totalitarian 	Critiques 	of the 	Modern
Movement
p. 21 1 	Motto: 	Adolf Hitler, 	'Speech 	on 	Art'. 	1 	1 	September
1935; 	cited 	by 	R. 	Taylor. 	The 	Word in 	Stone, 	tlie 	Rote of
Arehiteeture 	in 	National Socialist 	Ideoloyy. 	Berkeley. 	Calif..
1974. 	p. 	31.
p. 2 12 	Bauhaus Criticisms: 	see 	B. 	Miller-Lane, 	Areliiteeture
and 	Polities 	hi 	Gernwny 	1929-1945. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.,
i9hS. 	pp. 	69 	IT.
Anti-Semitism: 	see. 	for example. 	P. 	Schultzc-Naumburg.
Kunst 	und 	Rasse. 	Munich. 	1929: 	for 	Bolshevist 	innuendoes
see 	Alexander von 	Senger. 	Krisis der 	Arehitektiir. 	Zurich,
1928,
p. 214 	Half-Baked 	Art 	History: 	see Taylor, 	The 	Word in
Stone, pp. 	S 	5 	IT,
Speer: 	for 	his 	own 	version 	of events 	see 	Albert 	Speer, 	Inside
the 	Third 	Reich. 	New 	York. 	1970.
p. 2 1 5 	Regionalism: 	the intention 	was 	to 	mimic 	directly
local 	styles and 	patterns 	of building. 	The 	hip roof took 	on 	a
strong 	nationalist overtone 	in 	contrast 	to the
'internationali.st' 	flat 	roof, 	which 	was seen 	as 	a 	foreign,
rootless 	import. 	This overt revival 	of a 	vernacular must 	be
contrasted 	visually 	and 	ideologically 	with 	the 	modern
regionalism' 	of the 	1950s which 	sought 	to 	blend 	the 	best 	of
modern 	architecture 	and 	local 	traditions,
p. 2 1 7 	Soviet 	Union in Thirties: 	see 	Anatole 	Kopp.
L' Architecture de la periode staliniewie. 	C.renoble, 	1978. 	For
the 	reaction 	against 	the 	avant-garde 	and 	the 	re-use of
Classicism 	see 	the 	retrospective analysis 	of the 	Palace 	of the
Soviets Competition 	by 	M. 	P, 	Tsapenko. 	Realisticheskykh
Osnomkb 	Sovietskoi 	Arkhitektury. 	Moscow 	19 Si. 	PP- 	7 3 	1-
The 	Committee 	in 	charge announced 	on 28 	February 	1932
that 	'both 	new 	techniques 	and 	the 	best 	methods 	of Classical
"architecture" 	should 	be employed 	henceforth'.
Official 	Criticism 	olAvant-Garde: 	registered 	by 	Vzik, 	the
Central 	Fxecutive Committee 	of the 	Communist 	Party. 	1 9 30.
cited 	by 	Lubetkin. 	Recent 	Developments of Town-planning
in 	the 	USSR'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	May 	19 	5^-
p. 218 	Mussolini 	and Town-Planning: 	see 	Spiro 	Kostoff, 	The
Third 	Rome. 	Berkeley, 	Calif, 	I977- 	The 	best 	general
discussion 	of Italian 	architecture 	in 	the 	Fascist 	period is 	to
be found 	in 	Benevelo, 	History 	0) 	Modern 	Architecture, 	vol, 	2.
pp, 	561 	IT,
Gruppo 	7: 	see 	'Architettura' 	in 	Rasseyna 	italiana. 	December
1926. 	One 	of the Group's 	pronouncements 	was: 	That 	the
new 	architecture could 	be compared 	with 	that of the 	distant
past.' 	See 	also S. 	Danesi 	and 	L. 	Patetta, 	Rationalisnie et
architecture en 	Italic 	I9'9-I94-!. 	Venice, 	1976. 	and 	A,
Sartoris. 	Gli eletnenti dell architettura funzionale. 	Milan. 	1941.
p. 219 	Terragni: 	see 	P, 	Koulermos, 	'The 	Work 	ofTerragni.
Lingeri 	and 	Italian 	Rationalism'. 	Architectural 	Desiyn. 	March
1963 ; 	also 	E, 	Mantero, 	Ciiiseppe 	Terrayni e 	la citta del
razionalisnio 	italiano, 	Bari. 	19(19.
p. 	22 1 	Danleum: Thomas 	Schumacher. 	'From 	Gruppo 	7 to
the 	Danteum: 	a 	Critical 	Introduction 	to Terragni's 	Relazione
Sul 	Danteum'. 	Oppositions 	g. 	1977. 	PP- 	9^-10 S: 	for Terragni
quotation, 	see 	p. 	92.
Chapter 	1 	7. 	The 	Spread 	of Modern 	Architecture
to 	England 	and 	Scandinavia
p. 	223 	Motto: 	Hitchcock, 	The 	International 	Style. 	Preface to
196(1 	edition, 	p. 	xiii.
England 	in 	the Thirties: 	H. 	R, 	Hitchcock 	and 	L, 	K, 	Bauer.
Modern 	Architecture 	in 	Enyland. 	New 	York. 	1937. 	catalogue
of an 	exhibition 	at 	the 	Museum 	of Modern 	Art: 	J. M,
Richards. 	An 	Introduction 	to 	Modern 	Architecture.
Harmondsworth, 	1940: 	Anthony 	Jackson, 	The 	Politics of
Architecture, 	a 	History 	of Modern 	.\rchitecture 	in 	Britain,
London. 	1970; 	W. 	Curtis, 	'The 	Modern 	Movement 	in
England 	1930-9: 	thoughts 	on 	the 	political 	content 	and
associations 	of the 	International 	Style', 	in 	Le
Corhusier/Enylisli 	Architecture 	J 9 	ios. 	Open 	University. 	1975.
p. 225 	Lubetkin: 	see 	W, 	Curtis. 	'Berthold 	Lubetkin 	or
"Socialist" 	Architecture 	in 	the 	Diaspora'. 	.Archithese. 	12.
1974, 	pp, 	42-8: 	also 	R, 	Furneaux 	Jordan, 	'Lubetkin',
,4rc/ii(t'c(»ray 	Review, 	July 	1955, 	pp, 	5(1-44-
p. 226 	Le Corbusier: 	'The Vertical 	Garden 	City', 	Architectural
Review. 	79. 	January 	1 9 	56. 	pp. 	9-10.
p. 227 	Lucas, 	Connell. 	Ward: 	see 	Architectural .Association
lournal. 	November 	I95'i. 	special 	issue,
p. 228 	]. 	M, 	Richards: 	The 	Condition 	of Modern
Architecture 	and 	the 	Principle of Anonymity'. 	C;rr/c 	eds. 	N.
Gabo, 	J, 	L, 	Martin, 	B, 	Nicholson. 	London 	1957.
High 	Point 	II: 	Architectural 	Review. 	8 	5. 	October 	1938,
pp. 	1 61-4: 	akso. 	Anthony 	Cox. 	'High Point 	Two. 	North Hill,
Highgate', 	Focus. 	2, 	19 	58, 	pp, 7(1-9-
p.229 	Aalto's Absorption 	of Modern 	Architecture: 	see 	P, D,
Pearson, 	A/i>flr Aalto and the 	International Style. 	New 	York,
1978: 	for a 	general 	treatment, 	see 	Giedion, 	Space. 	Time and
Architecture. 	4th 	edn,, also 	Benevelo, 	.4 	History of Modern
Architecture, 	vol, 	2, 	pp. 	(107 	ff. 	For 	Paimio. 	see 	P. 	Morton
Shand. 	'Tuberculosis Sanatorium. 	Paimio. 	Finland',
Architectural 	Review. 	September 	1953. 	PP- 	85-90,
p. 230 	Aalto and 	Duiker: 	see 	Pearson, 	Alvar Aalto and 	the
International Style, 	p. 	87,
p. 232 	Alvar 	Aalto: 	see essay 	entitled 	'National 	Planning
and 	Cultural 	(K)als'. 	1 949. 	lor 	his 	rellections 	on 	nature.
excerpt in 	G. Schildt 	(ed,l. 	Alvar Aalto. 	Sketches, 	Cambridge,
Mass.. 	1978.

-- 400 of 420 --

Notes 	399
Chapter 	18. 	The 	Continuity 	of Older 	Traditions
p. 	2 54 	Motto: 	Reginald 	Blomticld. 	'Is 	Modern 	Architecture
on 	the 	Right 	Tracic?'. 	The 	ListciiiT, 	10. 	19^5. 	p. 	124.
Survivals: 	it 	is to 	Hitchcock's credit 	that 	he 	included 	a
chapter entitled 	'Architecture 	Called 	Traditional 	in 	the
Twentieth 	Century' 	in 	Aniutciturc 	iqth 	and 	jnth 	Centuries.
p. 	236 	An 	Deco: 	see 	C. 	Veronesi. 	Stijle tiiul 	Ih'sUjn 	1 909-29.
New 	York. 	1968: 	D. 	Clebhard. 	The 	Rkiifielil 	Biiildinii
1926-1928, 	Los 	Angeles. 	1970: 	Bevis 	Hillier. 	An 	Dno 	in 	the
z 920s and 	7 930.'>. 	London. 	1968.
p. 237 	American 	Eclecticism 	between 	the 	Wars: 	W. 	Kidney.
The 	Architecture of Choice . 	pAiecticism 	in 	America. 	iXXo-1930.
New 	York. 	1974.
p. 	238 	Lincoln 	Memorial: 	lor details 	of the commission 	see
U.S. Office of Public 	Buildings 	and 	Public 	Parks 	of the
National 	Capital. 	The 	Lincohi 	Memorial. 	W'asliington. 	U.C,
Washington. 	1927.
p. 	239 	New 	Delhi: 	the 	most 	interesting 	assessment of
Lutyens' 	designs 	is 	still 	Robert 	Byron's, 	in 	.Architectural
Review. 	(19. 	January 	19^1.
p. 	241 	.Asplund. 	Imagery: 	for an 	intriguing 	attempt 	at
explaining 	inetaphors 	within 	Asplund's 	work, 	see 	S. 	Wrede.
The Architecture of Erie Gunnar Asplund. 	Cambridge. 	Mass..
1979.
p. 	242 	Cla.ssicism: 	at 	the 	time of writing 	( 	1 980I. 	it 	is
fashionable 	to 	insist 	that 	modern 	architects 	cut 	themselves
off from 	all 	precedent 	and 	even 	to 	ignore 	the differences
between 	profound 	and 	superficial 	classical 	usages. 	For the
cheap 	stylism 	at 	present 	fashionable 	in 	America,
particularly, 	see 	Chapter 	28 	below.
Blomlield: 	'Is 	Modern 	Architecture 	on 	the 	Right 	Track.''
p. 	243 	Blomfield: 	'Is 	Modern 	.Architecture 	on 	the 	Right
Track.'': 	the 	fact 	that 	Blomlield 	identified 	inociern
architecture 	with 	'functionalism' 	is 	not 	entirely 	his own
fault. 	In 	England 	in 	the 	thirties 	the functional 	and 	moral
aspects of modern 	architecture 	were stressed 	by 	its
supporters 	at 	the expense of formal 	and 	symbolic 	qualities.
See. 	for example, 	the 	critical 	writings 	of N. 	Pevsner and 	|..M.
Richards 	in 	this 	period, 	or F. 	R. 	S. 	Yorke. 	The 	Modern 	House.
London. 	1934.
Chapter 	1 	9, 	Modern 	Architecture 	in 	America:
hnmigration 	and 	Consolidation
p. 	258 	Motto: 	for Giedion 	on 	tradition 	see 	.4rr/!/tir(iir(' 	You
and 	Me. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	I9s8.
p. 	259 	Gropius and 	Breiier 	in 	America: 	see 	particularly
Ciedion. 	Space. 	Time and 	.Architecture, 	vol. 	4; 	al.so 	VV. 	Curtis.
Boston: horty 	Years of Modern 	Architecture. 	Boston. 	Institute
of Contemporary 	Arts. 	1980. 	for discussion 	of diaspora: 	and
Jordy. 	American 	Huildinifs and 	Their Architects, 	volume 	4. 	for
Breuer's 	problems of transplanting 	modern 	architectural
ideas 	from 	Europe to 	America.
p. 	260 	Harvard: 	among 	those 	to 	study 	under Gropius 	in 	his
early 	years 	as 	a 	teacher 	were 	Barnes. 	Rudolph. 	Johnson, 	and
Pei. 	The 	version 	of modern 	architecture 	they 	absorbed 	was
somewhat 	puritanical 	and 	ever 	in 	danger of lapsing 	into 	a
glib, 	abstract 	formalism 	or else 	into 	a 	skin-deep
utilitarianism. 	What 	Robert 	Venturi 	was 	later 	(in 	Complexitfi
and 	Contradiction 	in 	.Architecture, 	1966 1 	to 	pillory 	as
'orthodox 	modern 	architecture' 	suffered 	from 	just 	such 	ills.
Modern 	architecture 	was 	bound 	to 	go 	awry 	when 	divorced
from 	the cinotional 	and 	Utopian 	Weltanschauumj 	which
produced 	it. 	It 	is testimony 	to the power of the architectural
historian 	as 	a 	myth-maker that 	Giedion 	managed 	to 	convey
Gropius 	as 	if he represented 	the core 	positions of the 	modern
movement, 	whereas, 	by 	the 	late 	thirties, 	his direction 	seemed
a debased 	and 	prettified 	version 	of the 	'International 	Style' 	of
the 	twenties, 	especially 	by contrast 	with 	his earlier works or
with 	the 	inventiveness of Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Aalto 	in 	the same
period.
p. 261 	Mies: 	for a 	simple 	introduction 	to 	Mies 	van 	der
Rohe's entire career see 	Peter 	Blake. 	Mies 	van der 	Rohe:
.Architecture and Structure. 	New 	York. 	1 9h(). 	also 	P. 	Carter.
Mies 	van der 	Rohe at 	Work. 	New 	York. 	1 9 74.
p. 	262 	Mies and Classicism: 	Colin 	Rowe. 	Neoclassicism 	and
.Modern 	.Krchitccturc'. 	Oppositions 	1, 	1975. 	pp. 	1-26.
p. 	263 	Colin 	Rowe: 	Introduction'. 	Five 	Architects. 	New
York. 	I97S.
p. 264 	Lake Shore: 	for 	a 	most 	subtle 	analysis of this 	building
and 	of Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe's 	use of the steel 	frame, 	see Jordy.
.American 	Buildincis and 	Their .Architects, 	vol. 	4. 	pp. 	22 1 	ff.
Mies van 	der Rohe. 	in 	Prologue 	to 	W. 	Blaser. 	Mies 	Van 	Der
Rohe. 	New 	York. 	196s.
p. 266 	Imitations of Mies: 	it 	is surely 	a 	fundamental
characteristic of all 	traditions that 	seminal 	works 	are
imitated 	for superficialities of language 	until 	a 	sort 	of slang
results. 	In 	case 	this 	argument 	sounds too 	haughty 	let 	me say
that 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	in 	particular learned 	many 	lessons
from 	the existing 	industrial 	vernaculars 	of commercial 	frame
buildings. 	One 	suspects that 	the 	relationship 	between 	'high'
and 	'low' 	architectural 	traditions 	always 	works 	both 	ways.
Mechanical 	Ventilation: 	see 	Banham. 	The 	Architecture of the
Well 	Tempered 	Environment. 	London. 	1969. 	pp. 	22b 	ff.. 	for a
discussion 	of the 	interrelationship between 	air-conditioning
and 	the 	curtain 	wall.
p. 	267 	LIN: 	see 	Le Corbusier. 	UN 	Headcjuartcrs. 	New 	York.
1947-
p. 	268 	Modulor: 	Le Corbusier. 	The 	Modulor. 	a 	Harmonious
Measure 	to 	the 	Human 	Scale. 	Universalhi 	Applied 	to 	.Architecture
and 	Mechanics. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1954.
Guggenheim: 	for a 	detailed 	analysis see 	jordy. 	.American
Buildinjis 	and 	their Architects, 	vol. 	4. 	p. 	279.
Frank 	Lloyd 	Wright, 	in 	Solomon 	R. 	Guggetdicim 	Museum
(brochure 	put 	out 	by 	museum. 	New 	York. 	1960I.
p. 270 	Wright: 	in 	Solomon 	R. 	Guggenheim 	Museum.
Wright: 	on 	Unity 	1'emple. 	Autohiographii, 	New York. 	1932.
pp. 	I38ff.
Chapter 	20. 	Forrn 	and 	Meaning 	in 	the 	Late
Works 	of Le 	Corbusier
p. 	271 	.Motto: 	Eocillon. 	The 	Life of Eorms 	in 	Art, 	p. 	74.
Surrealism: 	arguably 	the 	totemic 	fascinations of the
Surrealists 	intlucnced 	the 	primitivism 	already 	visible 	in 	Le
Corbusier's 	paintings 	and 	buildings 	of the 	1930s. 	One
suspects that 	his interests 	in 	multiple 	meanings and
hermetic 	erotic 	references 	may 	be 	related 	too. 	For the
invention 	of the 	bizarre 	'Llbu' 	sculptures, 	see Le Corbusier.
,\'('w' 	World of Space, 	New 	York. 	1948. 	p. 	2 5.
p. 273 	James Stirling: 	Ronchamp: 	Le Corbusier's Chapel
and 	the 	Crisis of Rationalism'. 	.4rr/iitoti/r«/ 	Renew. 	1 	19.
March 	1956. 	pp. 	155-61- 	For 	the patronage 	of Ronchamp.
see 	Martin 	Purdy. 	'Le Corbusier 	and 	the Theological
Program', 	in 	Walden 	(ed.). 	The 	Open 	Hand. 	p. 	286.
Le Corbusier: 	Oeuvre complete 	1 946-52. 	p. 	88.
Le Corbusier: 	The 	Modulor. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1 9 54. 	p. 	32.
For influences on 	Ronchamp. 	see 	Von 	Moos. 	Le 	Corbusier.

-- 401 of 420 --

400 	Notes
Etemente ciner Synthese. 	p. 	323.
p. 274 	La Tourette: 	see 	Serenyi. 	Le 	Corbusier, 	Fourier, 	and
the Monastery of Ema'. 	Art 	Bulletin. 	1967: 	also 	Purdy. 	'Le
Corbusier 	and the Theological 	Program', 	and 	also 	Colin
Rowe. 	'Dominican 	Monastery of La Tourette. 	Eveux-sur-
Arbresle. 	Lyons'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	129. 	1961.
pp. 	400-1.
[^Corbusier: 	Oeuvre complete 	195 7- 1965. 	p. 49.
p. 	275 	A. 	and 	P. 	Smithson: 	Ordinariness and 	Light. 	London.
1970. 	p. 	169.
James Stirling: 	'Carches 	to 	Jaoul ; 	Le Corbusier as 	Domestic
Architect in 	1927 	and 	19s 3'. 	Architectual 	Review. 	1 	1 S.
I9SS.PP- 	I45-SI-
p. 	276 	Second 	Machine 	Age: 	once again 	one 	senses the
epochal 	style of Le Corbusier's 	historical 	and 	social 	thinking.
For a 	lengthy discussion 	of the 	philosophy underlying 	Le
Corbusier's 	late 	works see 	W. 	Curtis 	in 	Curtis 	and Sekler
(ed.), 	Lt' 	Corbusier at 	Work.
Sarabhai: 	for brief observations on 	Ahmadabad 	patronage
conditions 	see 	Peter Serenyi. 	'Le Corbusier 	in 	India'.
exhibition 	catalogue. 	Northeastern 	University. 	Boston 	1980.
Chandigarh: 	for the 	broad 	principles of the 	urban 	layout see
Norma 	Evenson. 	Chandigarh. 	Berkeley. 	Calif. 	1966: 	for a
sceptical 	analysis. 	Sten 	Nilsson. 	The 	New Capitals of India.
Pakistanand 	Bangladesh. 	Lund. 	1973.
p. 277 	Open 	Hand: 	see 	Patricia 	Sekler. 	Le 	Corbusier.
Ruskin. 	the Tree 	and 	the Open 	Hand' 	and 	S. 	Von 	Moos, 	'The
Politics 	of the Open 	Hand: 	Notes on 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Nehru
at 	Chandigarh', 	in 	Walden 	(ed.). 	The 	Open 	Hand. 	pp. 42 	ff.
and 	41 2 	ff. 	The 	Le Corbusier quotation 	is 	from 	a 	letter cited
by 	Von 	Moos, 	note 	fis-
p. 279 	Parliament. 	Sources 	and 	Meaning: 	see 	Von 	Moos.
'The 	Politics of the Open 	Hand', 	also 	W. 	Curtis. 	Fragments of
Invention: 	The Sketchbooks 	ofLe Corbusier. 	Cambridge. 	Mass..
1981. 	The 	latter discusses the 	portico/dome theme, 	the
origins 	and 	multiple 	meanings 	of the 	lighting 	I'unnel. 	and the
way 	in 	which 	Le Corbusier's sketchbooks 	reveal 	his 	reactions
to. 	and 	transformation 	of. 	such 	Indian 	phenomena 	as
oxcarts 	and 	bull 	horns.
p. 280 	Observatory. 	Sun, etc.: 	see Le 	Corbusier. 	Oeuvre
complete. 	1952-57. 	p. 	94-
P. 	Nehru: 	from 	the 	inauguration 	speech. 	19^3. 	see 	Von
Moos. 	'The 	Politics of the Open 	Hand'.
p. 	281 	Carpenter 	Center: 	see 	Curtis 	in 	Le 	Corbusier at 	Work.
for a 	detailed 	analysis of the 	building's 	form, 	meaning 	and
genesis, 	especially 	Chapters 	3 	and 	1 	1.
p. 	282 	Le Corbusier: 	Oeuvre complete 	1957-65. 	p. 	54.
Chapter 	21. 	The 	Unite 	D'Habitation 	at 	Marseilles
as 	a 	Collective 	Housing 	Prototype
p. 	284 	Motto: 	Kublcr. 	The Shape of Time. 	Yale 	i ^bi. 	p. 	i 	?.
Unite: 	see 	Le 	Corbusier. 	L'Uivte d'Habitation de 	Marseille.
Souillac. 	1950.
p. 286 	Lewis 	Mumford: 	The 	Sky 	Line: 	the 	Marseille
"Folly"'. 	New 	Yorker, 	s 	October 	1957. 	PP- 	76 	ff.
p. 	287 	Ships: 	see 	Von 	Moos. 	'Wohnkollektiv. 	Hospiz 	und
Dampfer', 	Archilhese. 	12. 	1971. 	pp. 	30-41.
Beton 	Brut: 	see Curtis 	and 	Sekler 	(ed. I. 	Le 	Corbusier at 	Work.
p. 	166. 	for explanation 	of the 	architect's 	intentions at
Marseille.
Aix: 	for the importance of this meeting to the 	new. 	younger
generation 	see 	Banham, 	The 	New 	Brutalism, 	p. 	70.
p. 	288 	Team 	X or 'Team 	Ten': 	see 	Smithson 	(ed.). 	Tcmn 	in
Primer, 	for a 	collection 	of maxims 	and 	theories.
.'\TBAT: 	'Atelier de 	Batisseurs'. 	The 	Moroccan 	housing
envisaged 	courtyards 	in 	the 	air. 	The 	architects 	were 	aware
that 	many 	of the 	future 	users 	would 	come from 	the 	south 	of
the Atlas 	and 	therefore 	studied 	vernaculars from 	that 	region
when 	preparing 	their design.
New 	Brutalism: 	evidently 	the term 	was invented 	before 	there
were 	buildings 	to 	constitute 	a 	movement: 	See 	A. 	and 	P.
Smithson. 	'The 	New 	Brutalism', 	Architectural 	Review. 	April
1954, 	pp. 	274-5: 	also 	Banham. 	The 	New 	Brutalism,
p. 289 	Alison 	and 	Peter Smithson: 	The 	Built 	World. 	Urban
Re-Identitication', 	first 	published 	Architectural 	Design. 	June
1955. 	then 	in 	Ordinariness and 	Light, 	pp. 	los-h-
p. 290 	Clusters: 	see 	William 	Curtis, 	'A 	Language 	and 	a
Theme', 	in 	Denys 	Lasdun 	(ed.). 	A 	Language and a 	Thenw. 	the
.Architecture of Dengs 	Lasdun and 	Partners. 	London, 	197(1.
pp. 	9 	ff. ; 	the Smithsons 	published 	an 	article 	entitled 	'Cluster
City - 	a 	New 	Shape 	for 	the Community', 	in 	Architectural
Design. 	1957. 	some 	three 	years after Lasdun's 	first 	clusters.
Van 	Eyck: 	see J. 	Joedicke 	(ed.). 	CIAM 	'59 	in 	Otterlo. 	London
1 96 1 : 	for a 	full 	flavour of his 	ideas. 	Smithson. 	Team 	m
Primer: 	for the 	interest 	in 'place' 	see Jencks. 	Modern
Movements, 	pp. 	30 1 	ff.
p. 	29 1 	.Atelier 	5 : The architects 	were Erwin 	Fritz. 	Samuel
Gerber. 	Rolf Hesterberg. 	Hans 	Hostettler. 	Niklaus
Morgenthaler, 	Alfredo 	Pini.
p. 292 	Sert. 	Peabody Terraces: 	see 	Catherine 	J. 	Dean. 	The
Design 	Process and 	Meaning 	of J. 	L. 	Sert's 	Peabody Terraces
at 	Harvard', 	unpublished 	senior thesis. 	Han'ard, 	Fine 	Arts.
1976.
p. 294 	Pruitt-lgoc: 	designed 	by 	Minoru 	Yamasaki. 	1952-5.
was dynamited 	on 	15 	July 	1972. 	Until 	more 	is 	known 	about
the reasons 	this 	scheme 	failed, 	it 	can 	only 	be 	misleading 	to
claim 	that 	the event 	represents 	'the death 	of modern
architecture', 	as does Jencks. 	The 	Language of Post 	Modern
Architecture, 	p. 	9-
Lillington 	Street: 	sec 	W. 	Curtis. 	W Century 	Spanned:
Lillington 	Street 	Housing. 	Pimlico 	by 	Darbourne 	and 	Darke'.
Con/10/ssfwr. 	May 	1970. 	p. 	45: 	for Gordon 	Cullen's 	ideas, 	see
Townscape. 	London. 	1966.
Chapter 	22. 	Alvar 	Aalto 	and 	the 	Scandinavian
Tradition
p. 296 	Motto: 	Aldo 	Van 	Eyck. 	in 	Smithson 	(ed.). 	Team 	10
Primer, 	p. 	9.
New 	Regionalism: 	see. 	for example. 	Sigfried 	Giedion. 	'The
New 	Regionalism'. 	1954. 	an 	essay 	published 	in 	.Architecture
You 	and Me. 	Diargof a 	Development. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1958.
p. 	138.
p. 	299 	Karelian 	House: 	see 	Alvar Aalto. 	'Karjalan
rakennustaide'. 	Uusi 	Suomi. 	1941, 	translated 	in 	Alvar 	.Aalto,
Sketches, 	ed. 	G. 	Schildt. 	tr. 	S. 	Wrede. 	Cambridge, 	Mass..
1968. 	p. 	82. 	This 	small 	volume 	gives considerable 	insight
into 	Aalto's 	preoccupations 	with 	landscape formations, 	ruins
and 	vernacular 	forms, 	and 	into a 	world 	view 	in 	which 	the
harmony 	of man 	and 	nature 	was 	paramount. 	The 	most
useful 	introduction 	to 	Aalto 	is 	otherwise still 	G. 	Baird's 	Alvar
Aako. 	London. 	1970. 	See also 	R. 	Glanville. 	'Finnish
Vernacular 	Farmhouses'. 	Architectural Association 	Quarterly.
9. 	no. 	I. 	1977. 	pp. 	3(1-52 	for analysis 	of precinct 	forms 	in
the 	Nordic 	vernacular.
p. 	301 	Delphi: 	see Aalto. 	Sketches, 	particularly 	ills. 	9 	and 	1 	1.
drawn 	in 	1 9 S V 	Aalto .seems 	to 	have been 	preoccupied 	with

-- 402 of 420 --

Notes 	401
earth-forms, 	platforms, 	steps and 	public places in 	Delphi.
Analagous elements 	were 	used 	in 	many of his 	own 	civic
schemes. 	Once 	again 	one finds 	a 	'modern' 	architect
returning to 	some 	of the 	most 	archaic 	roots of architecture.
p. 	30? 	rtzon: 	little 	has 	been 	written 	on 	the 	architect. 	For 	an
introduction 	see 	Cicdion. 	'Jorn 	Utzon 	and 	the Third
feneration', 	in 	the 	1 967 edition 	o( Space. 	Time and
Architecture.
p. 	504 	Platforms: 	see 	'Platforms and Plateaux: 	Ideas 	of a
Llanish 	,\rchitect', 	'Aodiac 	in. 	Milan, 	1962.
p. 	305 	Philip 	Drew: 	Third Generation, 	pp. 	1 	s-lfi.
|0rn 	litzon: 	'The 	Sydney Opera 	House'. 	Zodiac 	14. 	Milan.
196s. 	p.44.
Chapter 	2 	?. 	Louis 	I. 	Kahii 	and 	the 	Challenge 	of
Monumentality
p. 	306 	Motto; 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn. 	cited 	by Jordy. 	American
Hiiildintis and 	Their 	Architects, 	vol. 	4. 	p. 	3f)l.
Monumentality : 	see 	Giedion, 	Architecture 	You 	and Me.
Cambridge, 	Mass. 	1 9 sS. 	p. 	2 s, 	for 	'The 	Need 	for 	a 	New
Monumentality', 	formulated 	in 	1943-4. 	The 	'Core of the
City' 	was 	taken 	as 	the 	theme 	for CIAM 	X 	at 	Hoddesdon.
England, 	luly 	19s i. 	Ciedion 	recorded 	his 	reactions 	to 	the
proceedings 	in 	an 	essay 	'The 	Humanization 	of Urban 	Life'.
19s I. 	in 	Architecture 	You 	and 	Me. 	p. 	12 s. 	For other 	views on
civic 	monumentality 	in 	this 	period 	see 	Henry 	Hope 	Reed.
'The 	Need 	for 	Monumentality.-'. 	Pfrspirtfl. 	i. 	I9S0.
p. 	307 	Niemeyer: 	see S. 	Papadaki. 	Oscar 	Niemeyer: 	Works 	in
Progress. 	New 	York, 	19S6. 	In a 	lecture 	at 	Sao 	Paulo. 	Max 	Bill
stated 	that; '.Architecture 	in 	your country 	stands 	in 	danger
of falling 	into 	a 	parlous .state of anti-social 	academicisin. 	1
intend 	to 	speak 	of architecture 	as 	a 	.social 	art; 	an 	art 	which
cannot 	simply 	be 	set 	aside 	. 	.
.' 	See 	Report 	on 	Brazil.
Architectural'iieview. 	116. 	I9S7. 	p.234.
p. 	308 	.Action 	Architecture: 	sec 	C. 	Kallmann. 	The 	"Action
Architecture" 	of a 	New 	Generation'. 	Architectural 	I'orwn. 	3,
October 	i9S9,pp. 	i 	32-7. 	For discussion 	of Boston 	City 	Hall
and 	a 	sketch 	of the 	scheme, 	see 	W. 	Curtis. 	Boston: 	Forttj
Years of Modern 	Architecture. 	Boston. 	1 980. 	p. 	I o.
p. 	309 	Kahn: 	the 	best 	general 	introduction 	is 	still 	Vincent
Scully, 	l.imis 	/. 	Kn/i(i. 	New 	York, 	1962; 	also Jordy, 	American
Buildiiifis and Their 	Architects, 	vol, 	4, 	pp. 	361 	ff.. 	for 	the
architect's 	philosophy of design 	and 	a 	detailed 	analysis 	of
Richards 	Medical 	Laboratories.
p. 	3 1 	3 	Kahn: 	for quotation 	and other statements of
intention 	see J. 	Rowan, 	'Wanting 	To 	Be'. 	Progressive
Architecture. 	.April 	1961. 	pp. 	i 	30-49.
p. 	3 1 	s 	Scully. 	lAtuts 	I. 	Kahn. 	p. 	3 7.
Dacca : 	lor further 	analysis of the 	symbolism 	and 	drawings of
the 	scheme, 	see 	William 	Curtis. 	'Modern 	Architecture.
Monumentality 	and 	the 	Meaning 	of Institutions: 	Reflections
on 	Authenticity', 	forthcoming 	in 	Harvard 	.Architectural
Review. 	1983. 	For extensive 	illustrations of Kahn's 	drawings,
see R. 	Giurgola 	and J. 	Mehta. 	Louis 	I. 	Kahn, 	Boulder. 	Col..
1975-
Chapter 	24. 	Architecture 	and 	Anti-Architecture
in 	England
p. 	317 	Motto: 	Peter Smithson. 	in 	Smithson 	(ed.l. 	Team 	ro
Primer, 	p. 	42.
English 	Architecture 	in 	Fifties: 	the 	most 	u.seful 	analyses 	of
this 	period 	are supplied 	by 	Jackson, 	The 	Pohtics of
Architecture, 	Banham. 	The 	New 	Brutalism. 	and Jencks,
Modern 	Movements, 	The pages of the 	Architectural 	Review
supply 	a 	fairly 	precise synopsis of the debates and concerns of
the decade,
Reyner 	Banham 	published 	an 	article entitled 	The 	New
Brutalism' 	in 	Architectural 	Review. 	December 	igss-
pp. 	355-62. 	It 	was 	an 	era 	in 	England 	which 	delighted 	in
'isms' 	(e.g.. 	the 	'New 	Empiricism'). 	For 	further analysis of
Hunstanton, 	see 	Philip Johnson. 	Comment on 	School 	at
Hunstanton 	Norfolk'. 	.Architectural 	Review. 	September 	1954.
pp. 	148-62: 	also 	A. 	and 	P. 	Smithson. 	'The 	New 	Brutalism'.
Architectural 	Review, 	April 	1954, 	pp. 	274-5.
Smithsons: 	for 	their relfections on 	'Urban 	Re-identification'
throughout 	the 	1950s, 	see series of articles 	in 	Architectural
design, 	republished 	in 	Ordinariness and Light.
p. 	319 	Rudolf Wittkower. 	the 	architectural 	historian, 	was
teaching 	at 	the 	Warburg 	Institute 	in 	the 	1940s 	and 	seems to
have 	influenced 	the 	theory, 	practice 	and 	historiography 	of
modern 	architecture. 	For 	example. 	Colin 	Rowe. 	his 	pupil,
applied 	similar 	methods 	and 	insights 	to 	Le Corbusier 	('The
Mathematics 	of the 	Ideal 	Villa', 	1947) 	as 	his 	mentor 	was
applying 	to 	Palladio 	at 	the 	same 	time: 	both 	were concerned
with 	the 	role of symbolic 	geometries 	in 	the expression 	of an
idealistic 	world 	view. 	Wittkower's 	book. 	Architectural
Principles 	in 	the 	.Age of Humanism, 	London. 	1949. 	seems to
have 	excited 	a 	Neo-Palladian 	obsession 	in 	some 	English
architectural 	circles. 	Architects 	were 	also 	quick 	to 	note
parallels 	between 	the 	harmonic 	proportions supposedly 	used
by 	Palladio 	and 	the 	mathematics 	employed 	in 	Le Corbusier's
Modulor. 	which 	became 	known 	in 	the early 	fifties. 	See H.
Millon, 	'Rudolf Wittkower. 	Architectural 	Principles in 	the Age
of Humanism: 	its 	Inlluence 	on 	the 	Development 	and
Interpretation 	of Modern 	Architecture', 	journal of the Society
of Architectural 	Historians. 	31. 	no. 	2. 	May 	19/2. 	pp. 	83-91.
Economist: 	for 	the 	role 	of the 	Smithsons' 	earlier 	urban
theories 	in 	this design, 	see 	Kenneth 	Frampton. 	'The
Economist 	and 	the Hauptstadt'. 	Architectural 	Design. 	1965.
pp. 	61-2. 	For the 	impact 	of picturesque 	aesthetic 	theories on
the 	arrangement, 	see 	Reyner 	Banham. 	'Revenge of the
Picturesque; 	EngUsh 	Architectural 	Polemics 	1945-65', 	in
J. Summerson 	(ed.). 	Concerrting Architecture, 	Baltimore.
1968. 	p. 	265.
p. 	320 	Robin 	Hood: 	for the 	architect's 	intentions see 	article
on 	scheme 	by 	Peter 	Smithson 	in 	Architecture d'aujourdhui.
January 	1979.
p. 	322 	Futurist 	Revival; 	This 	tag was 	in 	gossip 	circulation 	in
the 	London 	of the 	late 	1960s 	but 	the 	source 	is 	not certain.
However, 	it 	suggests the 	impact 	of Banham's 	'rediscovery' 	of
Futurism 	in 	Theory and Design 	in 	the 	Pirst 	Machine 	Age, 	and
his 	own 	'Neo-Futurist' 	arguments 	concerning 	the
progressive 	role 	of technology. 	Stirling's 	steel 	and 	glass
buildings 	in 	bold 	colours 	of the 	1 960s 	might 	almost 	be
illustrations of Sant' 	Ella's 	tract 	of 	1914. 	the 	'Messaggio'. 	In
presentations 	Stirling 	continued 	to 	argue the 	primacy of
programmatic 	logic 	in 	the 	genesis 	of his designs: 	in 	fact 	he
seems 	to 	have 	been 	involved 	in 	an 	eclectic 	commentary on
the 	imagery 	of earlier 	modern 	architecture. 	The 	overt
'mannerism' 	of his 	buildings of the 	1970s 	was operative 	in 	a
more 	subtle 	way 	many 	years 	earlier. 	For 	further discussion
of his sources see 	|. 	Jacobus. 	James Stirling. 	Buildings and
Projects. 	1950-79-4, 	New 	York. 	1975, 	introduction,
p. 	323 	James Stirling, 	'.Architect's 	.Approach 	to
Architecture'. 	'/Miiac 	16. 	Milan. 	1966, 	p. 	ifii.
Typology: 	for the 	influence of Pavilion 	Suisse 	on 	later

-- 403 of 420 --

402 	• 	Notes
university dormitories see 	W. 	Curtis. 'L'Universite. 	la 	viile et
I'habitat 	collectif. 	reflections sur 	un theme de 	I'architecture
moderne'. 	Anhithese. 	14. 	197s. 	P- 	2t). 	In 	the 	same 	article I
argued 	that 	university 	residences 	in 	the 	modern 	tradition
ha\ 	frequently 	been 	employed to demonstrate ideal
collective 	and 	urban 	proposals.
p. 	325 	Warren Chalk: 	Architecture as 	Consumer 	Product'.
The Japan 	AirhiUrt. 	i6S- 	197"- 	P- 	37. 	For further taste 	of
Archigram 	polemics, 	see 	Archigram 	/-/.V 	(published 	from
1 96 1 	to 	I 	9 70. 	London) 	and 	Peter Cook. 	Bxpcrimcnta!
Aniutertiire. 	London. 	1970.
p. 	326 	Thinkbelt: 	see C. 	Price. 	'Potteries Thinkbelt'.
Architectural 	Desifjii. 	Nov. 	1967. 	PP- 	S07 	IT.
p. 	327 	DenysLasdun:for 	a 	summary 	ol'his 	work 	and
philosophy 	ol' urban 	landscape see 	W. 	Curtis, 	'A 	Language
and 	a 	Theme', 	in 	D. 	Lasdun 	(ed. ). 	A 	Laiifliuuie and a 	Theme.
The 	Architecture of Dcnijs 	Lasihin 	ami partners. 	London. 	197b.
My 	sense of Lasdun's 	intentions 	is 	based 	on 	numerous
discussions 	with 	the 	architect 	from 	1 9f>9 	onwards.
p. 	329 	Dcnys 	Lasdun, 	'The 	Evolution 	of a 	Style'.
Ari7ii((Tt(ir(i/ 	Review. 	May 	I9f'9- 	It 	is 	hard 	to 	say exactly
when 	the term 	'strata' 	was 	tirst 	used 	by 	the 	architect 	to
convey 	his ideas about 	platforms. 	In 	the 	mid- 1 960s 	Lasdun
was 	much 	preoccupied 	with 	geological 	tissures 	and 	rock
formations. 	RaLsed 	urban 	levels 	were 	being 	discussed 	at 	the
time, 	particularly 	in 	Team 	X circles, 	with 	which 	Lasdun had
relatively 	slight 	contact. 	In 	any 	case, 	stratification 	was 	a
device 	basic 	to 	his 	own 	designs 	from 	the 	early 	1 9S()S
onwards, 	and 	the 	horizontal 	terraces 	allowed 	by concrete
cantilevering 	had 	caught 	his 	attention 	by 	the eariy 	1 9 30s
when 	he read 	Lc 	Corbusier's 	Vers 	une architecture. 	The word
'strata' 	should 	probably 	be taken 	as 	short-hand 	for 	an 	entire
philo.sophy. 	concerned 	with 	the 	reintegration 	of man. 	nature
and 	the city-
National Theatre: 	For Lasdun's 	intentions 	see 	'Building
Vistas/ 1
'. 	a 	conversation 	between 	Lasdun 	and 	Peter Hall, 	in
The 	Complete Guide 	to 	Britain's 	National Theatre, 	ed. 	j.
Goodwin. 	London, 	1977, 	p. 	25; 	also 	VV. 	Curtis. 	'Description'.
'Past 	Perspective'. 	'Criticism', in 	Architectural 	Review.
January 	1977. 	National Theatre Special 	Issue.
Chapter 	2S. 	The 	Problem 	of Regional 	Identity
p. 	33 	I 	Motto: 	Noboru 	Kawazoe. 	'Modern 	Architecture
Confronts 	l-'unctionalism. 	New 	Buildings of Japan'. 	Zodiac 	3.
Milan. 	19SS. 	pp. 	1 	17 	tf.
p. 	333 	Oscar 	Niemcyer: 	statement 	made 	in 	introduction 	to
S. 	Papadaki, 	The 	Workof Oscar Niemeijer. 	New 	York. 	19S";
see also 	P. 	L. 	Coodwin. 	Brazil 	Builds. 	New 	York, 	1943: 	Oscar
Niemeyer, 	Work in 	Progress. 	New 	York. 	i9sf>;H.R.
Hitchcock, 	Latin 	American 	Architecture. 	New 	York, 	1 9 s S-
Also, 	for a 	general 	overview, 	Benevelo. 	History of Modern
Architecture, 	vol. 	2. 	Ch. 	20. 	'The 	New 	International 	Field',
pp. 	74cS 	IT.
p. 	336 	Harry 	Seldler, 	Houses. 	Interiors and 	Projects. 	Sydney,
1 9S4. 	p. 	ix. 	For 	Paul 	Rudolph's criticisms of Seidler. 	see
•Regionalism 	in 	Architecture'. 	Perspecta. 	4. 	I9S7. 	P- 	' 	? 	For
general 	treatment 	of arrival 	of modern 	architecture 	in
Australia, 	see 	U. 	L. 	Johnson. 	Australian 	Architecture
1 90 1 -5 	I . 	Sources of Modernism. 	Sydney 	1 9>Sii. 	also 	the
numerous 	writings of Robin 	Boyd on 	the 	Au.stralian
environment.
Regionalism: 	for 	ideas 	behind houses 	in 	the 	Sydney 	area
rellecling a 	concern 	with 	place' 	and 	'identity', 	see Jennifer
Taylor. 	An 	Australian 	Identitfi, 	Houses for Siidney 	1953-63.
Sydney. 	1972.
P- 	337 	Japanese 	Modern 	Architecture: 	for the 	first 	half of the
20th 	century 	see 	A. 	Drexler. 	The 	Architecture of japan. 	New
York. 	I9SS. 	and 	for a 	modern 	architect's 	view of Japanese
tradition 	see 	Bruno Taut. 	Grundhnien 	japanischer 	.Architektur.
Tokyo. 	193s: 	translated 	as 	I'undanientals of Japanese
.Architecture in 	the same 	year. 	For 	more 	recent 	developments,
see 	M. 	Tafuri. 	L' Architettura 	nuxierna 	in 	Giappone. 	Bologna.
196s. 	and 	R. 	Boyd. 	New Directions 	in 	Japanese 	.Architecture.
New 	York. 	i9fiS.
p. 	339 	N. 	Kawazoe: 	for 	reflections on 	the 	analogies 	between
modern 	architecture 	and 	Japanese 	tradition 	see 	'Metabolism
i'. 	The 	japan 	Architect. 	44. 	Dec. 	1969. 	pp. 	191-8:
'Metabolism 	2: 	The 	Progress 	of Modern 	Architecture:
Architectural 	Values 	and 	Pragmatic 	Values', 	ibid.. 	Jan.
1970. 	pp. 	97-101 : 	also 	'Modern 	Architecture 	Confronts
Functionalism'. 	in 	which 	the 	author 	hinted 	at 	the difficulties
of creating 	an 	authentic 	architecture 	under a 	regime of neo-
colonialist 	American 	infiuence: 	It 	is 	a 	fact 	that 	in 	capitalist
society, 	concrete 	products 	are 	treated 	as abstract 	values. 	This
is the reason 	why 	modern 	architecture 	is 	inhuman 	and
denationized 	. 	.
.'
p. 	341 	Metabolism: 	Kikutake's statement 	is 	quoted 	in J.
Donat(ed.l, 	H'nrW.'lrc/iitcilHrc 	2, 	London, 	1965, 	p. 	13. 	See
also. 	K. 	N. 	Kurokawa. 	and 	K. 	Kikutake. 	Metabolism. 	Proposals
for a 	New 	Urhanism. 	Tokyo, 	1960, 	and 	Kurokawa,
'Metabolisin: 	the 	Pursuit 	of Open 	Form', 	in 	Donat 	(ed.).
World 	Architecture 	1. 	London 	I9b4.
p. 	342 	K. N. 	Kurokawa: 	'Two 	Systems 	of Metabolism'. 	The
lapan 	Architect. 	Dec. 	1967- 	P- 	'''"
Chapter 	2(1. 	Crises 	and 	Critiques 	in 	the 	1960s
p. 	344 	Motto: 	Robert 	Venturi. 	Complexitij 	and 	Contradiction
in 	Architectioe. 	New 	York. 	1 9bfi. 	p. 	id-
Third Generation: 	Throughout 	the 	19SOS 	Giedion 	attempted
to define 	the essence of a 	new 	post-war sensibility 	as
exemplified 	in 	the 	inheritors 	of the 	modern 	movement. 	Since
he 	thought 	of men 	like 	Perret 	and 	Behrens 	as 	pioneers, 	and
men 	like 	Le 	Corbusier 	and 	Gropius 	as 	the 	next 	stage, 	those
who 	came 	to 	maturity 	around 	1 9S()-fto 	were 	regarded 	as 	a
'third 	generation'. 	In 	an 	essay 	entitled 	'Spatial 	Imagination'.
1 9 S 7. 	Giedion 	referred 	to the concrete 	vaulting 	techniques
of Catalano 	and 	llfzon 	as evidence of a 	new 	dimension 	to 	the
'space-time' 	conception 	at 	the 	heart of modern 	architecture;
this 	he 	compared 	to 	the 	vaulting 	and 	grand 	interior spaces of
Roman 	antiquity. 	He expanded 	his 	rctlections on 	recent
world 	architecture 	in 	the 	introduction 	to 	the 	19(12 	edition 	of
.S>icf, 	Time ami Architecture, 	where 	he 	included Tange. 	and
spoke of a 	new 	consciousness 	binding 	the traditions of East
and 	West. 	He 	also 	pointed 	to 	an emergent 	civic
monumentality 	and 	a 	synthesis of the 	rational 	and 	the
organic. 	Jorn 	lltzon 	became 	the 	hero of the 	third 	phase 	in 	an
article vmtten 	in 	19(12- ^ 	entitled 	'J0rn 	lltzon 	and 	the 	Third
Generation', 	eventually 	published 	in 	the 	1 9(17 edition 	of
Space. 	Time and 	Architecture. 	Presumably 	Drew 	took 	his 	book
title 	from 	this 	source.
p. 	345 	Two 	Decades 	.\fter 	War: 	Giedion's 	and 	Benevelo's
fragmentary 	accounts 	arc 	filled 	out 	somewhat 	by 	J. 	Jacobus.
Twentieth 	Centtirii 	Architecture: 	The 	Middle 	Years 	1 940-65.
New 	York. 	1 9(1(1. 	and 	J. 	Joedicke. 	Architecture Since 	1 945.
London and 	Stuttgart. 	1 9(19. 	Drew's 	Third Generation 	is
useful 	for some 	aspects 	of the 	1 960s. 	Otherwise the series.

-- 404 of 420 --

Notes 	403
New Directions in 	Architecture, 	published 	by Braziller 	in 	the
late 	196ns 	(e.g.. 	New 	Directions 	in 	Swiss 	Architecture . 	. 	. 	in
British 	Arcltitecture 	. 	. 	. 	in 	Itulian 	Architecture, 	etc. I. 	is 	most
useful. 	See 	also G. E. 	Kidder Smith, 	TIte 	New Architecture of
Europe. 	New 	York, 	i yd 1
.
p. 	346 	Historicism in 	Italy: 	for 	an 	incisive 	critique see 	R.
Banham. 	'Neoliberty. 	the 	Italian 	Retreat 	from 	Modern
Architecture'. 	Archilectunil 	Review. 	12 s. 	April 	I4S4.
pp. 	230- s-
p. 	347 	Aide 	Van 	Eyck: 	in 	Smithson 	(ed.l. 	Team 	to 	Primer.
p. 	4 	;. 	For 	further clues 	concerning 	this 	artist's 	remarkable
insights 	see: 	'Labyrinthine 	Clarity', 	in 	1. 	Donat 	(ed.). 	World
.Architecture 	3. 	London. 	lyfifi. 	pp. 	121-22: 	and 	'Interior
Time/A 	Miracle 	in 	Moderation'. 	Meanimt 	in 	Architecture {ed.
Jencks. 	Bairdl. 	London. 	1969. 	pp. 	i 	71 	IT.
p. 	348 	Superstudio: 	see 	A. 	Natalini. 	'Description of the
Micro-Event 	. 	.
.'. 	E. 	Ambasz 	(ed.l. 	Italy: 	The New Domestic
Liindscape. 	New 	York, 	1 972. 	p. 	242.
p. 	549 	American 	Architecture 	1960s: 	for 	a 	useful 	if
polemical 	survey, 	see 	R. M. 	Stern. 	New Directions in American
Architecture. 	New 	York, 	1969. 	Stern's outlook seems 	to show
the 	influence 	of Venturis 	theories.
Paramilitary 	Dandyism: 	see 	V. 	Scully, 	American 	.{rcltitecturc
and 	Urbauisni. 	New 	York. 	1969. 	p. 	200.
p. 	3 5 1 	Venturi: 	Co/iip/c.viti/ and 	Contradiction, 	pp. 	23. 	104:
see 	also 	R. 	Venturi, 	D. 	Scott-Brown, 	S, 	Izenour. 	iearninii from
Las 	Vegas. 	Cambridge. 	Mass.. 	1972.
p. 	3 52 	Venturi. 	Complexitfi and Contradition. 	p. 	1 	1 8 : 	p. 	1 	1 6
:
pp. 	4 3-44-
p. 	354 	New 	York 	5: 	see 	Eisenman 	led.). 	Five 	.Architects.
Twenties as Classic 	Age: 	once 	again 	one 	senses 	the influence
of a 	historian 	on 	practioners: 	Graves's 	'mannerist' 	exercises
on 	the elements 	of an 	earlier 	tradition 	illustrate, 	in some
degree, 	the 	insights of Colin 	Rowe 	in 	'Mannerism 	and
Modern 	Architecture'. 	Architectural 	Review. 	11)7. 	May 	19S".
pp. 	2S9 	IT. 	Rowe 	hinted 	at 	parallelisms 	between 	the 	shapes 	of
the 	modern 	and 	the 	Renaissance 	traditions. 	Perhaps 	the
New 	York 	s 	imagined 	themselves 	as so 	many 	latterday
Vasaris 	and 	Giulio 	Romanos 	twisting the 	'normative'
statements of an 	earlier 	Classic 	age into 	new 	and 	perverse
patterns ?
Chapter 	27. 	Modern 	Architeeture 	and
Developing 	Countries 	since 	i960
p. 	356 	Motto: 	Hassan 	Fathy. 	.Architecture for tlw 	Poor, 	an
Experiment 	hi 	Rural 	Efmpt. 	Chicago. 	1973. 	p. 	19. 	Most 	of the
reflections 	made 	in 	this chapter 	grow 	from 	first-hand
obsen'ation. 	.'\n 	entire 	world 	history 	needs to 	be 	written
which 	examines 	the 	impact, 	region 	by 	region, 	of colonialism,
industrialization 	and 	rapid 	change on 	architecture. 	The
existing 	historiography 	of 	1 	9th- 	and 	20th-century
architecture 	and 	building 	continues 	to 	reflect 	a 	Western 	bias,
p. 	357 	Modern 	Regionalism: 	Some 	valuable strategies 	were
suggested 	in 	the 	19SOS 	by, 	for example, 	J. 	L. 	Sert 	in 	housing
for South 	America, 	and 	Maxwell 	Fry 	and 	|ane 	Drew 	for 	West
Africa: 	see 	Tropical .Architecture. 	New 	York, 	I9S6 	and 	Village
Housing 	in 	the 	Tropics. 	London. 	19 S3 	by 	Fry 	and 	Drew.
Fathy. 	.Architecture 	for 	tlw 	/'ixir. 	p. 	24.
p. 	358 	Komanticization 	of peasants: 	for further 	discussion 	of
peasantism 	and 	nationalism 	sec 	W. 	Curtis. 	'Type 	and
Variation: 	Berber 	Collective 	Dwellings of the 	Northwestern
Sahara', 	to 	appear in 	Muciarnas. 	i , 	New 	Haven, 	in 	1 982. 	The
same article examines 	the 	gradual 	modification of
vernacular types over a 	century of rapid change.
Self-build 	Housing: 	see J. 	F. 	Turner, 	Housing 	Bfi 	People.
Towards 	.Aiitononui 	in 	Building 	Environments. 	London. 	1976.
for 	a critique of housing concepts 	imposed 	from 	above, 	and
for an 	evaluation 	of self-built 	structures.
Barriadas: 	In 	1967 	the 	Peruvian 	government 	approached
the 	Lnited 	Nations 	Developinent 	Programme 	for support of
'PRE\T 	(Proyecta 	Experimental de 	Vivienda). 	Notable
international 	architects 	were 	invited 	to 	submit 	low-cost
proposals 	for 	infrastructures 	which 	could 	be completed by
the 	users. 	Among those 	involved 	were 	.Maki. 	Stirling 	and
Van 	Hyck. 	Typically, 	the 	last-named 	attempted 	to respond 	to
the 	life 	and 	form 	patterns 	of the 	pre-existing 	Barriadas. 	(The
government 	had 	tried 	previously 	to 	remove these.) 	See
.Arcliitectural 	Design, 	.'\pril 	1970. 	pp. 	187 	IT. : 	also 	W. 	Mangin.
'Urbanisation 	Case 	History in 	Peru'. 	.Architectural 	Design.
August 	196 3. 	pp. 	^66-70. 	Possibly 	the 	'PREVI' 	programme
was 	influenced 	by Turner's 	theories: 	he 	worked 	in 	Peru 	in
the 	late 	fifties 	and 	early 	sixties. 	For 	another 	housing 	theory
based 	on 	the 	idea 	of a 	fixed 	infrastructure 	and 	variable
components 	(in 	this 	instance 	for 	industrialized 	nationsi, 	see
N. 	J. 	Habraken. 	Supports: 	.An 	.Alternative 	to 	Mass 	Housing.
New 	York, 	1972.
p. 	359 	Z. 	Plocki: 	Towards a 	Mehmesian 	Style of Architecture.
Institute of Papua-New Guinea Studies. 	Boroko. 	197s.
p. 	22.
p. 	360 	B. 	V. 	Doshi 	and 	C. 	Correa: 	for something of Doshi's
philosophy 	see 	'The 	Proliferating 	City 	and Communal 	Life:
India'. 	Ekistics. 	25. 	Feb. 	1968. 	pp. 	67-9: 	for Correa 	see. 	for
example. 	.Arclhtecture 	in 	Hot 	Dry 	Chmates. 	1973.
p. 	361 	lean 	Francois Zevaco: 	for 	brief treatment 	of his early
works 	see 	Udo 	Kultermann. 	New 	Directions 	in 	.African
Architecture. 	New 	Y'ork. 	1 969. 	p. 40. 	The 	Agadir 	housing
was 	given 	an 	Aga 	Khan 	award 	in 	1980: 	see 	Aga 	Khan 	Award
for Architecture 	(brochure). 	Geneva 	and 	Philadelphia, 	1980.
p. 	364 	Smithsons: 	see 	'Pahlavi 	National 	Library'.
.Architectural 	Review. 	164. 	Aug. 	1978. 	pp. 	79-8S.
p. 	365 	Pan-Islamic 	Sentiments: 	see. 	for 	example. 	S, 	H. 	Nasr.
'The Contemporary 	Muslim 	and 	the 	Architectural
Transformation 	of the 	Urban 	Environment 	of the 	Islamic
World'. 	Proceedings of lite .Aga 	Klian 	.Awardfor .Arcliitecture. 	1.
Philadelphia. 	197S. 	The subtitle of the 	proceedings 	was:
'Toward 	An 	Architecture 	in 	the Spirit 	of Islam'. 	Some of the
intellectual 	and 	historical 	difficulties 	lurking 	in 	this
formulation 	were raised 	by 	other participants. 	For 	an
incisive study of problems of cultural 	identity 	in 	the 	Middle
East, 	see 	Abdullah 	I.aroui. 	Tlw 	Crisis of the 	Arab 	Intellectuals:
Traditionalism or 	Historicism-'. 	trans. 	Cammell. 	Berkely,
1976.
China: 	see 	j. 	L. 	Cohen, 	'Museums in 	the Service of
Revolution'. 	Art 	News. 	Summer 	1980. 	pp. 	80 ff.
Chapter 	28. 	The 	Traditions 	of Modern
Architecture 	in 	the 	Recent 	Past
p. 	367 	Motto: 	Aldo 	Van 	Eyck: 	The 	Interior of Time'. 	Jencks
and 	Baird 	(eds.). 	Meaning 	in 	Architecture. 	New 	York. 	1969,
p. 	171.
Rejection 	of .Absolutism: 	this 	seems to 	have 	worked 	on 	a
number of levels. 	One 	thinks of the 	popularization 	of the
ideas of Ivan 	Illich 	(e.g.. 	De-schooling Society) 	and 	Karl 	Popper
(e.g., 	The 	Open 	Society and its 	Enemies I : 	of the 	increasing

-- 405 of 420 --

404 	• 	Notes
scepticism 	about the dominant 	values of Western 	industrial
nations: 	of the increased 	respect 	for architectural
vernaculars 	(Bernard 	Rudofsky's 	Architecture 	Without
Architects. 	1964. 	must 	be counted 	a 	cult 	book); 	of a
pervasive distrust 	of cultural 	elites 	in 	the so-called 	'counter-
culture' 	of the 	late 	iqfios: 	and so on.
p. 	368 	Crisis: 	for example. 	M. 	MacEwen. 	Crisis in
Arcliitectiire. 	London. 	1974. 	For a 	more probing critique, 	this
time of the avant-garde 	and 	from 	a 	somewhat confused
Marxist 	standpoint, 	see 	M. 	Tafuri. 	Architecture ami 	Utopia:
Design and Capitalist 	Development. 	Cambridge. 	Mass., 	197(1,
For the 	gradual erosion 	of closed 	frameworks 	of aesthetic
reference see. for example. 	Leo 	Steinberg. 	Other Criteria. 	New
York. 	1 972, 	From 	the early 	1 470s 	onwards 	the 	glossy 	art
and 	architectural 	magazines 	arc 	full 	of the 	'crises of
modernism'. 	The 	rejected 	'modernism' 	usually 	turns out 	to
be 	an 	amalgam 	of opinions 	about 	art 	from earlier magazines,
p. 	369 	Radical Critiques of Planning: 	see, 	for example, 	the
ideas of John 	Turner cited 	in 	the notes to 	the 	last 	Chapter;
also 	M, 	Pawley, 	Architecture 	Versus 	Housii}(!. 	New 	York,
1 97 1, 	and 	[acobs. 	The 	Death 	and IJfe of Great 	American 	Cities.
Byker: 	for the 	design 	process 	and 	intentions of the 	scheme
see 	Architectural Design. 	November-December 	19 74- 	special
issue on 	Ralph 	Erskine.
p. 	370 	Vernacular 	Revival: 	for 	a 	sample of pop sociology
combined 	with 	the 	myth 	of a 	grass-roots 	architectural
expression, 	see Conrad 	Jameson. 	'Modern 	Archirecture 	as
An 	Ideology'. 	Architectural .Association 	Quarterhi. 	October-
December 	197 V 	It 	is curious 	how 	the 	arguments 	in 	favour
of a 	'heimatstir 	in 	opposition 	to 	an 	abstract, 	alienated 	form
of dwelling 	(i.e.. 	the 	one 	supposedly 	produced 	by 	modern
architecture) 	recur 	in 	different 	ideological 	guises 	over 	the
past 	sixty years.
Rossi: 	the 	passage 	may 	be 	found 	in 	'An 	Analogical
Architecture'. 	.A + 	U. 	May 	1976. 	p. 	74; 	for the 	architect's
urban 	theories see 	L' Architettnru dell citta. 	Padova. 	1 966. 	For
a 	far 	from 	dispassionate treatment 	of Rossi 	see 	R. 	Moneo,
'Aldo 	Rossi; 	the Idea 	of Architecture 	and 	the Modena
Cemetery'. 	Oppositions ^. 	Summer 	1976. 	pp. 	1-30.
p. 	371 	Foster: 	see T. 	Nakamura. 	'Foster 	and Associates'.
A + 	U. 	September 	197s. 	particularly 	the 	essay 	by 	R.
Banham.
p. 	372 	Centraal 	Beheer: 	see 	A, 	Colquhoun, 	'Centraal
Beheer'. 	Arcltitecture 	Plus. 	September-October 	1974.
pp. 	49-54. 	For a 	sample of Hertzberger's 	ideas, 	see 	'Place.
Choice and 	Identity'. 	W'orW Arc/i/t(rfi;r('4, 	London, 	19^17.
pp. 	74 	IT.
p. 	373 	European 	Investment 	bank: 	see 	Lasdun 	(ed.). 	,-1
Luiguage and 	.A 	Theme. 	London. 	1 976. 	for an 	earlier stage of
the 	design, 	and 	brief statement 	of intention.
p. 3 74 	Post-Modern: 	see 	C. 	jencks. 	The 	Rise of a 	Post-
Modern 	Architecture', 	in 	.Architectural Association 	Quarterhi,
October-December 	1 97 s. 	for 	a 	trial 	run 	of the 	ideas 	he 	later
published 	as 	his 	book 	The 	Language of Post-Modern
Architecture.
Beaubourg: 	for an 	exceptionally 	generous criticism 	of a
problematic 	work 	see 	R. 	Banham, 	'The 	Pompidolium -
Criticism', 	Architectural 	Review. 	May 	1977. 	pp. 	277 	ff.
p. 	376 	(ietty 	Museum: 	in 	his 	book 	on 	Post-Modern
architecture jencks 	illustrates 	the building on 	p. 	8 	i 	and 	gives
'Dr. 	Norman 	Neuerburg et 	al' 	credit 	for 	its 	design. 	Langdon
and 	Wilson 	and 	Stephen 	Garrett 	also 	had 	a 	role. 	Jencks 	gives
the building extensive coverage.
Post-Modcrnism and 	Linguistic Analogies: see. for example.
Jencks's criticism 	of Hertzberger and 	Van 	Eyck: 	'. 	. 	. 	let 	me
make 	clear that 	I 	Hnd 	Hertzberger's 	and 	Van 	Eyck's
statements 	about 	identity 	very 	relevant 	and 	sympathetic.
And. 	to 	introduce 	a 	personal element. 	I 	have 	supported 	them
in 	the 	past 	as 	I 	have 	the 	modern 	movement 	in 	general. 	Why
the 	break 	now } 	because 	the thought 	patterns 	of this
movement 	(or movements) 	haven't 	moved 	fast 	enough 	to
incorporate 	theoretical 	changes 	from 	sociology, 	semiology
and 	anthropology. 	. 	. 	. 	The 	architect 	still 	believes 	he 	is
providing 	universal 	identity 	with 	his 	articulated 	forms 	when
he 	is 	really 	just 	giving 	identity 	within 	his 	own 	limited,
historical code and one 	not 	shared 	by 	the 	majority of his
architectural 	clients. 	. 	.
.' 	Later, 	referring to 	Bakema's
buildings 	with 	their 	'traditional 	modern 	architect's code'
:
'Why. 	if he 	is 	really 	interested 	in 	identity, 	would 	he 	not use
historical codes. 	Dutch 	gables, 	or even 	plastic 	Corinthian
columns.'' 	(Both 	statements 	from; 	"The 	Rise 	of a 	Post-
Modern 	Architecture'.) 	The 	argument 	recalls 	the 	traditional
'realist' 	criticism 	of 20th-century 	'abstraction' 	in 	that 	it
disallows 	general 	communication 	because of a 	break with
traditional 	conventions, 	and echoes 	E. 	Gombrich 	in 	'The
Vogue 	of .Abstract 	Art'. 	Meditations on a 	Hohhij 	Horse. 	Oxford.
1963. 	p. 	145. 	However, 	architecture communicates 	through
many 	other 	means 	than 	imagery, 	and 	it 	remains to 	be 	seen
whether the 	addition 	of plastic columns 	will 	make 	for 	a
'publicly 	understood' 	architecture, 	let 	along one 	possessing
visual 	qualities of the 	sort 	that 	buildings 	must 	have 	if they
are 	to transcend 	the conventions within 	which 	they 	are
conceived.
p. 	377 	Revisionist Tendencies: 	attempts 	at 	ideological
criticism 	have 	not 	been 	the exclusive 	property 	of left-wing
critics. 	See. 	forexainple. 	Watkin. 	Morahtg and Arcititecture.
Oxford. 	1977. 	for 	right-wing. 	p. 	lis: 	'Our conclusion 	is that
an 	art-historical 	belief in 	the 	all-embracing 	Zeitgeist.
combined 	with 	a 	historicist 	emphasis on 	progress 	and 	the
necessary 	superiority 	of novelty, 	has come 	dangerously 	close
to 	undermining, 	on 	the one 	hand, 	our appreciation 	of the
imaginative 	genius of the 	individual 	and. 	on 	the 	other, 	the
importance 	of arti.stic 	tradition.' 	For the 	severe 	limitations of
Watkin's 	rather caricatured 	version 	of 'modern
architecture', 	see 	my 	review 	of Watkin's 	book 	in 	lonrnalof
Society 	oj 	Architectural 	Historians. 	3cS. 	October 	1 979,
pp. 	VU 	ff-
p. 	378 	Figure/Ground: 	this 	method 	of urban 	analysis 	seems
traceable 	to Colin 	Rowe. 	Stirling's one-time 	mentor. See
below. 	'Collage City'. 	The 	concept 	of 'bricolagc' 	(derived 	from
Levi-Strauss on 	the 	'savage 	mind' I 	is 	also 	traceable 	to 	Rowe.
and 	reflects an 	interest 	in 	composition 	from 	pre-existing
stylistic, 	typological 	and 	urban 	'fragments'.
p. 	379 	Graves: 	for 	his 	gradual 	transition 	from 	a
mannerization 	of 	1 92()s sources to 	a 	mannerization 	of
1920s 	and 	late 	iSth-century sources, 	see 	.Arcliitectural
Design. 	Architectural 	Monographs, 	no. 	s. 	1979. 	For a 	stab 	at
the 	increasing 	introversion 	of the 	American 	architectural
world 	of the 	1 970s. 	sec 	M. 	Tafuri. 	'Architecture 	dans 	le
boudoir; 	The 	Language 	of Criticism 	and 	the Crisis of
Language'. 	Oppositions 	i. 	May 	1974. 	pp. 	37-62.
Consumerism: 	one critic 	to suggest 	links 	between 	facile
stylism 	and 	the 	glibness of consuiner 	packaging 	is 	Kenneth
Frampton. 	an 	editor of Oppositions 	magazine, 	a 	forum 	of new
tendencies.
p. 	382 	Kricrs: 	see 	R. 	Krier. 	Stadtrawn 	in 	Thcoric 	and 	Praxis.
Stuttgart. 	197s. 	and 	L. 	Krier. 	Reconstruction 	oj 	the 	I'.uropean
City. 	Brussels. 	1978.

-- 406 of 420 --

Acknowledgements 	40
s
Collage City: 	Like Gotnbrich 	;ind 	Colqiihoiin 	('Typology 	and
Design 	Method' I, 	Rowe 	was clearly 	infkienced 	by 	the 	ideas of
Popper on 	the 	role ol' pre-existing 	theories 	and 	of deduction
on 	invention 	(viz. 	Tlw 	Liyic ol 	Sck'iitifii' 	/fccmrn/K 	in this
instance 	as 	a 	critique 	ol'the 	'functionalist' 	proposition 	that
form 	may 	'follow' 	from 	function. 	However, 	in 	the 	wrong
hands 	an 	obsession 	with 	'schemata' 	may 	end 	up 	in 	a 	facile
game 	played 	with 	inherited 	images 	and 	fragments. 	See 	also 	|.
Silvetti. 	'The 	Beauty 	of Shadows'. 	Oppositions 	9. 	Summer
i977.PP-44ff-
p. 	385 	A. 	Van 	Eyck: 	'The 	Interior of Time'.
Conclusion
p. 	386 	Modo: 	Heinrich 	VVolttlin. 	Priiuipks of Art 	Historij. 	The
Prohlciu 	oftlie 	Dewiopnient 	of Stale 	in 	IMi'r Art. 	trans. 	M.
Hottinger, 	New 	York, 	1950. 	p. 	1 	1.
p. 	388 	.Andre 	Malraiix: 	The 	Voices of Silence, 	trans. 	S. 	Gilbert.
New 	York. 	19s 	^ 	p. 	281.
Muthesius; 	'Wostehen 	wir.''. 	191 	1.
Unity 	In 	the 	Accomplished 	Work: 	I'rank 	Lloyd 	Wright 	had
this to 	say 	in 	1 9 S4 	I 	''ic 	\atural 	House): 	'Every house 	worth
considering as 	a 	work 	of art 	must 	have 	a 	grammar of its
own. 	"Grammar", 	in 	this sense, 	means 	the 	same thing 	in
any 	construction 	whether 	it 	be 	of words 	or of .stone 	or
wood. 	It 	is 	the shape-relationship 	between 	the 	various
elements 	that 	enter 	into 	the 	constitution 	of the 	thing. 	The
"grammar" 	of the 	house 	is 	its 	manifest 	articulation 	of all 	its
parts. 	This 	will 	be the 	"speech" 	it 	uses. 	. 	. 	. 	Everything has a
related 	articulation 	in 	relation 	to 	the 	whole 	and 	all 	belongs
together: 	looks 	well 	together because 	all 	together 	are
speaking 	the 	same 	language. 	If one 	part 	of your house spoke
Choctaw, 	another 	French, 	another 	English, 	and 	another
some 	sort 	of gibberish, 	you 	would 	have 	what 	you 	mostly
have 	nou' 	- 	not 	a 	\-ery 	beautiful 	result. 	Thus, 	when 	you 	do
adopt 	the 	"grammar" 	of your house - 	it 	will 	be 	the way the
house 	is 	to 	be 	"spoken 	". 	"uttered 	". 	You 	must 	he 	consistently
grammatical 	for 	it 	to 	be 	understood 	as a 	work 	of Art'.
Le Corbiisier: 	Towards a 	\ew Arehiteetiire. 	pp. 	27 	IT.
Acknowledgements
Copyright 	A.C.I., 	Brussels 2.3. 	2,4. 	2.5; Aeronautica 	.Militare-Doc, e
A,P, 	lfi,lll: 	Albertina. Vienna. 	Loos-archiv 	2.19; Alekan. 	Paris 2.6;
Wayne Andrews 4.1 	1 	; 'I'he Art'hitects Collaborative Inc. (photo
Robert 	Damora I 	19.1. 	1 9.2; Ove 	Arup 22,1 0, 	22,11:
Architectenburo Herman 	Hertzberger 28,4. 	2S,5 	(C 	Aerophoto
Shipholl; The ,'\rchilects' 	lournal 	1 	7.7; Courtesy ofThe Art 	institute
of Chicago h.\S: Atelier 	5 	21.11: 	Australian 	Information 	.Service
28.4; 	MorleyBaer 2(1.12; 	Daniel 	Bartush 	2 7.9; 	Bauhaus-archiv 	5.h.
5.7.5.9.9.2.9.3.9.4.9.10,9.12.9.14.9.15. 	11.5.13.9. 	I 	i. 13: Tim
Benton2.13.2,lft. 	3,7, 	5,2, 	5,4, 	9,lft.9,17. 	12,8, 	13,2, 	14,3.16,8,
lh,ll, 	17,4, 	18,l,24,7,2h,2,28.1;RaccoltaBertarelli, 	Milan 	5.1 	5:
Ted 	Bickford 28.1 2; 	Bildarchiv 	Koto Marburg 	Ihl 	; 	Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbesitz 2 3.3; 	D, Biliington 	3,12; 	Breeht-Kinzig Ltd
24, S, 	24,6; 	British 	Museum; 	by courtesy of the Trustees, 	2,1; 	Busch-
Relsinger Museum, 	Cambridge. 	Mass. 	Harvard 	University. 	9.1 	1
;
Geremy 	Butler 	1 .4. 	3.4. 	3,6,6,7,6.15,9.1, 	1 	1.12, 	12.1, 	12,1 	1,
21,4; Caisse Nationale des Monuments Historiqueset des Sites 	1,5.
28.2 ; G, 	Candilis 2 1 ,6 ; Giancarlo de Carlo 21,10; Chicago 	Tribune
11.2, 	11,3, 	11,4, 	11,5, 	1 1, 6 ;CivicoMuseoStoricoG. 	Garibaldi.
Como 	5.14. 	5.15. 	5.16; 	Peter Cook. 	Archigram 	( 19641 	24.9;
Country Life 	18.7; Courtauldlnstituteof Art 	13.10. 	17.6. 	17.8:J.A.
Cox pp. 	256-7: Dennis Crompton. 	24.9; 	William Curtis 2.7. 	3.5. 	3.8.
4.6.4.7. 	4.8. 	6. 1.6. 2.6. S. 6. 1 2. 	6.1 	3.6.16.6.17, 	11.8. 	11.9.
1 	1.16. 	11.17. 	13.4. 	1 	5.5. 	14.4. 	14.7. 	16.1 	3. 	17.2. 	17.5. 	18.6. 	19.4.
19.8.20.8.20.14.21.14.22.8.2 3.2.24.3.24.12.26.8.28.16.
28.19. 	PIates2-7. 	9. 	10. 	12, 	1 	3, 	frontispiece; 	Danske Arkitektens,
Copenhagen. 	18,8: Dienst Verspriede Rijkscollection 	Den 	tlaag
1 7.1 	1 	; 	Douglas Dickens 2 5.6; John 	Donat 	28,5,28,11; 	B,V, 	Doshi,
27,6; Ray Games 	19,6; Stephen 	Kstock 	26,10, 	26,1 	1 	; Mary Hvans
Picture Library 	3,2; 	Foster Associates. 	Architects and Hngineers
28.3; 	Lionel Freedman. New 	York 23.6; Joseph Giovannini 	14.6;
Glasgow School of Art 	2.14. 	2.1 	5. 	Plate 	1 	; 	Michael Graves, 	architect.
26.1 	3. 	28.12;courte.sy of the Greater London 	Council, 	Department of
Architecture and Civil Design 	18,1 	1 	; Guggenheim 	Museum 	19,1 	3.
19,14; 	Harvard 	University 	18,5; 	Hedrich-Blessing 	3,3, 	9.7, 9.8, 9.9,
15,2, 	28.7; Heinrich Helfenstein, '/iirich 	28.2; Keld Helmer-Petersen,
Copenhagen 28,18; 	Lucien 	Herve, Fondation 	Le Corbusier.'SPADEM
14.8, 	14.9. 	15.8. 	15.9. 	15.10. 	15.12. 	15.14. 	19.12.20.1.
20.3-20.6.20.10.20.15,20,15,21,1-21.4,21,9,22,3,2 3,1.2 5,2;
Japan Architect Co, Ltd, 	2 5, 1 0, 	25, 1 	5, 	28,5 ; 	K, 	R, Jarrett 	12,15;
Sharad 	Jhaveri, Zurich 	27,5; 	R,N, Johnson 	25.5; courtesy Johnson
Wax 	1 	5,4 	1 	5.7 Albert Kahn 	Associates. 	Architects & 	Kngineers.
Detroit 	3.1 	1 ; 	Anthony Kcrsting 	2.8. 4.1 . 	4.2. 4.3. 4.5. 	16.2. 	17.1:
Kimliell Museum. 	28.9. 	Plate 	16; 	KLM 	Aerocarto 	12.4; 	l£on Krier
28.1 5; 	Krolier-.VIiiller 	Ri)ksmuseum. Otterlo 	7.2: 	Kunstmnseum.
Basel 	7.1: 	Ladies Home Journal 	6. 3 ; 	Denys Lasdun 	21.8. 	24.1 	1
,
24,1 	3.24,14, 	27,1 2, 	28.6; 	M,Lin_dsay. 28,14; Christopher Little
(Aga 	Khan 	Foundation! 27,2, 27.7, 27.8. 	Plate 	1 5; Loewy
International Ltd 	1 8.4; ,MAS. 	Barcelona 2.9. 	2. 10. 	2. 1 	1 . 	2. 12. pp.
11 	12;LaurinMcCracken26.15;RobertK.Matesl9.13. 	19.14;
Ricardo Moncalvo. 'torino 26.1 	; 	David Moore. Sydney 2 5.5: 	Museum
of Finnish 	Architecture 	1 7.9- 	1 	7. 1 5. 	22.2-22.5. 	22.7. Plate 	1 1
:
Collection, the Museum of Modern 	.^rt. 	New 	York 	5.1 2. 6.4. 6.6.
6.14.8.4. 	11.15. 	1 	1.18: 	National 	Monuments Record 	18.3;
Nederlands Documentatie-centrum 	voor de Bouwkunst. 	Amsterdam
7.6, 	7,7, 	7.8. 	7.9. 	12.10-12.1 	3; 	New York Historical Society 	1 1.7:
BrendaNorrisl.2. 	1.3.1.6.2.2,3,3, 	3,10. 	3.1 	3, 	3.14, 	6,1 1. 	1 1,1.
16,5, 	26.4; 	Novosti 	Press Agency 	10.3-10.12. 	10.14-10.18. 	13.6:
Paul()ckrassa2l.l 	3; Open 	I'niversity 	5.1 	1 . 	7.4. 	7.5. 	7.14. 	13.11,
14.5; 	Papua New Guinea 	University ofTechnoIogy 27.4; 	Phokion
Karas and Sert, Jackson and Gourley Associates 	21,12; George Pohl,
Philadelphia 	2 3,11; Publifoto Notizie, Milano 26,3; 	R,1,B,A, 	1 ,4, 	3, 3.
3.4. 	3.6.6.7.6.15.9,1, 	11,12, 	12,1, 12,1 	1, 	23,9, 	25,1 	3; Retoria,
Tokyo 25, 1 2; Gordon Roberton (A,C, Cooper! 	1 4,2, 	14, 10; Kevin
Roche, 	John Dinkeloo and .Associates 26.7; 	Royal .Academy. London
9.1 	5; 	.\. 	Salas 	I^ortugal 	2 5,1 	; Sandak, 	Inc, 	11,11; Scandinavian
Airline S\steni 	22,1; 	Joseph 	H, Seagram & Sons, 	Inc. 	1 9.9 ; 	Harry
Seidler i!i 	.Associates 2 5.3; 	Mona 	Serageldin 	27.3; Julius Shulman
4.9:4.12. 	11.13. 	1 	1 ,14. 28.9, 	28, 10, pp. 	102-5 	iCarlos von
Frankenbergl; 	U'.H. Sims 	1 5. 3; 	Alison and 	Peter Smithson 	21.7.
24.2, 24,4, 	27,10; Stedelijk Museum, 	Amsterdam 	7,10, 	7,1 2, 	7,1 5;
James Stirling & 	Partners 24,8, 	24,1 	1 	; Ed Stoecklein 	28,1 	3; 	Franz
Stoedlncr, 	Diisscldorf. 	5.1. 	5.10: 	Ezra Stoller 	19.5.2 3.5. 	26.9; Todd
Stuart 	20.16; Swedish Museum of .Architecture 	18.9;ToshioTaira
2 5.10, 	2S,5;KenzoTange 	1 	5,9, 	2 5,1 	1, 25, 14; Toledo Museum of
Art 	1,1 	;UllsteinBilderdienst, 	Berlin 	12,9, 	16,5, 	16,4, 	16,6; United
Nations 	1 9,1 	1 	; 	University of Glasgow 4,4; 	X'enturi, 	Kauch 	and Scott
Brown 	26,10, 	26.1 	1 	; 	Victoria & Albert Museum 	Photographic Studio
1.2. 	1.5, 	1,6,2,2, 	3.1. 	3.10. 	3.13. 	3.14.4.10.6.11. 	16.5.26.4:
Jorgen 	VVatz 	18.8; Western 	Pennsylvania Conservancy 	1 	5.1 	(Bill
iledrich!. 	15.2. 	15.3 	(VV.H. Simsl. 	Plate 8 	(H. Corsinil; 	Kurt Wyss
2 5.12; 	Xinhua News .Agency 	27.1 	1 	; Minoru 	Yamasaki & associates
27.9; 	F.R. 	Yerbury 2.1 7. 	2.18. 	5.9. 	8.8, 8,9, 	8,1 	3. 	8.16. 	9.6. 	12.5.
13.1. 	18.2

-- 407 of 420 --

Index
Aalto. 	Alvar 	( 	1898-1976). 	196. 	22^. 	229-^^.
2 	u- 	24 ? 	2S8. 	270. 	291, 	296-302. 	HS.
368. 	378. 	380. 	387. 	388
Baker 	House. 	297-8. 	323. 	370. 	22.2
IJelphi. 	Sketch 	of. 	22.6
Mount 	Angel 	College 	Library. 	299
Maison 	Carree. 	304
Otaniemi 	Institute of Technology. 	300. 	22.^. 	22.
Paimio Sanatorium. 	221, 230. 	ij.ii. 	iy.12
Rovaniemi 	Library. 	299. 	22.4
Saynatsalo 	town 	centre. 	299. 	306. 	22. 3.
Plate 	I 	I
Shiraz Art 	t'.allery. 	300
Sunila 	pulp 	mills. 	231
Turku 	Sanomat 	building, 	229, 	27.9
Viipuri 	Library, 	230, 	233. 	17.10
Villa 	Mairca. 	232. 	17.13-17.15
Abbott, 	see Shepley
Abramovitz. 	Max. 	( 	1908-). 	261
Lincoln 	Center. 	New 	York 	(with 	Harrison 	and
Johnson). 	309. 	23.5
United 	Nations 	complex 	(with 	Harrison). 	267.
19. II
Abstract art. 	91. 	i 	36
Academy of Fine 	Arts. 	119
Acropolis. 	105. 	193. 	307
AEG 	factories. 	42. 	63, 	64. 	los. 	5.2
African 	masks. 	121
African 	sculpture. 	9
1
Agadir 	housing. 	361. 	362. 	2"."
Ahmadabad. 	27s. 	276
Institute 	of Management. 	313. 	314. 	360.27.5
Aix-en-Provence. 	287
Albers. 	Josef. 	I2t. 	131. 	334
Alexander. 	Christopher 	(1936-)
Notes on 	the Synthesis of h'orm. 	349
Algiers. 	208
'Obus' 	scheme. 	271. 	275. 	286. 	15.14
Alhambra. 	3 	3 	3
A 	L'lnnovation 	Department Store. 	25
Alphaville. 	266
Altes 	Museum. 	Berlin. 	280. 	20. 1
1
American 	Academy, 	Rome. 	310. 	351
American 	Radiator building. 	149. 	11.7
American 	Telephone 	and 	Telegraph 	building.
374. ^«-
7
Ames date 	Lodge, 	ss. 	4.-
Amsterdam. 	162. 	163. 	164. 	170. 	291, 	347. 	372.
'New 	South' 	area. 	12.4
Stock 	E.xchange. 	94. 	7.5
Ancher. 	Sydney 	( 	1904- 	). 	334
Angmering 	house. 	227
ancfsl. 	ri8
An.stuc, 	Gabriel, 	4 	3
Antwerp, 2S
Apollinaire, 	Guillaumc, 	107
Arboledas, 	Las, 	353
Archigram 	324-S. 	34i. 	548, 	349, 	375
'plug-in-city', 	325.24.9
Architects 	Collaborative. 	The 	(TAC). 	260-1
Harvard 	University 	Graduate 	Center. 	26
1
'Architettura 	Razionale.' 	219
'Archizoom.' 	348
Armory 	Show 	( 	191 	3). 	144
Arnhom 	Pavilion. 	347. 26.5
'art 	brut'. 	288. 	319
Art 	Ueco, 	91. 	137, 	150, 	151, 	236
Art 	Nouveau. 	18, 	2(1. 	21-36. 	37. 	39. 	411. 	46. 	60,
6 	3. 	65. 	70, 	91. 	I 	74, 	236
and 	Le Corbusier. 	lot. 	104, 	107. 	273
and 	Futurism. 	74
andGropius. 	loi
and 	Mendelsohn. 	122
and 	Mies 	van 	de 	Robe. 	10
1
in 	Japan. 	337
Arts 	and 	Crafts. 	24. 26. 	33.44.48-59. 	6(1. 	61.
63. 91. 	161. 	237
and 	the 	Bauhaus. 	1 	19
and Gropius. 	1 20
and 	De 	Stijl. 	98
and 	Nazi 	architecture, 	215
and 	Raymond 	LInwin, 	1 6
1
in 	California, 	3 	34
in 	England, 	223
in 	South 	Africa, 	197
Arup, 	Ove 	( 	i 	895-), 	225, 	305
Ashbee, 	Charles 	(186 3- 1942), 	48, 	96
Ashmole 	House. 	225
ASNOVA. 	see 	Association 	of New 	Architects
Asplund. 	Gunnar 	( 	188 5- 1940). 	229. 	241-2. 	303
Stockholm 	Crematorium. 	242. 	iH.in
Stockholm 	exhibition 	buildings, 	229
Stockholm 	Public 	Library. 	241. 	jHa)
Association 	of Contemporary 	Architects 	(OSA).
170. 	207
'F' 	type 	apartment, 	ic;. 	10
Narkomtin 	apartment 	building, 	i 	58-9. 	140
Association 	of New 	Architects 	(ASNOVA). 	137.
I 	39. 	140
ATBAT 	housing 	scheme. 	288. 	362. 	21.6
Atelier 	5 	Group.
Siedlung 	Halen. 	291. 	21.1
1
Atelier 	Perret, 	225
Athens. 	105
Charter of. 	173. 	208. 287. 	288
'Atlantic 	Wall', 	216
ATT building, 	see American Telephone 	and
Telegraph 	building,
Australia, 	258, 	334-6
Avenue 	de 	Versailles 	flats, 	Paris, 	225
Babylonian 	architecture, 	214
Bacon, 	Henry 	(i 866-1 924),
Lincoln 	Memorial, 	238, 	iS,6
Baghdad 	University scheme. 	364
Bagsvaerd 	church. 	383-5. 	388. 	2S.16-2S.z9
Baillie-Scott. 	M.H.I 	i865~i94S).4S. 	51. 	S4
Blackwell 	house. 	51
Hill 	House, 	51
Baizcau, 	see Villa 	Baizeau
Bakema, 	Joseph 	(1914-). 	290. 	349
Baker 	House. 	297-8. 	323. 	370, 	22.2
Balat. 	Alphonse. 	22
Ballio-Morpugo, 	V..
clearance around 	Mausoleum 	of Augustus,
16.10
Baltard, 	Victor 	(1805-1874)
Les 	Hallcs 	market sheds. 	38
Bangladesh. 	31 	5
Banham. 	Reyner. 	96, 	208, 	288, 	317-18
Theory anil 	Design 	in 	the 	Machine Age. 	326
Barcelona 	Pavilion, 	186, 	197.216. 	308. 	333.
388. 	13. 13-13. 15
Barnes. 	Edward 	L. 	(1922-). 	260
Barnsdall 	House. 	102-3, 	154, 	11,13
Baroque, 	the, 	106, 	160. 	207. 	228. 	277. 	527.
328. 	350. 	373
Barr. 	Alfred. 	131. 	158
Barragan, 	Luis 	(1902-), 	333
Plaza y 	Fuente. 	Mexico 	City. 	25.1
Riding 	school 	at 	San 	Cristobal. 	Plate 	14
'Barriada' 	housing. 	358
Barshch. 	M.. 	1 	38. 	171
Bartning. 	Otto(i883-i959). 	121
Basset-Lowke 	House. 	225
Bata 	shop. 	196. 	197
Bath. 	England. 	289
Baudelaire. 	71
Baudot. 	Anatolede 	( 	1834-191 	5 1.
Church 	of St-Jean 	de 	Montmartre. 	40. 	3.5
Bauer. 	Otto. 	171
Bauhaus. 	The. 	96. 	11 9-21. 	124-31. 	139. 	148.
175. 	I77.-JI2, 	225, 234. 	237. 	259
buildings. 	185. 	g.io. 9.13. 	g.14
Foundation 	Manifesto. 	126
lamp 	design. 	9.12
Bauhausbiicher. 	129
'Bay 	Region 	School'. 	3 34
Beardsley. 	Aubrey. 	22
Toilet 	of Salome. 	2.1
Bear 	Run. 	Pennsylvania. 	199
Beaux-Arts, 	see Ecole 	des 	Beaux- Arts
Bedford 	Park 	House. 	48
Behne. 	Adolf. 	1 20. 	1 2 	3
Behrens. 	Peter( 	1868-1940I. 	37. 	46. 	60. 	61-5.
66. 	70. 	74. 	105. 	122. 	123. 	171. 	236. 	242. 	i86
AEG 	factories. 	42. 	63. 64. 	105. 	5.2
Frankfurt 	gasworks. 	5,3
], 	Basset-Lowke 	House. 	225
Belgian 	Socialist 	party. 	24
Belle 	Fpoque. 	333
Belluschi. 	Pietro 	( 	1899-I.
Equitable 	Life 	Assurance 	building. 	267
Benacerraf addition. 	Princeton. 	354. 	26.13
Benscheidt. 	Karl. 	66
Bentham. 	Jeremy. 	322
Berbers. 	29. 	3113
Berg. 	Max 	( 	1870- 1947).
Breslau Jahrhunderthalle. 	44
Bergson. 	Henri. 	72
Berlage, 	Hendrick 	( 	1856-19 	54I. 	94. 	123. 	159.
162. 	164. 	170. 	185
'New 	South' 	area of Amsterdam. 	12.4
Amsterdam Stock 	Exchange. 	94. 	7.5
Berlin. 	21. 25, 	33. 	37. 	46. 	124, 	130. 	131. 139.
143, 166, 	170, 	212. 227. 	280, 	320. 	345. 	378
New 	National 	Gallery. 	183-5. 	3o8. 	345.23.3
Philharmonic. 	309. 	345
Turbinenfabrik. 	see 	AEG 	factories
University 	scheme. 	291. 	21,9
Berne, 	291
Bethnal 	Green 	housing, 	290, 	21.8
Beverly 	Hills, 	i 	54, 	i 	56, 	334
Bexhill 	Pavilion, 	227, 	17.5
Bibliotheque 	Nationale, 	182
Bibliotheque 	Ste-Genevieve, 	1
7
Bijvoet, 	Bernard 	( 	1889-), 	147
Maison de 	Verre, 	182, 	13,12
Zonnestraal 	Sanatorium, 	177, 13.5
Bing, 	Samuel, 	25
Birkchoj 	houses, 	303, 	22,9
Blackwell 	house, 	5
1
Blenheim 	Palace, 	239
Blomtield, 	Reginald 	( 	18 56- 1942). 	242-3
Carlton 	Club, 	242
Regent 	Street 	facades, 	i S, 1
1
Bo, 	Jqlrgen 	(19 19),
Louisiana 	Art 	Museum, 	302, 	22.S
Boccioni, 	llmberto, 	71, 	72, 	i 	35. 	5.12. 	5.13
Bodiansky, 	Vladimir
ATBAT housing Scheme 	(with 	S. 	Woods). 	288.

-- 408 of 420 --

5f)2. 	21.6
BoHll. 	Riccardo. 	(1939-),
VVtikien 	Seven 	housing. 	571
Bolshevism. 	131
Bomber Assembly 	Plant 	(Kahnl. 	262
BootsWarehou.se. 	Beeston, 	17, ij
Boston. 	56. 	259. 261. 	298
City 	Hall. 	307-8. 	350, 	2^.2
Government 	Center. 	3 so
University, 	349
Botta. 	Mario. 	571
Boullee. 	Etienne 	( 	i 	728-99). 	19. 	i 	3s. 	21s. 	3S(>.
370
Bourgeois. 	V.. 	1 	31
Bournville. 	160
Braque. 	Georges. 	9 	3. 	107. 	387
Brasilia. 	307. 	2 	^ 	1
Brazil. 	2=58. 	331. 	333- 	3S8
Breslau. 	64. 65. 	ihfi
Jahrhunderthalle. 	44
Breuer. 	Marcel 	( 	1902-). 	129. 	131. 	1^8.227.
2S9. 	3 	34
Angmering 	house 	(with 	F.R.S. 	Yorkel. 	227
armchair, 	y.i 	s
Ferry 	House dormitory. 	261
Brinckmann, 	Johannes ( 	1902-49). 	177. 	178. 	372
Britz-Siedlung 	housing scheme. 	170. 	12.9
Brno 	Kxhibition 	of Contemporary Culture. 	1928.
Fine Arts 	Pavilion. 	197
Broadacre 	City. 	199. 	209-10. 	15.15
Broadley's. 	5
1
Bruchfeldstrasse 	housing scheme, 	i (17
Brunelleschi 	1 	1 377-1446).
Pazzi 	Chapel. 	374
Brussels. 	21. 	22. 	24. 25. 	28. 	173
Brutalist. 	see 	New 	Brutalist
Bryggman. 	Krik 	(1891-1955), 	229
Bryn 	Mawr dormitories. 	313. 	23.9
Buffalo. 	New 	York. 	8
1
Bultinch. 	see Shepley
Bunshaft. 	Gordon 	( 1909-).
Lever House. 	266
Burges. 	William 	( 	1827-81). 	22
Burnham. 	Daniel 	( 	184(1-1912).
Chicago 	plan. 	145. 	ii-Z
Reliance 	building 	(with 	J.W. 	Root). 	149. 	264
Washington 	Mall 	plan. 	2 39
Butler. 	Samuel. 	202
Byker Wall. 	369-70. 	2ii.i
Cairo. 	358. 	27.^
California. 	56. 	58. 	156. 263. 	334. 	336, 	354
Calini 	and 	Montuori.
Termini 	Station. 	Rome. 	346
Cambridge. 	England.
University 	History 	Faculty 	building. 	322. 	24.6
Cambridge. 	Massachusetts. 	281. 	297
see also Harvard 	University
Camus. 	Albert, 	310
Canada. 	3 	34
Canberra 	Parliament 	building. 	28.14
Candilis, 	lleorgcs 	(191 	3-).
Berlin 	University 	scheme, 	(with 	Josic and
Woods). 	291. 	21.9
Frankfurt-Romerberg 	project 	(with Josic 	and
Woods). 	291
Cape 	Canaveral. 	323
Cape Town, 	331
CapltflZ/oi/rmi/ building, 	202
Carlo. 	Giancarlo 	de 	(1919-). 	328. 	343
Urbino College. 	291-2. 	347.21.10
Carlton 	Club. 	London. 	242
Caro. 	Anthony. 	354
Carpenter Center. 	281-3. 	20.76
Carson 	Pirie Scott 	store, 	i 	24
Carthage, 	i 	1 	s. 	19 	5
Casa 	BatUo. 	30. 	2.10
Casa 	di 	Dopolavoro. 	219
Casa 	di 	Elettricita. 	219
Casa 	del 	Fascio. 	221. 	354, 	16.12. 	16.13
Casa 	a 	Gradinate. 	73,5.15
Casa 	Mila. 	30. 	2.1
1
Castagnola. 	U.. 	219
Castel-Beranger. 	26
'Cathedral 	of Socialism'. 	119. 	9.2
'Cathedral 	of Work'. 	202
'Cause 	Conservative'. 	316
Celle. 	Germany. 	166
Centraal 	Beheer office 	building. 	372-3. 	28.4. 28.
s
Central 	Park. 	New 	York. 	1 60
Central 	Telegraph 	Office. 	Tokyo. 	337
Centrosoyus. 	139-40. 	203. 	ro. 13
Cezanne. 	Paul. 	93. 	107. 	287
Chalk. 	Warren. 	324. 	325
Champs-Elysees Theatre. 	43. 	3.10
Chancellery 	building, 	Berlin. 	215. 	26.4
Chandigarh. 	276-81. 	306-7. 	308. 	315. 334,
340, 	360. 	382. 	388. 	20.6. 20.7. 	20.<).
20.10. 	20.Z 	I. 	20.72. 20.14. 	t'rontispiece,
Plate 	10
Chapel 	of Notre 	Dame 	at 	Ronchamp. 	see
Ronchamp
Charcau. 	Pierre 	( 1883-1950). 	Maison de 	Verre.
182. 	13. 72
Charlottenburg 	Hochschule. 	66
Charter of Athens. 	173. 	208. 287, 	288
Chaux-de-Fonds, 	La, 	104, 	106
Chaux 	Saltworks. 	324
Chemnitz. 	177
Chermayeff. 	Serge 	( 	1900-). 	227
Bexhill 	Pavilion 	(with 	E. 	Mendelsohn). 	77.5
Chestnut 	Hill 	House. 	352.26.70
Chicago. 	21. 24. 	42. 	83. 	145. 148. 	261. 264. 	266
Chicago 	School. 	148.254
C/iicrt.(;o 	Tribune competition. 	125. 	146-9. 	157,
178, 	234, 	237. 266. 	380, 	1 7.2-7 1.6
China. 	365
Chirico. 	Giorgio 	de. 	333. 	370
Chochol. 	Josef(i88o-i956). 	196
Choisy. 	Auguste. 	37. 	38
Histoirede 	I'arehitecture. 	37. 	3.7
Chrysler 	building. 	150-1. 	153. 	236. 	77.9. 	P/rtlc 	5
Churchill 	Gardens. 	Pimlico. 	377
CI AM. 	see Congress 	Internationaux de
I'Architecture 	Moderne
Cite 	/miustric/ff. 	45-56. 	iio. 	159. 	167-2. 	765.
3.73. 	3.;4. 	'^3
Cite 	Universitaire. 	Paris. 	205
Citicorp Headquarters. 	Manhattan. 	373
Citrohan. 	see Maison 	Citrohan
Cittd 	Nuova, 	La. 	71. 	72-4. 	765. 	279. 	5.74
'City 	Beautiful' 	movement. 	745
Cizek. 	Franz. 	127
Classical 	antiquity. 	106. 	745
architecture. 	274. 	278, 	379
orders. 	39. 	42. 	774. 	747. 	748. 	206. 230. 	320
Classicism 	33. 	40. 	42. 	43, 	89. 	91, 93, 	704. 	105.
709. 	727. 	145. 	785. 	233. 	239, 242, 	308.
309
Claudius-Petit, 	Eugene. 	286
'Cloudhanger' 	project, 	jo.6
Coates. 	Wells 	(7895-7958).
Lawn 	Road 	flats. 	Hampstead. 	226-7. 	327. 77.4
Cobb. 	Henry 	(7926-). 	350
Index 	•
407
Cole. 	Thomas.
The 	Dream 	of the 	Architeet. 	7.7
Collage 	City. 	382
College 	Life 	Insurance 	building, 	349. 	26.7
Collins. 	Peter. 	79. 	390
Cologne
Deutscher 	Werkbund 	Pavilion. 	66
Museum. 	378
Theatre. 	25
Colonia 	Giiell 	chapel 	model, 	2.9
Colos.scum. 	Rome. 	278
Columbia 	University. 	354
Columbia 	World 	Exposition 	( 	1893). 	744. 	145
Communism. 	271.272
Como. 	22 7
Congrcs 	Internationaux 	de 	I'Architecture
Moderne 	(CIAM). 	777-3. 	796.208.237.
282. 	287-8. 	290. 	292. 	382
Connell. 	Amyas 	( 	7907-). 	242
Ashmole 	House. 	225
house 	at 	Frognal 	(with 	Lucas and 	Ward). 	227.
77.6
Constructivism. 	97, 	743. 	148, 	180, 	322
Constructivist 	artists, 	t 	33. 	740. 	322
ideas. 	742
influence. 	777
prototypes. 	797
consumerism. 	30. 	2 	36
Contemporary 	City 	for 	3 	Million 	Inhabitants.
see 	Ville Contemporaine
Cominuoiis 	Moinimeiil. 	.Arizona 	Desert. 	348. 	26.6
Cook, 	see 	Maison 	Cook
Cook. 	Peter ( 	19 	36-). 	324
Cooke. 	Bernard. 	197
Coolidge. 	.sir Shepley
Coonley 	House. 	79. 	8t. 	270. 	6.6. 6.7. 	6.70
Copenhagen. 	24. 	247. 	302
Academy 	of Art, 	303
Corbusier, 	see 	Le 	Corbusier
Cornell 	University. 	354
Correa. 	Charles. 	360
Costa. 	Lucio(7 902-). 	796. 	333
Ministry 	of Education. 	Rio de 	Janeiro. 	337
Courbet. 	Gustav. 	277
Coventry 	Cathedral. 	309
Cox. 	Anthony. 	228-9
Crabtree. 	sir 	Slater
Craftsman. 	The 	56. 	4.70
'Craftsman's 	Movement'. 	56. 	58
Cranston's Tea 	Rooms. 	30
Crawford's 	.Advertising 	building. 	225
Crittall 	workers' 	housing. 	225
Crompton. 	Dennis. 	324
Crown 	Hall. 	306
'Crystal 	Mountain', 	9.7
Crystal 	Palace, 	London, 	38, 	3.2
Cubism. 	77-2. 	97-707. 	733, 	744, 	289, 	302.
383. 	386
Cubist 	influence. 	362
Cullen. 	Gordon. 	294
Czechoslovakia. 	196-7
Dacca 	Parliament 	building. 	373. 	375,334.
23.72.23.73
Dada. 	727. 	289
Daihi 	Sews 	building. 	749
Dali. 	Salvador. 	29
Daly. 	Cesar. 	76
Dante. 	227
'Danteum'. 227. 	16.14, 	16.75
Darbourne 	and 	Darke.
Lillington 	Street 	estate. 	Pimlico. 	294. 	27.74

-- 409 of 420 --

4()8 	Index
Darmstadt 	Artists' 	Colony, 	fi ^
Debuysson. 	Jules. 	2 2
Delagecar. 	109
Delhi. 	2X0. 	?ot)
Delphi, 	22.6
Derby 	Civic 	Centre. 	378
Demidov. 	Count 	Anatoly 	Nikolaevich. 	1^2
Denis. 	Maurice. 	22
Denmark. 	2i)(i
Depression, 	the. 	i 	s8
Design 	and 	Industries 	Association. 	223
Dessau. 	<-)b. 	127. 	I2q. 	177
Detroit. 	43. 	hh
Deutscher 	Werkbund. 	48. 	S9. 	(S0-71. 	74. 	loi.
los. 	108. 	lib. 	127. 	131. 	185. 	216. 	223. 	2(1(1
Congress! 	iqi4). 	6s
'Expressionist 	VVing'. 	(is
lalirhuch 	( 	191 	3). 	64. 	5.4
pavilion 	at 	(Cologne Exhibition 	( 	1914I. 	hfi. 	i 	7S.
sr-.s.q
Deutzer C.asniotoren 	Pavilion. 	S-Q
Devetsil 	group, 	igh
Dharan 	.'\irport. 	Saudi 	Arabia. 	1(14. 	27.9
Dinkeloo. 	].. 	5s 	3
see also 	Roche
Diocletian's 	Palace. 	?is
'disurbanists'. 	171
Dodge 	House. 	4.12
Dogon 	architecture. 	291. 	348
Dom-ino system. 	46-7. 	96. 	los. 	no. 	i8s. 	2S2.
330. 	387- 	M5.3I6
Doshi. 	Balkrishna 	( 	1927-). 	281. 	360-1
Hyderabad 	housing. 	360, 	27.6
'Double 	House'. 	Brno. 	197
Downing. 	Andrew 	|ackson. 	SS
Drew, 	jane 	(191 	1-). 	276
Dubois. 	Max. 	47. 	los
DubulTet. 	lean. 	28S. 	^19
Dudok, 	Willem. 	(1884-1974).
Hilversum 	Town 	hall. 	I So. 	22s. 	i?.i()
Duiker. 	Johannes 	( 	1890-19 	^sK 	147
Zonnestraal 	Sanatorium. 	177. 	230. 	ij.is
Durand. 	J.N.L.. 	i 	7
Diisseldorf. 	34s
Dymaxion 	House. 	180-1. 	Ji.ii
Eames. 	Charles 	(1907-1978). 	263. 	334
Eames 	House. 	19.6
East 	Anglia 	University. 	292. 	328-9, 	347. 	348.
372,24.12
East 	End. 	London. 	2S8
Eaton. 	Leonard. 	K.. 	78
eclecticism. 	t6. 	7s. 	107. 	i 	32. 	142. 	237. 	260.
261. 	?o2. 	344. 	577. 	580
Ecolc 	des 	,'\rts 	Decoratifs. 	26
Ecole 	des 	Beaux-Arts. 	18-19. 	20. 21. 22. 	26. 	40.
4S. 	54- 	SS. 	56. 	58.66. 	333.382
Classicism, 	91. 94, 	2 	?8, 	242, 	309
disciplines. 	350
influence of. 	105. 	1 	10. 	126. 	161. 	242
planning. 	226. 	2 36. 	3 	1 	s
revival, 	223
system. 	I 	s 7, 	I 	s8. 	179. 	328
training. 	133. 	150, 	3 to. 	313
in 	United 	States, 	14s. 	260. 	261
'White 	City'. 	14s
Economist, 	building, 	319. 	24.^
Egypt, 	iio. 	3S7-8
Egyptian 	architecture. 	los. 	202. 	214. 	221
Ehn, 	Karl
Karl 	Marx 	Hof, 	171, 	72. 	j 	s
Elgen 	Haard 	housing. 	16 	i. 	294. 	12.5
Einstein 	tower, 	122, 	236. 	9.6
Eisenman. 	Peter (1932-), 	354. 	355
House 	II, 	3SS
Eisenstein. 	Serge, 	135
Eisler. 	Otto
Double House. 	197
Elementarism. 	99, 	125. 	129. 	177
Ellwood. 	Craig ( 	1922-). 	263. 	334
El 	Pedregal. 	533
Elsinore. 	30 ?
Ema 	monastery. 	166. 	274. 287. 21.4
Emberton. 	Joseph. 	( 	1889-19S6I
Royal 	Corinthian 	Yacht 	Club. 	22s
empathy, 	theory 	of. 	22. 92. 	122
Empire 	State 	Building. 	150. 	15 3
Endell. 	August. 	33, 	92
Engels. 	Friedrich. 	133. 	159. 	170
England. 	91. 	159. 	196. 	223. 242. 	2s8. 	288-qi.
297- 	317-30. 	331. 	US. 	348-9
Ennis 	House, 	i 	S4
L'Eplattenier. 	104
Equitable 	Life 	.-Assurance 	building. 	267
Errazuris. 	see 	Maison 	Errazuris
Ernst. 	Max. 	121
Erskine, 	Ralph 	(1914-), 	297. 	369-70
Byker 	Wall. 	369-70, 	28.1
L'Esprit 	Nouveau. 	108, 	109, 	112, 	117. 	289. 	3 	37
Etchells. 	Frederick
Crawfords' 	Advertising building. 	22=i
European 	Investment Bank. 	573. 	387. 	2S.6
Existentialists. 	319
Existenzminimum. 	175
Expiatory 	Church 	of the Sagrada 	Familia. 	see
Sagrada 	Familia
Expo 	67. 	Montreal. 	292
Exposition des 	Arts 	Decoratifs 	(Paris. 	192s) 	M7.
216. 	236
Pavilion 	de 	I'Esprit 	Nouveau. 	112
Expressionism. 	60. 65. 91. 	94, 	96. 97. 	121-4.
174.236
influence 	of. 	147. 	isi. 	170. 	175. 	309. 	54s
Expressionists. 	261
Fabianism, 	295,317
'factory 	aesthetic'. 	6b. 	i 	50, 	137. 	216. 	261
Fagus shoe-last 	factory. 	66. 	105. 	127. 	5.6
Falling 	Water. 	199. 	200-2. 	2 	5.1. 	15.2, 	15.3.
Plate 	H
Fargo-Moorhead 	Cultural 	Center. 	379, 	28.12
Farman 	Coliath 	aeroplane 	cockpit. 	113
Farnsworth 	House. 	262
Fascism. 	218. 	221
Fascist 	mythology. 	220
buildings. 	548
Fassler. 	John. 	197
Fathepur 	Sikri. 	277. 	20.
S
Fathy. 	Hassan 	(1 899-). 	^57-8
Arehitectiire 	for 	the 	Poor, 	an 	Experiment 	in 	Rural
Egiipt. 	?S7
Courna 	Mosque. 	27. i
house 	near 	Luxor. 	2~.2
Feininger. 	Lyonel.
Cathedral of Socialism. 	1 	19. 	9.2
Ferris. 	Hugh.
The 	Metropolis ofTonwrrow. 	153. 	1 	1. 10
Ferry 	House dormitory. 	26
1
Festival 	of Britain. 	317
Fiat 	factory. 	Turin, 	208. 219. 	16.9
Fiedler. 	Konrad. 	91
Figini. 	I.uigi 	( 	190 3-). 	219
I'inkelstein. 	N.. 	197
Finland. 	196. 	229, 297, 	299
Finnish 	Embassy 	in 	Moscow competition. 	2 ^ i
Finnish 	vernacular tradition. 	232
Finsbury. 	London. 	288. 	5 	1 	7
First 	Church 	of Christ. 	Scientist, 	58. 	4. 1
1
Flore, 	see Villa 	Flore
Florence. 	146. 	531
railway 	station. 	219
Florey 	building. 	^23.24.7
Focillon. 	Henri. 	183
Ford. 	Henry. 	45. 	109
factory. 	Detroit. 	66. 	5.7
1
Foundation. 	350. 	371
Foreign 	Office 	building. 	London. 	1
7
'formalism'. 	217. 	229
Fort 	Worth. 	Texas. 	375
Foster. 	Norman 	(1935-). 	371. 	372
Sainsbury 	Art 	Centre. 	3 7
1
Willis. 	Faber 	and 	Dumas 	building. 	28. 	3
Fouilhoux. 	Andre 	( 	1879-1945). 	153
Fourier. 	Charles. 	16. 	112. 	159-60. 	171,207.
'phalanstere'. 	289. 	12.
1
Frampton. 	Kenneth. 	180
France, 	40. 	74. 	91. 93. 	i 	24, 	144. 	i 	59. 	180. 	197.
218. 223. 	242
Frank, 	[osef. 	171
Frankfurt, 	i 	30. 	166-7. 	170. 	I73
gasworks. 	5.3
'Frankfurt 	kitchen'. 	167
Frankfurt-Rcimerberg 	project. 	291
Frcdensborg 	houses. 	303
French 	Revolution. 	214
Frette. 	C. 	219
Freyssinet. 	Eugene 	(1879- 1962). 	44
Orly 	airship 	hangars. 	44
Frickc 	House. 	Oak 	Park. 	Plate 	3
Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper competition. 	123-4. 	9-7
Froebel 	blocks. 	75. 	78. 	270. 	388. 	6.9
Frognal. 	house 	at. 	227. 	1 7.6
Fruges. 	Henri. 	1 	10
Fry. 	E. 	Maxwell 	(i 899-). 	227. 	276
Fuchs, 	B. 	( 	1895-1972).
Pavilion 	of the 	City 	of Brno. 	197
functionalism. 	108. 	158. 	243. 	355. 	370, 	376,
Fuller. 	R. 	Buckminster 	(1895-). 	158. 	260, 	325,349,
Dymaxion 	House. 	180-1. 	13. II
Furner. 	Stanley. 	197
Furniture 	Manufacturers' 	Association 	building
project, 	324
Futurism. 	71-4, 	91. 	97. 	107. 	126. 	225
influence of. 	1 	34. 	I 	35, 	I 	36. 	144. 	232. 	326. 	327
Futurist 	revival. 	322, 341. 	373-4
Futurist 	sculpture. 	133
'Ci' 	group 	124. 	I 	30
Ciabo. 	Naum 	(1890-). 	133. 	225
dallaretese 	housing. 	370, 	28.2
GaWc. 	Emile. 	26
t^amble 	House. 	Pasadena. 	56-8. 	4.9
Ciannett. 	William 	Channing.
Hoitse 	Beautiful. 	77
(.harden 	City, 	i 	30. 	161. 	165. 	167. 	288. 	289. 	317
(Marches, 	see Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches
Garnier. 	Charles 	(1825-1898),
Paris Opera, 	226, 	1.5
Carnier. 	Tony 	(i 869-1948)
Cile 	Wus(rie//e. 	45-6, 	no. 	159. 	161-2. 	165.
3.13. 	3.14. 	12.
J
Caudi. 	Antoni 	(1852-1926). 	22. 	26-30. 	236,
284, 	371. 	377
Casa 	Batllo, 	30, 	2.10
Casa 	Mila, 	1 	1-12. 	30. 	2.1
1
Colonia 	Ciicll 	chapel 	model. 	2.9

-- 410 of 420 --

Palau 	Guell, 	28
ParkGuell. 	29
Sagrada 	["amilia. 	Kxpiatory 	Church 	of. 	28, 	24. 	2.^
Santa 	Colonia 	de Cervello. 	29
C.auguin, 	Paul. 	22. 	2S
General 	Motors 	Technical 	Centre. 	2(17
Geneva. 	179. 	197
Germany 	S9. 	'10. 	fid. 	74. 	los. 	121. 	124. 	144.
iSo. 	197. 	212. 218. 	22 	^ 	297. 	245
Getty. 	Paul. 	^76
Getty 	Museum. 	37S-fi. 	28.10
Ghent. 	22
Giacometti. 	Alberto. 	^02
Giedion. 	Sigfried. 	149. 	21s. 	2^b. 	243. 296. 	^os.
306. 	344
Nine Points o] Mivtiintrnlnlilii 	(with 	|. 	L. 	Sertl.
306
Space. 	Time and 	Architecture. 	260
Gill. 	Irving. 	( 	1870-1936). 	S8-9. 	i 	S4. 	ISS
Dodge 	House. 	4.12
t'linslierg. 	R..
Avenue de 	Versailles 	Hats 	( with 	B. 	Lubetkin I. 	22 s
Ginzburg. 	Moisei 	( 	1892-1946). 	138. 	139. 	171
'tSreen 	Moscow' 	project. 	12.24
NarkomKn 	apartments 	(with 	I. 	Milinis). 	10. t^)
Giotto. 	14(1
Giulio 	Romano 	( 	1492-1 S4'il.
Palazzo 	del 	Te. 	3S4
Giurgola. 	Romaldo 	11920-). 	381-2
Australian 	Parliament 	building competition.
381. 	2^'. 	14
Glasgow School 	of Art. 	30-3. 	42. 	58. 	2.13. 2.15.
Plate 	1
Glasner 	Hou.se. 	82-3. 	6.8. 	6.10
Glass 	Hou.se. 	New 	Canaan. 	262-3. 	1 9-5
tllass 	Pavilion. 	Cologne. 	5. ; 	1
Glencoe. 	Chicago. 	82
Godalming. 	England. 	S2
Godwin. 	F. 	W. 	( 1 8 3 3-1 8 36 1. 	48
tloethe. 	127
Goctheanum 	at 	Dornach. 	236. 	1H.2
GolT. 	Bruce! 	1904-)
Bavanger House. 	349
Golden 	Lane 	housing, 	288-9. 	319. 	21.7
Golden 	Section. 	107. 	221. 	268
Golosov. 	I.
workers' 	club. 	17s. 	177. 	i 	3.6
Goncourt. 	F,dmond 	de. 	25
Gothic. 	16. 	28. 	29. 	37-8. 	39. 	58. 	118. 	1 	19. 	214.
234. 	331
Gothic 	revival. 	229. 	238. 	294
Gourna 	Mosque. 	27.1
Graves. 	Michael 	( 	1934-). 	354. 	369
Benacerraf addition. 	354. 	26.1
3
Crooks 	House. 	379
Fargo-Moorhead 	Cultural 	Center. 	379. 	28.12
Grayswood 	'New 	Farm'. 	227
Greece. 	los. 	284. 	310. 	320
Greek 	architecture. 	197
'Green 	Moscow' 	project. 	171. 	12.74
Greene. 	Charles 	( 	1868-19S7) 	and 	Hcnn'
(1870-1954). 	56
Gamble 	House. 	s6-S. 	4.9
Greene. 	David. 	324
Greenwich 	Hospital. 	239
Griffin. 	Walter 	Burley 	(1876-1937), 	90. 	334
Canberra 	plan. 	381-2
Gropius. 	Walter (1 88 3- 1 969). 	48. 	64. 	65. 	74.
96. 	104. 	118-21. 	123, 	124-31. 	132, 	227,
231. 	270. 	271. 	297. 	298
in 	America. 	158. 	350-5
and 	Behrens. 	66
atCIAM, 	171-3
early 	work. 	loi
Mir 	iiik/ 	.Auflutn. 	126
influence 	of. 	197, 	354
lutermitiomil 	Arcliitectiire. 	337
and 	I.e 	Corbusier. 	109
and 	Nazism. 	2 1
2
andTAC. 	260-1. 	364
and Taut. 	70
.AHCHITECTIRE
Baghdad 	University scheme. 	364
Bauhaus 	building. 	9.'". 	9.1 	3. 	9.24
C/i/ciii/oTri/jHHc 	skyscraper design. 	125. 	147.
148. 	12.5
Fagus 	shoe-last 	factory. 	66. 	205.5.6
Gropius 	House. 	29.
2
Harkness 	Commons 	dormitories. 	29.2
J.F. 	Kennedy 	Building. 	261
Palace of the 	Soviets 	competition. 	243
Pan 	Am 	skyscraper. 	262
Siemen.sstadt 	housing 	scheme. 	2 	70. 	9. 2 7
Sommerfeld 	House. 	222. 	94
VVerkbund 	Pavilion. 	Cologne. 	205. 	5.7. 	s.X. 	5.9
Grundtvig 	Church. 	241. 	28.8
'Gruppo 	7'. 	218-19
'Casa 	di 	Dopolavoro'. 	2 1
9
Officino 	produzione di 	Gaz. 	229
Gruzman. 	Neville. 	336
Ciuadet. 	lulien. 	40. 	45
Elements et 	llieories ile 	I'architectiire. 	40
Guggenheim 	.Museum. 	268. 	270, 	29.23. 	29.24
Guild 	House. 	Philadelphia. 	352-3. 	26.22
Guimard. 	Hector 	( 	2867-2942). 	26, 28. 	30. 	37
Castel-Beranger, 	26
Paris 	Metro. 2.6
Villa 	Flore. 	26. 	2.7
Ciullichsen. 	Marie 	and 	Harry. 	2 	32
Gwathmey. 	Charles, 	354. 	355
Hadrian's 	Villa. 	Tivoli, 	106. 	274. 325. 	382
Hagia 	Sophia. 	Istanbul. 	280, 	3.2
Halsy's 	Barber shop. 	Berlin. 	25
Ham 	Common 	houses. 	275. 	320
Hamburg. 	266
Hamilton. 	Richard. 	325
Hancock Tower. 	350,26.8
handicraft. 	220. 	282. 	302. 	3S2
Hanson. 	Norman 	( 	1909-). 	297
Harkness 	Commons 	dormitories. 	Harvard. 	2 9.2
Harmon, 	see Shreve
Harrison. 	Wallace 	(2895-), 	2 	53, 	262
Lincoln 	Center, 	New 	York 	(with 	Johnson 	and
Abramovitz), 	309. 	23.5
United 	Nations 	Complex 	(with 	Abramovitz).
267. 	29. 	2 	2
Hartley. 	Marsden. 	244
Harvard 	University. 	Cambridge. 	Mass., 	260. 282,
292,297
Carpenter Center, 	282-3, 	20.26
Graduate Center, 	262
Graduate School 	of Design, 	334. 	335. 349. 	352
Memorial 	Church. 	28.5
Haupstadt 	scheme. 	320
Haussmann. 	Georges 	(2809-91), 	145, 	160, 	228
Hawksmoor, 	Nicholas 	(2662-1736), 	54, 	327,
328, 	352
Hegelian 	ideas. 	226
Heinkel 	factory. 	226
Hejduk. 	John 	(2929-). 	3 54, 	35
S
Helsinki. 	229. 	230, 	232, 	299
Henard. 	Eugene, 	207
Henderson. 	Nigel. 	289. 	329
Index 	404
Hent2ebique. 	Francois 	(1842-292 1 1. 	39. 	42, 43, 	47
system 	for reinforced 	concrete, 	3.4
Hentrich 	and 	Petschnigg,
Phonix 	Rheinrohr skyscraper, 	345
Herculaneum. 	376
Herriot. 	Edouard. 	262
Herron. 	Ron 	( 	2 9 30-).
Walking 	Cities 	project. 	324
Hertzberger. 	Herman 	(2932-).
Centraal 	Beheer office 	building. 	Apeldoorn.
372-3,28.4.28.5
Hessen. 	Grand 	Duke 	Ernst 	Ludwig von. 	6 3
Heures 	Claires. 	Les. 	see 	Villa 	Savoye
Highland 	Park. 	Chicago. 	79
High 	Point 	I 	flats. 	London. 	222. 	225-6. 	27.2. 	27.3
High 	Point 	II 	flats. 	London. 	228-9, 	317- 	17-8
Hilbershcimer. 	Ludwig. 	( 	2885-2967), 	232. 	147
Hildebrand, 	Adolf von. 	19
Hill 	House. 	Helensburgh. 	52.4.4
Hilversum. 	Town 	Hall. 	277.230. 	23.20
Hiroshima 	Memorial. 	25.9
Hitchcock. 	Henry-Russell. 	22. 	258. 	236. 	243
The 	International 	Style: 	.Architecture since 	i <)22
(with 	P. 	Johnson). 	274. 	285. 	260
Hitler. 	Adolf, 	222, 224, 	225
•Hof',the. 	172
Hoff. 	Rob 	van 	t'. 	see 	Van 	t'Hofl'
Hoffmann. 	Joseph 	(2870-2956). 	34. 	35. 	37. 	104,
255
Palais 	Stoclet, 	34. 	42
Purkersdorf convalescent 	hoitie, 	34
Holland, 	74, 	90, 93, 94, 	96, 	108, 	222, 	270, 297,
228, 	223, 230, 	345. 	372
Hollywood, 	334
Holyoke Center, 	349
Holzel. 	Adolf 	2 2 2
'Home 	in 	a Prairie Town'. 	6.3
Hong 	Kong. 	337. 	25.6
Hood. 	Raymond 	( 	2882-2934I, 	248-9, 	253, 	2 	58
American 	Radiator building, 	249, 	22.7
Chicaijo 	Tribune competition 	design 	(with 	J. 	M.
Howells). 	248-9.234. 	22.6
Dfli/i/ 	.Vfn's 	building. 	249
McGraw-Hill 	building. 	249. 	2 	2.8
Rockefeller Center. 	22.22
Hookof Holland 	housing. 	96. 	270, 	22.20, 	22.22,
Hoover factory. 	Perivale. 	236. 	28.3
Horiguchi. 	Sutemi 	1 	1895 	).
Okada 	house. 	338.25.7
Horta. 	Victor 	( 	2S62-2947). 	22-5. 	26, 28, 	37
A 	L'Innovation 	Department 	Store, 	25
Hotel 	Solvay. 	24
Maison 	du 	Peuple, 	24, 	2.4
Tassel 	House. 	22. 	2.
3
Hotel 	Solvay. 	24
'House 	for an 	Academic couple'. 	28.23
House 	for an 	Art 	Lover. 	34
'House 	of the 	Future'. 	329
House of German 	Art. 	224. 	26.2
Howard. 	Ebenezer( 	2850-2928). 	222
Tomorrow. 	A 	Peaceful 	Path 	to Real 	Reform, 	260
(iarden 	City, 	265, 	22.2
Howe. 	(Jeorge) 	2886-2955). 	157-8. 	278, 	260
PSFS 	skyscraper (with 	W. 	Lescaze), 	157-8.
278, 	266, 	320. 	2 	2.28
Howells. 	John 	Mead 	( 	2868-2959)
Chicafio 	Tribune competition 	design 	(with 	R.
Hood). 	248-9. 	234. 	22.6
Hudnut. 	Dean 	of the Harvard 	GSD. 	259
Huis 	ter 	Heide Villa. 	96. 	/./
Humber automobile. 	209
Hunstanton 	School. 	327. 	24.2

-- 411 of 420 --

410 	Index
Hunt. 	R.M.I 1827-1895). 	238
Hurva 	Synagogue. 	^6s-h, 	27.12
Hyderabad 	housing, 	^lo. 	27.6
Hyokekan 	Museum. 	Tokyo. 	337
lie de 	France, 	iSh. 	331
Illinois 	Institute of Technology. 216. 261. 	79.3. 	19.4
Imperial 	Hotel. 	Tokyo. 	337-8. 	202
Impressionists. 	2S
I.N. A. 	housing. 	Rome. 	?4S-ft"
India. 	2s8. 	275-81. 	28 	^. 	^ 	H- 	?S8. 	?ho
Indiana. 	550
industrial 	Revolution. 	14.48. 	356. 	387
Interbau 	Exhibition. 	Berlin 	(i 9 s 7 1. 	34
S
International 	Modern 	Movement. is8
International 	Style. 	91. 	roi. 	131, 	174-8S. 	186.
2^6. 	27s. 	29h. 	?37. 	374
emergence of. 	124
intluenceof, 	333
in 	the 	tilties. 	330
in 	the sixties. 	544. 	?S4. 	^SS
and 	Islam. 	3(15
in 	Australia. 	336
in 	Czechoslovakia. 	197
in 	developing countries. 	356
in 	l-lngland. 	227, 	22S
in 	Italy. 	570
in 	lapan. 	381
in 	Mexico. 	331
in 	Scandinavia. 	2 	30
in 	the 	United States. 	137. 	13 8. 	261. 	309
and 	Aalto. 	298
and 	Asplund. 	242
and 	Le 	Corbusier, 	47. 	in
and 	Kahn. 	310
and 	Loos. 	;6
and 	Mendelsohn. 	123
and 	Wright. 	7s. 	200
lofan. 	B. 	M. 	( 	1891-), 	143. 	216. 	217
Palace of the Soviets design. 	lo.jS
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exhibition 	1 	1937). 	16.7
Iran. 	500
Islam. 	36s
Isozaki, 	Arata 	(1931-I. 	569. 	377.381
'Metabolist' 	scheme. 	23.12
Oita 	Bank. 	342
Oita 	Girls 	High 	School. 	342
Istanbul. 	105. 	280
Italy. 	(So. 	105. 	106. 196. 	211. 	218-22. 	308.
US-6
Itoh. 	Chinto. 	337
Itten. 	lohannes. 	121
student 	work 	produced 	under 	Itten. 	9.3
Ivrea. 	219
Izcnour. 	Steven.
Lenrniiu] 	from 	Las 	Vegas. 	352
|ac(ibs. 	Jane
Dfdth 	and 	lifi' of Great 	American 	Cities. 	352
lacobsen. 	Arne. 	( 	1902-1971).
S.'\S 	Hotel. 	Copenhagen. 	296. 	22.1
lain 	sect. 	276
laipur observatories. 	280. 	314
jantar 	Mantar. 	Delhi. 	280
)aoul. 	see 	Maisons 	laoul
Japan. 	153. 	196.238.281. 	30s. 	3^1. 	337- 	M2.
54 S
Japanese architecture. 	78. 	1 	53. 	3 	36
intlucncc on 	Dc 	StijI, 	98
prints. 	91. 	6.; 	J
tea 	ceremony. 	88
tradition. 	26 3
Japanese 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exhibition 	(1937). 	338
Jarry. 	Alfred, 	271
Jazz Modern, 	i 	30
Jeanneret. 	Charles 	Edouard. 	see 	Le Corbusier
Jekyll. 	Gertrude. 	52
Jencks. 	Charles. 	37(1. 	377. 	378. 	380
Jenney. 	William 	le 	Baron. 	144
Jensen-Klint. 	P.U. 	(1833-19 	301.
Grundtvig 	Church. 	241. 	I.S.S
Jerusalem 	3h3-h
Jewett Arts 	Center. 	331)
J. 	F. 	Kennedy 	Building. 	Boston. 	261
Johns. 	Jasper, 	323. 	331
Johannesburg 	funeral 	home. 	197
Johnson. 	Peter.
Johnson 	House. 	Chatsworth. 	336. 	25.5
Johnson. 	Philip 	(1906-). 	138. 	174. 	183.260.
261. 	369
ATT building. 	374.2^.7
Glass 	House. 	New 	Canaan. 	262-3. 	193
Lincoln 	Art 	Gallery. 	Nebraska. 	309
Lincoln 	Center. 	New 	York 	(with 	Harri.son 	and
.Abramovitz). 	309.23.3
TIte 	International Stijle. 	see 	Hitchcock
Johnson 	Wax 	building. 	200-2. 	268. 	270, 	373.
13.4. 	J3.5. 	15-6
Jones. 	Owen.
Grammar of Ornament. 	22
Jordy. 	William, 	182, 	239
Josic, 	Alexis 	( 	1921-1. 	291
Frankfurt-Romerberg 	project 	(with 	Candilis
and 	Woods). 	291
Berlin 	University 	scheme 	(with 	Candilis 	and
Woods). 	291. 	343, 	27.9
Jugendstil, 	26
jura 	Regionalist movement. 106
Jyvaskyla 	design 	scheme. 	301
Kahn. 	.Albert 	( 	1869- 1942). 	43-4. 	261
Bomber 	Assembly 	Plant. 	262
Ford 	factory. 	66. 	3. 1
1
Kahn. 	Louis I. 	(1902-74). 	261, 	344. 	330-1.
363-6. 	36S, 	369. 	37S. 	380, 	387. 	3S8
Ahmadabad 	Institute of Management. 	31 	3,
314. 	360. 	2;, 9. 	27.3
Bryn 	Mawr dormitories. 	313. 	23,9
Dacca 	Parliament 	buildings, 	313.313,3 34.
23.9.23.72,23.13
Kimbell 	Museum. 	373. 	2S.9. 	Plate 	76
Phillips 	Exeter 	Academy. 	23.9
Richards 	Medical 	Laboratories. 	312. 	342.23.7.
2 3.,S'
Salk 	Institute. 	La 	Jolla. 	236-7. 	314. 	313. 	23.10
Yale 	Art 	Gallery. 	310.23.6
Kakuzo. 	()..
Book of Tea. 	H8
Kallmann. 	Gerhard. 	(191 	3-). 	333
Boston 	City Hall 	(with 	McKinnell 	and
Knowles). 	307-8.230.23.2
Kandinsky. 	Wassily. 	118. 	121. 	129. 	143.270. 	387
Concerninij 	tlie Spiritual 	in 	.Xrt. 	91. 	121
Karl 	Marx 	IJof. 	i 	71
Kiirntncr 	Bar. 	36
Katsura 	Imperial 	Villa. 	338
Kaufmann. 	FMgar. 	J.. 	199
Kaiilmann 	Desert 	House. 	137. 	334
Kawazoe. 	Noboru. 	339. 	341
Keck. 	George, 	i 	38
Kennedy 	Airport. 	309. 	2 	3.4
Kennedy 	Building. 	Boston. 	26 	i
Kew 	Gardens, 	323
Khnopfl'. 	Fernand. 	22
KielVioek 	housing. 	Rotterdam. 	170. 	12.72, 	12.73
Kiesler. 	Friedrich 	(1890-1965).
Cite dans 	I'espace. 	96
Kikutake. 	Kiyonori 	( 	1928-). 	341
Kimbell 	Art 	Museum. 	375. 388, 	28.9. 	Plate 	76
Kingo 	houses. 	296. 	303. 	385
Kingston-upon-Hull 	project. 	2S.75
Klee, 	Paul. 	121, 	129, 	743
Klerk, 	Michel 	de 	( 	1S84-792 	3), 	94, 	97, 	121,
162-4
Eigen 	Haard 	housing, 	163. 	294, 	12.5
Zaanstraat 	housing. 	96. 	7.6
Klimt, 	Gustav. 	34
Knights 	of Columbus 	Headquarters. 	349-350
Knowles. 	IMward 	( 	1929-).
Boston 	City 	Hall 	(with 	Kallmann 	and
Mckinnell). 	307-8. 	330. 	2;i.2
Kocher. 	1 	38
Koetter. 	F.
Collage Citu 	(with 	C. 	Rowe). 	382
Kofu. 	Japan. 	342
Korean 	War. 	339
Kramer. 	Piet 	(i 881- 1 961). 	94. 97. 	121. 	762
Krefeld 	Hou.se. 	785
Kreis. 	Wilhelm. 	273
Krejcar. 	Jaromir. 	196
Kremlin, 	i 	33
Krier. 	Leon 	( 	1 946-) 	and 	Robert.
Kingston-upon-Hull 	project. 	2X.75
Stadtrawn 	in 	Theorie 	und 	Praxis. 	382
Kroha. 	|..
Brno 	Exhibition 	of Contemporary Culture. 	Fine
Arts 	Pavilion. 	197
Mlada 	Boleslav 	Industrial 	School. 	797
Kroller-Miiller 	project. 	123. 	724
Kunstgewerbeschulen. 	60. 	779
Kurokawa. 	Noria 	( 	19 34-). 	347
Yamagata 	Hawaii 	Dreamland. 	342. 	25. 7 	3
Kyoto Town 	Hall. 	340. 	25.70
Kysela. 	Ludvik. 	796
Bata 	shop. 	197
Labrouste. 	Henri 	(7807-7875)
Bibliotheque 	Ste-Genevieve. 	17
Bibliotheque 	Nationale. 	182
Ladovsky. 	N.A.. 	733
Lagos. 	3 	37
Lahore, 	276
Lake 	Shore 	Drive 	apartments. 	Chicago. 	264. 	266.
79.7. 	79.S. 	Plate 	9
Lalique. 	Rene. 	236
Lamb, 	.sec Shreve
Landmann. 	Ludwig.
Das 	Siedhatgsaml 	der Grosstadt. 	766
Lang. 	Fritz. 	749
Langdon 	and 	Wilson.
Getty 	Museum. 	373-6. 	28. 70
Larco. 	S.. 	279
Larkin 	building. 	42. 	94, 	202. 270. 	372. 	373. 	7.4
La 	Roche/Jeanneret. 	see 	Maison 	La 	Roche/
Jeanneret
Lasdun. 	Denvs 	( 	7974-). 	293. 	320. 	327. 344.
348. 	387
Bethnal 	Green 	housing. 	290, 	21.8
East 	Anglia 	University. 	292. 	328-9. 	347.
24.72
European 	Investment 	Bank. 	373. 387. 	2H.6
Hurva 	.Synagogue. 	363-6. 	27.12
National Theatre. 	London. 	329-30. 	373.
24.1 	{.24.14
Royal 	College 	ol 	Physicians. 	328, 	373. 	24.11.
Plate 	I 	3

-- 412 of 420 --

Index 	411
St James's 	Hats. 	328
Laugier. 	Abbe, 	17.43. 	14s
primitive 	hut, 	1.2
Laurens. 	Henri. 	305
Lausanne. 	171
Lavrov. 	B..
linear city 	proposal, 	i o. 1
6
Lawn 	Road 	flats. 	2(16-7. 	327. 	17.4
Lazo. 	Carlos.
University 	of Mexico City. 	333
Le 	Corbusier (Charles Edouard 	|eanneret,
l887-H)6sl. 	14. 	yi. 	43. 	104-17. 	124.
131, 	132. 	isi. 	154. 	177. 	185. 	I86-4S.
196. 	147. 	203-10, 	321. 	234. 	267-8. 	270.
271-83. 	246. 299. 	302. 	305. 	319. 	368.
378. 	380. 	386. 	387. 	388
influences on. 	36. 	65. 	66. 	197. 	236. 	242
early 	work. 	46-7. 	loi
'type 	forms'. 	105. 	104
and 	Nazism. 	212
at 	CI AM. 	171
influence of. 	138-4. 	197. 	219. 220. 	227. 	228.
31 	S. 	3^2. 	327. 	?28. 	333. 	3S2. 	3S4- 	^SS. 	379
ARCHITECTURE
Algiers project. 	268. 	271. 	273. 286. 	15.14
Carpenter Center. 	281-3. 	20.16
Centrosoyus. 	i 	39-40. 	203, 	70.13
Chandigarh. 	276-81. 	306. 	307. 	308. 	315.
334. 	340. 	360. 	388. 	20.6. 20.7,
2o.()-20.i2. 	20.14. 	Frontispiece. 	Plate 	10
Dom-ino 	system. 	46-7. 	282. 	330. 	355. 	387.
3.15. 	3.16
Leagueof Nations 	project. 	143. 	179-80. 	203.
306. 	1 	3.7
machine a 	habiter. 	104. 	117
Maison 	Citrohan. 	109-10. 	165. 	192. 	276.
286. 	3SS. 	^'.7
Maison 	Cook. 	1 	12-13. 	ii4. 	115. 	117. 	127.
174. 	142. 	193. 	225. 27s. 	8.10
Maison 	Errazuris. 	204
Maisons 	Jaoul. 	275. 244. 	320. 	336. 	20.4
Maison 	de 	Refuge. 	203. 	208
Maison 	La 	Roche/Jeanneret. 	I lo-i i. 	14 	3. 	8.S.
8.9.8.12
Maison 	Stein, 	see Villa 	Stein
'Modulor' 	system. 	268. 272. 	280. 	286
Mondaneum 	scheme. 	197
Museum 	of World 	Culture project. 	268
Palace 	of the Soviets design. 	143. 	203, 	382,
10.17
Pavillon 	de 	I'Esprit 	Nouveau. 	137
Pavilion 	Suisse. 	139. 	204-6, 	207. 	208. 	231.
273. 	284. 	286. 298. 	15.S-15.10
Petite Maison 	de 	Weekend. 	204. 	223. 	271.
27s, 	276. 	15. 1
1
Project 	2 	3A. 	see 	United 	Nations
Ronchamp. 	Chapel 	of Notre 	Dame. 	273-4.
282. 	301. 	320. 	20.1. 	20.2
Rue 	de Sevres 	atelier. 	281. 	338
Sarabhai 	house. 	275-6. 	20.5
St-Baume Shrine 	project. 	273
St-Die, 	306. 	307
Les Terrasses, 	see Villa 	Stein
La Tourette, 	monastery 	of, 	274-5. 	?o8, 	312,
19.12
Unite d'habitation, 	207, 	271-2. 	275, 	284-5.
317. 	?2o. 	340. 	34S- 	3&9. 	370. 	21.1-21..3
United 	Nations 	Headquarters. 	267. 	19.1
1
Venice Hospital 	project. 	281-2. 	291. 	20.15
Villa 	Baizeau 	at 	Carthage. 	143, 	8.12
Villa 	Meyer. 	1 	1 	5. 	142
Villa 	Savoye. 	iSi. 	183. 	146. 	147. 	200. 203.
223.232.233.234.237. 	3 	33. 	338.
8.1 2. 	14.1 -14.10. 	Plate 	7
Villa 	Schwob. 	106. 	107,^.3
Villa 	Shodan. 	275-6
Villa 	Stein 	(Les Terrasses), 	11 5-1 7, 	175, 	182.
192. 	143. 	227. 275. 	354. 	8.12-8.16
Ville Contemporaine. 	iii. 112, 	123, 	151,
164-6, 	178. 	207, 225, 307, 382, 	12.6, 	12.7
Ville 	Radieuse, 	La, 	165, 	206, 	207-8, 	209, 210,
268, 277, 283, 	286. 287. 	288. 290, 	15.12,
15.13
'Ville 	Voisin'. 	112. 	151. 	165. 	207
Weissenhofsiedlung. 	i^.i
OTHKR 	WORK
art 	school 	project. 	8.
1
sketch 	of the 	Acropolis. 	8.2
Still-Life. 	8.4
'Ubus'. 	271
PlIBLICATIONS
'Five 	Points of a 	New Architecture'. 	1 14. 	175.
192. 	193. 	204, 	206, 225, 226, 	229, 	271,
27s. 	^07'8.i2
Vers 	une architecture. 	116, 	146. 	192. 	144. 	243.
351.S.5-S.7
Voyafie d'Orient. 	105
When 	the 	Cathedrals 	were 	White. 	209
League 	of Nations 	competition, 	115. 	139. 	156.
175. 	178. 	179-80. 	203. 	237. 	268. 306.
322. 	1 	3.7. 	13-9
I^doux. 	Claude 	Nicolas 	(1736-1806). 	14. 	105. 	370
Saltworks 	at 	Chaux. 	324
architecture parlante. 	374
Leger. 	Fernand.
The 	City. 	107
Leicester University 	Engineering 	building. 	322.
24.^^. 	Plate 	12
Leipzig 	Fair. 	141 	3.
Steel 	Industry 	Pavilion. 	70. 	5.10
Lenin 	Hills. 	217
Lenin 	Institute project. 	140-2. 	10.14
Lenin's Tribune design. 	10.3
Leonidov. 	Ivan.
Lenin 	Institute 	project. 	140-2. 	10.14
Lescaze. 	William 	( 	1 846-1969).
PSFS 	skyscraper 	(with 	C. 	Howe), 	i 	57-8, 	178,
266, 	320. 	II. iS
Lethaby. 	W.R. 	(1857-1931). 	48. 	55. 	223
Lever 	House. 	266
Lewis. 	Wyndham, 	no, 	223
Libera, 	A.. 	219
Lillington 	Street 	estate. 	294. 	21.4
Lincoln 	Art 	Gallery. 	Nebraska. 	309
Lincoln 	Center. 	New 	York. 	309. 	23.5
Lincoln 	Memorial, 	238, 	1S.6
linear city. 	171. 	10.16
Linz, 	2 1
2
Lipchitz, 	110
Lissitzky, 	El, 	93, 	46, 	124, 	126, 	133, 	137, 	i 	34,
140. 	177
'Cloudhanger' 	project. 	10.6
Lenin's Tribune design. 	10.3
'Proun' 	(City), 	134, 	lo.i
Russia: 	.An 	Architecture for 	World 	Revolution. 	1 70
Liverpool 	University. 	320
Loewy. 	Raymond 	( 	1893-). 	149
streamlined 	train. 	1S.4
London. 	17. 	33. 	242. 261, 288, 	29(.), 	317, 	314,
!?7- 	?S7
London 	Zoo,
Gorilla 	house. 	225
Penguin 	pool. 	225. 	17.2
Loos. 	Adolf! 	1870-1933). 	34. 	35-6, 	37, 	no.
147- 	171
Chicago 	Tribune competition 	design, 	11.
4
Kiirntner 	Bar. 	',(>
Palais 	Stoclet. 	2.17. 	2.18
Steiner House. 	36. 	2.19
'Ornament 	and 	Crime'. 	36
Los 	Angeles. 	236, 	334
Louisiana 	Art 	Museum. 	Copenhagen, 	302, 	22.
H
Lovell. 	Philip. 	155
Lovell 	Beach 	House. 	156-7. 	1 	1 . 1
6
Lovell 	House. 	1 	56-7. 	1 1. 1 7. 	Plate 	6
Luban 	chemical 	works. 	65. 5.5
Lubetkin. 	Berthold 	(1901-), 	196, 	221, 223, 225.
290,327. 	387
Avenue de Versailles flats 	(with 	R. 	Ginsberg). 	225
Finsbury 	plans 	( with 	Tecton I. 	3 1
7
High 	Point 	I 	(with Tecton). 	228. 	17.1. 	17.3
High 	Point 	II 	(with 	Tecton). 	228-9. 	U7. 	17-8
Penguin 	pool 	(with Tecton). 	London 	Zoo, 	17.2
Soviet 	Pavilion 	Strasbourg 	(with 	Tecton)
(1929). 	225
Whipsnadc 	bungalow, 	227
Lucas, Colin 	( 	1906-)
house 	at 	Frognal 	(with 	Lucas 	and 	V\'ard(, 	227.
17.6
Grays wood 	'New Farm', 	227
Lucas, 	William, 	336
Luckenwald 	hat 	factory, 	123
Luckhardt, 	VVassili 	(1889-1972), 	345
Lutyens, 	Edwin 	(1869-1944), 	48, 	52-4, 	56.
225,351
Jekyll 	House, 	52
New 	Delhi, 	234, 234, 277, 	18,7
Orchards, 	52
Overstrand 	Hall, 	52
Plaisaunce, 	52, 	4.6
Tigbourne Court, 	52. 	4.5
Lyndon, 	see 	Moore
Lyons, 	45, 	162
machine 	art, 	104
McGraw-Hill 	building, 	144, 	1 	1.^
machine a 	habiter. 	182. 	192
McKim. 	C.F. 	( 	1847-1909),
Racquets Club 	(with 	Mead 	and 	White), 	266
.McKinncIl, 	Michael.
Boston 	City 	Hall 	(with 	Kallmann 	and Knowles).
307-8, 	350,23.2
Mackintosh. 	Charles 	Rennie(i868-I928). 	30-3,
34.48, 	51,94,223. 	386
Cranston's 	tea rooms, 	30
Glasgow 	School 	of Art, 	30-3,42, 	58,
2. 1 3-2. 1 5. 	Plate 	1
Hill 	House. 	4.4
House 	for 	an 	Art 	Lover. 	34
.Mackmurdo, 	Arthur ( 	1851-1942). 	22,48
Macmurray. 	1 	53
Madison 	Avenue, 	352
Magnitogorsk, 	142
Magritte, 	Rene, 	333
Maillart. 	Robert. 	( 	1872-1940), 	44
concrete 	bridge, 	3.12
Mairea. 	see Villa 	Mairea
Maison 	Carree, 	304
Maison 	Citrohan. 	104-10. 	111, 	112, 	131. 	165.
142. 	276. 286, 355, 	S.7
Maison 	Cook. 	112-13, 	114. 	115. 127, 	T17, 	127,
174, 192, 	193, 	225, 275. 	8.10
Maison 	Errazuris, 	204
Maisons Jaoul, 	275, 	294, 	296, 	320, 	336, 	20.4
Maison 	du 	Peuple, 24, 	2.4
Maison 	de 	Refuge, 	20 3, 	208

-- 413 of 420 --

41- 	Index
Maison 	La 	Roche/Jeanneret, 	i 	lo-i i, 	195. 	8.8.
8.9.8.12
Maison 	de Verre. 	182. 	13.12
Majolica 	House, 	33
Maki. 	Fumihiko(i928-|, 	341
Malevich, 	Kasimir (1878-1935). 	93. 96. 	i 	33
Mali. 	362-3
Mallet-Stevens. 	Robert 	(1886-194S). 	180, 	22s
Malraux. 	Andre. 	38S
Manchester, 	England, 	i 	59
Manhattan, 	146. 151. IS3. 	165. 	209. 	266, 268.
3M. 	549. 	357.374
Mansart. 	Francois. 	108
Manual Training School. 	St 	Louis, 	56
Marcks. 	Gerhard. 	121
Marin 	County Court 	House. 	270
Marinetti. 	Tommaso. 	"I. 	72. 	2i8
Marseilles, 	see Unite d'habitation
Martienssen. 	Rex 	( 	190S-1942). 	196. 	331
Johannesburg 	funeral 	home. 	197
Peterhouse 	flats. 	197
Martin, 	Sir 	Ixslie ( 	1 90S- 1, 	317
Royal 	Festival 	Hall. 	London, 	24.1
Martin 	Kstate 	plan, 	7.
;
Martin House, 	79, 	81
Marx. 	Karl. 	133. 	IS9. 	17"
Marx-Engels Institute. 	Titlis. 	217
Marxism. 	21 	1. 	212
Marxist 	ideas. 	134. 135. 	140
mass 	production. 	105. 	133. 	138. 	167
Massachusetts. 	55. 	259. 	260
Massachusetts 	Institute of Technology 	(MIT). 	sf>.
297
Matisse. 	Henri. 	387
Mausoleum of Augustus. 	6.10
May. 	Ernst 	(1 886- 1 970), 	I 	30. 	159. 	166. 	170, 	217
Romerstadt 	Siedlung, 	12.8
Mayan 	prototypes, 	i 	S4
Maybeck. 	Bernard 	1 	1S26-19S7I. 	58
First 	Church 	of Christ. 	Scientist. 	58. 	4. j 	7
Mayer. 	Albert. 	276
Mayekawa. 	Kunio 	(190S-). 	338, 	340. 	381
Kyoto Town 	Hall. 	340.25.10
Metropolitan 	Festival 	Hall. 	Tokyo. 	340
Nippon 	Sogo 	Bank. 	Tokyo. 	3 39
Mazdaznan 	cult. 	121
Mead, 	see 	McKim
Mecca 	Intercontinental 	Hotel. 	364-5
mechanization. 	105
Meier. 	Richard. 	( 1 934-), 	354. 	355
Meier-Graefe. 	Julius. 	2S
Melnikov. 	Konstantin. 	i 	^7. 	216. 	322
Ministry 	of Heavy 	Industry 	project. 	143
Rusakov 	Workers' 	Club. 	137. 	10.8
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exposition. 	192s. 	i 	37.
10.5
Mendelsohn, 	Erich 	(1887-1953), 	37, 	120, 	I2T.
122-3. 	132
De 	La 	Warr seaside pavilion. 	Bexhill 	(with 	S.
Chermayeff). 	17.5
Einstein 	Tower. 	122. 	2 	56. 	9.6
I.uckenwalde 	hat 	factory. 	123
Palace 	of Soviets 	competition 	design. 	14 	i
Schockcn 	department 	store. 	177-8. 	1 	i.8
Merrill. 	J.O.. 	see Skidmore
'Messaggio', 	72-73
'Metabolist Group'. 	^41-1. 	349
scheme 	for a 	modern 	city. 	25. 1
2
Metropolitan 	Festival 	Hall. 	Tokyo. 	340
Mexico City 	University. 	333
Meyer. 	Adolf. 	66
Meyer. 	llannes( 1 889 	-1954). 	131. 	180
League of Nations competition 	design . 	180
322, 	1.3.9
Meyerhold, 	i 	34. 	225
Michelangelo. 	108. 	206. 	271. 	283
Michelucci. 	Giovanni 	( 	1S91-),
Florence 	Railway 	Station, 	219
Midway Gardens. 	121
Mies van 	de 	Robe. 	Ludwig 	( 	1 886-1969). 	loi.
12^-4. 130-1. 	147. 	175. 	178. 	231. 242.
263. 270, 271, 	299, 	306, 	349. 	377
and 	Behrens. 	66
influence of. 	272. 	296, 	303. 310. 	317, 	^34
and 	Le 	Corbusier, 	104. 	123
in 	the 	United 	States. 	1 58. 	258
'universal 	space'. 	372
ARCHlTF.CTtiRE
Barcelona 	Pavilion. 	183-5. 	186. 	197. 	216.
308. 	333, 	3S8. 	7 	M 	5-13. 15
Berlin. 	New 	National 	Gallery, 	308, 	345. 	23.3
Berlin 	Reichsbank, 	2 1
2
brick 	villa 	project. 	124, 	9,9
concrete 	office 	building 	project, 	9.8
Farnsworth 	House. 	262
Friedrichstrasse skyscraper competition.
125-4.9.7
Ulinois 	Institute of Technology, 	216, 261, 	79.5,
79.4
Krefeld 	House, 	785
KriJller-Miiller Villa, 	123
Lake 	Shore 	Drive apartments, 	264. 	266, 	79.7.
19. S. 	P/rt(f 	9
Rosa 	Luxemburg Monument. 	185
Seagram 	building. 	266, 	267. 	320. 	19.9
Siedlung 	design. 	1 3
1
Tugendhat 	House. 	197
VVei.sscnhofsiedlung 	designs. 	Stuttgart. 	185. 	73.2
Milan. 	279. 	346. 	S70
The 	I'roblem 	of Buildini) Socialist 	Cities, 	171
Millard 	House. 	154. 	71.15
Mllyutin. 	N.A.. 	159. 	177. 	207
minimum 	habitation. 	173
Ministry 	of Heavy 	Industry 	project. 	74 	5
'Mini-unite'. 	377
Miro. 	Joan 	204
MIT. 	see 	Massachusetts 	Institute 	of Technology
Mlada 	Boleslav 	Industrial 	School. 	797
Moberly. 	see Slater
Modcna 	Cemetery. 	370
Mogul 	tradition. 	277
Moholy-Nagy. 	Laszlo. 	93. 	727, 	125, 	726. 	729.
7 	37. 	148
lAflht-Spaee 	Modiihttor. 	9. 	7 	7
'Mondaneum. 	797
Mondrian. 	Piet. 	87. 95. 94. 97. 98. 99. 	124. 	770.
785.227.262. 	347
Monument 	to 	the Third 	International. 	734. 	735
Montreal 	Expo 	67. 	292
Montuori. 	see Calini
Monza. 	219
Moore. 	Charles 	(1925-). 	355. 	357
Piazza 	d'ltalia. 	New 	Orleans. 	378
Santa 	Barbara 	Faculty 	Club. 	354. 	26. 	7 2
'Sea 	Ranch' 	(with 	Lyndon). 	554
Mopti 	Medical 	Centre, 	Mali. 	362-3. 	2y.8. 	Plate 	75
Morgan, 	William 	( 	7 9 30-). 	745
Morris, 	William. 	7 5. 	25. 	48, 	55. 56. 	720, 	767
Morocco. 	288. 	303. 	361
Moscow. 	7 	33. 	135. 	7 	37. 	740. 	207. 	365
subways. 	217
student 	dormitory. 	;o.ri. 	ro.12
Mount 	Angel 	College 	Library. 	299
Moya. 	Hidalgo, 	see Powell
Muller. 	Peter 	( 	7927-). 	336
Muller House. 	336.25.4
Mumford. 	Lewis. 	744, 	267, 	268
The 	lirown 	Decades. 	744
Munich. 	66
Munich 	Olympic 	Games 	buildings. 	364
Munstead 	Wood house. 	52
Musce 	de 	I' Art 	Moderne. 	374
Museum 	of Modern 	Art. 	Copenhagen, 	see
Louisiana 	Art 	Museum
Museum 	of Modern 	Art 	Show 	( 	7932). 	758
Mussolini, 	209, 278. 	227
Muthesius, 	Hermann. 	60-1. 	63. 	65. 	70. 74. 	105.
7 	78. 	779. 	727. 	266. 	388
Das enijUsche 	Haus. 	54
Mzab. 	Algiers. 	208. 	274
NarkomHn 	apartment 	building, 	738-9. 	740.
70.9. 	7 0.70
National Theatre. 	London. 	329-30. 	373.24.13,
24.74
Nazi 	Germany. 	211. 272. 	218
architecture. 	214-16
party. 	737
persecution. 	227
Nazism. 	727. 	277. 	345
Nebraska. 	309
Negro sculpture. 	93
Nehru. 	Pandit. 	277. 	280
Nenot. 	Le. 	P.-H. 	(185 3-19 34). 	779. 	242
neo-classicism. 	238. 261. 	309
neo-Georgian 	modes. 	237
neo-Gothic 	modes. 	237
Neo-RationalLsm, 	370
Nervi. 	Pier 	Luigi 	(7897-7979). 	340
Turin 	Exhibition 	Hall. 	26.7
Neue 	Sachlichkeit. 	see 	'New Objectivity'
Neutra. 	Richard 	(7892-7970). 	156-7. 	158. 	260
Kaufmann 	Desert House. 	757. 	334
Lovell 	House. 	156-7. 	ii.iy. 	Plate 	6
Wie 	Haul 	Ajnerika?. 	757
New 	Brutalism, 	288, 319, 	377
New 	Brutalists. 	228. 	275. 	281. 290. 	321, 	322. 	336
New 	Deal, 	799
New 	Delhi. 	225. 	234. 	239. 	277. 	351
Viceroy's 	House. 	18.
~
New 	Gourna. 	Egypt. 	357
New 	Haven. 	Connecticut, 	349-50
'New 	Objectivity' 	(N£'uf'Siic/i!ic/if;fi(), 	107. 	730,
770. 	780. 	785
New 	Orleans. 	378
New 	Regionalism. 	296
'New Towns'. 	288. 	317
New 	York. 	26. 	74. 	746. 	750. 	760. 	337, 	349
New 	York 	State Theater. 	23.5
'New 	York 	5', 	354. 355. 	368, 	379
Newcastle. 	England. 	369-70
Niemeyer. 	Oscar 	(7907-). 	334, 	345, 	387
Brasilia. 	307, 	23.7
Ministry 	of Education. 	Rio de Janeiro. 	333
Pampuiha 	Casino 	and 	restaurant. 	333. 	25,2
Nietzsche. 	Friedrich. 	705
Nikolayev, 	I.,
student 	dormitory. 	Moscow. 	70.11. 	10.12
Nippon 	Sogo 	Bank. 	Tokyo. 	3 	39
Norfolk. 	England. 	52
Norton. 	Charles 	Eliot. 	260
Notre 	Dame du 	Raincy. 	Church 	of, 	236. 	18.1
'Novembergruppe'. 	723
Nowicki. 	Matthew 	(7970-7957 	). 	276
Nureitiberg. 	214

-- 414 of 420 --

Oak 	Park. 	Cliicago. 	77. 	S8. 	1 	54. 	4.K
objet-tfipcs. 	1 	10
Oe. 	Asade. 	541
Officino 	produzione 	di 	Gaz. 	219
OTiorman, 	|uan 	(190=;-)
Mexico City 	I Iniversity 	Library, 	3 3 3
Oila 	bank. 	^42
Girls' 	High 	School. 	342
Okada 	House. 	Tokyo, 	3 38. 	25.7
Olbrich. 	J.M. 	(1867-1908). 	33. 34. 	63
Art 	Gallery. 	5 	^
Oldenburg 	Exhibition 	1905, 	63
Oliver 	House, 	i 	S7
Olivetti. 	Adriano. 	2 	19
Olivetti 	building, 	324
Olmsted. 	Frederick 	Law 	(1822-1903I. 	160
Olympic 	Stadium. 	Berlin. 	215
Munich. 	364
Tokyo. 	140. 	25.11
The 	Orchard. 	Chorley 	Wood. 	4.
3
Orchards. 	Godalming. 	S2
Oregon. 	249
Oriental 	carpets. 	91
Orly 	airship 	hangars. 	44
OS A. 	see Association 	of Contemporary 	Architects
Otaniemi 	Institute 	of Technology, 	?oo. 	22.5, 	22."
Otto. 	Frei 	( 	1925-). 340. 	564-5
Mecca 	Intercontinental 	Hotel, 	364-5
Munich 	Olympic 	Games buildings. 	364
Oud, 	J.P. 	(i89()-t96 	5) 	96. 	98, 	109. 	131
factory 	project. 	1919. 	96. 	7.9
Hook 	of Holland 	housing. 	96. 	1 70. 	12.10. 	1 2. 1
1
Kiefhoek housing. 	170. 	12.12. 	12.13
.seaside housing. 	96. 	~.8
Overstrand 	Hall. 	52
Owen. 	Robert. 	161
Owings. 	N. 	( 1 90 3-). 	see Skidmore
Oxford 	University.
Florey 	building. 	323, 	24.y
St 	Hilda's dormitory. 	320
Ozenfant. 	Amedee, 	107. 	no
L'Esprit 	Nouveau 	(with 	Le Corbusier). 	108
I'oundatwns 0) 	Modern 	Art. 	107
Paddington. 	London. 	288
Pacific 	Exhibition 	( 1 9 1 5 ), 	5 8
Paestum 	temples. 	109. 	192
Pahlavi 	Library. 	363-4. 	2/. 10
Paimio 	Sanatorium. 	221, 	230, 	17. 1 1, 	17.12
Pakistan. 	276
Palace of Labour competition. 	135, 	10.4
Palace of the Soviets competition, 	142. 143, 	203,
216, 217, 237, 	382. 	10.17. 	10.18
Palais Stoclet. 	34. 	42. 	2.17. 	2.18
PalauGuell. 	28
Palazzo 	del Te. 	3 54
Palazzo 	della 	Ci\alta 	Italiana. 	222
Palladio 	( 	i 	508-1580). 	192, 	242, 262. 	352, 	371
Villa 	Malcontenta, 	83. 	117
Palm 	Houses. 	Kew 	Gardens. 	32 	?
Palm 	Springs, 	3 34
Pampulha 	Casino 	and 	restaurant, 	333, 	25.2
Pan 	Am Skyscraper, 	261
Pan-Russian 	Executive 	committee, 	133
pantheism, 	29
Pantheon, 	106, 	108, 	280
Paoletti, 	Silvius, 	26
Paolozzi, 	Eduardo, 	319
Papua 	New 	Guinea, 	358-60
village, 	2~.4
Paris. 	17. 	20. 21. 22. 	25, 	33, 	37, 	43, 	107, 	108,
no, 	112, 143, 145, 	i5o, 	164, 182. 	225. 	277
Exhibition 	(1900). 	26
Exhibition 	(1937). 	216. 	??**
German 	Pavilion. 	16.6
Japanese 	Pavilion. 	338
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	16.7
Exposition des 	Arts 	Decoratifs 	(1925). 	1 37.
216. 	236. 	322
Pavilion 	de I'Esprit 	Nouveau. 	112. 	1 	37
Soviet 	Pavilion, 	i 	37. 	322. 	10.5
Metro. 	26. 	2.6
Opera. 	226. 	1.5
Park Cmell. 	29
Parthenon, 	105, 	108, 	109, 	192, 	193, 	231, 	274,
301, 	14,11
Pasadena, 	56, 	154
Paul, 	Bruno, 	123
Pavilion 	of the City 	of Brno, 	197
Pavilion 	de 	I'Esprit 	Nouveau, 	112, 	137
Pavilion 	Suisse, 	139, 	204-6. 	208. 231. 273. 	284.
286, 	298, 	207, 	15,8-15,10
Paxton, 	Joseph 	( 	1803-1865),
Crystal 	Palace, 	38, 	^.2
Pazzi 	Chapel. 	374
Peabody Terraces. 	292-3, 	349. 	21,12
Pei, 	leoh 	Ming 	( 	191 7-I, 	260, 	353
Hancock Tower, 	350, 	26,8
Peking, 	277
Great 	Hall of the 	People. 	365
Ministry 	of Building. 	365.27.11
Museum of Chinese 	History and the Revolution,
Penguin 	pool, 	London 	Zoo, 	1 7.2
Pennsylvania 	University, 	Philadelphia, 	3 1 2, 	34 3,
350
Peressutti. 	Enrico 	( 	1 908-),
Torre 	Velasca 	(with 	E. 	Rogers), 	346, 	26,3
Perret, 	Auguste 	(1875-1954), 	19, 	37, 	40-3, 	46,
47, 	58, 	104, 	105, 	106, 	107, 	143, 	242, 	385,
386
Champs-Elysees Theatre, 	43, 	3.10
Church 	of Notre 	Dame du 	Raincy, 	236, 	18. i
Rue 	Franklin 	Hats, 	40-1, 	5.6-3.8, 	Plate 	2
Rue de 	Ponthieu 	garage, 	42, 	^.t)
Perret. 	Gustav. 	40. 	4 5
Perrycroft. 	49. 4.2
Persian 	Gulf. 	357. 	364
Peru, 	358
Pessac, 	1 	1 o
Peter Jones's Store, 	227
Peterhouse 	flats, 	197
Petite 	Maisonde Weekend, 	204, 	223, 271, 	275,
276, 	15.11
Pevsner, 	Antoine, 	153
Pevsner, 	Nikolaus, 	21-2, 	33, 	48, 49, 	105, 	236,
243,273, 	317
phalanstere', 	160. 	171. 	207, 	12.1
Phidias, 	283
Philadelphia. 	178, 	350-3
Exhibition 	of 	1 8 79, 	7 5
Guild 	House, 	352, 	353.26,11
Philadelphia 	Savings 	Fund 	Society 	(PSFS)
skyscraper, 	157-8, 	178,266,320, 	11.18
Phillips 	Exeter 	Academy. 	23.9
Phonix 	Rheinrohr skyscraper. 	345
Piacentini. 	M. 	(1881-1960), 	218
Rome 	University Senate, 	16,8
Piano, 	Renzo(l937-), 	327, 	374
Pompidou 	Centre 	(with 	R, 	Rogers), 	327, 	28.8
Piazza d'ltalia. 	New 	Orleans, 	378
Picasso, 	Pablo, 	93, 	107, 	204, 278, 	387
I 'Aficionado. 	7. 	i
Piero della 	Francesca. 	107
Index 	413
Pimlico. 	288, 	294, 	317
Pirelli 	building, 	Milan, 	546, 	26,2
Place 	Beaubourg, 	Paris, 	374
Plaisaunce, 	52, 	4.6
Plaza 	y 	Fuente. 	Mexico 	City. 	333, 25,1
Plocki, 	Z., 	359-60
Plug-in-City', 	325, 	24,9
Poelzig, 	Hans 	(1869-1936), 	64, 	121
Luban 	Chemical Works. 	65. 	5.5
Poissy. 	see Villa 	Savoye
Politburo. 	142
Pollini. 	G. 	( 	1903-I. 	219
Pollock. 	Jackson. 	271. 	289
Pompeii, 	105
Pompidou 	Centre, 	327, 	374,28,8
Pont 	du 	Gard, 	1 08
Ponthieu, 	Rue de, 	garage. 	42. 3.9
Ponti. 	Clio 	(189 1-1979),
Pirelli 	building. 	346, 	26.2
Pop 	Art. 	352. 	354. 	355
influence of. 	348. 	376
Popper. 	Karl
The Open Society and 	Its 	Enemies. 	382
'Populist' 	movement. 	132
Port 	Moresby. 	358
Post-Modernism. 	374. 	376. 	377, 	378. 	387
Potsdam. 	122
Potteries Thinkbelt. 	326. 	24.10
Poussin. 	Nicolas. 	107
Powell. 	P. 	(1921-). 	317
Churchill Gardens, 	Pimlico 	(with 	H, 	Moya). 	317
Prague, 	197
Prairie 	Houses, 	78, 	80, 83, 89. 	154, 	6,3
Prairie 	School, 	56, 88, 	90, 	145
Praunheim 	housing scheme, 	167
Pravda 	building, 	136, 	177, 	10.7
Pre-Raphaelites. 	22
Presence of the Past 	Exhibition. 	380
Price. 	Cedric 	( 	1 9 	54-). 	326
Potteries Thinkbelt, 	326, 	24.10
Priene. 	291
primitivism, 	17, 	121, 	204, 	271, 	320
Princeton 	University, 	354
the 	Benacerraf addition. 	354,26,13
Prinzregentenstrasse, 	2 1
4
Prix de 	Rome, 	4 5
Procter & 	Gamble, 	56
'Prolecult' 	movement, 	132
'Prouns', 	I 	33, 	139, 	lo.i
Pruitt-Igoe 	scheme. 	294. 	21.3
PSFS. 	see 	Philadelphia 	Savings 	Fund Society
Pullman 	City. 	160
Pugin.A.W.. 	16.48. 	118
Punin. 	Nikolai. 	135
Purism. 	91. 	93, 97, 	107-8, 	no. 	116. 	117. 	165.
I 	74, 	194, 196. 	197. 	219. 237. 271. 	355
Purist 	language. 	140
Purist 	pictures. 	112. 	115
Purists. 	107. 	108
Purkersdorf convalescent 	home. 	34
pyramids. 	108
Quaroni. 	L.. 	345
Racine. 	Wisconsin. 	200
Racquets Club. 	New 	York. 	266
Radiant 	City, see 	Villa Radieuse
radical 	eclecticism. 	380
Ransome. 	Ernest. 	39. 	43
Rasmus.sen. 	Steen 	Eiler, 	303
Rathenau, 	Emil, 	6 ?, 	121
Rationalism, 	1 	7-18, 	24, 	57, 	38, 	39, 	47. 48. 91,

-- 415 of 420 --

414 	• 	Index
loi, 	los. 	19s
influence of. 	14(1. 	147
Rationalists, 	29, 	34(1, 	355
Rauschenberg. 	Robiert. 	302. 	3s
i
Rava.C.E., 	219
Ravereau. 	Andre.
Mopti 	Medical 	Centre. 	362-3. 	27. S. 	Plate 	25
Raymond. 	Antonin 	( 	1888-1976). 	196. 	338
Readers' 	Digest 	publishing 	house, 	3 39
Realism. 	143. 	216
Red-Blue 	Chair, 	98. 	99. 	7.10
RedHouse. 	The, 	48. 	4.1
Red 	Square. 	217
Refuge, 	see 	Maison 	de 	Refuge
Regent 	Street 	facades, 	18.1
1
Reilly. 	.s-cf Slater
Reinhard. 	i 	s 	3
Reliance 	Building. 	149. 	264
Renaissance. 	14. 	78. 	i6s. 	207. 	308. 	331. 	381
Richards. 	J. M.. 	228
Richards Medical 	Laboratories. 	312. 	142. 	2^.7. 	2^.8
Richardson. 	Henry 	Hobson. 	(18 	38-1886) 	17. 	SS.
S6. 	94- 	144.229
Ames 	Gate 	Lodge. 	SS. 	4-7
Richfield 	building. 	2 	36
Richmond. 	London. 	288. 	317
Riding 	School 	at 	San 	Cristobal. 	IVate 	74
Ridolti. 	M.. 	34
S
Rietveld. Gerrit 	(1884-1464). 	44. 	y6. 49. 	126. 	i 	32
Red-Blue 	Chair. 	98, 	99. 	7. zo
Schroeder 	House. 	96. 	99-101. 	1 	1 1. 	7.13. 	7.14.
7. IS. 	Plate
4
Rimpl. 	H.
Heinkel 	factory. 	216
Rio 	de 	laneiro. 	3 	31
Ministry 	of Education. 	333
Robic 	House. 	79. 	83-8. 	79. 	192. 	270. 	388.
h. 12-6. 16
Robin 	Hood 	Gardens. 	320. 	24.4
Roche. 	K. 	( 	1 922- land 	Dinkeloo. 	T. 	(191 8-).
U9-S0
College Life 	Assurance 	building. 	Indiana. 	3 so.
J 6.
7
ford 	Foundation. 	350
Knights of Columbus 	Headquarters. 	349-so
Rockefeller. 	14s
Rockefeller Center, 	i 	s 	3. 	1 	1. 	r 	i
Rogers. 	Ernesto.
Torre 	Velasca 	(with 	E. 	Peressutil. 	346. 	26.
;
Rogers. 	Richard 	(1933-). 	327
Pompidou 	Centre, 	(with 	R, 	Piano). 	374. 	28.
S
Roman 	Baths. 	106, 	roS
Romanesque. 	6 	3
Rome. 	14s. 	218. 	310. 	3SI
Rome 	Univensity Senate 	building. 	16.S
Romerstadt 	housing 	scheme. 	167. 	12.fi
Ronchamp. 	Chapel 	of Notre 	Dame. 	273-4. 	282.
301. 	320. 	20.1, 	20.2
Roosevelt. 	F.D.. 	is8
Root. 	)ohn 	Wellborn 	( 	18SO-9T). 	144
Reliance 	building 	(with 	1). 	Burnham). 	149. 	264
'Ropetskaia' 	group, 	1 	32
Rosa 	Luxemburg 	Monument, 	iSs
Rose 	House, 	3 	34
Ro.senquist. 	32s
Rossi. 	Aldo( 	193 1-1. 	368. 	371
Gallaretese 	housing. 	370. 	2X.2
Modena 	Cemetery. 	370
1,'Architettiira ilelhi 	Citta, 	370
Rotterdam, 	i 	77. 	290
Rovaniemi 	Library. 	299, 22.4
Rowe. 	Colin. 	263. 	320. 	3S4. 	382. 	383
Collacie 	Citfi 	(with 	F, 	Koetter), 	382
Royal 	College of Physicians, 	328, 	373.24.11.
Plate 	1^^
Royal 	Corinthian 	Yacht 	Club. 	22s
Royal 	Festival 	Hall. 	3 1 7. 	24.
1
Royal 	National 	Pahlavi 	Library. 	363-4. 	27.10
Rudolph. 	Paul(l9i8-|. 	260. 281. 	336. 	349.
^SO. 	3S?
Art 	and 	Architecture 	building. 	Yale. 	3 so. 	26.9
Boston 	Government 	Centre. 	3 so
jewett 	Arts 	Center. 	350
Rue 	Franklin 	tlats 	40-1 . 	3.6-3.S. 	Plate 	2
Rue de 	Ponthieu 	garage. 	42. 	3.9
Rue de 	Sevres, 	atelier. 	28
1
Rusakov 	Workers' 	Club, 	i 	37. 	10.
S
Ruskin. 	John, 	i 	s. 	22. 28. 29. 	48. 	161. 	273
Russia. 	74. 	93. 	104. 	125. 	132-43, 	170, 	180, 	223
Saarinen. 	Eero 	(1910-61 	1, 	261, 	340
General 	Motors Technical 	Center, 	267
TWA Terminal. 	Kennedy 	Airport. 	304. 	2^.4
Saarinen. 	F.liel 	(187 3- 19 so)
rrihidic design. 	149
Sabsovich. 	171
Sachs 	apartment. 	157
Safdie. 	Moshe(i938-)
'Habitat'. 	Expo 	67. 	292
Sagrada 	Familia. 	Expiatory 	Church 	of the. 	28. 29.
2.H
Sainsbury 	.Art 	Centre. 	371
St 	Andrews 	University 	dormitory. 	324
St-Baume Shrine project. 	273
St-Die 	306. 	307
St 	Dunstan's 	Road 	studio. 	48
St 	Hilda's dormitory. 	Oxford. 	320
St 	lames 	Hats. 	328
St-Jean 	de 	Montmartrc, 	Church 	of, 	411. 	i.s
St 	Louis, 	s6
St 	Mark's Tower project. 	I 	S3. 	210
Saint-Simon. 	Henri, 	ift. 	112. 	159-60. 	i6s
Sakakura. 	Junzo 	( 	1901-1969).
Japanese 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exhibition. 	3 	31. 	338
Salem. 	(Iregon. 	202
Salk 	Institute. 	La 	|olla. 	256-7. 	314-is. 	23.10.
2^.1
1
Salon 	d' Automne. 	1 	1 	1 . 	164
San 	Francisco. 	146, 	270, 	334. 	354
Sandwich. 	Kent. 	S4
Sansovino. 	jacopo. 	242
Santa 	Barbara 	Faculty 	Club. 	354. 	26.72
Santa 	Coloma 	de 	Cervello. 	29
Sanf 	Elia. 	Antonio 	(1880-1916). 	60. 	72-4. 	326
Casa 	a 	Gradinate. 	s. i.S
power station. 	5.16
La 	Citta 	Niiova. 	71. 	72-4. 	165. 	219. 	5.14
Sarabhai 	House. 	275-6, 	20.5
Sartre. 	jean-Paul. 	319
SAS 	Hotel. 	Copenhagen. 	22.1
Saudi 	Arabia. 	364. 	365
Savoye. 	see 	Villa 	Savoye
Saynatsalo 	town 	centre. 	299. 	306. 	22. 	j. 	Plate 	i 	t
Scandinavia. 	223. 	229
Scandinavian 	design. 	296
Scarpa. 	Carlo 	( 	1406- 1 4 78), 	347
Scharoun. 	Hans( 	i893-t472). 	1 	31. 	175. 	309. 	34s
Berlin 	Philharmonic. 	304. 	34s
Scharoun. 	House. 	175
Weissenhofsiedlung. 	13. i
Scheerbart. 	Paul 	( 	1 86 	3- 19 15 1. 	70. 	118. 	120. 	124
Schindler. 	Rudolf ( 	1887-195 	3). 	155-6. 	1 	57.
I 	58. 	260. 	334
Lovell 	Beach 	House. 	1 56- 157, 	11.16
Oliver House, 	i 	57
Sachs 	apartments. 	157
Schindler 	House. 	155. 	11.14
Wolfe 	House. 	157
Schinkel. 	Karl 	Friedrich 	(1781-1841), 	13. 	17.
34. 	61. 	84. 	123. 	185. 	214. 	262
Altes 	Museum. 	Berlin. 	2S0. 	378.20.11
Schlemmer. 	Oskar. 	121. 	124
Schocken 	department store, 	177-8, 	13.
S
Schoenmaeker. 	9 3
Schoussev. 	A.V.
Marx-Engels 	histitute. 	217
Schroeder 	House. 	46.99-101. 	in. 	127. 	1 70.
174. 	i8s. 	254. 	7.13-7.15. 	Pkte4
Schwippert. 	345
Sch witters. 	Kurt, 	121
Schwob, 	see Villa 	Schwob
Scotland. 	324
Scott. 	Geofl'rey. 	264. 	328
The 	Areliiteetiin' of Humanism. 	93
Scott. 	Sir George Gilbert 	(181 1-78).
Foreign 	Office 	building. 	1
7
Scott-Brown. 	Denise. 	(1931-).
Learnini] from 	Las 	Vegas. 	352
Scully. 	\'incent. 	55. 	315. 	344
'Sea 	Ranch'. 	354
Seagram 	building. 	266. 267. 	320. 19.9
Secession. 	The. 	155
influence of. 	337
Secessionist 	circles. 	33
Seidler. 	Harry 	( 	1923-). 	334-6
Rose 	House. 	3 34
Seidler House. 	334,25,3
Semper. 	Gottfried 	{1803-79). 	61
Sennet. 	Richard. 	351
Sert. 	Jose 	Luis 	( 	1902-). 	ig6. 	292
Boston 	Llnivcrsity. 	349
Holyoke 	Center. 	349
Peabody Terraces. 	292-3, 	344. 	12.12
Crtii 	Our Cities Survive.^. 	292
'Nine 	Points 	on 	Monumentality' 	(with 	S.
Giedion). 	306
Seurat. 	Georges. 	107
Severini. 	Gino. 	71
Shaw. 	Richard 	Norman. 	(1831-1912). 	52. 	55
Sheeler. 	Charles. 	144
Sheffield 	University. 	289
Shepley. 	BulHnch. 	Coolidge 	and 	Abbott,
Harvard 	Memorial Church. 	1S.5
Shingle Style. 	55. 	77
Shiraz 	Art 	Gallery. 	300
Shodan. 	see 	Villa 	Shodan
Shreve. 	Lamb 	and 	Harmon.
Empire 	State 	Building. 	150. 	153
SiedlungHalen. 	Berne. 	291. 	21.11
Siedlungen. 	167. 	211
Siemens 	Computer Centre 	project. 	324. 	24.8
Siemensstadt 	housing scheme. 	170. 	9.16
Silesia. 	167
Silsbee. 	Joseph 	Lyman. 	76. 	77
Silvetti. 	Jorge. 	383
Sin 	Centre. 	324
Sitte. 	Camillo(l84 3-i4()3). 	160. 	383
Skidmore. 	Louis 	( 	1897-1962). 	Owings.
Nathaniel 	( 	1 90 3-) 	and 	Merrill. 	John 	O.
(1846-1475). 	344
Lever 	House. 	266. 267. 	7 9. 	10
Mecca 	airport. 	365
Slater. 	J.A.. 	Moberly. 	A. 	H.. 	Reilly. 	C.H.. 	and
Crahtree. 	W..
Peter Jones's Store. 	227
Slavic 	Revival, 	132

-- 416 of 420 --

Smith. 	David. 	271
Smith. 	Norris 	Kelly. 	77
Smithson. 	Alison 	(1928-) 	and 	Peter ( 1923-).
27s. 	2SS-90. 	^ 1 	7-20. 	548. 	364
Eivnoinist 	luiilding. 	5 1 9, 	24. 5
Golden 	lAine 	housing. 	288-9. 	319. 	21.7
Haupstadt 	scheme. 	?2o
'House of the 	Future', 	319
Hunstanton 	School. 	317.24.2
Robin 	Hood 	Gardens. 	320. 	24.4
Royal 	National 	Pahlavl 	Library. 	363-4. 	2y.io
St 	Hilda's 	dormitory. 	3211
Sheffield 	University 	scheme. 	289
Soltan. 	)., 	349
Sommerteld. 	Adolf, 	121
Sommerfeld 	House, 	Berlin. 	121. 	i 	30. 	9.4
Soria 	y 	Mata. 	Arturo. 	160
South 	Africa. 	196. 	331
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exposition 	( 	192s). 	137.
332. 	10.5
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	Paris 	Exhibition 	1 	1937), 	217. 	ifi.,-
Soviet 	Pavilion. 	Strasbourg 	(1929). 	22=;
Soviet Union. 	132-43. 	160. 	166. 	177, 	206,
216-17. 	231. 	237. 	258
Spain. 	196. 	333
Speer. 	Albert 	( 	190 5-). 	214-15. 	216. 	222
Chancellery building. 	Berlin. 	215. 16.4
German 	Pavilion. 	Paris Kxhibition 	(1937). 	1 6.6
Olympic 	Stadium. 	Berlin. 	215
'Zeppelinfeld' 	arena. 	214. 	16. i
Plan 	for 	Berlin, 	(with 	Hitler). 	16.3
Spence. 	Sir 	Basil 	( 	1907-1976).
Coventry 	Cathedral. 	309
'Spook 	School'. 	30
Stalin. 	1 	32
Stam. 	Mart 	( 	1899-). 	129. 	I 	31. 	I 	77
Stavha. 	197
Sun'itel. 	197
Steel 	Pavilion. 	Leipzig. 	5.10
Steichen. 	Edward. 	144
Stein. 	SCI' Villa 	Stein
Stein. 	Gertrude. 	115
Steiner. 	Rudolf
Goethcanum 	II. 	18.2
Steiner 	House. 	36.2.19
Stella. 	Joseph. 	144
Stern. 	Robert. 	(19 39-).
'House 	for 	an 	Academical 	Couple'. 	380. 	28. 23
Stick 	and 	Shingle 	Style, 	56
Stick 	Style. 	55. 	58. 	334
Stickley. 	Gustav. 	56
bungalow design. 	4.10
Stieglitz. 	Alfred, 	144
Stijl. 	De. 	71. 	93, 	94. 	96. 	97-101. 	107. 	108. 	124.
125. 	126. 	160. 	174. 	225. 289. 	337. 	347
exhibition. 	7.11
Stiriing. 	James(i926-). 	273. 	320. 	344. 	348.
369. 	378-9
Cologne 	Museum. 	378
Derby 	Civic Centre. 	378
Dorman 	Long 	building. 	324
Florey 	building. 	323.24.7
Ham 	Common 	houses. 	275. 	520
History 	Faculty 	building. 	Cambridge. 	322. 	24.6
Leicester 	University Engineering 	building (with
], 	Gowan), 	322. 	24.5. 	Plate 	12
Olivetti 	building. 	324
Siemens 	AEG 	project. 	324. 	24.8
St 	Andrew's dormitories. 	324
Stuttgart 	Museum. 	378.28.11
Stockholm 	Crematorium. 	242. 	iS.io
Public 	Library, 	241, 	iS.q
exhibition 	buildings, 	229
Stoclel, 	.i^dolf and 	Suzanne. 	34
Stoclet 	House, 	.sec 	Palais Stoclet
Stone, 	Edward 	Durell 	( 	1902-1978). 	261
United 	States 	Embassy, 	Delhi, 	309
'Streamlined 	Moderne' 	style. 	2 	36
Street. 	G.E. 	( 1 824-8 1 ). 	294
Stubbins. 	Hugh 	(191 2-).
Citicorp 	headquarters. 	374
Studio. 	The 	2 s
Sturgess House. 	49
Stuttgart. 	130. 	131. 	166. 	175
Museum. 	378-379. 	28.11
see also Weissenhofsiedlung
Style Liberty. 	26
Sugar Loaf Mountain 	project. 	270
Sullivan. 	Louis 	( 	1856-19241. 	22, 24. 	38-9. 	58.
76. 	77. 	144. 	147. 	149, 	isi. 	310
Carson 	Pirie Scott 	store. 	1 24
Wainwright 	building. 	3.3
'The Tall 	Office 	Building 	Artistically
Considered'. 	146
Summerson. 	John. 	14
Sunila 	pulp mills. 	231
'Superstudio'. 	348
Continuous 	Monument, 	.Arizona 	Desert. 	26.6
Suprematism. 	133
Surrealism. 	29. 	271. 	333
influence 	of 	371
Switzerland. 	106. 	371
Sydney. 	Australia. 	336
Sydney Opera 	House. 	303-5. 	309. 	344. 	385.
22.10. 	22.11
Symbolist 	ideas. 	92
Syndicalism. 	207
TAG, 	see Architects Collaborative
Tafuri. 	Manfredo. 	162
Taisekiji 	Temple. 	342
Tait. 	T.S. 	( 	1882-1954I. 	225
Crittal 	workers' 	housing. 	225
Taj 	Mahal. 	239
Taliesin. 	90, 	153. 	200. 	210
Taliesin 	fellowship. 	200. 	270
Taliesin 	foundation. 	199
Tange. 	Kenzo 	(191 	3-), 	281. 	305. 	340-1. 	344.
381. 	3«7
Hiroshima 	Memorial. 	25.9
Kagawa 	Prefecture. 	340
Tokyo Olympic 	Stadium. 	340. 	25. 1
1
Yamanashi 	Press 	and 	Radio 	Centre. 	342. 	25.14
Tassel 	House. 	22. 	2.;t
Tatlin. 	Vladimir 	( 	1880-1938). 	143
Monument 	to 	the Third 	International, 	i 	34.
I 	35. 	306. 	10.2
Taut. 	Bruno 	( 	1880-1938). 	70. 	118. 	120. 	121.
123. 130. 	131, 	147. 	170.304. 	337
Alpine 	Architektur, 	118. 	9.7
Britz Siedlung. 	170. 	72.9
Glass 	Pavilion. 	Cologne. 	5.77
Die Stadtkrone. 	1 	1
8
Steel 	Pavilion. 	Leipzig. 	5.70
Team 	X. 	290. 	296. 	302.320. 	325. 	334. 	345-9.
363.368-70.382.387
Team 	10 	Primer. 	348
Tecton. 	225
see also Lubetkin
Tehran. 	363. 	364
Teige. 	Karel. 	196
'Tendenza', 	370
Termini 	Station, 	Rome. 	346
Terragni, 	Giuseppe 	(1904-42). 	219-22. 	223.
Index 	• 	415
355. 370. 	371. 	387
Casa 	del 	Fascio. 	211. 	76.72. 	76. 73
'Danteum'. 	221. 	76.74. 	76.75
Palazzo della 	Civilta 	Italiana. 	222
Terrasses. 	Les. 	see 	Villa Stein
Tessenow. 	Heinrich 	(1876-1950I. 	106
Thapar. 	P.N.. 	276.
Theatre 	des Champs-Elysees. 	43. 	3.70
Third 	Reich. 	212. 	215
Third 	World. 	35S
Thompson. 	Benjamin 	(1918-). 	260
Thonet. 	Michael. 	35. 	no
Ticino. 	371
Tiffany. 	L.C.. 	26
Tiflis. 	2 1
7
Tigbourne Court. 	52. 	4.5
Tivoli. 	see Hadrian's 	villa
Tokyo. 	196. 	331. 	337. 	338. 	339. 	340
Tomkin. 	197
Toorop. 	Jan. 	22
Torre 	Velasca. 	Milan. 	346. 	26.3
Tourette. 	La. 	monastery of. 	274. 	308. 	312. 	20. j
Toyu. 	Katayama.
Hyokekan 	Museum. 	337
Transvaal 	group. 	196
Troost. 	Gerdy. 	214
House 	of German 	Art. 	214. 	76.2
Trucco. 	G. 	Matte. 	208
Fiat 	factory. 	219. 	76,9
Tugendhat 	house. 	197
Tunisia. 	115
Turbinenfabrik. 	see AEG 	factories
Turin. 	208. 	219
Exhibition 	(1902 1. 	26. 	104
Exhibition 	Hall 	(1962). 	26.7
Turku 	Sanomat 	building. 	229. 	7 7.9
TWA 	Terminal. 	Kennedy 	Airport. 	309. 	2^.4
Twentieth 	Century 	Group. 	319. 	325
Uccle. 	2 5
Unite d' 	Habitation. 	Marseilles. 	207. 271. 	272.
275. 	284-95. 	312. 	317. 320. 	340. 	345.
369. 	370. 	27.1. 	27.3
United 	Nations 	complex. 267, 	79.7 	7
United 	States. 	43. 91. 	104. 	136-7. 	144-58. 	160,
786. 	236. 	237. 	238. 	258-70. 	282. 	292.
298. 	308-16. 	349-55! 	371
United 	States 	Embassy. 	Delhi. 	309
Unites. 	171. 	207
Unity Temple. 	44. 	58. 	79. 	88-9. 	202. 242. 270.
338. 	6.70. 6.77. 	6.18
Unwin. 	Raymond 	(186 	3-1940). 	161
Urbino 	College. 	291-2. 	347. 	27.70
Urfeld 	youth 	hostel. 	215. 	76.5
'Usonian' 	houses. 	199. 	202-3. 	-to
Utopia. 	135. 	159. 	206. 210. 258. 272. 	386
Utopian ideas. 	16. 	70. 	159-60. 	161. 	167. 	195.
291. 	286. 	293. 	320
Utopianism. 	97. 	104. 	172. 	118. 	123. 	127. 	t 	33.
144.180.288.347.378.382
Utrecht. 	99
Utzon. 	J(6rn 	(1918-). 	297. 	303-5. 	328. 	340.
344- 	?fi9. 	387
Bagsvaerd 	Church. 	383-5. 	28. 16-28. ig
housing 	at 	Birkehoj. 	Elsinore. 	303. 	22.9
Fredensborg houses. 	303
Kingo 	houses. 	296. 	303
Sydney Opera 	House. 	303-5. 	328. 22.70. 	22.17
Val des 	Bons 	Malades. 	373
Valdameri. 	Rino. 	221
Van 	Alen. 	William, 	i 	50-1. 	234

-- 417 of 420 --

41 6 	• 	Index
Chrysler building, 	i 	;o-i. 	1 	1.9. 	Plate 	5
Vanbrugh. 	|ohn 	{1664-1726). 	54
van 	der Vlugt. 	Leendert 	(1894-1936). 	177
vandeV'elde. 	Henry 	(186 3-19 5 7I. 	25. 26. 30.
43.65.119
Cologne Theatre. 	25
furniture designs. 	2.5
Halsy's 	barbershop. 	25
van 	Doesburg. 	Theo(i883-i93i). 	93. 94. 96.
98. 	124. 	12=5. 	126. 	148. 	354
spatial diagrams. 	7.12
VanEvck. 	Aldo(i9i8-). 	290-1. 	303. 	347-8.
385. 	387
Arnhem 	Paxilion. 	347. 	26.5
Ysbaanpad 	orphanage. 	291. 	347. 	372. 	26.4
Van 	Nelle 	I'actory. 	177. 	178. 	372. 	13.4
van 	t'HolT. 	Rob.
Huis ter 	Heide Villa. 	96. 	7.7
Varentsov. 	T..
urban 	project. 	10.15
Varma. 	P.L.. 	276
Venice Biennale (1980). 	380
Venice Hospital. 	281-2. 	291. 	20.15
Venturi. 	Robert. 	(1925-). 	351-3, 	354. 35S. 376.
377. 	3S1. 	3S2
Chestnut 	Hill 	House, 	352.26.10
Philadelphia Guild House. 	352-3. 26.11
Complexity 	and Contradition 	in Architecture. 	351
Versailles. 	207. 	239
Vesnin. 	Viktor A. 	(18S2-1950I. 	Leonid 	A.
( 1880-1953). 	Aleksandr 	(1883-1959).
133. 	I35-6. 	138
Palace of Labour project. 	10.4
Pravda 	building, 	i 	36. 	177. 	10.7
Vesser. 	Karl.
Urfeld 	youth 	hostel. 	215. 	26.5
Viceroy's 	House. 	New Delhi. 	277. 	18.7
Vichy 	Government. 	209. 	271
Vienna. 	21. 	33. 	34. 	37.92. 	121, 	155, 	171.334
Post Office Savings 	Bank. 	33. 	2.16
Viipuri 	Library. 	230. 	233. 	17.10
Villa 	Baizeau. 	193,8.12
VillaFlore. 	26. 	2.7
Villa 	Malrea. 	232. 	17.13-17.15
Villa 	Meyer. 	115, 	192
Villa 	Savoye. 	181, 	183. 	186-95. 	196, 	197,200.
203. 223. 232. 233, 234, 237. 	333. 388.
8.12. 	14.1-14.10. 	Plate 	7
Villa 	Shodan. 	275-6
Villa 	Schwob. 	106. 	107.^.3
Villa 	Stein 	at 	Garches. 	115-17. 	175. 	182. 	192.
193.227.275. 	354. 	S.12. 	«.i6
Villar. 	Francisco del. 	28
Ville Contemporaine. 	in. 	112. 	123. 	151.
164-6. 	178. 	207. 	225. 	307. 	12.6. 	12.7
Ville-Radieuse. 	La. 	165, 	206. 	207-8. 	209, 	210.
268, 277, 283. 286. 	287. 288. 	290. 	15.12.
15.13
'Ville 	Voisin'. 	112. 	151. 	165
'Vingt. 	les'. 	22
VIollet-le-Duc. 	£.(1814-1879). 	16. 	18,20.25,
26. 	37. 	38. 	39. 	40. 	46. 	90. 	105. 	195
Dictionnaire de I'architectiire. 	47
Entretieiis sur I'architecture. 	7.3. 	2.2
Vkhutemas School. 	125, 	133, 	137
Vladlmirov, 	V., 	138
Volkswagen, 	216
Vorticism. 	223
Vo.sges 	Mountains. 	273
Voysey. 	Charles (1 857-194 1 1. 	22.48-51, 	54. 	56
Bedford 	Park 	house. 	48
Broadleys. 	51
Perrycroft. 	49. 	4.2
St 	Dunstan's 	Road studio, 	48
Sturgess 	house. 	49
The Orchard. 	4.3
Wagner. 	Otto 	(1841-1918I, 	33-4. 	170
Majolica 	House. 	33
Vienna 	Post 	Office Savings Bank. 	33. 	2.16
Moderne .Architektiir. 	3 3
Wagner School. 	171
Wainwright 	building, 	3.3
Walden 	Pond. 	260
Walden 	Seven 	housing. 	371
Walking 	Cities 	project. 	324
Wall 	Street 	crash. 	144
Wallis. Gilbert 	and 	Partners
Hoover factory, 	Perivale, 	18.3
Ward. 	Basil
house 	at 	Frognal 	(with 	Connell and 	Lucas).
17.6
Ward 	Willitts 	house. 	79-80. 	6.4. 	6.5
warehouse aesthetic. 	42
Warhol. 	Andy. 	325
Washington 	Mall. 	239
V\'ashington 	Monument. 239
Wasnuith 	\'ohnncs. 	89, 	90, 	96, 	106
Webb. 	Michael. 	124
Furniture 	Manufacturers' 	.Association 	building
project. 	324
Sin 	Centre. 	324
Webb. 	Philip 	( 	183 1-191 	51. 	52. 	56
The 	Red 	House, 	48,4,1
Weimar Republic. 	119. 	125. 	127. 	129. 	166.
260
Weissenhofsiedlung. 	Stuttgart. 	166. 175. 	185.
345.9.16. 	n.i. 	13.2. 	13.5
Welfare 	State. 	295. 	317
Wendingen 	expressionists. 	122
VVerkbund. 	see Deutscher 	Werkbund
Werner. 	Eduard. 	66
Whale 	Beach. 	336
Whipsnade 	bungalow. 	227
White. 	S.. 	SCI' McKim
Wiener 	V\'erkstatte. 	34
Williams. 	Owen 	( 	1890-1969)
Boots 	Warehouse. 	Beeston. 	227. 	17.17
W'illis. 	Faber 	and 	Dumas 	building. 	371. 372.
2S.3
Wilson, 	see 	Langdon
Winslow 	House. 	77. 	78. 	89. 	6.1. 	6.2. 	6.10
Wisconsin. 	75. 	90
Wittkower. 	Rudolf
.4rc/iilectura/ 	Principles 	in 	the .Age of Humanism.
319
Witwatersrand. 	University. 	197
Wolfe House, 	i 	5 7
WolfHin. 	Heinrich. 	19. 	64. 	92. 	I 	58
Woods. 	Shadrach 	(1923-1973). 	291. 	328. 	349
.'\TB.'\T 	housing scheme 	I with 	Bodiansky).
288. 	3(12.21.6
Berlin 	L'niversity 	scheme 	(with 	Candilis 	and
Josic). 	291. 	21.9
Frankfurt-Rcimcrberg scheme 	(with 	Candilis
and josic). 	291
Woodward. 	Calvin. 	56
Workers' 	Club. 	137. 	20.8
World Trade Centre. 	3 74
World 	War 	I. 	34, 	loi. 	122. 	258
World 	Warn. 	258. 	271. 	296. 	344, 	387
Wright. 	Frank Lloyd(i867-i959). 	19. 	55-6, 	57.
58,76-90,98. 	117. 	114. 	15 3-5, 	158. 	174.
212. 	223, 	234, 242. 260. 	261. 	268-70.
271. 	299. 	303. 	316. 	378. 	380
influence of. 	55. 	66. 	94-6. 	97, 98, 	106, 	121.
124. 	156. 	157. 	310, 	327,334.336. 	347.
3 so
Froebel 	blocks. 	75. 78. 	270, 	388, 	6.9
Barnsdall 	House. 	154. 	22.13
Broadacre 	City. 	199. 	209-10. 	15.15
Capital Journal building. 	202
Cathedral 	of Work. 	202
Coonley 	House. 	79. 	81. 	270, 	6.6, 	6.7. 	6.20
Design 	Centers. 	210
Ennis 	House. 	154
Falling 	Water. 	199-200. 	202. 270. 	322, 	373.
25.2-J5. 	3. 	Plate 	8
Fricke 	House. 	Oak 	Park. 	Plate 3
Glasner 	House. 	82-3. 	6.8. 	6.20
Guggenheim 	Museum. 	268-70, 	19.13. 	19.24
'Home 	in 	a 	Prairie Town'. 	79. 6.3
Imperial 	Hotel. 	Tokyo. 	202. 	337, 	338
Johnson 	Wax 	building. 	200-2, 	270. 	322. 	373.
I.5-4-I5-6
Larkin 	building. 	42. 	79. 	88. 	94. 	202. 270. 	373.
7-4
Marin 	County 	Court House. 	270
Martin 	House. 	79. 	81. 	7.3
Midway 	Gardens. 	121
.Millard 	House. 	154. 	22.25
National 	Life 	Insurance project. 	153
own 	house. 	Oak 	Park. 	4.8
Prairie 	House. 	The'. 	54. 	78. 	80. 83. 	89
Robie 	House. 	79. 	83-8, 	270. 	386. 387. 	388.
6.22-6.26
skyscraper designs. 	153
St 	Marks Tower project. 	153. 	210
Sugar 	Loaf Mountain project. 	270
Taliesin. 	90. 	153. 	200. 	210
Unity Temple. 	44. 	58. 79. 	88-9, 	154, 	202,
242. 270. 	338. 	6.10. 6.17. 	6.18
'L^sonian' 	houses. 	199. 	202-3. 	210
Ward 	Willitts House. 	79-80. 	6.4. 	6.5
.in 	and Craft 	of the 	Machine. 	The. 	56, 	78
Testament. 	A. 	1 54
Wastnuth 	Volumes. 	89, 90. 96. 	106
Wurster. 	William 	(1895-1973). 	334
Yale 	University 	Art Gallery. 	310, 	23.6
.Art 	and 	Architecture building. 	350, 	26.9
Yalovkin. 	F.. 	138
Yaraada. 	Mamoru 	( 	1 894-)
Central 	Telegraph 	Office. 	Tokyo. 	337
Yamagata 	Hawaii Dreamland. 	342. 	25.13
Yamanashi 	Press 	and 	Radio 	Centre. 	342.
25.24
Yamasaki. 	Minora 	(1912-). 	294. 	364. 	374
Dharan 	.'Airport. 	364. 	27.9
Pruitt-Igoe 	scheme. 	294, 	22.23
W'orld 	Trade Centre. 	3 74
Yokoyama.
Taisekiji Temple. 	342
Yorke. 	F.R.S. 	(1906-62). 	227
Ysbaanpad 	orphanage. 	291. 347. 372. 	26.4
Zaanstraat 	hou.sing. 	96. 	7.6
Zeeland. 	241
Zelenko. 	171
Zen 	philosophy. 	3 	36
'Zeppelinfeld' 	;irena. 	214. 	26.2
Zevaco. 	j.F..
.Agadir 	housing. 	3(11. 	3(12.27.7
Zevi. 	Bruno. 	346
Zholtovsky, 	I.V., 	143
Zonnestraal 	Sanatorium. 	177. 	230. 	23.25

-- 418 of 420 --

i
I

-- 419 of 420 --

Modern 	Architecture
since 	1900
WILLIAM 	J.R. 	CURTIS
With 	441 	illustrations, 	16 	in 	color
This 	book 	fills 	a 	long-felt 	need 	by 	providing 	a 	sound, 	readable 	and 	balanced 	overall
view/ 	of 	the 	history 	of 	modern 	architecture. 	Dr 	Curtis 	examines 	the 	origins 	of 	the
modern 	tradition 	in 	the 	late 	nineteenth 	century, 	and 	sets 	its 	development 	in 	a 	broad
context 	that 	includes 	changing 	social 	and 	technical 	conditions 	Within 	this
framework 	he 	emphasizes 	the 	variety 	of 	personal 	and 	regional 	strands 	w/ithin
modern 	architecture.
In 	developing 	his 	central 	theme 	of 	the 	growth 	of 	a 	modern 	tradition 	the 	author
adopts 	an 	integrated 	approach 	that 	blends 	the 	practical, 	aesthetic 	and 	social
dimensions 	- 	yet 	the 	stress 	is 	on 	the 	formal 	and 	symbolic 	aspects 	of 	the 	art 	Atten-
tion 	IS 	concentrated 	on 	major 	works 	of 	the 	century, 	and 	in 	some 	chapters 	individual
architects 	and 	individual 	buildings 	are 	given 	the 	detailed 	analysis 	the 	author
believes 	they 	deserve.
The 	book 	is 	divided 	into 	three 	parts 	which 	deal 	with 	the 	period 	of 	formation 	(up 	to
about 	1918), 	the 	period 	of 	crystallization 	(c.1918-40), 	and 	the period 	of 	dissemination
(from 	about 	1940 	to 	the 	present). 	The 	scope 	is 	deliberately 	varied 	from 	chapter 	to
chapter 	as 	the 	author 	traces 	movements 	(like 	Art 	Nouveau), 	building 	types 	(like 	the
skyscraper), 	style 	phases 	(like 	the 	'International 	Style'), 	and 	political 	uses 	and 	crit-
iques 	of 	architecture 	(as 	in 	the 	Soviet 	Union 	and 	Germany 	between 	the 	wars) 	The
treatment 	of 	the 	major 	figures 	such 	as 	Wright, 	Le 	Corbusier, 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe 	and
Aalto 	IS 	thus 	set 	in 	context. 	The 	final 	section 	of 	the 	book 	examines 	the 	history 	of
modern 	architecture 	since 	World 	War 	II, 	and 	includes 	the 	late 	works 	of 	the 	modern
masters 	as 	well 	as 	the 	ideas 	and 	buildings 	of their 	successors. 	In 	conclusion 	the
author 	casts 	a 	critical 	eye 	on 	contemporary 	fashions, 	and 	stresses 	the 	emergence
of 	new 	human 	needs 	and 	cultural 	problems 	in 	the 	so-called 	'Third 	World'
Modern 	Architecture 	since 	1900 	is 	a 	wide-ranging 	yet 	critical 	account 	of 	a 	tradi-
tion 	which 	has 	been 	shaped 	by 	individual 	genius 	as 	well 	as by 	social 	forces 	William
Curtis 	has 	produced 	a 	clear, 	sympathetic 	and 	just 	appreciation 	of 	the 	main 	outline
and 	the 	rich 	variety, 	of 	modern 	architecture. '
William 	Curtis 	was 	born 	in 	Birchington, 	Kent, 	England, 	in 	1948 	and 	studied 	at 	the
Courtauld 	Institute 	of 	Art 	in 	London, 	and 	later 	at 	Harvard 	University 	He 	has 	taught
the 	history 	of 	architecture 	and 	theories 	of 	design 	at 	universities 	in 	England 	the
United 	States 	of 	America 	and 	Australia, 	most 	recently 	at 	Harvard. 	He 	has 	written
numerous 	articles 	on 	modern 	architecture, 	and 	organized 	several 	exhibitions
Among 	his 	publications 	are 	Le 	Corbusier/Englisfi 	Architecture 	1930s 	(1975) 	Le 	Cor-
busier 	at 	Work: 	the 	Genesis 	of 	the 	Carpenter 	Center 	for 	the 	Visual 	Arts 	(1978) 	and
the 	catalogue 	Boston: 	Forty 	Years 	of 	Modern 	Architecture 	(1980). 	He 	gave 	the 	an-
nual 	Power 	Lecture 	in 	Contemporary 	Art 	in 	Australia 	in 	1981, 	and 	received 	the
Founder's 	Award 	of 	the 	Society 	of 	Architectural 	Historians 	in 	1982. 	He 	is 	soon 	to
publish 	a study 	on 	fortified 	dwellings 	of 	the 	north-western 	Sahara
Jacket 	subject: 	Ludwig 	Mies 	van 	der 	Rohe, 	Lake 	Shore 	Apartmi
detail 	of 	mullions.
Prentice-Hall, 	Inc.
Englewood 	Cliffs, 	New 	Jersey 	07632
Chicago. 	1950,
Books-history/Poi
In 	Great 	Britain 	0-13-586669-3

-- 420 of 420 --

