

-- 1 of 387 --



-- 2 of 387 --

Site Analysis

-- 3 of 387 --



-- 4 of 387 --

Site Analysis
Informing Context-Sensitive
and Sustainable Site
Planning and Design
Third Edition
James A. LaGro, Jr.

-- 5 of 387 --

Cover image: Courtesy of James A. LaGro, Jr.
Cover design: Anne-Michelle Abbott
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright 	2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written per-
mission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on
the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness
of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising
herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care Depart-
ment within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317)
572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book
refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download
this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.
wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
LaGro, James A.
Site analysis : informing context-sensitive and sustainable site planning and design / James A. LaGro Jr. –
Third Edition.
pages 	cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-12367-6 (cloth); ISBN 978-1-118-41626-6 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-41893-2;
ISBN 978-1-118-43186-3 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-48815-7 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-48817-1
1. Building sites–Planning. 	2. Building sites–Environmental aspects. 	3. Land use–Planning.
4. Land use–Environmental aspects. 	I. Title.
NA2540.5.L34 	2013
720.28–dc23
2012026248
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

-- 6 of 387 --

For David and Kyle

-- 7 of 387 --



-- 8 of 387 --

Contents
Preface 	xi
Acknowledgments 	xiii
PART I 	CONTEXT AND APPROACH 	1
CHAPTER 1 	SHAPING THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT 	3
1.1 Introduction 	3
1.2 Ecosystem Services 	3
1.3 Place-Based Stewardship 	5
1.4 Evidence-Based Design 	11
1.5 Site-Planning Process 	17
1.6 Professional Competency 	24
1.7 Conclusion 	27
PART II 	PREDESIGN AND ANALYSIS 	29
CHAPTER 2 	SITE SELECTION AND PROGRAMMING 	31
2.1 Introduction 	31
2.2 Site Selection Scope 	33
2.3 Site Requirements 	42
2.4 Spatial Extent of the Search 	43
2.5 The Site Selection Process 	43
2.6 The Site Selection Report 	60
2.7 Conclusion 	60
CHAPTER 3 	ASSESSING THE SITE’S PHYSIOGRAPHIC CONTEXT 	71
3.1 Introduction 	71
3.2 Parcel Size and Shape 	76
3.3 Topography 	76
3.4 Geology, Hydrology, and Soils 	81
vii

-- 9 of 387 --

3.5 Climate and Microclimate 	90
3.6 Natural Hazards 	98
3.7 Conclusion 	99
CHAPTER 4 	ASSESSING THE SITE’S BIOLOGICAL CONTEXT 	112
4.1 Introduction 	112
4.2 Nature’s Infrastructure 	113
4.3 Wetlands 	118
4.4 Wildlife 	121
4.5 Plants 	122
4.6 Conclusion 	126
CHAPTER 5 	ASSESSING THE SITE’S LAND USE, INFRASTRUCTURE, AND
REGULATORY CONTEXT 	135
5.1 Introduction 	135
5.2 Land Use Type and Intensity 	135
5.3 Property Ownership and Value 	137
5.4 Land Use Regulation 	140
5.5 Infrastructure 	151
5.6 Conclusion 	155
CHAPTER 6 	ASSESSING THE SITE’S CULTURAL AND HISTORIC CONTEXTS 	167
6.1 Introduction 	167
6.2 Building and Neighborhood Character 	167
6.3 Historic Resources 	170
6.4 Demographics 	175
6.5 Environmental Perception 	176
6.6 Conclusion 	188
CHAPTER 7 	INTEGRATION, SYNTHESIS, AND ANALYSIS 	204
7.1 Introduction 	204
7.2 On-Site Design Influences 	205
7.3 Off-Site Design Influences 	212
7.4 Land Use Suitability Analysis 	222
7.5 Suitability and Development Regulation 	229
7.6 Conclusion 	232
PART III 	DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 	245
CHAPTER 8 	CONCEPTUAL SITE DESIGN 	247
8.1 Introduction 	247
8.2 Context-Sensitive Design 	247
8.3 Design Creativity 	249
8.4 Conceptual Design Process 	251
8.5 Conceptual Design Principles 	264
viii 	Contents

-- 10 of 387 --

8.6 Concept Evaluation 	273
8.7 Conclusion 	274
CHAPTER 9 	DESIGN DEVELOPMENT 	278
9.1 Introduction 	278
9.2 Urban Design Theory 	279
9.3 Open Space Systems 	294
9.4 Circulation Networks 	299
9.5 Buildings 	312
9.6 Site Plan Review 	316
9.7 Conclusion 	320
Appendix A – Mapping and Graphics 	323
Appendix B – Resources 	333
Glossary 	338
References 	346
Index 	361
Contents 	ix

-- 11 of 387 --



-- 12 of 387 --

Preface
Designing with nature—and with sensitivity to pertinent cultural, historic, and legal
factors—is the land use ethic that has guided the writing of this book. This third edition of
Site Analysis retains the basic structure of earlier editions by devoting one or more chapters
to individual phases of the site planning process and by arranging these chapters in the
sequence in which they typically occur.
This edition’s nine chapters examine the linkages between contextual conditions and the
design and development—and redevelopment—of the built environment. A variety of
project types, scales, and geographic settings are considered, although greater attention is
given in this extensively revised edition to urban sites.
This book is written primarily for a multidisciplinary audience of university students and
early-career practitioners. Like previous editions, this book can be a resource for landscape
architecture students taking introductory design studios and site analysis courses, and for
architecture, urban planning, and civil engineering students taking site planning courses.
Working effectively across disciplines has never been more important. Advances in urban
sustainability will require more effective and synergistic collaborations among the planning
and design professions, especially architecture, engineering, landscape architecture, and
urban planning. Meaningful collaboration among these professions’ educational programs
can also strengthen relationships between universities and their broader communities.
More than two decades ago, Boyer (1990) argued that universities should place greater
value on engaged scholarship (i.e., applying one’s academic expertise to solve consequential
societal problems). Problem-based learning, characterized by small teams of students
focusing on solving real-world problems, is particularly relevant in professional planning and
design programs, where students strive to develop their problem-solving knowledge and
skills (Barrows, 1996).
xi

-- 13 of 387 --

Within a few years after graduation, many design and planning practitioners study for
professional competency exams. This edition, therefore, can serve as a resource for early-
career practitioners studying for licensing exams in landscape architecture or architecture and
for certification exams in urban planning. My hope is that this book is also useful to public
sector planning staff, elected officials, and appointed citizens who serve on local boards or
commissions that formally review land development proposals.
xii 	Preface

-- 14 of 387 --

Acknowledgments
Many illustrations in this edition were generously provided by professional planning and
design firms. I especially wish to thank Paul Kissinger (Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates);
Jim Fetterman (The HOK Planning Group, St. Louis); Jack Scholl (Environmental Planning
& Design, Pittsburgh); Fran Hegeler and Jim Stickley (Wallace, Roberts & Todd, San
Francisco); Meg Connolley (Land Design, Charlotte); Bob Thorpe (R. J. Thorpe and
Associates); Brian Peterson (SmithGroup JJR, Madison); Paul Moyer (EDAW, Alexandria);
and Bill Fruhling (Department of Planning and Development, City of Madison, Wisconsin).
Several newer illustrations were created by David LaGro, a recent graduate of Cornell
University’s Master’s in Landscape Architecture program.
Several educators provided constructive critiques at various stages and editions of this
book. They are Jack Ahern (University of Massachusetts), Gary Clay (California Polytechnic
State University–San Luis Obispo), Randy Gimblett (Arizona State University), Paul Hsu
(Oklahoma State University), David Hulse (University of Oregon), Nate Perkins (Uni-
versity of Guelph), Rob Ribe (University of Oregon), and Peter Trowbridge (Cornell
University). The book also benefited from three anonymous reviews of this edition’s
proposal to the publisher.
Margaret Cummins, executive editor at John Wiley & Sons, oversaw the production of
all three editions. On this third edition, additional editorial assistance was provided by
Lauren Poplawski and Michael New, and the production process was led by Donna Conte.
Bridget and David LaGro provided unstinting support and encouragement.
xiii

-- 15 of 387 --



-- 16 of 387 --

Site Analysis

-- 17 of 387 --



-- 18 of 387 --

p a r t 	I
Context and Approach
Part I of this book presents the rationale for a context-sensitive approach to site planning and
design. Chapter 1, “Shaping the Built Environment,” addresses the sustainability imperative
and design strategies to create healthier, resilient, and more livable built environments. The
chapter also presents a systematic, multiphased approach to place-making at the site scale.
1

-- 19 of 387 --



-- 20 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	1
Shaping the Built Environment
Sustainable design balances human needs (rather than human wants) with the carrying
capacity of the natural and cultural environments. It minimizes environmental impacts,
and it minimizes importation of goods and energy as well as the generation of waste.
—United States. National Park Service (1993, p. 55)
1.1 	INTRODUCTION
About 82 percent of the 312 million U.S. residents—and 50 percent of the planet’s 7 billion
inhabitants—now live in urbanized areas (United Nations, 2010). Cities and their suburbs
today import vast quantities of both raw and processed resources (for example, energy,
water, food) and they export—often to rural areas—massive quantities of wastes (for
example, plastics, paper, metals).
Yet, the global economy—with its 12,000-mile supply chains—increases international
dependencies and, potentially, reduces the resilience of communities to distant political
disturbances and natural disasters (for example, Japan’s 2011 earthquake and tsunami).
Sustainability is a global challenge requiring context-specific changes in the structure and
function of our built environments. Urban population growth heightens the need for
comprehensive interdisciplinary solutions to this contemporary challenge.
1.2 	ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
Advances in telecommunications technologies, combined with extensive highway networks
and sprawl-inducing land use regulations and subsidies, have greatly loosened the geographic
constraints on population distribution and land development spatial patterns.
3

-- 21 of 387 --

Transportation costs, markets, and raw materials no longer determine the location of
economic activities. We have developed an information-based economy in which
dominant economic activities and the people engaged in them enjoy unparalleled
locational flexibility. In this spatial context, amenity and ecological considerations are
more important locational factors than in the past. Cities located in amenity regions of
North America are growing more rapidly than others and such trends will intensify as
society becomes more footloose.
(Abler et al., 1975, p. 301)
The earth’s ecosystems perform functions that are essential to human health and welfare.
In Functions of Nature, deGroot (1992) classified nature’s functions into four life-supporting
categories: production, regulation, carrier, and information services (Table 1-1). Nature’s
“infrastructure” helps protect the quality of the air we breathe and the water we drink, and it
provides an abundance of other “goods and services.” These include food, fiber, water,
biodiversity, and energy production as well as the provision of cultural, recreational, and
spiritual experiences (Daily et al., 1999; Reid et al., 2005).
The value of nature’s services to human well-being, and the implications of different
management approaches over space and time, are not widely appreciated or even well
understood. Consequently, environmental management practice has suffered from an
incorrect assumption (Folke et al., 2002, p. 437): that “human and natural systems can be treated
independently” [emphasis added]. Many human activities, however, impose detrimental
impacts on the earth’s capacity to sustain life. The World Resources Institute (WRI) tracks
global environmental trends, and the following findings—among many others—reinforce
the global sustainability imperative:
TABLE 1-1 	Ecosystem services support human civilization by providing a broad range
of “goods and services.”
Function 	Goods or Services
Production 	Oxygen
Water
Food and fiber
Fuel and energy
Medicinal resources
Regulation 	Storage and recycling of organic matter
Decomposition and recycling of human waste
Regulation of local and global climate
Carrier 	Space for settlements
Space for agriculture
Space for recreation
Information 	Aesthetic resources
Historic (heritage) information
Scientific and educational information
Source: Adapted, in part, from deGroot (1992, Table 2.0–1).
4 	Site Analysis

-- 22 of 387 --

Tropical forests are shrinking, and the rates of plant and animal species extinction are
increasing.
Groundwater tables are falling as water demand exceeds aquifer recharge rates, and
groundwater continues to be contaminated with pesticides and other contaminants.
Global climate change and warming are occurring, and the sea level is projected to rise
by as much as 3 feet (0.91 meter) by 2100.
Source: http://earthtrends.wri.org/
Hurricanes, floods, and other natural hazards continually threaten human health, safety,
and welfare. Yet, many disasters causing the loss of life and property can be prevented, or at
least mitigated, by better land use decisions that reduce these risks (H. John Heinz Center for
Science, Economics, and the Environment, 2000; Mileti, 1999). Dennis Mileti, who led the
Heinz Center’s natural hazards risk analysis, concludes in a press release from the National
Science Foundation (1999, p.1):
The really big catastrophes are getting large and will continue to get larger, partly
because of things we’ve done in the past to reduce risk. . . . Many of the accepted
methods for coping with hazards have been based on the idea that people can use
technology to control nature to make them safe.
In the United States, hurricanes, flooding, and severe storms contribute about three
quarters of the total damages from natural hazards. Per capita losses from natural hazards are
outpacing population growth, and if the trend of the past two decades continues, direct
losses of $300 to $400 billion are probable within the current decade (Gall et al., 2011).
1.3 	PLACE-BASED STEWARDSHIP
The World Commission on Environment and Development (1987, p. 40) suggests that
“sustainable development seeks to meet the needs and aspirations of the present without
compromising the ability of those to meet those of the future.” Concern over climate
change, in particular, has precipitated advances in “sustainability science”—which seeks to
understand the complex dynamics of interconnected human and environmental systems.
Actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (climate mitigation) and increase cities’ resilience
to extreme weather events (climate adaptation) are applications of sustainability science. Yet,
the most ambitious application of sustainability science, is “the integrative task of managing
particular places where multiple efforts to meet multiple human needs interact with multiple life-support
systems in highly complex and often unexpected ways” [emphasis added] (Clark, 2007, p. 1737).
The built environment—the three-dimensional arrangement of buildings, transportation
and utility networks, and green spaces—influences community health and sustainab-
ility across the urban-to-rural continuum. As the theoretical concepts guiding sustainability
science are translated into actions, the built environment’s transformation will require closer
collaboration of architects, landscape architects, urban planners, engineers, and other allied
professionals. There is a critical need for planning and design professionals who can bridge
Shaping the Built Environment 	5

-- 23 of 387 --

professional “silos” and lead multidisciplinary teams in cre-
ating policy, design, and technology solutions to local,
regional, and global sustainability challenges.
Sustainability initiatives at the federal level currently
include the Partnership for Sustainable Communities—an inter-
agency initiative of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Transportation
(DOT), and the Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment (HUD). This collaboration has been a catalyst for
integrated sustainability planning at the local and regional
scale (www.sustainablecommunities.gov/). Along with efforts
by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), this partnership explicitly recognizes that the spatial
structure of the built environment—the location and design
of buildings, transportation systems, and green spaces—
influences not only economic prosperity and environmental
quality, but also public health (Figure 1-1).
Our quality of life is dependent on many factors, including
our safety and sense of security, our individual freedom and
physical and mental health, and our opportunities for self-
expression as individuals (Kaplan and Kivy-Rosenberg, 1973).
Most, if not all, of these factors are affected by the design of the
built environment. Sprawling development patterns, for
example, tend to reduce people’s housing choices and limit their
opportunities for healthy, active living (Frumkin et al., 2004).
Over the past six decades, suburban sprawl in the United
States has been planned, financed, and constructed while largely ignoring the associated social,
economic, and environmental externalities (Soule, 2006). Since World War II, the interplay
of local land use planning and federal and state policies has produced abundant “driveable
suburban” landscapes but far fewer “walkable urban” neighborhoods (Leinberger, 2008).
Besides diminishing the nation’s energy security, the consequences of this land development
paradigm include a litany of public health impacts (Frumkin and Jackson, 2004), economic
impacts (Burchell et al., 2005), and environmental impacts (Johnson, 2001).
Public policy plays a significant role in shaping the built environment (Ben-Joseph and
Szold, 2005). In the United States, local development regulations have not only
encouraged low-density sprawl but also have inhibited other, more sustainable forms of
development. Zoning codes, for example, emerged in the early twentieth century to
protect public health, safety, and welfare (Platt, 2004). These land use controls were
effective in separating new residential areas from polluting industries and ensuring that
new housing construction met basic health and safety standards. But zoning codes also
routinely separated residential development from shops, restaurants, and other commercial
uses, often with detrimental consequences for community health and well-being. There is
an urgent need in the United States for land use planning and regulatory reforms
(Schilling and Linton, 2005).
Because public policies play significant, yet often hidden, roles in shaping the built
environment, planning and design professionals should be leaders in formulating better
Supporting
Provisioning
Regulating
Cultural
NUTRIENT CYCLING
SOIL FORMATION
PRIMARY PRODUCTION
FOOD
FRESH WATER
WOOD AND FIBER
FUEL
AESTHETICS
SPIRITUAL
EDUCATION
RECREATION
CLIMATE REGULATION
FOOD REGULATION
DISEASE REGULATION
WATER PURIFICATION
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
LIFE ON EARTH - BIODIVERSITY
Figure 1-1 	Ecosystem
services support a hierarchy of
human needs. Source: Adapted,
in part, from Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment (2005).
6 	Site Analysis

-- 24 of 387 --

public policy. Professional associations are, in fact, taking a greater advocacy role. These
changes are reflected in recently launched sustainability initiatives by the American Society
of Landscape Architects (ASLA) Sustainable Sites Initiative , the American Institute of
Architects (AIA) SustAIAnability 2030 Toolkit, the American Planning Association (APA)
Sustaining Places Initiative, and the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Institute for
Sustainable Infrastructure. These sustainability initiatives express strong values and advocacy
positions—concerning social equity, for example—that are reflected in each profession’s
continuing professional education programs and competency exams.
The ASCE, for example, defines “sustainability” as follows:
A set of environmental, economic and social conditions in which all of society has the
capacity and opportunity to maintain and improve its quality of life indefinitely without
degrading the quantity, quality or availability of natural, economic, and social resources.
(http://www.asce.org/Sustainability/ASCE-and-Sustainability/ASCE---Sustainability/)
The ASLA’s Sustainable Sites Initiative defines “site sustainability” as
design, construction, operations and maintenance practices that meet the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs. http://www.sustainablesites.org/
Suburban sprawl has not only degraded environmental quality in the United States, but
has also produced low-density, auto-oriented communities that contribute to sedentary
lifestyles and diminished public health (Frumkin et al., 2004). Communities aspiring to
become more prosperous, livable—and sustainable—are taking steps to retrofit their built
environments in several important ways (Dunham-Jones and Williamson, 2011). “Smart
Growth,” “New Urbanism,” and “sustainable design” are three related development
paradigms that focus attention on the physical configuration, or design, of the built envi-
ronment. Key attributes are the following:
Mixed and integrated uses (i.e., diverse housing, shops, workplaces, schools, parks,
and civic facilities encompassing interconnected indoor and outdoor environments)
Clustered, compact buildings (i.e., architecture that enriches public open spaces,
especially streetscapes, and creates neighborhoods and urban districts with a strong
sense of place)
Open space systems (i.e., connected natural areas and other outdoor places that
provide linear recreational opportunities)
Transportation networks (i.e., integrated systems safely serving pedestrians, bicycle
riders, public transit, and automobiles)
Achieving these objectives involves coordination on a community-wide, and even
regional, scale. Yet, these efforts must also be coupled with good design at the site, or parcel,
level. Site-scale development—usually on privately owned property—is the primary way in
which most communities change, for better or worse. And there are significant con-
sequences of poor site planning. Detrimental impacts range from exposing people to safety
and property risks to making people endure an unhealthy—even ugly—public realm. For
Shaping the Built Environment 	7

-- 25 of 387 --

these reasons, protecting public health, safety, and welfare is the primary reason for licensing
professional landscape architects, architects, and engineers.
In the past decade, the number of local sustainability efforts has accelerated, focusing
increasingly on integrated approaches to achieving multiple social, economic, and envi-
ronmental goals. In Ottawa, Canada, for example, in the process of developing the city’s
Official Plan (“A Vision for Ottawa”), citizens agreed to a set of community sustainability
principles that addressed both the natural and cultural environments. These include:
Minimize harm to the natural environment by recognizing that growth is ultimately
limited by the environment’s carrying capacity.
Respect other life forms and support biodiversity.
Use renewable and reliable sources of energy and foster activities that use materials in
continuous cycles.
Do not compromise the sustainability of other communities (a geographic perspec-
tive) or the sustainability of future generations (a temporal perspective).
Value cultural diversity,
Source: www.web.net/ortee/scrp/20/23vision.html
Sustainability is a complex technical, scientific, political, and social challenge, however, and
efforts to advance this new paradigm must address this complexity systematically and holisti-
cally (Graffy, 2008). New policies, institutional structures, and professional cultures are needed
to respond to sustainability challenges in ways that protect environmental quality, increase
community resilience, and improve the quality of life for both current and future generations.
Sustainability initiatives can benefit from an in-depth understanding of natural and cul-
tural assets. Diamond and Noonan (1996, p. xix) call for recognition of a broad set of
community resources.
A constituency for better land use is needed based on new partnerships that reach
beyond traditional alliances to bring together conservationists, social justice advocates,
and economic development interests. These partnerships can be mobilized around
natural and cultural resources that people value.
Natural and cultural resources that should be assessed at the community level include
(Arendt, 1999):
Wetlands and wetland buffers
Floodways and floodplains
Groundwater resources and aquifer recharge areas
Woodlands
Moderate and steep slopes
Significant wildlife habitats
Historic, archaeological, and cultural features
Productive farmland
Scenic viewsheds from public roads
8 	Site Analysis

-- 26 of 387 --

Collectively, these resources form a unique spatial pattern or “signature” that helps to
define a community’s sense of place (Figure 1-2). Given their ecological, economic, and
psychological importance to human well-being, these patterns must be carefully considered
in designing the built environment, from the regional to the site scale (Figure 1-3).
In the context of the built environment, real-world problem solving involves the
“stewardship of place” (Beatley and Manning, 1997; Stewart, 2010). The arrangement of
streets and buildings involves “design decisions” that—for better or worse—shape the built
Figure 1-2 	Natural and human-made factors influencing a greenway planning project along the Mississippi River in St. Louis,
Missouri. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Shaping the Built Environment 	9

-- 27 of 387 --

environment. Some designs, however, are far better than others, and the solution to con-
temporary placelessness is often simply better design. Stewardship depends not only on
analyzing what is or has been, but also on imagining what could be, i.e., futures scenarios
(Duderstadt, 2000). Net-zero energy buildings—and other aspirational goals for buildings as
well as sites, communities, and regions—can lead to important policy, design, and tech-
nological breakthroughs.
The average citizen may think that design excellence is a frill or that it simply costs too
much. But there are many reasons to justify the expense of investing in skilled planning and
design. In Designing the City: A Guide for Advocates and Public Officials, mayors, real estate
developers, and others who were interviewed expressed the following opinions about the
quality of design in the built environment (Bacow, 1995):
“Good design promotes public health, safety, and welfare.”
“Good design makes a city work better, not just look better.”
“Good design attracts people to a city, and those people help pay for essentials that
help instill pride and satisfaction in what citizens get for their taxes.”
“Well-designed [real estate] products will succeed in tight markets where poorly
designed products will not.”
Good design also reduces the long-term life-cycle costs of operating and maintaining
buildings’ infrastructure. For example, up-front building design costs may represent only a
Figure 1-3 	Spatial
hierarchy—regions,
landscapes, sites.
Spatial
	Grain
Spatial
Extent
Site
Landscape
Region
10 	Site Analysis

-- 28 of 387 --

fraction of the building’s life-cycle costs. Yet, when just 1 percent of a project’s up-front
costs are spent, up to 70 percent of its life-cycle costs may already be committed; when 7
percent of project costs are spent, up to 85 percent of life-cycle costs have been committed
(Romm, 1995). Consequently, design excellence enhances community livability and sus-
tainability, which benefits society, the economy, and the environment (Table 1-2).
1.4 	EVIDENCE-BASED DESIGN
Communities change incrementally through a continual process of land development and
redevelopment, largely through private sector real estate projects at the site scale. The
development of unsuitable sites—or poorly designed development on otherwise suitable
sites—can negatively affect a broad array of natural and cultural resources (Sanford and
Farley, 2004). On-site impacts, for example, may diminish visual quality and reduce native
plant and wildlife biodiversity. Off-site impacts may include traffic congestion, flooding, or
pollution of local surface waters (Arnold and Gibbons, 1996). Because these externalities
degrade the quality of life, local governments must play an active and informed role in
guiding the location, intensity, and character of land development and redevelopment.
Each site’s carrying capacity is a measure of the type and intensity of development that can
be supported without imposing detrimental effects on society, the economy, or the envi-
ronment (Figure 1-4). A context-sensitive and sustainable approach to site planning pays
close attention to development location. Site planning that is responsive to inherent envi-
ronmental constraints can reduce construction costs, enhance critical ecosystem services,
TABLE 1-2 	Benefits of context-sensitive site planning and design.
Society 	Enhances pedestrian/bicyclist mobility and safety
Creates opportunities for active living
Promotes a sense of community
Creates attractive surroundings
Increases neighborhood safety
Improves access to public services
Minimizes negative impacts on surrounding properties
Protects cultural and historic resources
Economy 	Attracts visitors, tourists, and investment
Increases property value
Creates marketable “experiences”
Speeds real estate sales and rentals in tight markets
Attracts high-skilled employees and employers
Reduces commuting times
Uses land efficiently
Environment 	Conserves energy
Protects biodiversity
Reduces air and water pollution
Protects ecosystem processes and reduces urban heat islands
Shaping the Built Environment 	11

-- 29 of 387 --

and protect intrinsic cultural resources. In Guiding Principles of Sustainable Design, the U.S.
National Park Service (1993, p. 45) analyzes the potential environmental impacts of new
park facility construction by seeking answers to these questions:
What inputs (energy, material, labor, products, and so on) are necessary to support a
development option, and are the required inputs available?
Can waste outputs (solid waste, sewage effluent, exhaust emissions, and so on) be dealt
with at acceptable environmental costs?
Can development impacts be minimized?
Sustainable design is inherently context-sensitive, minimizing negative development
impacts by respecting the landscape’s natural and cultural patterns and processes (Figure 1-5).
In “Fostering Living Landscapes” (1997, p. 275), Carol Franklin writes:
It is the growing realization of the interconnectedness of development and envi-
ronmental processes worldwide and within our communities that drives the evolution
of sustainable design. At every scale, sustainable design is fundamentally about inte-
grating the natural structure of the site with the built environment.
Visual literacy—the capacity to graphically communicate design problems, relevant con-
textual information, and potential solutions—is an essential skill in the planning and design
professions. The ability to integrate ideas from different disciplines into a coherent whole and
to communicate that information to others is also an important leadership skill (Gardner,
2006). Decision-support systems, which are commonly deployed in medicine and other
applied professions, can help interdisciplinary teams make better decisions in planning
Figure 1-4 	Suitability for
sustainable development is
determined by existing patterns
of natural and cultural resour-
ces, as well as by the built
environment’s physical
attributes.
12 	Site Analysis

-- 30 of 387 --

and designing the built environment. Analytical tools—including geographic information
systems and three-dimensional modeling—can reveal relevant spatial and temporal patterns
among interconnected natural and human systems.
The city of Portland, Oregon, has an Office of Sustainable Development whose mission is
“to provide leadership and contribute practical solutions to ensure a prosperous community
where people and nature thrive, now and in the future” (www.portlandonline.com/osd).
Through research, outreach, technical assistance, and policy, the Office of Sustainable
Development works to increase the use of renewable energy and resources, reduce solid
waste and conserve energy and natural resources, and prevent pollution, and improve
personal and community health.
The worldwide sustainability movement gained substantial momentum in the 1990s and
2000s by focusing on design principles and quantitative performance measures, or metrics
at the community, neighborhood, site, and building scales. Five significant milestones in this
transformative process are briefly summarized below.
1.4.1 	Smart Growth
Making the built environment more sustainable and livable—through smarter land use
planning and policymaking—creates more transportation options, more housing choices,
and more walkable, mixed-use neighborhoods. Smart Growth principles can guide both
public and private sector decision making (International City/County Management Asso-
ciation, 2002). These goals for shaping—and reshaping—the built environment are sum-
marized below.
Figure 1-5 	Sustainable planning, design, and management is a holistic approach to creating environmentally sensitive devel-
opment and mitigating environmental degradation.
Shaping the Built Environment 	13

-- 31 of 387 --

Preserve open space, farmland, natural beauty, and critical environmental areas by
directing development toward existing communities.
Foster distinctive, attractive communities with a mix of land uses, compact building
design, and a strong sense of place.
Create a range of housing opportunities and choices in walkable neighborhoods that
provide a variety of transportation choices.
Make development decisions predictable, fair, and cost-effective, and encourage
community and stakeholder collaboration in development decisions.
Source: www.smartgrowth.org
Smart Growth, New Urbanism, and Landscape Urbanism are complementary—and, in
many ways, converging—paradigms for shaping more livable and sustainable built envir-
onments. Each approach encourages the development of pedestrian-friendly communities
that not only conserve but celebrate local cultural and natural resources. Certification
systems have been developed to promote these goals by quantifying design outcomes. A
small number of these systems is summarized on the following pages.
1.4.2 	Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
In the United States, the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green
Building Rating System 	provides benchmarks for the design, construction, and operation
of green buildings and related site development (see www.usgbc.org). LEED promotes
sustainability by focusing on building and site performance in five areas affecting human and
environmental health:
Sustainable site development
Water savings
Energy efficiency
Materials selection
Indoor environmental quality
Green buildings are healthy places, in part, because natural daylight, good air quality, and
plants tend to improve health and healing (Ulrich, 1991). Green buildings also improve
educational outcomes, enhance employee job satisfaction and productivity, and cost sub-
stantially less to operate and maintain than conventional buildings (Russell, 1997;
Stein, 1997).
Choosing locally sourced construction materials and implementing energy- and water-
conserving technologies also reduce building impacts on the environment. Green design is
good for business in other ways as well, such as improving market competitiveness by
enhancing the customer’s “experience” (Pine and Gilmore, 1999). Because unsustainable
business practices can reduce profitability and competitiveness, sustainability is now an
integral component of a business school education (Burch, 2001).
14 	Site Analysis

-- 32 of 387 --

LEED’s rating systems are voluntary guidelines that are incrementally improving the
sustainability of the U.S. built environment. Current LEED guidelines for green con-
struction include the following areas:
New commercial and retail construction
Existing building operations and maintenance
Multiple buildings and on-campus building projects
Neighborhood development
Schools, homes, and healthcare facilities
Major commercial renovation projects
1.4.3 	LEED for Neighborhood Development (ND)
LEED for Neighborhood Development (ND) was created through a collaboration of
the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC), the Congress for the New Urbanism, and
the Natural Resources Defense Council. This neighborhood rating system integrates
the principles of Smart Growth, traditional neighborhood design, and green building
design. Building and neighborhood performance are measured in several categories,
including two that are particularly relevant to site analysis and related issues examined
in this book.
Locations and Linkages
The Locations and Linkages credits encourage developers to build homes away from
environmentally sensitive places and to locate them instead in previously devel-
oped and other preferable sites. These credits reward homes that are built near
already-existing infrastructure, community resources, and transit facilities, and they
encourage access to open space for walking, physical activity, and time spent
outdoors.
Sustainable Sites
The Sustainable Sites category discourages development on previously undeveloped
land, minimizes a building’s impact on ecosystems and waterways, and encourages
regionally appropriate landscaping. LEED-ND credits reward smart transportation
choices, low-impact stormwater management, and efforts to reduce erosion, light
pollution, the heat island effect, and construction-related pollution.
1.4.4 	SITES
Another set of voluntary guidelines and performance benchmarks has been recently
developed for site design, construction, and maintenance practices. The Sustainable Sites
Initiative 	(SITES ) is an interdisciplinary effort by the ASLA, the Lady Bird Johnson
Shaping the Built Environment 	15

-- 33 of 387 --

Wildflower Center at The University of Texas at Austin, and the United States Botanic
Garden. The guidelines and performance benchmarks established by SITES are expected to
be incorporated into future revisions of the USGBC’s LEED Green Building Rating System.
The prerequisites and potential credits that can be earned through sustainable site design are
summarized below.
Prerequisites and Credit Categories of the SITES Guidelines and Performance
Benchmarks
1. Site Selection (21 possible points) Select locations to preserve existing resources
and repair damaged systems.
2. Predesign Assessment and Planning (4 possible points) Plan for sustainability
from the beginning of the project.
3. Site Design—Water (44 possible points) Protect and restore processes and systems
associated with the site’s hydrology.
4. Site Design—Soil and Vegetation (51 possible points) Protect and restore pro-
cesses and systems associated with the site’s soil and vegetation.
5. Site Design—Materials Selection (36 possible points) Reuse/recycle existing
materials and support sustainable production practices.
6. Site Design—Human Health and Well-Being (32 possible points) Build strong
communities and foster a strong sense of stewardship.
7. Construction (21 possible points) Minimize effects of construction-related
activities.
8. Operations and Maintenance (23 possible points) Maintain the site for long-term
sustainability.
9. Monitoring and Innovation (18 possible points) Reward exceptional perfor-
mance and improve the body of knowledge on long-term sustainability.
Source: http://www.sustainablesites.org
1.4.5 	STAR Community Index
A certification system that focuses on the community scale is the STAR Community Index,
launched in 2012. It has been developed through a partnership between ICLEI-Local
Governments for Sustainability (formerly the “International Council for Local Environ-
mental Initiatives”), the USGBC, and the Center for American Progress (CAP). STAR
Community Index is a consensus-based rating system for community sustainability (http://
www.icleiusa.org/sustainability/star-community-index):
Much as LEED transformed the building industry, STAR will transform the way local
governments set priorities and implement policies and practices to improve their
sustainability performance. It will become the definitive means by which local gov-
ernments measure and “certify” their achievements.
16 	Site Analysis

-- 34 of 387 --

STAR indicators and metrics fall within three broad categories:
Natural systems (ecosystems and habitat, water and stormwater, air quality, waste, and
resource conservation)
Planning and design (land use, transportation and mobility, and parks, open space, and
recreation)
Energy and climate (energy, emissions, renewable energy, and green building)
As the STAR system is implemented, participating communities can be expected to give
greater scrutiny to the costs and benefits of land development and redevelopment proposals.
This is likely to increase attention on the site plan review process—and on policies to ensure
context-sensitive site planning and design.
1.5 	SITE-PLANNING PROCESS
Site planning is the art of arranging the external physical environment to support human
behavior. It lies along the boundaries of architecture, engineering, landscape architecture, and
city planning, and it is practiced by members of all these professions. Site plans locate
structures and activities in three-dimensional space and, when appropriate, in time.
—Lynch (1971, pp. 3–4)
Context-sensitive site planning is a multiphase process for making choices about where to
build—and where not to build (Figure 1-6). It involves location-specific problem solving,
based on a thorough understanding of the site’s cultural, legal, physical, and ecological milieus.
Programming
Site
Selection
Site
Inventory
(Physical)
Site
Inventory
(Biological)
Site
Inventory
(Cultural)
Site
Analysis
Design
Development
Construction
Documentation
Project
Implementation
Conceptual
Design
Figure 1-6 	Site-planning and design process.
Shaping the Built Environment 	17

-- 35 of 387 --

The combination of unique site conditions and multiple project objectives creates a
complex design problem that may have dozens of potentially satisfactory solutions that meet
all of the program’s functional requirements. Yet, some of these solutions are better than
others. Poor site planning often has unintended consequences, such as pedestrian-vehicle
conflicts, human exposure to natural hazards, or pollution of streams and lakes.
Site-planning projects typically fall into three categories:
Projects with no buildings
Projects with one building
Projects with two or more buildings
Projects with no buildings include parks, greenways, and other recreation areas. Intro-
ducing green infrastructure into the built environment is an increasingly important per-
centage of professional site-planning work. Yet, projects involving the siting of one or more
buildings are probably more common. The design of these buildings and sites requires close
coordination—particularly during the site analysis and conceptual design phases—between
the project’s landscape architects, architects, and engineers.
Context-sensitive site planning requires a broad set of knowledge and technical skills as
well as a land use ethic to protect environmental quality and create healthy, livable, and
sustainable places. A context-sensitive approach to land planning and management has a long
tradition of prominent proponents and ideas, ranging from Aldo Leopold’s “Land Ethic,” a
chapter in A Sand County Almanac, to Ian McHarg’s classic Design with Nature, and, more
recently, Jan Gehl’s Cities for People.
1.5.1 	Project Initiation
The growth and development of the built environment occur incrementally and may be
initiated by clients in the private or public sector. Clients may be individuals, partnerships, or
corporations, nonprofit organizations, or federal, state, or local governments. In some cases, a
client may simply choose a firm that it has worked with in the past. Or the firm may be
chosen for its reputation from prior completed projects, its specializations in the types of
projects and services provided, or its proximity to the client and/or the site. In other cases, a
client—especially if it is a government agency—may solicit firms with a Request for
Qualifications (RFQ) or a Request for Proposals (RFP). Once the firm is selected, a contract
for professional services defines the work to be completed. Typically, this contract includes a
scope of services, a schedule for delivering the services, and a budget and payment schedule.
1.5.2 	Site Selection and Programming
Land development typically occurs in one of two ways: clients have a site and then deter-
mine what and when to build on that site, or clients have a set of land use objectives and then
find a site for those uses. Across the urban-to-rural continuum, parcels of land vary broadly in
size, shape, character, and context. Site selection involves identifying and evaluating alter-
native sites and selecting the best site for the project’s intended uses.
18 	Site Analysis

-- 36 of 387 --

Site-planning projects vary not only in their location within the urban-to-rural contin-
uum but also in their planned site uses. A project on a large site, for example, might involve
the construction of new streets, walkways and buildings. Another project might have no
new construction but might focus instead on the conservation, restoration, and management
of natural areas. Programming refines the project’s objectives and defines its functional
requirements, such as the proposed land uses, the area allocated for each land use, and the
spatial relationships among those uses.
The program may be developed by the client alone, or with the help of consultants who
have programming expertise. Programming often includes market analyses or user demand
studies, and studies of relevant precedents. Once defined, the project’s program helps to
focus the subsequent site inventory and analysis and design process. The program for a
multifamily housing project, for example, might include the number, type, and density of
housing units planned for the site (Table 1-3). More details on site selection and pro-
gramming are provided in Chapter 2.
1.5.3 	Site Inventory
Good site planning requires an understanding of relevant contextual factors or attributes. In
some contexts, a single site attribute will determine the suitability—or feasibility—of the site
for a particular use. For any combination of program and site, there are always attributes that
can be ignored to make the process more efficient. Deciding which attributes to assess and
which attributes to ignore depends on at least four factors:
Proposed site uses
Existing on-site and off-site conditions
Requirements for permits and approvals
Costs of data collection and analysis
Collectively, these factors determine the scope of the site assessment, which may
consider a broad variety of physical, biological, and social or cultural factors. These include
existing pedestrian circulation patterns and vehicle traffic volumes, locations of underground
utilities, and architectural styles within the surrounding built environment. Ecologists,
TABLE 1-3 	Sample program elements for a housing project.
Number of Units (by type)
Building Height 	Unit Density* 	Studio 	1BR 	2BR 	3BR
Three-Story 	20 DU/AC 	10 	30 	50 	10
Five-Story 	40 DU/AC 	15 	45 	75 	15
*DU 	dwelling units. AC 	acre (or hectare)
Source: Adapted from Affordable Housing Design Advisor (www.designadvisor.org).
Shaping the Built Environment 	19

-- 37 of 387 --

hydrologists, anthropologists, and other experts may participate in collecting, mapping, and
evaluating site and contextual attribute data. On large sites, attribute mapping and
analysis are particularly well suited for applications of computer-based geographic infor-
mation systems.
Chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6 examine the site inventory process in greater detail.
1.5.4 	Site Analysis
A site inventory—the process of mapping the site’s relevant physical, biological, and cultural
attributes—is not a site analysis. A vegetation map, for example, may show the site’s existing
conditions for a single attribute—the locations of plant communities and, perhaps, individual
specimen trees. This map, like other inventory maps, is valid, regardless of the uses that
might be considered for the site. The fate of the existing vegetation depends, in part, on the
intended uses or program for the site.
Site suitability for a specific land use or combination of land uses is a function of the
site’s assets and liabilities—or opportunities and constraints. Many physical, biological, and
cultural factors can influence the site’s suitability for the project under consideration. Site
assets (Table 1-4) may be unique natural or cultural resources that contribute to the site’s
sense of place within the community or region. Conversely, site liabilities could include soil
contamination from prior commercial or industrial uses. In this case, the site analysis can
assess whether environmental remediation is needed, what action should be taken to protect
adjacent properties from contamination, and what buildings and infrastructures can be used
or recycled (Platt and Curran, 2003).
Information from the site inventory must be integrated and synthesized to assess the
site’s suitability for specific program objectives (Figure 1-7). Design influences may range
from municipal development regulations to biophysical and cultural features on or near
the site. Mapping the project’s opportunities and constraints helps to inform sustainable site
planning. A good site analysis can also encourage collaboration among the allied professions
working on the project (Figure 1-8). More detailed information on this process is provided
in Chapter 7.
1.5.5 	Conceptual Design
Conceptual design, the process of adapting the program to the unique features of the site,
flows directly from the site analysis. Concept plans spatially organize the project’s proposed
uses on the site. Major program elements—and important existing conditions—are shown
diagrammatically on the concept plan. Circulation pathways are often portrayed as arrows,
and major uses or activity zones are portrayed as polygons, or bubbles.
Creating two or more concept plans, or bubble diagrams, is helpful in exploring site
design options. If one concept is superior to the others, then the evidence supporting the
best alternative will be more persuasive when compared to feasible, but less desirable,
alternatives. Frequently, the best concept is a hybrid plan that is created by merging features
from two or more alternative concepts. Chapter 9 includes examples of concept plans and a
more detailed discussion of conceptual site design.
20 	Site Analysis

-- 38 of 387 --

Biological
Physical
Biological
Cultural
Attributes
Attributes
Attributes
Land Use
Suitability
Figure 1-7 	Relationship
between attribute mapping and
land use suitability analysis.
TABLE 1-4 	Hazards, constraints, or nuisances that may influence site selection and site planning and design.
Categories 	Hazards 	Constraints 	Nuisances
Physical 	Flooding 	Shallow bedrock
Storm surge 	Shallow water table
Hurricane 	Erosion susceptibility
Earthquake 	Hardpan soils
Landslide 	Expansive clay soils
Volcano 	Open water
Avalanche 	Wetlands
Aquifer recharge areas
Springs and seeps
Steep slopes
Biological 	Wildfire 	Endangered species 	Insects
Cultural 	Toxic waste 	Wellheads 	Harsh views
Unstable fill 	Historic sites 	Odors
Archaeological sites 	Noise
Shaping the Built Environment 	21

-- 39 of 387 --

1.5.6 	Design Development
The design development process refines the site concept plan. Regardless of the project’s
program, design development involves documenting—usually with plans, sections, eleva-
tions, and three-dimensional perspectives—how the plan’s components functionally relate to
one another. Subsequent design iterations refine the organization and articulation of
buildings, walls, parking lots, pathways, and other “hard” and “soft” spaces on the site.
Depending on the location and scope of the project, approvals and permits may be
required from government units at the local, state, or provincial and national levels. Local
governments, especially, play a significant role in shaping the built environment through the
site plan and development review process. More information about the design development
phase is presented in Chapter 9.
1.5.7 	Project Implementation
Project implementation is the process of converting a design vision into a real built envi-
ronment. Typically, this requires construction documents (CDs), which consist of con-
struction drawings and written construction specifications. CDs serve as the basis for
construction cost estimates and construction contracts. Once this documentation is complete
and the necessary financing and approvals are acquired, the project can be built. The CDs
can also ensure that the constructed project accurately reflects the approved designs.
Construction Drawings
Construction drawings include plans, sections, elevations, and details. Four plans, in par-
ticular, provide essential information about the site’s existing and proposed conditions:
Figure 1-8 	Information from
the site analysis is used by many
professions engaged in the site
planning, design, and develop-
ment process.
Engineering
(Environmental remediation)
Architecture
(Building design)
Landscape
Architecture
(Site planning)
Planning
(Site plan review)
Law
(Due diligence)
Real
Estate
(Land development)
Site
Analysis
22 	Site Analysis

-- 40 of 387 --

Layout plan (horizontal control): locates buildings, streets, and parking areas,
walkways, utility lines, and other site elements in relation to the site’s boundaries
and other existing built and natural elements.
Grading plan (vertical control): locates existing contours (dashed lines), proposed
contours (solid lines), and proposed spot elevations at high and low points, and
locates pavement corners in relation to a local elevation benchmark. Drainage
swales and storm drain systems are also included.
Utilities plan (subsurface and surface utilities): locates sanitary sewer systems, on-site
wastewater disposal and treatment systems, drinking water distribution lines, electrical
supply lines, lighting, and telecommunication cables. Typically, the utility plan specifies
type (for example, sanitary sewer) and size or capacity (for example, pipe diameter).
Planting plan (trees, shrubs, vines, and groundcover): locates existing and new
vegetation, including the desired spacing between new plantings. Plant quantities,
sizes, and root conditions are included in a table or schedule.
Other plans that may be included in the site construction documents are as follows:
Demolition plan (site preparation): for infill sites especially, identifies the buildings,
utility structures, and other site elements that will be either removed, protected, or
retrofitted.
Irrigation plan: locates the site irrigation system, although sustainable site design
minimizes the need for supplementary irrigation by specifying well-adapted native
and naturalized plant materials.
Erosion and sediment control plan (ESC): in some jurisdictions, an ESC must be
submitted before development permits can be issued (United States Environmental
Protection Agency, 1993). Typically, an ESC includes a description of predomi-
nant soil types and provisions for preserving topsoil and limiting soil disturbance.
In addition to these plans, construction details provide supplementary information on the
specified construction materials and methods (Strom et al., 2004). Depending on the site
structure or element designed, construction details may be in the form of plans, sections, or
elevations.
Construction Specifications
Construction specifications supplement the construction drawings and include information
that is typically conveyed in report form rather than on the construction drawings. The
general specifications cover bidding requirements, required insurance and bonding, as well as
incentives for completing construction before the final completion date. Competitive bid-
ding is practiced by public clients for all but small projects and by private clients for most
large projects (Sauter, 2005). Contractors bid to complete the project that is conveyed by the
construction documents.
The technical specifications are written descriptions of the procedures and materials required
to build the project. They include information about the quality of materials, construction
Shaping the Built Environment 	23

-- 41 of 387 --

methods and standards, and work safety requirements. Many of these requirements are based
on government or industry standards, including those of the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM).
Contract Administration
Construction supervision is the responsibility of the general contractor and the various
subcontractors building the project. This work may involve earth moving and demolition of
existing buildings; construction of new buildings, roads, utilities, and other site structures;
and plant community restoration and landscaping. Typically, the designers, whether land-
scape architects, architects, or engineers, work on behalf of the client. These consultants or
agents protect the owner’s interests through contract administration, which ensures that the
project’s implementation reflects the approved plans and construction documents.
Permitting and Approvals
If design skills were easy to acquire and universally applied in shaping the built environment,
there would be little need for land development controls. In the real world, however, poor
design is far too common, resulting in assorted social, economic, and environmental impacts.
Local government’s primary purpose is to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
Municipalities may try to achieve these objectives in four ways (Chapin and Kaiser, 1985):
Land use planning (for example, a comprehensive plan and a capital improvements
plan)
Public investment (for example, transportation and utility system infrastructure, parks,
and open spaces)
Regulations (for example, zoning and subdivision ordinances and building codes)
Incentives (for example, preferential taxation and zoning bonuses)
Collectively, these plans and policies determine if, when, where, and how land devel-
opment can occur. If the work is not completed as approved, the local governing agency can
require that the deficiencies be adequately addressed before issuing the project’s “Certificate
of Occupancy.”
1.6 	PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCY
Several professional licensing and certification exams assess the knowledge, skills, and
values that inform the practice of competent site planning and design. Competency is
tested on the professional licensing exams for architects (NCARB, 2005), landscape
architects (CLARB, 2006), and civil engineers (NCEES, 2009) and on the certification
exam for urban planners (AICP, 2011). These exams recognize the complexity of site
planning and test for competence in several relevant areas, as briefly illustrated below, that
vary by profession.
24 	Site Analysis

-- 42 of 387 --

1.6.1 	Landscape Architecture Registration Exam (LARE)
The Landscape Architect Registration Exam (LARE) covers several topics integral to site
planning, including the following:
Problem Definition (for example, techniques to elicit client and user intentions and
needs)
Programming (for example, how to develop a project’s design program)
Inventory (for example, knowledge of planning and land use laws including zoning,
development restrictions and design guidelines, accessibility regulations, natural
features, cultural features, characteristics of plant material, land information sources,
and the political and regulatory approval processes)
Analysis (for example, factors influencing the selection of plant materials; human and
natural factors influencing design; social and cultural influences on design)
Site Design (for example, developing site or land use plans that take into consid-
eration the off-site and on-site influences on development; creating a site design
that considers various codes, consultant studies, and principles of sustainability)
The Council of Landscape Architectural Registration Boards (CLARB) conducted a task
analysis of the profession of landscape architecture in North America to determine the types
of work performed by practicing landscape architects. The respondents were asked to
identify their work tasks and rank them in terms of each activity’s perceived contribution
to the protection of public health, safety, and welfare (the primary justification for state
licensing laws for landscape architects, architects, and other professions). Five of the 11 most
important tasks—including 2 of the top 3—involve site selection, programming, or site
analysis (Table 1-5).
1.6.2 	Architect Registration Exam (ARE)
According to the National Council of Architectural Registration Boards (NCARB, 2005, p.
36), the Architect Registration Exam (ARE) tests for the ability to
TABLE 1-5 	Partial results of a survey of more than 2000 randomly selected landscape architects: Self-assessment of work
tasks (by rank) that affect public health, safety, and welfare.
Rank 	Task
2 	Identify relevant laws, rules, and regulations governing the project.
3 	Evaluate natural site conditions and ecosystems (for example, slopes, wetlands, soils, vegetation, climate).
6 	Identify required regulatory approvals.
10 	Evaluate the capability of the site and the existing infrastructure to support the program requirements.
11 	Elicit user’s intentions and determine needs.
Source: CLARB (1998, p. 7).
Shaping the Built Environment 	25

-- 43 of 387 --

[d]elineate areas suitable for the construction of buildings and other site improvements
responding to regulatory restrictions and programmatic requirements . . . and define a
site profile and maximum buildable envelope based on zoning regulations and
environmental constraints.
The ARE also expects registered architects to integrate “human behavior, historic pre-
cedent, and design theory in the selection of systems, materials, and methods related to site
design and construction.” Subjects tested on the ARE include:
Programming Planning and Practice
Site Planning and Design
1.6.3 	Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Exam
According to the civil exam administered by the National Council of Examiners for
Engineering and Surveying (NCEES), examinees are tested on multiple subjects that
influence—or are impacted by—site planning, design, and construction in the built envi-
ronment. These include:
Hydraulics and Hydrologic Systems (for example, infiltration, runoff, detention,
watersheds, storm sewer collection systems)
Soil Mechanics and Foundations (for example, soil-bearing capacity, slope sta-
bility, soil stabilization, retaining walls)
Environmental Engineering (for example, ground and surface water quality,
environmental regulations)
Transportation (for example, traffic analysis and control, street intersection design,
pavement design)
1.6.4 	Certified Planners Exam (CPE)
There are 3142 counties and thousands more municipalities in the United States. Although
the names vary from state to state, government bodies that review land development pro-
posals include city councils, planning commissions, urban design commissions, village and
town boards, and zoning boards of appeals. A recent APA survey of training programs for
planning commissioners found that 69.5 percent of the APA-sponsored programs addressed
site plan review.
The site development permitting and approval process requires support from qualified
staff members who perform site plan reviews and advise the planning commissioners.
Typically, many of these professionals are, by training, urban planners.
The Comprehensive Planning Exam (CPE) administered by the American Institute of
Certified Planners (AICP) expects planners to be familiar with a broad range of site-planning
issues. The CPE includes the following topics:
26 	Site Analysis

-- 44 of 387 --

Plan Making and Implementation (for example, environmental analysis; devel-
opment plan and project review; program evaluation; communication techniques)
Spatial Areas of Planning (for example, corridor planning, neighborhood planning,
waterfront planning, and downtown planning)
1.7 	CONCLUSION
Land use suitability is not uniformly distributed across the earth’s surface. Each site has a
unique set of physical, biological, and cultural attributes, and some of these attributes limit
the site’s suitability for certain uses. Consequently, a comprehensive understanding of each
site and its context is a necessary precursor to good site planning and design. If the site’s
existing contextual conditions are poorly understood, the site’s development may det-
rimentally impact people, property, and the environment. Or, more commonly, opportu-
nities to maximize the site’s social, economic, and environmental value will be missed.
QUESTIONS
1. What distinguishes sustainable design of the built environment from more conven-
tional design paradigms?
2. How does a site inventory differ from a site analysis?
3. What additional competencies could be tested on professional licensing exams to
potentially improve the design of the built environment?
Shaping the Built Environment 	27

-- 45 of 387 --



-- 46 of 387 --

p a r t 	I I
Predesign and Analysis
The next six chapters—the core of the book—address the closely linked predesign and
analysis phases of the site-planning process.
Often, a client already owns a site and then a detailed program is developed for that site.
In other cases, the client has a set of more general objectives, and a search is made for a site
that can best accommodate those objectives. In either case, the site planner adapts the
project’s program to the unique features of the selected site.
Context-sensitive site planning requires a thorough understanding of the site’s suitability
for the intended uses. This diagnostic process begins with an assessment of relevant legal,
cultural, and biophysical factors, followed by the integration, synthesis, and analysis of this
information within the context of the project’s specific goals.
29

-- 47 of 387 --



-- 48 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	2
Site Selection and Programming
The business of selecting a site has evolved into a sweet science.
—Kindelspire (2007)
2.1 	INTRODUCTION
Site selection plays a critical role in site planning and design. Using land efficiently—and in
keeping with its intrinsic qualities and surrounding character—is a fundamental precept of
sustainable land development and design. These places require fewer inputs of energy and
materials and generate fewer detrimental outputs such as water and air pollutants.
The U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED certification program now considers the site’s
context and previous land use history in evaluating developments for possible certification as
Platinum, Gold, or Silver green projects (www.usgbc.org/LEED). The early LEED rating
systems for building were criticized for ignoring site context and focusing solely on the
building. Subsequent versions of LEED included points for site selection and design, but
relatively few points. In response, the American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA)
developed Sustainable Sites, a certification system that focuses on advancing sustainability by
improving site selection, planning, and design. These efforts contributed to the development
of the LEED-ND certification program for neighborhood design.
Urban infill is development that occurs on vacant or remnant lands passed over by
previous development. Urban redevelopment involves the “replacement, remodeling, or
reuse of existing structures to accommodate new development” (Otak, 1999, p. 1). Building
on previously developed land helps to reduce the development’s “ecological footprint”
(Wackernagel and Rees, 1996) and, potentially, increase community livability.
31

-- 49 of 387 --

Many existing urban and suburban sites are location-efficient—that is, they have excellent
access to existing public transportation and utility networks (Center for Neighborhood
Technology, 2012). Mixed-use redevelopment of these sites can contribute to local sus-
tainability and livability initiatives, by:
Locating housing near employment and services
Efficiently using existing urban services and facilities
Creating jobs and increasing the community’s tax base
Conserving energy and improving air quality by reducing reliance on vehicles
These benefits are reflected in a survey of leading real estate investors, developers, and
analysts (Pricewaterhouse Coopers and Lend Lease Real Estate Investments, 1999, p. 14) as
follows:
Suburbs struggle because they have let developers run amok, oblivious to traffic
growth, sewer system capacity or even recreational needs. . . . Increasingly, better
suburban centers are starting to look like smaller versions of traditional cities, featuring
attractive neighborhoods, easily accessible retail and office districts, and mass trans-
portation alternatives to the car.
Greyfields into Goldfields, a publication by the Congress for the New Urbanism, features 12
case studies of successful redevelopment projects that converted “dead malls” into “living
neighborhoods” (Sobel et al., 2002). Greyfields are previously developed sites that have
minor and relatively easily mitigated environmental challenges. These sites include strip malls
and other shopping malls, typically with one-story, flat-roofed commercial buildings sur-
rounded by large surface parking lots. With hundreds of architecturally bland, vehicle-
centric malls in the United States especially, these sites present significant opportunities to
improve the built environment through mixed-use infill and redevelopment (Dunham-
Jones and Williamson, 2011).
Compact mixed-use development, combining residential, commercial, and other land
uses, helps to reduce commuting times, lower energy consumption, and reduce air pollution
(Platt and Curran, 2003). Urban infill and redevelopment, however, can face significant
obstacles. Development costs are usually higher on urban infill sites than on suburban fringe
sites. Zoning codes that prohibit higher-density mixed-use development are another
challenge.
Some state and local governments are revising inflexible zoning codes that rigidly
mandate building setbacks, lot size minimums, and other development standards that, in
effect, result in low-density sprawl. Complementary strategies include reducing public
subsidies for “greenfield” development on rural, previously undeveloped sites near the urban
periphery. This strategy directs capital investments for public infrastructure to areas that are
best suited for redevelopment.
The cost savings of urban infill and redevelopment can be substantial. A 20- to 40-year
scenario planning study in New Jersey compared the prorated costs of accommodating
908,000 new residents in two different ways: sprawl versus a more compact form of
32 	Site Analysis

-- 50 of 387 --

development. The study found that the compact development pattern would save as much
as $2.3 billion in public facility capital construction costs and as much as $160 million
annually in operation and maintenance costs over the next 20 years (Burchell et al., 2005).
2.2 	SITE SELECTION SCOPE
The scope of a site selection effort is a function of the project’s objectives and requirements
and the spatial extent of the search. These issues are discussed in more detail in the following
sections.
2.2.1 	Programming
Site selection is an optimization process conducted for many purposes, including real estate
development, plant and wildlife habitat restoration, farmland protection, and public open
space acquisition (Table 2-1). Once a site is selected, its intended uses can be planned—or
programmed—in more detail. Programming occurs over a range of spatial scales, from the
entire site down to individual buildings (Figure 2-1). The program is usually expressed in
terms of the quantity and quality of spaces needed to meet anticipated project needs. As
more is learned about the site and the future users’ needs and preferences, the program can
be refined.
Client objectives vary widely within the private sector, the private nonprofit sector, and
the public sector. According to Tusler et al. (1993, p. 233), a successful project programmer:
Communicates the proposed process to all involved
Does not lock in preconceived solutions
Reconciles subcomponent needs with overall organizational goals and resources
Frequently tests and reviews design concepts as functional and space models are
explored
TABLE 2-1 	Typology of site selection goals and selected project outcomes.
Goals 	Desired Outcomes (Examples)
Habitat Restoration 	Wetland, prairie, riparian area, forest
Natural Resources Conservation 	Public open space, farmland
Public and Quasi-Public Facility Construction 	Affordable housing
School, jail, or prison
Park or waterfront promenade
Infrastructure (highways, airports)
Business Expansion, Relocation, and Establishment 	Manufacturing facility
Restaurant
Bank
Corporate headquarters
Real Estate Development 	Housing (single-family detached houses, condominiums)
Mixed use (office, retail, housing)
Site Selection and Programming 	33

-- 51 of 387 --

Figure 2-1 	Project goals, objectives, and program elements conveyed graphically and verbally in a poster format. Note that each
goal begins with an action verb. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
34 	Site Analysis

-- 52 of 387 --

Site Selection and Programming 	35

-- 53 of 387 --

Programming for the design of new buildings has developed into a professional spe-
cialization, separate from the field of architecture. These specialists typically work with
stakeholders in developing building programs for hospitals, schools, prisons, and other
facilities that have a clearly defined public purpose. Whether architects should be responsible
for both programming and design is an issue on which there are differing opinions. Reasons
for this division of labor include (Tusler et al., 1993, pp. 228–229):
Perceived conflicts of interest in defining the scope of work and providing subsequent
professional design services
Bias in the professional design schools against specialization
Limited education of designers in psychology, communications, finance, statistics, and
other skills necessary for effective programming
Maxwell and Brown (1993, p. 260) comment on the role of the building programmer:
“The programmer must be [an] expert not only at synthesizing disparate—and often
seemingly unrelated—user data but also at translating these data into practical, ‘designer-
friendly’ information.” Dividing the responsibility for programming and design reduces the
potential for biased program analysis and prevents inappropriate design solutions caused by
preconceptions or misconceptions about the design problem to be solved (Brown and
Scarborough, 1993).
Programming in isolation from project design, however, can potentially overlook
important site constraints and opportunities. Commenting on trends in health care archi-
tecture, Tusler et al. (1993, p. 242) conclude:
What is necessary is for both disciplines, design and programming, to be involved
simultaneously in the very early, formative stages of project conception. There also
needs to be mutual respect for each other’s specialization and a close working rela-
tionship as an integrated team.
Programming for sites is far less mature than programming for buildings. This generally
reflects a lack of understanding of the built environment’s effects on public health, safety, and
welfare. When designing higher density development, especially, the spaces between
buildings warrant as much attention as the buildings themselves.
Project programming entails four basic steps (Goldman and Peatross, 1993):
Initiate the project.
Develop the project’s mission and objectives.
Determine the project’s operational and physical requirements.
Document and present the program to the client.
Establishing a list of program goals is a key step in the site-planning and design process. In
addition to determining the project’s operational and physical requirements, programmers—
in consultation with the client and other stakeholders—must reconcile the budget with
project expectations.
36 	Site Analysis

-- 54 of 387 --

Programming entails gathering information about the site and context, user needs and
preferences, and design precedents. Based on a survey of 74 professional programmers,
Preiser (1985, p. 11) found that the most common methods of information gathering to
support program development were, by rank, as follows:
Interviews
Surveys
Document analysis
Behavioral observation
Visiting a state-of-the-art project
Literature search
Other (for example, interactive group techniques such as charrettes, workshops, and
discussions)
Site reconnaissance in the programming phase can yield information about the site and its
surroundings that may either facilitate or hinder the desired uses of the site (Figure 2-2). The
initial site visit can help determine which of the site’s attributes should be inventoried and
analyzed as the design process continues. A client may have unrealistic expectations for the
development of a site, and any potential site constraints should be identified as soon as possible.
The site reconnaissance relies on diverse supporting information, such as the following:
Historic and current aerial photographs
Zoning maps
Road maps
Soil maps
Flood hazard maps
Tax assessment maps
These documents are usually available from local and state governments (see Appendix
B). Although the spatial scale and resolution of these maps and aerial photos are generally
too coarse to support detailed site planning, this information can be very useful for site
selection.
2.2.2 	User Needs and Preferences
A primary goal of the programming phase is to reach agreement with the client about the
expectations for the project. Therefore, one of the first steps is to identify the decision
makers and to define the decision-making process (Goldman and Peatross, 1993). Public
sector projects, such as a new library or a new park, typically involve a diverse group of
stakeholders. Multiple decision makers must be consulted directly or indirectly through their
representatives, before important programming decisions can be finalized. These stake-
holders may include (Goldman and Peatross, 1993, p. 362):
Site Selection and Programming 	37

-- 55 of 387 --

Elected officials
Appointed officials
Facility operators
Funding managers and analysts
Public works and building maintenance staff
Citizen groups representing taxpayers
With private-sector projects, surveys, focus groups, and other means of soliciting con-
sumer preferences can help the proposed projects meet the demands of specific market
Figure 2-2 	Programming
considers market context for
commercial projects. This map
shows the locations of other
major golf courses in the vicinity
of a proposed golf course com-
munity (Soos Creek) near Seat-
tle, Washington. Source: R. W.
Thorpe and Associates.
38 	Site Analysis

-- 56 of 387 --

sectors. These sectors, or demographic groups, include young single professionals; families
with school-age children; empty nester couples whose children no longer reside with them;
and the retired elderly. Market analysts can help to identify the attributes that should be
considered in project programming and site selection. For example, a variety of locational
factors influence consumers’ decisions in selecting where to live. Depending on the
household demographic profile, residential location preferences may be influenced by:
Proximity to the workplace
Quality of nearby schools
Neighborhood safety
Proximity to restaurants, shops, and services
Quality of nearby recreational facilities
These factors may not be important to every household, but collectively they reflect many of
the concerns in the housing market.
Behavioral observation, or post-occupancy evaluation, is often a key activity in pro-
gramming. Human behavior in outdoor environments, especially, varies significantly at
different times of the day or week, with changes in the weather, and with other factors such
as programmed activities or special events (Whyte, 1980). These factors can dramatically alter
a site’s use over the course of a day, a week, or a year. Site users’ behavior also vary with
differences in age, gender, and other demographic factors.
2.2.3 	Visual Preference Surveys (VPS)
Visual preference surveys (VPS) are a useful way to solicit stakeholder opinions concerning
future development, redevelopment, or restoration alternatives (Nelessen, 1994). Ewing
(2001, p. 271) writes:
VPS helps citizens and community leaders envision design alternatives in ways that
words, maps, and other communications media cannot. This makes it ideal for
“visioning” projects, design charrettes, and other physical planning activities with
public involvement.
VPS are particularly useful in helping residents determine how they would like their
community or neighborhood to look. Site-planning and design decisions that impact the
built environment’s visual quality include the following:
Building scale and massing (for example, height, width, and shape)
Building articulation (for example, facade, signs, roof)
Building placement (for example, relationship to street and site entrances)
Open space (for example, lighting and landscaping)
Vehicle parking (for example, screening and relationship to street)
Site Selection and Programming 	39

-- 57 of 387 --

Most VPS use the following approach (Ewing, 2001, pp. 271–273):
Fifty to 100 participants are shown photographs or slides of scenes.
Viewing time per scene is a half-minute or less.
Scenes may be evaluated in any of three ways: (1) rating on a Likert scale, such as 1 to 5
(1 	least preferred, 5 	most preferred); (2) ordinal ranking of scenes; and (3) forced
choice between scenes in paired comparisons. Statistical analysis of the preference ratings
considers means, medians, and variance to help explain preferences and differences across
scenes (Figure 2-3). Viewers may be asked to explain their preferences, which can enhance
the interpretation of the results. VPS also have public education value. They can help
participants understand the value of good design in the built environment.
2.2.4 	Design Precedents
Formal investigations of the structure and function of both indoor and outdoor built
environments have the potential to advance planning and design policies and practices.
Figure 2-3 	Sample images from a VPS with a rating scale ranging from 	1.0 to 	1.0.
40 	Site Analysis

-- 58 of 387 --

The ability to analyze existing built environments is a critical skill for site planners as well
as public sector staff who are responsible for evaluating land development proposals.
Precedent studies, of which postoccupancy evaluations (POE) are one type, are focused
case studies to learn from prior experience. These studies advance many fields of endeavor,
ranging from business, law, and medicine to engineering, architecture, and site planning
(Clark and Pause, 2005). Preiser et al. (1988, p. 3) define the activity for buildings as
follows:
Postoccupancy evaluation is the process of evaluating buildings in a systematic and
rigorous manner after they have been built and occupied for some time. POEs focus
on building occupants and their needs, and, thus, they provide insights into the
consequences of past design decisions and the resulting building performance. This
knowledge forms a sound basis for creating better buildings in the future.
In the classic book Learning from Las Vegas, Robert Venturi and colleagues document a
postoccupancy evaluation of the Las Vegas Strip during the 1960s (Venturi et al., 1972). The
authors diagram the architectural and spatial qualities along this iconic highway corridor.
Postoccupancy evaluations of outdoor spaces such as parks, plazas, and campuses are less
common. Yet, these design case studies are an important method of advancing site planning
and design practice and ultimately improving the quality of the built environment.
The Landscape Architecture Foundation (LAF) has developed a case study method
for site-planning projects. The LAF recommends collecting the following information
(Francis, 1999):
Programmed uses and requirements, including the needs of special user groups (e.g.,
children, the chronically ill, the elderly)
Spatial organization and articulation of buildings, circulation systems, and open space
Design responses to site and contextual factors
Techniques for protecting and restoring environmental and cultural resources
Construction and operational costs
Postoccupancy evaluations can improve site planning and design practice by identifying
best practices as well as past design mistakes and missed opportunities. Zube (Miller, 1997, p.
68) comments:
We do not invest an adequate amount of resources studying our design/planning
successes and failures from an aesthetic, ecological, and functional perspective. We
could learn much of benefit to both teaching and practice.
Design successes—or failures—and comparisons among alternative design approaches can
yield valuable lessons for future projects. Good precedent studies identify models that can be
adapted to design problems involving a similar combination of program, site, and context.
Traditional neighborhood design (TND), for example, is a mixed-use development para-
digm that is firmly rooted in a rigorous analysis of the past (Duany et al., 2001).
Site Selection and Programming 	41

-- 59 of 387 --

2.2.5 	Program Documentation
A project’s program may specify the land uses, activities, or
facilities that will occur on the site, the amount of space
required for these proposed activities, the desired spatial rela-
tionships among these activities, and even the phasing of the
development. The best mix of uses depends on the client’s goals
as well as on the size, character, and location of the site. For
example, if one of the programmed uses is housing, information
about the quantity and quality of the housing could be pro-
vided. A detailed housing program could include the desired
number of dwelling units of each type (single-family, multifamily), the number of bedrooms in
each dwelling type, and even the amenities to be included in each unit.
Open space is also a multifunctional program element. Meaningful open space can facil-
itate groundwater infiltration, provide a visual amenity and recreational opportunities, and
protect wildlife habitats. The benefits of open space are multiplied, in most cases, when the
open spaces are linked within a contiguous green infrastructure network (United States
Environmental Protection Agency, 2011).
Land development programs also may include incompatible land uses that are typically
separated spatially. Conversely, other site activities or uses may need to be physically adjacent to
one another. The desired relationships among programmed uses are determined from client
surveys, precedent studies, and other sources. These spatial relationships fall into one of four
categories:
Adjacency is essential.
Adjacency is desirable but not essential.
Adjacency is unimportant.
Adjacency should be avoided.
An adjacency matrix, with programmed uses in the rows and adjacency preferences in the
columns, can summarize the desired spatial relationships among multiple program elements.
When programs are complex, spatial relationships among program elements can be difficult
to interpret from an adjacency matrix. This problem can be alleviated somewhat by creating
spatial relationships diagrams. A plan-view bubble diagram, for example, portrays the desired
horizontal relationships between a targeted activity or land use, at the center of the diagram,
and other programmed uses arranged around this central element. Program diagrams may
also address desired horizontal and vertical spatial relationships (Figure 2-4).
2.3 	SITE REQUIREMENTS
Each project’s program has site requirements that may include minimum parcel size,
proximity to transportation and utilities, suitable soils, and other parameters. Once the site
selection criteria are established, alternative sites can be identified, evaluated, and compared.
Land use regulations and land value are two of the many attributes that vary spatially
within the built environment. These attributes are design determinants that influence the
restaurant
SYNERGIES OF VERTICAL MIXED USE
residential 	office
retail
Figure 2-4 	Schematic sec-
tional diagram showing desired
horizontal and vertical
land use relationships.
Source: E. Dunham-Jones and
J. Williamson, Retrofitting
Suburbia: Urban Design
Solutions for Redesigning
Suburbs, copyright 	2011 by
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. This
material is reproduced with
permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
42 	Site Analysis

-- 60 of 387 --

location, density, and character of new development spanning the rural-to-urban
continuum.
2.4 	SPATIAL EXTENT OF THE SEARCH
Site-planning projects come about in one of two ways: A client may already own a site and
the future uses of the land have yet to be determined, or the client has predetermined
objectives and a site must be found to accommodate them. Depending on the client’s goals,
potential sites may be widely dispersed geographically or they may all be located within one
large, contiguous parcel. Consequently, site selection involves two possible courses of action:
selecting a site from among two or more noncontiguous sites or selecting a site from within a
larger contiguous parcel—possibly already owned by the client.
Potential sites are either selected or rejected based on each site’s suitability for the
intended uses. This screening process may span a range of spatial scales, involving the
analysis of not only the sites but also the communities in which the sites are located. In
today’s global economy, businesses that are expanding or relocating may evaluate sites in
several countries. Site selection decisions at the national and regional scales consider con-
textual data aggregated for large geographic areas, such as states, counties, and municipal-
ities. Subsequently, additional data are collected on potential sites within each desired area
(Case Study 2-1).
A site selection process may also evaluate sites that are under a single ownership. This
commonly occurs on projects initiated by public institutions that have relatively large land
holdings. Colleges and universities often face this challenge. Campus expansion or rede-
velopment, for example, may involve the construction of new student housing, research or
classroom space, or facilities for recreational and intercollegiate athletics. On a university
campus covering an area of several hundred acres (or hectares), multiple potential building
sites may be available for any given project. Yet, these sites can vary dramatically in their
suitability for the proposed uses. On a hilly site, for example, development constraints for a
proposed dormitory might include the soil’s high susceptibility to erosion or the site’s poor
accessibility for the disabled. On a relatively flat site, in contrast, constraints might include
poor drainage and susceptibility to flooding. These are just some of the many existing
physical factors that can potentially influence the siting, the design, and—ultimately—the
function of either a new building or outdoor facility.
2.5 	THE SITE SELECTION PROCESS
Selecting the most suitable available site for a land development or redevelopment project
has several potential benefits. These include:
Greater convenience for the site’s users
Enhanced aesthetics
Fewer negative environmental impacts
Reduced costs for permitting, construction, operation, and maintenance
Site Selection and Programming 	43

-- 61 of 387 --

The site inventory process documents key biological, physical, and cultural attributes of
the site and its immediate surroundings. Nevertheless, several site and contextual attri-
butes are considered, though usually in less detail, during the site selection process. These
attributes include the endogenous (on-site) as well as exogenous (off-site) factors that
determine the site’s suitability for the intended project.
The site selection process has six discrete steps:
1. Clarify project objectives and site requirements.
2. Choose the site selection criteria.
3. Collect site data and select potential sites.
4. Evaluate each site’s suitability.
5. Rank the alternative sites and select the best.
6. Test project feasibility.
These steps are discussed in more detail over the next several pages and are summarized
diagrammatically in Figure 2-5.
2.5.1 	Step 1: Clarify Project Objectives and Site Requirements
The site selection process is initiated by the client. Project objectives can vary widely among
different clients, which can include public agencies, nongovernment organizations, and
privately owned businesses.
Public sector projects involving site selection include the acquisition or development of
facilities, such as libraries, schools, and parks. Businesses—whether owned by individuals,
partnerships, or corporations—engage in site selection to relocate or to expand into new
markets. Virtually any type of business may engage in site selection, ranging from small retail
and service sector operations to large international corporations.
Real estate development is another activity that regularly involves site selection. “Loca-
tion, location, location”—as the old adage goes—are the three most important factors in real
estate. Location has a very significant effect on property value. For this reason, site selection is
a critical step in the real estate development process.
2.5.2 	Step 2: Choose the Site Selection Criteria
Site suitability is partially a function of site conditions, contextual factors, and expected costs.
The site’s capacity to sustain the proposed uses or activities depends, in part, on the site’s
physical conditions, which include the site area, solar access, and available municipal utilities
and services. Site suitability is also a function of the site’s social, regulatory, and environment
contexts (for example, the scale and architectural character of the surrounding neighbor-
hood). Finally, site suitability depends on the specific costs and benefits of the proposed
project at that site (for example, costs for site acquisition, design and engineering, and
operation and maintenance).
44 	Site Analysis

-- 62 of 387 --

Many social, economic, and environmental factors can influence the success of a land
development or redevelopment project. Choosing an appropriate set of selection criteria will
narrow the search and streamline the process of evaluating and comparing potential sites and,
ultimately, selecting the best available site. This process addresses three crucial issues:
Capacity: Does the site provide adequate physical conditions for the project?
Compatibility: Is the proposed project compatible with the surroundings?
Affordability: Do the project’s benefits outweigh its costs?
Analyzing key site and contextual attributes, or “threshold” criteria, can make the site
selection process more efficient. Frequently, a relatively small number of attributes will have
a disproportionately large influence on the site selection decision. These include essential site
1 CLARIFY PROJECT
OBJECTIVES and
REQUIREMENTS
BEST
SITE
2 DETERMINE SITE
SELECTION CRITERIA
3 GATHER SITE DATA
and SELECT POTENTIAL
SITES
4 EVALUATE EACH
SITE'S SUITABILITY
(e.g., constraints &
opportunities)	Site A
Site B
Site C
Site D
Site Factors
Size & cost
Access & utilities
Physical constraints
Land use regulations
Contextual Factors
Transportation
Market or service area
Political environment
Hazards 5 RANK the
EVALUATED SITES and
SELECT the BEST SITE
6 CONDUCT a
FEASIBILITY STUDY
of the SELECTED SITE
CLIENT INITIATES
PROJECT
Capacity
Access/transportation
Utilities
Zoning
Useable space
Affordability
Acquisition costs
Design costs
Permitting costs
Operation &
maintenance costs
Compatibility
Political environment
Physical constraints
Community character Does it “pencil out?”
Acquisition costs
Design costs
Permitting costs
Operation &
maintenance costs
Eco-restoration
Public parks & facilities
Affordable housing
Business expansion or
relocation
Real estate: housing,
commercial, mixed
Land Uses or Activities
Figure 2-5 	Site selection process diagram.
Site Selection and Programming 	45

-- 63 of 387 --

or contextual conditions that, if absent, exclude those sites from further consideration.
Conversely, undesirable site or contextual conditions could, if present, make these sites
unfeasible for the program under consideration.
Site Conditions
Subsurface conditions are important in the site selection process. Shallow depths to bedrock
or groundwater, for example, can reduce a site’s suitability for constructing buildings,
foundations, and underground utilities. Urban sites can present other complications for
development, but these sites may offer excellent redevelopment opportunities. Typically,
urban brownfield sites have access to a full range of public services and utilities. Brownfields
are properties that, because of prior land uses either on or near the site itself, contain haz-
ardous pollutants. Various federal, state, and local brownfield programs can help facilitate the
redevelopment of these sites. In the state of Wisconsin, for example, a “Land Recycling
Law” (Wisconsin Act 453) had two major objectives:
Encourage local governments to take title to environmentally contaminated land and
restore the sites to productive use.
Exempt municipalities from responsibility for remedial action if the property is
acquired through a tax delinquency proceeding or by order of a bankruptcy court.
Public sector brownfield redevelopment programs reduce financial risks and allow
remediation—in certain situations—to conditions that are still contaminated but develop-
able. Instead of requiring complete waste removal from the contaminated site, certain types
and quantities of wastes are allowed to remain underground if steps are taken to prevent
stormwater infiltration into the contaminated soils. An impervious barrier, such as a com-
pacted clay layer, will control leaching and inhibit the movement of chemical contaminants
into the groundwater.
Parcel size or area is another threshold criterion in selecting sites for some purposes. For
example, in selecting sites for public schools in the state of Alaska, the minimum required
land area for a public school site varies with the type of school that will be constructed
(Table 2-2). Unfortunately, this is an example of how site selection criteria can contribute to
urban sprawl. Prospective school sites of 30 acres (12.1 hectares) or more will be typically
available only on the suburban periphery, where very few—if any—students will have the
opportunity to walk or bicycle to school.
TABLE 2-2 	Site area standards for selecting public school sites in the state of Alaska.
School Type 	Minimum Site Area
Elementary School 	10 acres (4.0 hectares) 	1 acre (0.4 hectares) for each 100 students
Middle School 	20 acres (8.1 hectares) 	1 acre (0.4 hectares) for each 100 students
High School 	30 acres (12.1 hectares) 	1 acre (0.4 hectares) for each 100 students
K-12 School 	20 acres (8.1 hectares) 	1 acre (0.4 hectares) for each 100 students
Source: Alaska Department of Education (1997, p. 5).
46 	Site Analysis

-- 64 of 387 --

Other criteria may be important in selecting sites for other uses. For example, the
American Society of Golf Course Architects (2000) suggests that sites selected for golf course
development should have the following:
A visually interesting landscape (for example, rolling hills) that will minimize earth-
moving operations and reduce construction costs
Adequate soil drainage and quality topsoil, which are essential for growing fine turf
Sufficient utility availability (for example, electricity and potable water)
Convenient access to transportation infrastructure, which is necessary to attract golfers
at various skill levels
Contextual Factors
Access to transportation infrastructure remains an important site selection criterion for
most land uses. A site’s access to sufficient utility service is another important factor. These
services include the delivery of potable water, electricity, and natural gas, as well as the
collection and treatment of wastewater. Telecommunication technologies greatly expand
the range of suitable locations for some commercial activities. Access to high-speed
Internet connections is not ubiquitously available and may therefore be an important site
selection criterion.
Visibility to a site from adjacent streets or other off-site locations may be an asset, par-
ticularly if retail or other patron-dependent businesses are being considered for the site.
Visual quality may also influence site selection decisions. Natural and cultural amenities often
enhance property values and contribute to a site’s unique sense of place. Major water bodies,
forests, and mountainous or hilly terrain are amenities that add value to nearby properties,
especially those with unobstructed views of the amenity.
A context-sensitive approach to site selection also considers the compatibility of the
proposed uses with the surrounding area. For example, criteria for selecting prison sites in the
United States include site conditions as well as broader social conditions. These site selection
criteria include (Ammons et al., 1992) the following:
Proximity to the communities from which most inmates come
Areas capable of providing or attracting qualified professional staff of racial and ethnic
origins compatible with the inmate population
Areas with adequate social services, hospitals, schools, universities, and employment
opportunities to support the correctional goals
Contextual considerations also include the site’s visibility from adjacent roads and highways
and the ease with which views to a new prison can be screened (Krasnow, 1998).
Government permitting and approval processes also influence some site selection deci-
sions. The approval process for a redevelopment project, for example, can be delayed or
halted by neighborhood concerns about vehicle traffic, building height, or development
density. Potential project delays can be enough to steer prospective developers away from
municipalities with protracted development review processes.
Site Selection and Programming 	47

-- 65 of 387 --

If all relevant site and contextual factors could be measured quantitatively, the process of
selecting the best available site would be relatively straightforward. Most site selection
decisions, however, involve not only financial but social, environmental, and ethical con-
siderations as well.
2.5.3 	Step 3: Collect Site Data and Select Potential Sites
On some projects, the client may identify potential sites (Figure 2-6). In other cases, the
potential sites must be discovered (Figure 2-7), often through spatial analysis using geo-
graphic information systems (Castle, 1998). Data sources that can be useful in finding
potential sites include the following:
Multiple listing services (MLS) for property that is for sale or rent
Maps of vacant, infill, and redevelopable land prepared by local municipalities during
comprehensive plan updates and neighborhood planning studies
Local governments are generally supportive of development and redevelopment that add
jobs and contribute to local property and sales tax revenues. In addition to providing maps of
Figure 2-6 	Potential sites (east and west) for a new mental health center on an existing health sciences campus in the state of
Illinois. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
48 	Site Analysis

-- 66 of 387 --

available infill and redevelopment sites, planning and economic development agencies may
provide other useful data about the sites, including parcel area, available utilities, and
applicable development regulations.
2.5.4 	Step 4: Evaluate Each Site’s Suitability
Once potential sites have been identified, additional data are needed to assess each site’s
suitability for the proposed project. Evaluating site suitability typically involves the analysis of
both quantitative and qualitative data. Some common data sources include:
Aerial photographs
Parcel boundary and tax assessor data
Highway maps
Utility maps
Topographic maps
Soils maps
Ground-level photographs showing views on- and off-site
Figure 2-6 	Continued.
Site Selection and Programming 	49

-- 67 of 387 --

A property boundary survey is commonly required for the sale of a property and may be
available for sites under consideration. A topographic survey, with detailed data on site
elevations and major tree locations, usually is not acquired until after a site has been selected.
Public investments in schools and parks can have significant impacts on a community’s
fiscal and natural resources, and these investments should be informed by a rigorous site
selection process. The challenge of selecting a school site is reflected in the following quote
from the Alaska Department of Education (1997, p. 2):
The perfect school site can be envisioned as generally level with some topographic
interest, having complete utilities, stable, well-drained soils, excellent road and
pedestrian access, protection from excessive weather patterns, [and] with ample space
for school facilities, [a] playground, and sports fields. The site would be accessible to
present and future populations and be free of any natural or environmental hazards. It
would be removed from undesirable business, industry and traffic hazards but con-
venient to important facilities and recreational/outdoor learning areas. In most
communities, however, the perfect site is elusive and difficult to find.
Figure 2-7 	Oblique aerial
photograph with potential proj-
ect sites delineated. Source:
Wallace, Roberts & Todd, LLC.
Used with permission.
50 	Site Analysis

-- 68 of 387 --

Typically, site suitability is evaluated by using a predetermined scale for rating the
selection criteria. Examples of rating scales for site selection criteria include the following:
Qualitative Rating Scale
Very good
Good
Acceptable
Somewhat acceptable
Unacceptable
Quantitative Rating Scales
1 	favorable
0 	neutral
–1 	unfavorable
TABLE 2-3 	Guidelines for rating school sites based on potential flooding impacts.
Flooding Potential 	Score
Site is not in floodplain; no nearby water bodies 	4
Site is in proximity to water bodies but well above floodplain 	3
Site is in close proximity to flood-prone areas 	2
Site is within floodplain boundaries 	1
Site floods routinely 	0
Source: Alaska Department of Education (1997).
4 	excellent
3 	good
2 	fair
1 	poor
0 	unacceptable
“Threshold criteria” are critical site and contextual attributes that aid in screening
potential sites. If the threshold criteria are met by one or more sites, the site evaluation
process can proceed to other selection criteria. Conversely, if a site does not satisfy the
threshold criteria, then that site is eliminated from further consideration. Threshold criteria
can be physical, economic, or legal attributes of the site or its surroundings. The flooding
risk, for example, is considered in siting public schools in Alaska (Table 2-3).
The city of San Francisco adds to its public open space system through a systematic land
selection process. Priority is given to significant natural areas that are not otherwise protected
from degradation or development and to open spaces, facilities, and other property in
neighborhoods that are either “high-need areas” (as designated in the Recreation and Open
Space Element of the City’s General Plan) or are experiencing a significant increase in
Site Selection and Programming 	51

-- 69 of 387 --

residential population and have few open spaces or recreational resources (San Francisco
Recreation and Park Department, 2006, p. 3). The process of evaluating sites for potential
open space acquisition in San Francisco employs an extensive set of suitability criteria (see
Sidebar 2-1).
Sidebar 2-1
Public Open Space and Natural Areas
City and County of San Francisco, California (United States)
This site selection process is used to acquire open space for new parks and public recreation areas.
I. MINIMUM CRITERIA
All sites must meet all of the “base” or threshold criteria to be considered for further evaluation. This ensures
that the sites meet at least the minimum standards for site size, maximum slope, absence of unstable soils or
other hazardous or toxic conditions, adequate sunlight, and pedestrian access. Evaluation of the sites that are
then considered for acquisition employs a more detailed set of suitability criteria.
II. SITE SUITABILITY CRITERIA (425 POINTS)
Base Criteria (175 points)
Size (20 points)
0.5 1.0 acre (0.2–0.4 hectare) 	5 points
1.0 4.0 acres (0.4–1.6 hectares) 	10 points
More than 4.0 acres (1.6 hectares) 	20 points
More than 4.0 acres (1.6 hectares) 	20 points
Threatened by Development (10 points)
Green space not zoned open space 	10 points
If site requires eminent domain, subtract 25 points.
Slope (15 points)
Flat (less than 2 percent slope over 75 percent of site) 	15 points
Sloped (less than 8.3 percent slope over 75 percent of site) 	10 points
Sunlight (15 points)
Site adjacent on all sides to zoning district(s) with land use controls limiting height over 40 feet (12.2 meters)
15 points
Views (25 points)
Site offers view of the ocean or bay 	10 points
Viewshed protection 	15 points
If freeway or highway is within 200 feet (61.0 meters), subtract 10 points.
52 	Site Analysis

-- 70 of 387 --

Once a small number of potential sites have been chosen, more detailed studies assess the
fit between each site and the intended program. When sites are being evaluated for multiple
uses, the site selection process becomes more complex because different land uses may
require different conditions. One approach is to prioritize the proposed land uses and
then solve the site selection problem for the most important land use. Sites considered
suitable for the primary land use can then be considered for the next most important
land use, and so on.
2.5.5 	Step 5: Rank the Alternative Sites and Select the Best One
Site suitability ratings are summarized in a matrix as either numerical or graphical values. The
site evaluation matrix lists the potential sites and each site selection criterion (Figure 2-8).
There are no inherent limits on either the number of selection criteria or the number of sites
Site Access and Accessibility (70 points)
Bus stop within 2 blocks of the site 	10 points
More than one side of the site allows entry 	10 points
Accessible for the disabled 	30 points
Site is adjacent to the bay trail, bay ridge trail, or coastal trail 	15 points
Site is adjacent to a numbered route on the Official San Francisco Bike Route 	5 points
Health and Safety (20 points)
Adjacent average daily traffic is below 2000 vehicles 	10 points
Adjacent average daily traffic is below 3000 vehicles 	5 points
No prior development on site (green space) 	10 points
If adjacent to polluting facility, subtract 15 points.
Bonus Criteria (250 points)
Natural and cultural resources (bonus up to 70 points)
Historic or cultural resources on site 	15 points
Relatively undisturbed site supporting significant and diverse plant and wildlife habitat 	15 points
Healthy trees 	15 points
Over a historic creek (requires site investigation if justified by historic records) 	10 points
Adjacency and gaps (bonus up to 180 points)
Within a high-need area 	100 points
Outside the service area of all existing open space property 	30 points
Designated open space in an approved planning document that increases residential densities 	50 points
Site Selection and Programming 	53

-- 71 of 387 --

that can be evaluated. There are practical limits, however, dictated by the time and resources
available, as well as by the risks of selecting a poorly suited site.
When criteria are rated on a quantitative scale, the scores may be combined into a single
site suitability index that is either weighted or unweighted. Simply adding the suitability
scores for all selection criteria is one approach, yielding a total “unweighted” suitability score
for each site as follows:
Site suitability score unweighted 	X 1 	X 2 	X 3 	X n
where X 1, X 2 . . . X n are suitability scores for the selection criteria.
While this approach is attractive for its simplicity, combining the ratings for diverse
selection criteria has drawbacks. Site conditions, cost factors, and contextual factors are
lumped together in one total score, potentially masking important information about the sites’
suitability for the intended uses. Moreover, the unweighted approach gives equal importance
to each selection criterion. Some criteria, however, are more important than others.
Figure 2-8 	Site selection matrix comparing criteria ratings for the two alternative sites. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used
with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
54 	Site Analysis

-- 72 of 387 --

An alternative approach is to “weight” each criterion according to each attribute’s per-
ceived importance to the site’s suitability for the proposed uses. The algorithm for a
weighted site suitability score is as follows:
Site suitability score weighted 	X 1 W 1 	X 2 W2 	X 3 W 3 	X n W n
where X 1 , X 2 . . . X n are suitability scores for the selection criteria, and
where W 1 , W2 . . . W n are criteria weights.
The weighted approach gives the most important selection criteria greater influence.
Because the scheme for weighting the selection criteria can dramatically influence the eval-
uation results, the weights must be chosen very carefully. On public sector projects especially,
this requires discussion and often negotiation among the various stakeholders. Table 2-4
shows an example of a weighting scheme used to evaluate and select potential school sites.
Another approach is to rate each criterion and condense these ratings into one summary
index that combines the site evaluation scores for social and land use factors, construction cost
factors, and maintenance and operating cost factors (Table 2-5). This approach calculates
separate scores for each grouping of selection criteria. Rather than relying on a single index to
summarize the diverse effects of biophysical and cultural factors on the proposed uses, the site
selection decision is a more nuanced assessment of social, economic, and environmental factors.
Regardless of which approach is taken, the sites must be ranked individually or divided
into ranked groups of sites. In a study of potential sites for the Hood Canal Bridge, for
example, the Washington State Department of Transportation (2005) analyzed 18 sites but
did not weight the suitability criteria or compute a summary score for each site. The sites
were evaluated and placed in one of four ranked categories:
TABLE 2-5 	Site evaluation summary table for school site selection.
Sites
Criteria 	1 	2 	3 	4
Social and Land Use Factors 	5 	4 	3 	4
Construction Cost Factors 	3 	4 	5 	3
Maintenance and Operating Cost Factors 	2 	3 	5 	3
Grand Totals 	10 	11 	13 	10
Source: Alaska Department of Education (1997).
TABLE 2-4 	Scheme to weight site selection criteria.
Weight 	Importance to Project
5 	Essential
4 	Very important
3 	Important
2 	Somewhat important
1 	Not very important
Source: Alaska Department of Education (1997, p. 3).
Site Selection and Programming 	55

-- 73 of 387 --

Preferred sites
Acceptable sites
High-risk sites
Least reasonable sites
The site evaluation matrix included graphic symbols to identify each site’s suitability class.
The candidate sites were then mapped and summarized in a site selection report.
2.5.6 	Step 6: Test Project Feasibility
Once the best site has been selected, the project’s feasibility may be studied in more detail
before the site is purchased and the project moves to subsequent phases of the site-planning
process. Whether it is a private sector or public sector project, feasibility studies examine the
proposed project’s costs and benefits. A project’s financial feasibility is determined, in part, by
the physical characteristics of the site and by contextual factors, including the market for
potential customers, competing projects in the area, and regulatory constraints, as well as the
community’s expectations and attitudes concerning land development. Feasibility studies
may include the following:
Market analysis
Assessment of site- and context-specific constraints and opportunities (for example,
risk assessment)
Pro forma financial statements (private sector development) or capital budget/funding
estimates (public sector project)
Design concepts (for example, concept plans and three-dimensional simulations)
On a typical real estate development project, the feasibility study assesses whether or not
the selected site will “pencil out,” or yield the expected return on investment (ROI). The
pro forma statement is the spreadsheet that summarizes the project’s anticipated cash flow,
showing projected expenses, revenues, and profits (Peiser, 1992). This financial statement is
needed to obtain mortgage financing commitments and analyze risks associated with the
proposed development.
The feasibility study also supports other decision making, including (1) how much of the site
can be developed (for example, physical and regulatory constraints limit the developable area,
to some extent, on most sites); (2) what regulatory permits and approvals are needed to develop
the site; and (3) estimates of the time and political obstacles or incentives that can be expected
(Triad Associates, 2001). If the site has not yet been purchased, the client may then decide to
buy it. In some situations, the client may acquire adjacent land parcels to assemble a larger site
with greater development potential. But if the constraints for the proposed project are too
formidable, the client may decide against purchasing the site.
Site Evaluation, Acquisition, and Holding Costs
Site acquisition costs include consultants’ fees for site evaluation and selection. The purpose
of this investigation, or “due diligence,” is to ensure that all potential risks and costs have
56 	Site Analysis

-- 74 of 387 --

been anticipated before acquiring the property. For sites with a history of previous com-
mercial or industrial uses, considerable time and effort may be devoted to site evaluation. An
option to purchase a site is one way that a prospective buyer can reduce the financial risk. If
the client decides not to buy, the financial “exposure” on the project is more limited. After a
site is purchased, land holding costs accrue as the development process continues. These
include property financing costs and real estate taxes.
Site Design and Engineering Costs
As cities grow, land parcels that were “passed over during the first wave of development tend
to be developed later, at higher densities” (Peiser, 1992, p. 48). These sites may have
remained undeveloped for a variety of reasons. A landowner may have simply held the land
for speculative purposes in anticipation of the property’s increasing value. In other cases, sites
are undeveloped because they have significant development constraints.
Difficult sites are more costly to develop for several reasons. Rugged topography,
unstable soils, or shallow bedrock are just a few of the physiographic constraints that
make project design, permitting, and construction more complex and, therefore, more
expensive. Yet, these vacant parcels are often attractive for development because they
are well served by existing public infrastructure and are often located in areas convenient
to cultural amenities and lifestyle conveniences.
Although most sites can be engineered to accommodate the construction of buildings,
roads, and related infrastructure, the development of environmentally sensitive sites can
have negative on-site and off-site consequences. Potential impacts include the destruction
of plant and wildlife habitat and loss of local biodiversity. Life safety risks may also result
from site disturbances that increase the likelihood of landslides or other environmental
hazards.
Permitting and Approval Costs
Not all project costs can be quantified monetarily. Environmental degradation from land
development transfers costs to society rather than to the responsible parties. These negative
impacts are externalities—the result of what economists call “market failures.” A funda-
mental role of local government is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by mini-
mizing these negative externalities. Development impact fees are one way that governments
attempt to link these costs to the responsible parties.
As more has been learned about the built environment’s impacts on ecosystems and
human health, public scrutiny of development proposals has increased. Yet, values and
attitudes toward new development still vary widely among communities, resulting in
differing approaches concerning where, when, and how development is allowed to
proceed.
Objections to development or redevelopment proposals often rest on concerns about the
projects’ off-site impacts. These impacts may affect local environmental quality, the com-
munity’s fiscal well-being, or neighboring residents’ quality of life. Logically, then, the site
selection process must consider the project’s potential off-site impacts. Neighborhood
concerns can prevent a project from being approved or result in substantial revisions to the
project’s scope. NIMBYism (Not In My Backyard) is a substantial challenge to many urban
and suburban redevelopment projects.
Site Selection and Programming 	57

-- 75 of 387 --

Construction and Mitigation Costs
Site preparation and construction costs typically cover excavation and site grading,
stormwater management, site lighting and utilities, buildings, circulation systems, and
landscaping. Site constraints may substantially increase these costs, particularly if devel-
opment is planned for areas that are poorly suited for construction. These constraints range
from poor soil drainage or shallow depths to bedrock to the potentially life-threatening
hazards of flooding and landslides. Ian McHarg’s credo (1969), “design with nature,”
remains an ethically compelling and financially sensible site-planning objective. Designing
with nature reduces development impacts on the web of biophysical systems that func-
tionally link land, water, and biota. Conserving a site’s natural features—such as major trees
and landforms—can also make the remaining developed site a much more desirable place
to live, work, and play.
Mitigating the project’s negative impacts may be required as a condition of project
permitting and approval. Many development projects increase the demands on public
services and facilities. “Exactions” are payments to compensate communities for the
increased costs of providing public services for new development (Altshuler and Gomez-
Ibanez, 1993). Exactions often include payments for off-site infrastructure, such as street
intersection improvements, new traffic signal installations, and utility system extensions.
Exactions may also include impact fees—or dedication of land in lieu of payments—for
public schools and neighborhood parks.
Depending on the municipality in which the project is located, school district impact fees
can amount to several thousand dollars per proposed dwelling unit. For example, a 2005
survey of jurisdictions in King County, Washington State, found that school district impact
fees for a new single-family home ranged from none in the Seattle district to more than
$5000 in parts of the Auburn district (Triad Associates, 2005). Impact fees for public services
such as fire and police protection are also quite common, regardless of the project type.
Chapter 9 includes additional discussion of project implementation issues.
Operation and Maintenance Costs
Maintenance and other project operational costs are also influenced by site conditions.
Building heating and cooling costs, for example, are affected not only by the building’s
design and construction but also by the building’s siting. When continuing life-cycle costs
are considered in site selection decisions, sustainable, or green, approaches to development
may be more cost effective than conventional resource-intensive alternatives.
Environmental hazards that can increase maintenance and operating costs include
flooding, soil erosion, and wildfires. Sites that are subject to natural hazards impose signif-
icant continuing costs. If hazard insurance is available, premiums will be higher than for
comparable property that is not located within a hazardous area.
Other commonly considered factors include corporate tax rates, the available workforce,
and utility capacities and rates. For a heavy-manufacturing facility, for example, proximity to
essential raw materials may be the most important criterion in the site selection decision. This
is particularly true if the raw materials are bulky and expensive to transport. In contrast, for a
firm that manufactures precision instruments, a location near an available supply of skilled
labor—such as tool and die makers—would be more important.
58 	Site Analysis

-- 76 of 387 --

Locational Preferences and Benefits
The value of commercial real estate is strongly influenced by its accessibility. According to
Site Selection magazine’s annual survey of developers, owners, managers, and promoters of
office buildings, proximity to an interstate highway interchange was a key contextual
attribute in the 1990s. The demand for visibility and easy highway access was reflected in
office building site costs (O’Connor, 1996) as follows:
Our survey results show that with increasing distance from the interstate there is a steady
decline in the average price per acre of prepared sites. For sites less than one mile from the
interstate, the average price per acre is $53,000. For sites between one and five miles from
the interstate, the average asking price drops to $45,000 per acre, and for sites between
five and 10 miles from the interstate, the average price dips to $31,000 per acre.
Preferences for residential locations vary widely among different segments of society, or
“markets,” which are largely defined by age, occupation, education level, income, and
family status. For younger couples with children, for example, housing preferences tend to
be influenced by the proximity and quality of primary and secondary schools and outdoor
recreational opportunities.
Development Incentives
Economic development incentives can play a significant role in selecting sites for commercial
and industrial development. According to the International Economic Development Council,
the main goal of economic development is to improve “the economic well-being of a com-
munity through efforts that entail job creation, job retention, tax base enhancements and quality
of life” (www.iedconline.org). The rationale for land development incentives rests on the
economic benefits that may accrue to the state, county, or municipality offering the assistance.
State, county, and local incentives include tax abatements, fee waivers, low-interest loans,
and off-site improvements to public infrastructure (Haresign, 1999). Development subsidies
may also include site preparation costs, assistance with the site plan review and permitting
process, and even site selection services. These subsidies are usually based on the expected
economic benefits from the new businesses. Economic benefits are typically measured by
easily quantified metrics such as the number of jobs created, the expected payroll, or the
revenue generated by selling a publicly owned facility (Moore, 1998).
Economic development programs can create jobs and stimulate capital investment, yet
these programs may precipitate the relocation of businesses from one community to another
(Buss, 2001; Guskind, 1989). Moreover, these business-friendly policies may pay little or no
attention to the environmental or public health implications of the resulting development.
For example, many suburban “office parks” in America are single-use developments
accessible only by private vehicles. These developments tend to have large surface parking
lots and minimal pedestrian infrastructure. Not only do outlying office parks reduce workers’
opportunities for physical activity, these low-density developments also limit access by
potential employees who do not own vehicles. In one case in Minnesota, for example, more
than 20 businesses relocated from an urban site to a distant suburban office park that had no
access to public transportation (Libby et al., 2000).
Site Selection and Programming 	59

-- 77 of 387 --

2.6 	THE SITE SELECTION REPORT
A site evaluation report is often prepared to summarize the site selection methods and results
for review by the client and other stakeholders. A typical site evaluation report (Sidebar 2-2)
includes both text and graphics (Wike and Bowers, 1995):
2.7 	CONCLUSION
Site selection is the process of identifying a suitable parcel of land for one or more specific
purposes. A site’s location influences the complexity and cost of planning, permitting, and
Sidebar 2-2
Title page
Table of contents
Executive summary
Summarizes the purpose and scope of the study, including the type and size of the planned facilities; briefly
describes the sites; indicates which site was selected and the rationale for choosing the selected site.
Introduction
Describes the purpose and scope of the study.
Site selection process
Explains the site selection criteria and the criteria rating and weighting schemes.
Graphics: context map showing each site and its immediate surroundings; location map showing all of the
sites that were considered and key landmarks or reference points such as major streets or highways or municipal
boundaries; property boundary surveys; aerial photograph of each site, site cross sections, and photographic
panoramas.
Comparative evaluation of candidate sites
Describes the strengths and weaknesses of each site. This may include projected project costs at each site (for
example, land costs, permitting and impact fees, site development costs, utility extension costs, and construc-
tion costs). It may also include information on community financial assistance and development incentives
(see www.siteseekers.org).
Graphics: site evaluation matrix; tabulated data summarizing the individual site evaluations and allowing
comparison among the alternative sites.
Conclusions
Briefly summarizes the study’s conclusions.
References
Appendices
60 	Site Analysis

-- 78 of 387 --

implementing a land development or redevelopment project. Land use regulations and
cultural, economic, and biophysical attributes all influence—to varying degrees—the site’s
feasibility for the intended project uses.
Site selection involves the collection and analysis of both site and contextual data.
Determining which site and contextual attributes to evaluate depends, in part, on the
program, or intended uses of the site. Project programming considers user needs, the site and
its context, and both successful and unsuccessful design precedents.
Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming
ARLINGTON C OUNTY B OATHOUSE
SITE PLANNING : EDAW, INC., ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA
ARCHITECTURE : RUMMEL , K LEPPER & K AHL , LLP, B ALTIMORE , MARYLAND
BACKGROUND
The U.S. Congress initiated this study to assess the potential for siting a boathouse (rowing facility) within
Arlington County along the Potomac River. The facility would be located along the Virginia side of the river on
public lands managed by the National Park Service. Four sites were considered (Figure 2-9).
PROJECT SCOPE
This study included the development of a minimum and a maximum program for the potential Arlington County
Boathouse. These two programs were used to analyze the feasibility of each study site. The criteria used to
assess each site’s suitability for the boathouse addressed physical conditions, visual/cultural resources, envi-
ronmental impacts, economics, and operational issues.
PROGRAM/PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Developing the program for the boathouse involved several steps, including:
Reviewing a study prepared by Arlington County’s Water-Based Recreational Facility Task Force in 1995
Interviews with crew coaches at the three Arlington County public high schools
Precedent studies of three area boathouses and one area boat club
Based on this information, the minimum boathouse program included:
Existing boat storage needs and immediate expansion plans of the crew teams at three Arlington County
public high schools
Exercise areas, lockers, showers, and storage space for the three schools
Site Selection and Programming 	61

-- 79 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Boat-repair area
Minimal office space
Access for trailers, school buses, and emergency vehicles
Gas storage area
Outdoor rigging areas
The maximum boathouse program included all of the above requirements along with additional boat
storage for other high school crew teams in the area, individual rowers, and other community rowing programs
(Figure 2-10).
FACILITY AND SITE ANALYSIS
The analysis of the four sites included assessments of site constraints, conditions of the river for rowing,
transportation access, required infrastructure improvements, and potential visual impacts (Figures 2-11, 2-12,
and 2-13). Schematic site plans were prepared for a minimum program and a maximum program at each site.
Figure 2-9 	Map showing the
locations of sites considered for
the proposed boathouse on the
Potomac River. Source: EDAW,
Inc. Used with permission.
62 	Site Analysis

-- 80 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Figure 2-10 	Building footprints for existing boathouse precedents and the minimum and maximum proposed boathouse
programs. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with permission.
Site Selection and Programming 	63

-- 81 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Figure 2-11 	Inventory map of floodplains and soils at the Rosslyn waterfront sites. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with
permission.
64 	Site Analysis

-- 82 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Site improvements necessary to accommodate each program were identified, including a new access drive, drop-
off area, and parking lot (Figure 2-14). Photos of each site’s existing conditions were compared with photo-
simulations to assess the potential visual impacts of the proposed buildings at each site (Figures 2-15 and 2-16).
Figure 2-12 	Inventory map of tree cover and subaquatic vegetation at the Rosslyn waterfront sites. Source: EDAW, Inc.
Used with permission.
Site Selection and Programming 	65

-- 83 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Figure 2-13 	Inventory map of potential archaeological sites at the Rosslyn waterfront sites. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with
permission.
66 	Site Analysis

-- 84 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Figure 2-14 	Schematic site plan for the lower Rosslyn waterfront site. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with permission.
Site Selection and Programming 	67

-- 85 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
Figure 2-15 	Photograph of the existing view of the site from the Potomac River. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with permission.
Figure 2-16 	Photosimulation of the potential view of the site with the proposed boathouse from the Potomac River.
Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with permission.
68 	Site Analysis

-- 86 of 387 --

Case Study 2–1 	Site Selection and Programming (continued)
PUBLIC COMMENTS
Public comments received during the planning process helped identify concerns associated with each location
along the Potomac River. Comments related to rowing conditions, proximity to the public high schools, trans-
portation access, environmental issues, aesthetic concerns, and cultural and historical factors.
COMPARING THE CANDIDATE SITES
The programs, improvements required at each potential site, and expected impacts of each site and program
alternative were compared graphically and in a table (Figure 2-17).
Figure 2-17 	Table comparing alternative sites and programs. Source: EDAW, Inc. Used with permission.
Site Selection and Programming 	69

-- 87 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. What are some ways that user needs and preferences influence programming desires?
2. What are some contextual factors that might affect a site’s suitability for a new
proposed elementary school?
70 	Site Analysis

-- 88 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	3
Assessing the Site’s
Physiographic Context
In the end, our society will be defined not only by what we create, but by what we refuse
to destroy.
—John Sawhill, former president, The Nature Conservancy
3.1 	INTRODUCTION
Every site is embedded within a landscape, and a key goal in site planning is to understand the
site and its surroundings. Both basic and applied research have contributed to our under-
standing of the physical, biological, and cultural environments. This continually expanding
knowledge base is the foundation for land planning, design, and management theory. The
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (3rd ed.) defines theory as follows:
1. A system of assumptions, accepted principles, and rules of procedure devised to
analyze, predict, or otherwise explain the nature or behavior of a specified set of
phenomena.
2. A belief that guides action or assists comprehension or judgment.
The field of medicine clearly reflects the synergistic relationship between theory and
practice. Research on heart function, blood chemistry, and other aspects of human physi-
ology informs the medical practitioners’ health care decisions. The natural and social sciences
similarly provide the theoretical foundation for actions that shape the built environment in
ways that can sustain current and future generations.
71

-- 89 of 387 --

Redeveloping a parcel of land requires information about the site as well as the site’s
surroundings. Many site attributes, such as vegetation type and slope, are unevenly dis-
tributed spatially. Some attributes, such as seasonal temperatures and precipitation, show very
little spatial variation at the site scale. Temperature and precipitation can vary dramatically, of
course, throughout the year. This temporal variation may affect the uses of the site from
season to season. Consequently, it may be appropriate to document the spatial distribution of
a particular attribute at more than one time of the year. Site attributes that vary seasonally
include wildlife distributions, wind direction and speed, sun and shade patterns, and
groundwater levels. Because site planning and design involve land use decisions affecting
people, an understanding of human behavior, attitudes, and preferences is also necessary.
The site inventory is a focused process of collecting and mapping essential contextual
information. It is not a “fishing expedition” or an open-ended investigation of all biophysical
or cultural phenomena that occur on or near the site. The project program, although subject
to revision as more site information becomes available, helps to narrow the scope of this data
collection effort.
3.1.1 	Base Maps
One of the first tasks in a site inventory is to develop a base map. The base map serves as the
template for attribute mapping and analysis, as well as for subsequent site planning and design
drawings (see Chapter 1). If a topographic survey of the site is available, the base map will
typically include project boundaries and other surveyed information (Table 3-1). Topo-
graphic surveys, for site-planning purposes, are usually made by a licensed land surveyor
TABLE 3-1 	Data conveyed on a typical site survey.
Category 	Locational Data
Legal 	Property lines (angles and distances)
Easements and building setback lines
Site area
Topography 	Elevation contours
Spot elevations for high points and low points
Vegetation 	Wooded areas
Isolated trees (species and diameter at breast height)
Soils/Geology 	Boreholes
Hydrology 	Surface water
Wetlands 100-year floodways and flood fringe
Utilities 	Type (for example, sanitary sewer, electric, gas, telephone)
Capacity (size of line or pipe)
Manholes, hydrants, and other fixtures
Structures 	Buildings, walls, and fences
Circulation 	Streets and street rights-of-way
Parking areas and spaces, curbs and gutters
72 	Site Analysis

-- 90 of 387 --

according to specifications tailored to the program and the site. Oblique and vertical aerial
photos of the site can provide additional contextual information (Figure 3-1).
Rectified aerial photos are particularly good base maps to overlay inventory, analysis, and
conceptual design graphics (Figure 3-2). The size and orientation of the base map depend
largely on the size and shape of the site, the complexity of the program, and the importance
of nearby off-site factors. Ideally, a single size and orientation are used consistently for the
entire set of illustrative materials. Maps and plans are normally oriented so that north is at
the top of the sheet.
The size of the base map is also a function of the map’s scale. A land use planning project
for a relatively large area (for example, several hundred acres or hectares) could conceivably
have a relatively small-scale base map (for example, 1:200 or 1:400). Conversely, a site-
planning project for a residential or commercial building on a much smaller area (for
example, 1 acre or hectare) could have a relatively large-scale base map (for example, 1:20 or
1:40). The base map typically includes the following existing site conditions:
Property boundaries
Public rights-of-way and easements
Topography
Buildings
Figure 3-1 	Vertical aerial
photograph with project
boundaries superimposed.
Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of
The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	73

-- 91 of 387 --

Streets and utility lines (above and below ground)
Adjacent property uses and owners
The base map also typically includes the following ancillary information:
Site location map (a small-scale map showing the site within its broader context)
Title information (for example, project name, location, designer, consultants)
North arrow
Graphic map scale
Data sources (date of site boundary survey, name of surveyor, and other source data)
A title “block” is a common feature of construction drawings, which include grading
plans and planting plans. For site inventory and analysis maps, and conceptual plans, title
information can be presented in a far less structured format; for example, titles may even be
drawn freehand (Figure 3-3).
Figure 3-2 	Graphic symbols
can convey pertinent informa-
tion about existing site condi-
tions and proposed conceptual
designs.
Graphic Symbol
Points
Lines
Polygons
Circulation, Utilities 	Barrier, Constraint
District, Corridor
Node 	Gateway, Conflict
74 	Site Analysis

-- 92 of 387 --

Figure 3-3 	Conceptual master plan with north arrow, graphic scale, and an ancillary land use table. Source: Edward D. Stone, Jr.,
and Associates. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	75

-- 93 of 387 --

3.2 	PARCEL SIZE AND SHAPE
Land development—and redevelopment—occur over a range
of site scales. A single-use commercial project, for example, can
be designed and implemented on a site of less than 1 acre (0.4
hectare). In contrast, a single-family housing project may be
planned for a site of 20 acres (8.1 hectares) or more.
Parcel size is an intrinsic constraint on a site’s development
potential. If all other factors are equal, larger sites can accommodate more extensive and
more diverse development than smaller sites. On smaller sites, off-site factors are more likely
to influence the site’s design. Therefore, two or more contiguous parcels of land are
sometimes combined to create one larger parcel under a single ownership. Larger sites
generally allow greater flexibility in arranging program elements on the site. Additional site
area also allows for the integration of green space, including natural areas and new plantings
to separate incompatible uses, screen undesirable views off site, and filter and retain
stormwater.
The shape of the site also can reduce development potential and design flexibility. This is
especially true on smaller sites and on narrow linear sites that have a higher edge-to-interior
ratio than properties that are more compact in shape (Figure 3-4). A greater proportion of
edge increases the site’s exposure to the surrounding landscape. If the site is adjacent to a busy
highway, for example, a linear or small site will substantially limit the site planner’s ability to
buffer traffic noises. However, if the site is adjacent to a natural amenity, a parcel with a
relatively high edge-to-interior ratio will benefit from this spatial relationship, particularly if
the amenity is likely to persist well into the near future (Figure 3-5).
In combination, a site’s size and shape can substantially affect its suitability for potential
development. Municipal zoning regulations, for example, typically impose building setbacks
from front, side, and back property boundaries. These restricted areas may occupy a rela-
tively large percentage of a linear site’s total area and render the site unfeasible for devel-
opment from a financial perspective. Context, therefore, is especially important when
evaluating small or linear sites.
3.3 	TOPOGRAPHY
Understanding the site’s topography is essential in making good site-planning and design
decisions. Topographic surveys provide critical information about the site’s biophysical
context. Three key attribute maps can be derived from a topographic survey to graphically
show variations in elevation, slope, and aspect.
3.3.1 	Elevation
Changes in elevation affect both drainage patterns and visibility to and from the site. Ele-
vation data are portrayed on topographic maps as contour lines and spot elevations. For site-
planning purposes, an effective way to visualize topographic relief is to create a choropleth
map of elevation. To make it easy to understand, the map should have relatively few (five to
Edge = 36%
Interior = 64%
Edge = 46%
Interior = 54%
Figure 3-4 	Relationship
between parcel shape and
edge-to-interior ratio for two
parcels of equal area.
76 	Site Analysis

-- 94 of 387 --

nine) elevation classes. The range of existing elevations on and adjacent to a site determines
the range of each elevation class. For example, if the highest elevation on the site is 1327 feet
(404.2 meters) above a local benchmark and the lowest elevation is 832 feet (253.6 meters),
the map must show a range of elevation of at least 495 feet (150.9 meters) (1327 	832
495). To limit the map’s visual complexity, 495 can be divided by six classes for a result of
82.5 feet (25.1 meters). To create elevation classes of equal increments, 82.5 can be rounded
up to 100. To enhance the map’s effectiveness (Figure 3-6), each “layer” is then shaded or
colored—typically with a spectrum ranging from cool colors (for lower elevations) to warm
colors (for higher elevations).
3.3.2 	Slope
Differences in soil parent materials and weathering account for characteristic landforms or
landscape “signatures.” The landforms also reflect the area’s surficial geology. Landforms
result from constructional processes (for example, wind deposition) and destructional pro-
cesses (for example, soil erosion) acting on underlying geologic structures (Bloom, 1978).
A site’s suitability for roads, walkways, buildings, and other structures is, in part, a
function of the existing slopes on the site. In Hong Kong and San Francisco, cities with
relatively warm climates, development frequently occurs on sites with relatively steep slopes.
Figure 3-5 	Coastal and inland water bodies are amenities that can significantly increase the value of adjoining properties.
Waterfront property, however, may also face elevated risks of flooding.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	77

-- 95 of 387 --

In contrast, in locations with freezing winter temperatures, vehicle and pedestrian circulation
systems on steep gradients can create safety hazards from icy, sloping surfaces.
Spatial variation in a site’s elevation creates slopes that have both a gradient and an
orientation. Slope gradients can be computed and easily mapped with most geographic
information systems (GIS) and computer-aided design (CAD) software (Figure 3-7). The
range of each mapped slope class depends on the intended uses of the site and on the specific
site and contextual conditions, including soil characteristics, vegetative cover, and regulatory
requirements. For example, to prevent significant environmental and aesthetic impacts,
development regulations may prohibit construction on very steep slopes (for example,
greater than 25 percent). Soil stabilization and erosion controls may be required on moderate
to steep slopes (for example, 8 to 15 percent or 15 to 25 percent). Conversely, sites that are
essentially flat (less than 1 percent slope) may be poorly drained. Each of these slope con-
ditions warrants mapping, because these locations have significant site planning implications.
3.3.3 	Aspect
A slope’s orientation, or aspect, is the compass direction that the slope faces (for example,
north or northeast). Variations in slope and aspect influence the daily and seasonal solar
Figure 3-6 	Choropleth map showing six elevation classes. Each class represents 100 feet (30.5 meters) of elevation change.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
78 	Site Analysis

-- 96 of 387 --

radiation received by the site. In the Northern Hemisphere, north-facing 10-degree
slopes will receive far less solar radiation than south-facing slopes of the same gradient
(Figure 3-8). Because the slope faces away from the sun, the solar radiation striking a north-
facing slope hits the surface at a shallow, or acute, angle. Consequently, sunlight strikes
the slope in a more diffuse pattern, delivering to the surface less solar energy per unit area
(Figure 3-9).
Aspect influences microclimate by affecting the amount of solar radiation striking the site.
As with other physical attributes, the importance of a slope’s aspect depends partly on the
proposed uses of the site. At higher northern latitudes, for example, south-facing slopes are
better suited for siting buildings that will incorporate active and/or passive solar heating.
Conversely, a north-facing slope may be better suited for ski trail development in order to
limit the melting of snow in late winter and early spring.
Slope aspect, like slope gradient, can be mapped with commercially available GIS soft-
ware. Typically, aspect is classified using eight categories: north, northeast, east, southeast,
south, southwest, west, and northwest. These are portrayed graphically by either shading or
color. More shaded northern slopes (in the Northern Hemisphere) are typically rendered
with cooler colors or heavier hatching than are the other slopes with greater solar exposure.
Figure 3-7 	Choropleth map of a slope gradient. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK
Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	79

-- 97 of 387 --

Figure 3-8 	Influence of latitude on the intensity of solar radiation striking the earth’s surface. Source: From Landscape Planning,
3rd ed., by William M. Marsh. Copyright 	1998 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Figure 3-9 	South-facing slopes (in the Northern Hemisphere) receive significantly more solar radiation than north-facing slopes.
80 	Site Analysis

-- 98 of 387 --

3.4 	GEOLOGY, HYDROLOGY, AND SOILS
3.4.1 	Geology
Surficial geology is concerned with the structure, composition, and stability of the materials
beneath and—in some locations—at the earth’s surface. Bedrock geology has a persistent
effect on landforms due to the different rates of weathering that occur on the soil parent
materials. Landform classification is useful in regional assessments, particularly for charac-
terizing attributes that are difficult to quantify, like scenic beauty. Eskers, kames, and
moraines, for example, are distinctive landforms created by prior glaciation. Landforms, in
conjunction with vegetation, define viewsheds and can increase visual quality. Landforms
also influence microclimate, stormwater runoff and infiltration, and the distribution of plant
and animal species.
Soil formation, soil erosion, and soil deposition are natural processes that involve rock
fragmentation and weathering. Weathering occurs unevenly because of variations in the
bedrock’s chemical composition and structure. An important attribute of surficial geology is
the depth-to-bedrock. In some landscapes, bedrock lies many yards or meters below the
ground surface. If excavation for building foundations or for other site structures is planned
for a site with shallow bedrock or glacial eratics (boulders), blasting or other special methods
of removal may be necessary. The cost of excavating a cubic yard or meter of rock is many
times greater than the cost of excavating the same volume of soil. Because these subsurface
conditions significantly increase the costs of building construction, the depth-to-bedrock is
typically investigated.
Geologic maps show the age and distribution of rock layers and other geologic materials.
A volume of rock of a specific type and age range is considered a geologic unit. Colors and
letter symbols identify each geologic unit at or near the land surface. Therefore, a sandstone
of one age might be shown as one color, for example, while a sandstone of a different age
might be shown as a different color. A geologic map usually includes information on
topography and cultural elements, such as roads, to help orient the map user.
A searchable catalog of paper and digital geologic maps is available online through the
United States Geological Survey (see Appendix B). Several map themes in the database are
potentially useful in site planning and design (Table 3-2). These geologic attributes influence
a site’s suitability for excavation and grading, wastewater disposal, groundwater supply, pond
construction, and other common land development objectives (Way, 1978).
A site’s subsurface conditions may be assessed, in greater detail, in conjunction with the
topographic survey. This investigation usually requires the services of a geotechnical engi-
neer. Data on depth-to-bedrock, for example, are collected by drilling bore holes with a
mechanical driller. These samples provide information about the site’s soil and surficial
geology (Joyce, 1982). The spacing and number of boreholes depend on the conditions of
the site and the purposes of the investigation. Sites with great variability in soil and geologic
conditions may require more intensive subsurface investigation. Similarly, when large
buildings will be constructed on a site, the area and depth of the subsurface investigation will
be greater than if the project did not include these structures.
Volcanic activity, earthquakes, and landslides are relatively common events in some parts
of the world. These geologic disturbances are potentially devastating hazards that must be
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	81

-- 99 of 387 --

considered when planning new development in these regions. The locations of potential
geologic hazards, such as landslides, are often mapped by government agencies involved in
preventing or minimizing natural disasters (Figure 3-10). Geologic investigations may
include section diagrams showing locations that are susceptible to earthquakes and other
hazards.
3.4.2 	Hydrology
Water circulates in the environment through precipitation, overland flow, infiltration,
storage, and evapotranspiration. Groundwater moves by capillary action through the porous
spaces between unconsolidated sand, gravel, and rock, and between the fractures and faults
in the underlying bedrock. The water table, or upper surface of the groundwater resource,
generally mirrors the surface terrain. In landscapes where groundwater is the source of local
or municipal wells, groundwater pumping can substantially increase the depth to the water
table.
Topographic variation creates drainage patterns, which, in turn, influence plant dis-
tributions. The spatial correlation between vegetation associations and site drainage patterns
is particularly strong in arid and semiarid landscapes where water is often the primary limiting
factor on plant growth and distribution. Although the groundwater-vegetation linkage is
more subtle in less arid environments, the continuous or seasonal saturation of soils can
create wetlands. In coastal environments, brackish or saline surface and groundwater result in
the development of salt marshes and other distinct wetland communities.
Without on-site and off-site mitigation, urban development can have significant impacts
on local and regional hydrology. These negative impacts include (United States Environ-
mental Protection Agency, 1993):
Increased volumes and rates of runoff discharges
Reduced time needed for runoff to reach surface waters
Increased frequency and severity of flooding
Reduced streamflow during prolonged periods of dry weather
TABLE 3-2 	Selected map themes of the National Geologic Map Database.
Category 	Theme
Geology 	General (for example, rocks and sediment at or near the earth’s surface); Structure (for example, thickness
of buried rock units); Engineering (for example, engineering properties of soils); Coastal (for example,
areas of coastal zone erosion or sedimentation)
Natural Resources 	Nonmetallic resources (for example, sand and gravel); Water (for example, groundwater aquifers and water
quality); Other (for example, geothermal resources)
Hazards 	Earthquake hazards (for example, faults and earthquake zones); Volcano hazards (for example, eruption
history); Landslides (for example, existing landslides and landslide potential)
Source: United States Geological Survey (2000).
82 	Site Analysis

-- 100 of 387 --

Figure 3-10 	Map of landslide hazard susceptibility in the San Francisco Bay region. Source: Wilson, R. C., and Jayko, A. S., 1997.
Preliminary maps showing rainfall thresholds for debris-flow activity, San Francisco Bay region, CA. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File
Report 97–945 F, in Ramsey and others, 1999, Landslide hazard susceptibility maps for the San Francisco Bay region: Tools for
emergency planning during the 1997–98 El Niño: ESRI Map Book, v. 14, p. 18–19.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	83

-- 101 of 387 --

Land development—until relatively recently—involved the construction of buildings and
paved surfaces that are impervious or nearly impervious. These land cover changes sub-
stantially increased the risks of flooding, erosion, and other ecological impacts on properties
“downstream” (Figure 3-11). Surface water pollution associated with stormwater runoff
reduces the aesthetic, recreational, and ecological value of rivers, lakes, and other water
bodies. Consequently, stormwater management has become a highly regulated aspect of the
land development process.
Land development may also negatively impact groundwater quality. When local
groundwater is the source of a community’s potable water, efforts must be made to ensure
that on-site wastewater treatment systems and stormwater runoff do not contaminate local
wells (Figure 3-12). For decades, siting requirements for on-site wastewater treatment sys-
tems used soil conditions as the primary siting criterion. As treatment technologies evolved,
more highly engineered on-site wastewater treatment systems—and associated buildings—
Figure 3-11 	Impervious surfaces in a watershed potentially increase stormwater runoff and reduce soil infiltration and
groundwater recharge. Source: Federal Interagency Stream Restoration Working Group.
84 	Site Analysis

-- 102 of 387 --

have been constructed on formerly unsuitable sites (LaGro, 1996). These sites include
locations with bedrock and/or water tables as shallow as 20 centimeters (8 inches) below the
ground surface.
Stormwater movement, infiltration, storage, and discharge are considered in the site
inventory. The assessment of hydrologic conditions requires analysis of the site’s surface and
subsurface features, including topography, vegetation, surface water distribution, land use,
climate, and soil-forming processes and deposits (Kolm, 1996). Surface drainage patterns
(Figure 3-13) and potential flood hazard zones (Figure 3-14) are typically mapped. These
areas serve critical ecological functions and, therefore, comprise major development
constraints.
Aquifer recharge areas are also important to identify and protect from development. The
primary paths of groundwater flow and the locations of groundwater discharge to the surface
are also important, particularly in more rural locations. Subsurface geologic characterization
may include the analysis of aquifer permeability, thickness, and discontinuities (Kolm, 1996).
Maps of groundwater and local geological conditions are particularly important in land use
Figure 3-12 	To protect the quality of potable water supplies, land use controls often limit development in areas near community
wells. Source: From Landscape Planning, 3rd ed., by William M. Marsh. Copyright 	1998 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	85

-- 103 of 387 --

planning for rural areas without access to municipal water service (Figure 3-15). These site
data can help determine potential sources of potable groundwater (Figure 3-16).
3.4.3 	Soils
Climate, landform position, and parent material are key physical factors in soil genesis and
morphology. Other factors include the growth, death, and decomposition of vegetation,
microorganisms, and other biota living above ground or within the soil itself. Soil properties
are also affected by the previous and current land uses (Ferguson, 1999). For example, sites
with a history of previous industrial or commercial uses may be contaminated with a variety
of hazardous substances, and investigation of a site’s subsurface conditions is warranted. If
hazardous wastes are present on the site, the costs of remediation can be substantial.
Depending on the site’s location and the intended land use program, the inventory may
include the following soil attributes:
Acidity/alkalinity (pH)
Permeability
Erosion potential
Figure 3-13 	Map showing watershed boundaries (ridges) and major drainage patterns (valleys). Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
86 	Site Analysis

-- 104 of 387 --

Depth to seasonally high-water table
Depth-to-bedrock
Subsurface conditions affect not only the complexity of excavation and construction but
also the project design (Figure 3-17). To ensure that the integrity of a new building or
structure is not compromised, foundations in colder climates are designed to a depth below
the lowest frost level. This depth may be 3 or more feet (about 1 meter) below the ground
surface. For large multistory buildings, foundations are designed to considerably greater
depths for structural stability.
Soils vary widely in texture, fertility, permeability, and other attributes that influence
plant growth and development. Soils that are favorable for plant health reduce the impact of
pests and diseases and, therefore, can reduce pesticide use. Soil erosion frequently occurs
when vegetation cover is removed or substantially damaged during site clearing and con-
struction. Topsoil losses from prior agricultural uses or other erosive forces can increase the
costs of reestablishing vegetation on a site after construction.
Bacteria and other microbes in the soil naturally decompose wastes. This essential eco-
system service enables the use of soil-based on-site wastewater treatment systems (OWTS). If
these systems will be installed on the site, the soils must be evaluated for their permeability
and capacity to remove chemical and pathogen contaminants from wastewater effluent. Very
Figure 3-14 	Map showing the floodway and the 100-year flood zone along a river in the Midwest. Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	87

-- 105 of 387 --

Stream Alluvium
Vashon Recessional
Outwash
Vashon Till
Salmon Springs Drift
Intermediate Drift
Undifferentiated
Deposits
•TB-1 Boring location and number
266 Groundwater Elevation in Feet
Groundwater Elevation in
Contour Feet
Generalized Groundwater
Flow Direction
270
Qvr
Qvr
Qvr
Qvr
Qvr
Qvr
Figure 3-15 	Map of groundwater elevation and surficial geology. Source: R. W. Thorpe and Associates.
88 	Site Analysis

-- 106 of 387 --

Selected Well/Boring
Location and Number
(Geologic Log Available)
Estimated Well Location
(Geologic Log Unavailable)
Spring Location and Number
Geologic Cross Section
Location and Designation
Area for Potential
Groundwater Exploration
• G1
•
D1S
A	A
Figure 3-16 	Map of potential rural well locations. Source: R. W. Thorpe and Associates.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	89

-- 107 of 387 --

rapidly draining soils, typically those with high sand and gravel content, may be poorly suited
for conventional on-site wastewater treatment (Figure 3-18). Similarly, impervious soils,
such as hardpan, are also constraints that limit on-site treatment without the use of more
highly engineered alternative wastewater treatment systems.
Many landscapes outside of urbanized areas have had soils inventoried and mapped. The
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Soil Survey maps are spatially coarse (for example,
1:15,840 scale) and do not capture the fine-scale spatial variability that occurs in the depth-
to-bedrock, depth-to-water-table, and other key attributes. However, these soil maps—and
the soil ratings for specific land use types—can be useful in assessing a site’s suitability for the
proposed uses (Figure 3-19).
3.5 	CLIMATE AND MICROCLIMATE
A site’s expected climatic and microclimatic conditions can influence various site-planning
and design decisions, including the following:
Building orientation and façade design
Siting and design of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems
Selection and placement of plant materials
Design of the stormwater management infrastructure
Figure 3-17 	Map of existing environmental conditions on a site analyzed for a new infill building. Note the drainage
patterns and areas with soils poorly suited for building foundations. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The
HOK Planning Group.
90 	Site Analysis

-- 108 of 387 --

Seasonal and monthly climate data are available from national weather services (for
example, in Australia, at www.bom.gov.au/climate). Local weather records can provide
additional information about the weather conditions that can be expected in each season.
Relevant data include the following:
Temperature (maximum, minimum, and day/night temperature variation)
Humidity (high, low, and averages)
Wind (maximum, average velocity, and direction)
Rainfall (monthly precipitation totals, 10-year maximums for a 1-hour and a 24-hour
period)
Snowfall (monthly total and maximum for any 1 day)
Solar radiation (monthly average)
Potential extreme weather hazards
Figure 3-18 	Choropleth map showing four soil classes based on soil texture, slope, and erosion potential. Source: R. W. Thorpe
and Associates.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	91

-- 109 of 387 --

Figure 3-19 	Map of soils for a coastal site in Kuwait. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK
Planning Group.
92 	Site Analysis

-- 110 of 387 --

Over the past decade, evidence of climate change has been mounting. The most recent
report of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007) documents a broad range
of substantial risks to property, life, and livelihoods. Yet, the potential positive and negative
impacts of climate change vary temporally and spatially. For example, the U.S. Department
of Agriculture (USDA) Plant Hardiness Zone map shows the locations where different
average annual minimum temperatures can be expected each year in the United States,
Canada, and Mexico. The map depicts 11 zones, based on average minimal temperature
ranges (for example, -10 to -20 degrees Fahrenheit or -23.4 to -28.8 degrees Celsius for
Zone 4). The plant hardiness map was recently revised, however, to reflect changing climate
conditions (Figure 3-20). This has led to some significant changes in plant hardiness zone
classifications (Table 3-3).
Regional climatic conditions do not account for local variations in microclimate.
Microclimate has a particularly important effect on two aspects of the built environment:
energy consumption for the heating and cooling of buildings, and the comfort of people in
outdoor settings. Both energy consumption and outdoor microclimate are influenced by the
location and design of the buildings and outdoor spaces. Depending on the height of nearby
buildings, trees, or other vertical elements, shadows of varying lengths may be cast across the
site on sunny days.
Shadow length varies daily and seasonally, especially in higher latitudes (Figure 3-21).
The solar exposure of outdoor spaces near buildings varies not only with weather conditions
but also with time of day, day of year, and location of the space in relation to the buildings
and to the sun (Figure 3-22). Slope and aspect also influence surface temperatures through
their effect on the amount of solar radiation striking the site’s surface.
Energy consumption for heating and cooling buildings can be reduced through both
passive and active solar designs. Greater energy efficiency can be achieved passively by
moderating the solar radiation striking and entering a building and by moderating winds and
breezes near the building. In environments where winds are strong and persistent, significant
modifications of building forms may be necessary.
Ambient air temperatures in outdoor areas depend, in part, on whether the space is
exposed to full sunshine. Surface materials and vegetation within the space also affect air
temperatures. Paving materials like brick and stone absorb solar radiation, reradiate the
energy as heat, and thereby raise the air temperature immediately above the paved surfaces.
The heat index is an estimate of “apparent temperature”—the temperature that one feels
because of the interaction between air temperature and relative humidity. Direct sunlight
can raise heat index values by as much as 15 	F (United States National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Agency, 2000a).
Trees, for example, intercept the solar radiation that would otherwise strike pavements,
rooftops, and other surfaces. Inorganic surfaces, especially if they are dark in color, absorb
and subsequently reradiate more heat energy than vegetation. Plant leaves also tend to lower
air temperatures through evapotranspiration. In addition to moderating air temperature and
humidity, plants can improve air quality by removing chemical pollutants and, as a result of
photosynthesis, by adding oxygen to the atmosphere.
Metabolic energy (generated within the body) and radiation (from the sun and from the
earth) are the main sources of energy available to heat a person. A person is thermally
comfortable when there is a balance between the body’s heat losses and heat gains. Energy
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	93

-- 111 of 387 --

Figure 3-20 	Former and revised U.S. plant hardiness maps show the effects of climate change on average minimum winter
temperatures. Source: United States National Arboretum.
94 	Site Analysis

-- 112 of 387 --

can be lost from a person’s body mainly through evaporation of perspiration, convection
from wind, and radiation.
In a classic study of the relationships between environment and human behavior, William
H. Whyte (1980) used time-lapse photography to document the locations of people visiting
the plaza of the Seagram Building in New York City. The rooftop of an adjacent building
was his vantage point for viewing the plaza below. On a relatively cool spring day, plaza users
TABLE 3-3 	Changes in United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) plant
hardiness zones (reflecting average annual minimum temperature ranges) for selected
cities in the United States.
City 	Old Hardiness Zone 	New Hardiness Zone
Chicago, Illinois 	5 	6
Columbus, Ohio 	5 	6
Nashville, Tennessee 	6 	7
Phoenix, Arizona 	9 	10
St. Petersburg, Florida 	9 	10
Tulsa, Oklahoma 	6 	7
Source: Ellis, 2003, p.35.
Figure 3-21 	Diagram of seasonal changes in the maximum daily sun angle for a midlatitude location in the Northern Hemisphere.
Source: From Landscape Planning, 3rd ed., by William M. Marsh. Copyright 	1998 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	95

-- 113 of 387 --

either sat or stood in locations that were exposed to direct
sunlight. As shadows swept across this outdoor plaza, people
came and went, but the majority of visitors at any one time
were in the sun. People animated the plaza’s sunny spaces in
synchronization with the moving area exposed to full
sunlight.
Microclimate can vary greatly over short distances and
over short time spans due to variability in a site’s exposure to
solar radiation and wind (Brown and Gillespie, 1995). In
outdoor rural and suburban environments, solar radiation and
wind are the microclimatic factors that can be most easily
modified by design. Buildings, trees, walls, and other vertical
elements cast shadows, and understanding sun and shade patterns is essential in site planning
and design. Winter winds can be buffered somewhat with windbreaks, and land uses can be
arranged to reduce the negative effects of winds on outdoor activities.
A solar radiation map can be created in a GIS by overlaying and combining three
attribute layers: slope gradient, slope aspect, and vegetation (deciduous and coniferous trees
primarily). The complexity of the solar radiation map depends on the number of classes in
each input layer. If each of these three layers has several classes, the potential number of
combinations would be relatively high. For example, the slope gradient map could have
three classes (0–10 percent, 10–20 percent, and greater than 20 percent); the slope aspect
map could have eight classes (for the eight compass points); and the tree cover map could
have four classes (no tree cover, deciduous trees, coniferous trees, and mixed deciduous/
coniferous trees). If these three layers were combined, the resulting map of all slope, aspect,
and tree cover combinations could have 96 classes (3 classes multiplied by 8 classes mul-
tiplied by 4 classes).
Although useful as an intermediate layer, the solar radiation map would be difficult to
interpret. This map could, however, be reclassified, or recoded, to more clearly convey the
site’s microclimate. One possible map class, for example, would portray all site areas with less
than 10 percent south-facing slopes and no tree cover. Another class would portray all areas
with greater than 10 percent north-facing slopes and coniferous tree cover. In the northern
latitudes, these two areas would receive markedly different levels of solar radiation during the
winter months. Another approach is to aggregate the various slope, aspect, and vegetation
combinations into one of the following four classes (Beer, 1990):
Very warm areas
Warm areas
Cool areas
Very cool areas
Prevailing summer breezes and winter winds can be shown as directional arrows
(Figure 3-23). Because wind is highly variable in both speed and direction, it may be
depicted graphically with “wind rose” diagrams that show the frequency distribution of the
wind direction, velocity, and duration at a specific location.
North 	South
Summer
Winter
Figure 3-22 	Schematic dia-
gram of the difference in sum-
mer and winter shadow length
cast by a building in the North-
ern Hemisphere.
96 	Site Analysis

-- 114 of 387 --

Assessing a site’s microclimate is challenging, because a variety of sun, shade, and wind
patterns can occur on a site. The position of the sun above the horizon changes seasonally
and daily from sunrise to sunset. Solar access is a particularly important microclimatic factor
in urban settings, where buildings may be either immediately adjacent to the site or on the
site itself. When the development program includes outdoor spaces for seating, dining, and
other activities, shade patterns should be evaluated for several times of the day and year when
people are likely to use the outdoor spaces (such as plazas and terraces). Shade diagrams
might be created, for example, for these four times of the day:
Figure 3-23 	Climate analysis for a coastal land-planning project in India. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission
of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	97

-- 115 of 387 --

Midmorning (9 a.m.)
Noon (12 p.m.)
Midafternoon (3 p.m.)
Late afternoon (5 p.m.)
The position of the sun above the horizon also depends on the latitude of the site. In
higher latitudes, especially in areas where freezing winter temperatures are the norm, the
use of outdoor space is influenced by its exposure to the sun. Therefore, shade diagrams
(Figure 3-24) are typically prepared for one or more of these days of the year:
Midsummer (summer solstice)
Midwinter (winter solstice)
Equinox (vernal or autumnal)
The summer and winter solstices occur on about June 21 and December 21, respectively.
The equinox, when day and night are equal in length, occurs each year on about March 21
and September 22.
3.6 	NATURAL HAZARDS
Natural hazards include atmospheric, hydrologic, geologic, and wildfire events that, because
of their location, severity, and frequency, have the potential to adversely impact humans,
their structures, or their activities (Organization of American States, 1990). Natural hazards
present significant risks to human life and property and, therefore, must be considered in the
site-planning process.
The built environment’s vulnerability to hurricanes, in particular, is substantial, because a
large proportion of the world’s population lives near the oceanic coasts. With growing
awareness of global climate change, the environmental, economic, and human impacts of
natural hazards have become an important public policy issue. The Year 2000 Building
Code marks a substantial shift in public policy regarding construction in areas that are prone
9:00 am 	12:00 pm 	3:00 pm
June 21
December 21
Figure 3-24 	Schematic shade diagrams showing projected shadow lengths at different times of the day and year.
98 	Site Analysis

-- 116 of 387 --

to natural hazards. In an attempt to reduce continued rebuilding in floodplains and other
hazardous areas, the U.S. federal government has purchased many vulnerable properties. The
U.S. Geological Survey has also created a series of maps that inventory the risks of various
natural hazards in the United States. This is potentially useful contextual information for site-
planning projects in areas that are subject to these natural hazards.
3.7 	CONCLUSION
A site’s physical attributes have a substantial impact on how the site should be developed
(Table 3-4). Assessing these physical attributes is shaped by the project’s program and the
characteristics of the site and the broader regional context. Potential data sources include
aerial photographs, topographic surveys, subsurface investigations, and a variety of publicly
available reference maps. Although not always possible due to time and budgetary con-
straints, visiting a site at different times of the year can enhance understanding of the site’s
character, especially its microclimate.
TABLE 3-4 	Selected physiographic factors to consider in siting buildings,
infrastructure, and other land uses.
Category 	Attribute 	Land Use Significance
Hydrology 	Depth-to-water-table 	Suitability for building foundation excavations
Suitability for on-site wastewater treatment
Drainage patterns 	Flooding hazards
Stormwater management
Groundwater recharge
Geology 	Depth-to-bedrock 	Suitability for building foundation excavations
Suitability for on-site wastewater treatment
Fault lines 	Earthquake hazards
Landslide hazards
Soils 	pH 	Plant species selection
Porosity 	Suitability for on-site wastewater treatment
Structure and texture 	Erosion potential
Topography 	Slope gradient 	Circulation system safety
Building design and construction complexity
Erosion potential
Stormwater management
Slope aspect 	Microclimate
Suitability for solar architecture
Elevation 	Visibility and visual quality
Drainage patterns
Climate 	Wind direction 	Location of outdoor activities
Windbreak location
Solar access 	Building design and placement
Location of outdoor activities
Plant species selection
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	99

-- 117 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning
INDIAN T RACE
B ROWARD C OUNTY , FLORIDA
OWNER /DEVELOPER : A RVIDA C ORPORATION , MIAMI , FLORIDA
TRAFFIC ENGINEER /E CONOMIST : W ILBUR SMITH AND A SSOCIATES , MIAMI , FLORIDA
ENGINEER : GEE AND JENSEN , WEST PALM B EACH , F LORIDA
LAND PLANNER: ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING & DESIGN (EPD), M IAMI LAKES , FLORIDA
OVERVIEW
This New Town project was planned for 10,000 acres (4000 hectares) on the western edge of a large, urbanized,
and rapidly growing metropolitan area along the southeastern coast of Florida. Indian Trace is a planned unit
development (PUD) designed to ultimately accommodate about 100,000 residents. A 2-year research, analysis,
and planning effort culminated in the conceptual master plan that integrated new development within an
extensive green infrastructure network. The process involved many local, state, and federal agencies, citizen
groups, and a team of leading planners, engineers, economists, and ecologists. The projected build-out period
for this new town is 40 years.
SITE ANALYSIS
The 16-square-mile (41-square-kilometer) site is bounded by four major existing or proposed highways. To the
north and west of these highways are protected Everglades Conservation Areas. Long-range projections of
population and land use were provided by the Broward County Area Planning Board and the County Planning
and Zoning Department.
The site’s physiographic context was examined during the site inventory and analysis. Data sources included a
detailed topographic survey and aerial photographs, supplemented by field investigations of soil, water, veg-
etation, and wildlife. More than 30 “eco-determinant” maps were created to define the site’s ecological
context and long-range constraints and possibilities. These maps addressed climate (Figure 3-25), hydrology
(Figure 3-26), and other biophysical attributes. No endangered species were found, but vegetation on this site
included an abundance of invasive exotic species (i.e., melaleuca, Brazilian pepper, Australian pine). Relatively
shallow groundwater, low-site elevations in relation to mean sea level (MSL), and abundant seasonal rainfall
were important land use constraints.
Cultural factors influencing the project’s conceptual design included the locations of public facilities and
infrastructure. Regional transportation systems, schools, public safety, and medical facilities were considered,
along with other cultural attributes. For each of these elements, existing conditions, as well as community and
regional plans for the future, were assessed.
100 	Site Analysis

-- 118 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Figure 3-25 	Map of climatic factors influencing the site. This map shows the direction of winter winds, average seasonal
precipitation, seasonal times of sunrise and sunset, and average seasonal temperatures. Source: Environmental Planning &
Design. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	101

-- 119 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
DESIGN FEATURES
Open Space
An extensive open space system will provide recreational and visual amenities to each neighborhood
(Figure 3-27). In addition to the lakes, waterways, and wetlands (“blueways”), the plan also creates a diverse
system of upland green space. Together, the water areas and the green spaces create a green infrastructure
framework for shaping future development patterns.
Figure 3-26 	Map of groundwater showing locations of saltwater intrusion, aquifer depths, and direction of groundwater
flow. Source: Environmental Planning & Design. Used with permission.
102 	Site Analysis

-- 120 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Water
The water resources management plan is designed to prevent flooding, protect water quality, replenish
underground reserves, and use surface water storage areas as community amenities (Figure 3-28). Approxi-
mately 3000 acres (1200 hectares) are allocated to lakes, waterways, and other water storage areas. Stormwater
runoff is filtered by grassed swales and buffer strips adjacent to lakes and waterways. The water elevation in the
lakes is designed to be 4.0 feet (1.2 meters) above mean sea level and, during rainy periods, discharge to the
South New River Canal will occur, at a limited rate, when the system reaches 5.0 feet (1.5 meters) above MSL.
Figure 3-27 	Conceptual diagram of the proposed open space system, consisting of surface water and green areas. This
green infrastructure creates the spatial framework for future building development. Source: Environmental Planning & Design.
Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	103

-- 121 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Neighborhoods
Residential population on the site is distributed as a gradient from low density in the southwest to medium
density in the northeast. Neighborhoods vary in shapes and sizes to accommodate multiple housing types,
ranging from semirural “villages” to apartment complexes with urban densities (Figure 3-29). Average housing
density will be 4.08 dwelling units per gross acre (0.4 hectare). Neighborhood gathering places, focal points, and
recreation activities are designed to be within easy walking or biking distances of residents. In addition, all of
the schools, major cultural facilities, and commercial districts are located close to at least two neighborhoods.
And commercial and civic uses are planned for neighborhood centers.
Figure 3-28 	Conceptual diagram of the water resources management plan. Source: Environmental Planning & Design.
Used with permission.
104 	Site Analysis

-- 122 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Circulation
The plan’s multimodal transportation network includes a regional public transit node and a system of freeways,
arterial parkways, collector roads, and local streets (Figure 3-30). The plan also includes separate bus lanes, mini-
transit routes, and an extensive walking and biking trail system. Limited building frontage is allowed along
major parkways and collector roads, although the right-of-way for parkways accommodates walkways and
bicycle paths. Utility lines for water distribution and wastewater collection parallel the site’s network of major
Figure 3-29 	Conceptual land use plan for the entire site. Source: Environmental Planning & Design. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	105

-- 123 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Figure 3-30 	Conceptual diagrams of the proposed multimodal circulation system including streets and highways, public
transit stops, walkways, and bike paths. Source: Environmental Planning & Design. Used with permission.
106 	Site Analysis

-- 124 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Figure 3-30 	Continued.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	107

-- 125 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Figure 3-30 	Continued.
108 	Site Analysis

-- 126 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
roads and streets (Figure 3-31). Two-lane roads designed for low speeds and limited traffic volumes are common
in many neighborhoods.
Recreation
Upon completion, the New Town will contain more than 20 acres (8 hectares) of recreational land for each 1000
residents. These recreational areas include several school/neighborhood parks, five larger urban parks, one
regional park, and two golf courses (Figure 3-32).
Community Center
A planned community center will accommodate civic, cultural, and commercial uses, along with a regional
transit terminal. Industrial uses planned for areas outside of the community center include a regional goods
distribution center and research-oriented light industry.
Figure 3-31 	Conceptual diagrams of proposed water distribution and wastewater collection systems. Source: Environ-
mental Planning & Design. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	109

-- 127 of 387 --

Case Study 3–1 	New Town Planning (continued)
Figure 3-32 	Conceptual diagrams of the proposed recreation, parks, and open space systems. The hierarchy of open
spaces spans a range of spatial scales: regional/urban, community, and neighborhood. Source: Environmental Planning &
Design. Used with permission.
110 	Site Analysis

-- 128 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. How might a site’s solar access affect the location and species selection of trees? Or,
the siting of a new building?
2. In what ways could local hydrology and geology affect a site’s suitability for housing
development?
Assessing the Site’s Physiographic Context 	111

-- 129 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	4
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context
The more clearly we can focus attention on the wonders and realities of the universe, the
less we shall have destruction.
—Rachel Carson (1962, p. xix)
4.1 	INTRODUCTION
About 82 percent of America’s population now lives in urban areas. The U.S. population
doubled in the past six decades, growing from 151 million in 1950 to about 304 million
people in 2010. During this period, millions of acres of forests, grasslands, and wetlands in
America were converted to urban, suburban, and exurban development. This unprece-
dented expansion of the built environment—with relatively little attention paid to its
sustainability—eradicated countless habitats and fragmented natural corridors linking terrestrial
and aquatic habitats. Because of habitat loss and fragmentation, ecosystems today are more
isolated from each other—and less buffered from both human and nonhuman disturbances.
In recent years, according to the U.S. Geological Survey, about 10,000 miles (16,000
kilometers) of paved roads and 1 million new homes were built annually. These impervious
surfaces—and many of the largest metropolitan areas in the United States—are located
in watersheds supplying the nation’s major rivers and estuaries. Because of this proximity,
aquatic ecosystems—and, in many communities, municipal water supplies—are at signif-
icant risk.
Ecosystems have both biotic and abiotic components, and the ecological structure and
function of landscapes are influenced by the complex interplay of biological, physical, and
cultural systems (Naveh and Lieberman, 1984; Turner et al., 2001). Landscape ecology is a
transdisciplinary science concerned with landscape structure, function, and change (Forman
112

-- 130 of 387 --

and Godron, 1986). Both basic and applied research in landscape ecology can help to inform
more context-sensitive land use planning at regional, community, and site scales (Dramstad
et al., 1996).
We now understand, for example, that when new roads are built in formerly forested
landscapes, they can be barriers to the lateral movement of ground-dwelling animals, iso-
lating endemic species, and ultimately dooming those species to extinction at the local level
and possibly at broader spatial scales (Figure 4-1). Conversely, roads constructed through
previously undisturbed forests, or other fragmented natural areas, can serve as linear conduits
for pathogens and invasive exotic species (Forman, 2003). The trans-Amazonian highway is
a prominent example of how road development fragments habitats and opens up previously
inaccessible areas to further deforestation and other land cover change (Vieira et al., 2008).
4.2 	NATURE’S INFRASTRUCTURE
Nature’s infrastructure is the air, water, soil, plants, animals, and microbes that—together, in
ecosystems—provide many of the “goods and services” we need to survive on this planet.
Trees, for example, remove carbon dioxide and add oxygen to the air we breathe through
photosynthesis. Soils—which are teeming with microorganisms—help detoxify pollutants in
stormwater runoff. But there are limits to the amount of pollution that the environment,
in any given location, can absorb without reducing ecosystem services and impairing human
health.
Many conventionally designed built environments result in off-site environmental
impacts, such as contaminant-laden stormwater runoff from parking lots and other imper-
vious surfaces. Climate change heightens the risks of this “business as usual”—and resource-
consumptive—development paradigm. Many conventional land use practices not only
imperil environmental quality, but also community livability.
Combined storm and sanitary sewers—an artifact of early-twentieth-century practices in
urban sanitation—exist in nearly 800 cities in the United States, mostly in the northeastern
Great Lakes and northwestern regions (United States Environmental Protection Agency,
2004). Many of the nation’s largest cities—including Washington, D.C.—spill tons of
sewage into the nation’s waterways during heavy rainstorms and snowmelts. These com-
bined sewer overflows (CSOs) adversely impact aquatic ecosystems and the regional
economies that are dependent on these natural resources. In the Chesapeake Bay—the
Interior Habitat 	Edge Habitat
Figure 4-1 	Forest patch size
and shape affect the quality of
this habitat for interior and edge
species. Forest fragmentation
from road and utility construc-
tion, for example, reduces habitat
area and quality.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	113

-- 131 of 387 --

nation’s largest estuary—crab and oyster fisheries have declined because of polluted runoff
from the built environment and from adjoining agricultural areas. The Bay’s ecological
degradation has diminished the regional seafood industry that relies on its fisheries.
America’s shopping malls, commercial strips, and office complexes typically have too few
trees, too little green space, and vast expanses of impervious pavement that shed rather than
conserve rainwater (Figure 4-2). Studies by the nonprofit Center for Watershed Protection
show that streams, lakes, and other aquatic ecosystems are degraded when just 10 percent of
the contributing watershed’s surface is developed impervious area. Poorly designed urban
Figure 4-2 	The “sea of
asphalt” surrounding many U.S.
shopping malls represents a
conventional (mid- to late-
twentieth-century), yet unsus-
tainable, land development
paradigm.
114 	Site Analysis

-- 132 of 387 --

and suburban development is the culprit—where buildings, parking lots, streets, and
highways treat rainwater as a waste product rather than as a natural resource.
Fortunately, streets and parking lots can be retrofitted (Figure 4-3). Low-impact design can
reduce “effective” imperviousness and substantially decrease the built environment’s hydro-
logic and ecological impacts. “Green streets” have pervious pavement—and are bordered by
shade trees and bio-infiltration swales, or rain gardens, which filter storm runoff and allow
rainwater to percolate into the ground (Case Study 4-1). Highways can be greened, too, by
planting medians and rights-of-way with native species of trees, grasses, and wildflowers. With
nearly 47,000 miles (75,639 kilometers) of interstate highways, and many more miles of state
and county highways, eliminating mowing on thousands of acres would cut carbon emissions
and help reestablish habitat connectivity—creating ecological “bridges” for species displaced
by the road building, nearby development, and, potentially, a changing climate.
Green roofs—a good example can be found on Chicago’s City Hall—employ an insu-
lating layer of plants and soil that reduces heating and cooling costs and harvests rainwater
that would otherwise flow into nearby sewers. They also can provide usable outdoor space
above the noise and fumes of congested streets. Green roofs help cool cities in summer, too.
Chicago offers grants, and New York City now offers property tax credits to spur green roof
retrofits. These incentive programs are models for the rest of the country.
Greener, more natural approaches to managing riparian zones—protected, ideally, with
conservation easements—can also reduce the quantity and improve the quality of storm
runoff entering surface waters. The value of ecosystem services to human well-being and the
implications of different land use patterns and environmental management approaches are
becoming better understood. Biologically based ecosystem services include food and fiber
production, waste decomposition and assimilation, as well as the provision of recreational
and spiritual experiences in nature (Daily et al., 1999; Reid et al., 2005).
Human systems are integrally connected with natural systems (Folke et al., 2002).
Investing strategically in nature’s infrastructure could be transformative—advancing
Figure 4-3 	A new tree island created within an existing shopping center parking lot.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	115

-- 133 of 387 --

environmental protection while making our communities healthier and more resilient to
climate change (LaGro, 2009).
4.2.1 	Ecological Communities
An ecological community is an aggregation of interacting species living together in the same
place. Complex interactions among climate, soils, topography, disturbances, and the
organisms themselves influence the composition and spatial distribution of ecological
communities (Sadava et al., 2006). These communities are often named for the dominant
plant species, which may be dominant because of either its physical size or its abundance.
Two examples of North American communities are the beech-maple-hemlock and the oak
savanna communities (Carpenter et al., 1975).
Landscape pattern—that is, the spatial arrangement of habitat patches and corridors, along
with the intervening land uses and land covers—strongly influences biodiversity and other
indicators of ecosystem health (Turner, 2005). Ecotones—the spatial boundaries of eco-
logical communities—are especially important areas biologically. Animals may find shelter in
one ecotone but seek food in another habitat.
4.2.2 	Habitats and Niches
William E. Odum (1959), in Fundamentals of Ecology, writes:
The habitat of an organism is the place where it lives or the place where one would go
to find it. The ecological niche, however, is the position or status of an organism
within its community and ecosystem resulting from the organism’s structural adap-
tations, physiological responses, and specific behaviors (inherited and/or learned). The
ecological niche of an organism depends not only on where it lives but also on what it
does. By analogy, it may be said that the habitat is the organism’s “address,” and the
niche is its “profession,” biologically speaking.
The expanding built environment has dramatically altered the structure and ecological
function of landscapes worldwide. Habitat fragmentation, for example, is a global problem
that can be mitigated through the coordinated reintroduction of green infrastructure. Just by
planting trees and gradually increasing a community’s tree canopy, the negative impacts of
habitat loss and impervious surfaces can be mitigated. Planting trees is a stormwater best
management practice (BMP).
Land use changes often impact habitat structure (for example, the pattern, size, and
connectivity of habitat patches and corridors). Landscapes are a kind of dynamic mosaic,
consisting of patches (for example, woodlot) and corridors (for example, stream), and
sometimes a larger, more extensive matrix (for example, cropland). Natural environmental
corridors allow the movement of organisms between habitats on daily and seasonal time
scales. These corridors also enable species migration over longer temporal and spatial scales.
Gaps in environmental corridors, therefore, can be targets for restoration (Hilty et al., 2006).
Habitat connectivity is an important function of regional open space systems, particularly
in the context of climate change, which is altering the geographic range of countless plant
116 	Site Analysis

-- 134 of 387 --

and animal species. Riparian areas and wetlands serve important hydrologic functions, in
addition to their ecological benefits, which include biodiversity (Wilson, 1988). These
natural areas also provide recreational opportunities, aesthetic amenities, and outdoor “living
laboratories” for natural science education (deGroot, 1992).
Simply leaving natural areas untouched may not be enough to ensure their ecological
health. Many forest bird species, for example, require habitats in large forest patches. The
“interior” forest habitats are buffered from predators and from microclimatic fluctuations
that are more common within forest edge habitats. Many animal species also need more than
one habitat type for their different life-cycle stages, such as reproduction and migration.
4.2.3 	Invasive Species
For millennia, plant and animal species have been adapting to habitats altered by human
activities. Centuries of global trade, migration, and settlement have introduced thousands of
nonnative species to new environments. These exotic—and sometimes invasive—species
include megaflora, like the eucalyptus and melaleuca trees in the United States. Other
common invasive plants include vines (kudzu) and shrubs (Brazilian pepper).
An estimated 50,000 species of exotic plants, animals, and microbes have become
established in the United States in both managed and natural ecosystems (Myers, 1979;
Pimentel et al., 2000). Nearly half of the species listed as threatened or endangered under the
federal Endangered Species Act are at risk primarily because of predation by, or competition
for food and space with, invasive nonnative species (Wilcove et al., 1998). Exotic species also
have substantial economic impacts. Annual expenditures for the control of nonindigenous
species are estimated to exceed $6 billion per year in the United States alone (Pimentel
et al., 2000).
Exotic species are particularly successful colonizers when the new habitats present min-
imal competitive controls that limit their growth and reproduction. Invasive species may be
limited in their native habitats, however, by grazing (in the case of plants) or by predation (in
the case of animals). Competition for the same ecological “niche” helps hold in check the
populations of competing species.
The melaleuca tree, now one of the most invasive tree species in the Florida Everglades,
was intentionally seeded there in the mid-twentieth century (Davis and Ogden, 1994).
Without understanding the potential impacts of the plant on the Everglades ecology,
melaleuca seeds were dispersed in an effort to dry the wetlands and create land suitable for
agriculture and urban development. Similarly, the eucalyptus tree was imported into Cali-
fornia from Australia and planted as a new source of timber. In the benign California climate,
and with no significant natural competitors, the eucalyptus species has successfully colonized
many of the state’s native oak forests and savannas (Santos, 1997).
On sites with significant native plant and animal communities, consideration should be
given to mapping the distributions of both native and invasive exotic species. This infor-
mation can be used in developing plans to eradicate invasive exotic species and potentially
restore degraded native communities. Detailed information on the distribution of native and
exotic species must be collected by visiting the site (Figure 4-4). In some contexts, the
restoration of wetlands, prairies, riparian corridors, and/or woodlands may be feasible. Soils,
hydrology, and vegetation maps are helpful in selecting the most suitable locations for exotic
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	117

-- 135 of 387 --

species eradication and native species restoration. A chor-
opleth map can show the locations of significant vegetation
over a range of densities (Figure 4-5). In areas where plant
communities have evolved under a fire regime, the fre-
quency of wildfires—a natural hazard for any nearby
development—may also be mapped (Figure 4-6).
Global land cover satellite digital data are available at 30-
meter (98.4 feet) spatial resolution through the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey’s Land Cover Institute (http://www.landcover.
usgs.gov/). In the United States, the National Land Cover
Dataset (NLCD) is a 31-volume compact disc (CD) set
containing 21 categories of land cover, percent tree canopy,
and percent urban imperviousness derived from the imagery.
Large-scale aerial photographs support even more detailed
land cover mapping. Color infrared photographs are partic-
ularly useful in assessing vegetation health.
4.3 	WETLANDS
Since the beginning of European settlement in the early
1600s, the area that is now the coterminous United States
has lost—primarily through agricultural and urban devel-
opment—more than half of the area’s original wetland
acreage (Dahl, 1990). The federal agencies involved in
wetland regulation define wetlands on the basis of hydrol-
ogy, vegetation, and soils. Most states have also developed
regulatory definitions of wetlands, but these definitions tend
to emphasize the presence of certain vegetation rather than
the area’s soils and hydrology. Wetlands classified on the
basis of plant and soil conditions generally fall into one of
the following three categories (Tiner, 1997; United States
Fish and Wildlife Service, 2000):
Areas with hydrophytes and hydric soils (marshes, swamps, and bogs)
Areas without soils but with hydrophytes (aquatic beds and seaweed-covered rocky
shores)
Areas without soil and without hydrophytes (gravel beaches and tidal flats) that are
periodically flooded
The National Wetlands Inventory (NWI), administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, includes information about the extent, characteristics, and status of wetlands in the
United States. The NWI includes an online digital wetlands database for the entire United
States (http://wetlandsfws.er.usgs.gov/NWI/). These maps, although relatively coarse in
spatial scale, provide useful contextual data. The Fish and Wildlife Service’s wetland
Figure 4-4 	Landscape archi-
tect assessing the habitat type
and quality in southwest Florida.
Note the desiccation of the
cypress trees (Taxodium dis-
tichum) caused by nearby drain-
age canals excavated during the
mid-twentieth century.
118 	Site Analysis

-- 136 of 387 --

Figure 4-5 	Map showing
three densities of vegetative cov-
er. Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of
The HOK Planning Group.
Figure 4-6 	Map of fire fre-
quency in the Santa Monica
Mountains of California. Map
categories reflect the number of
times the land has burned.
Source: James A. Woods 1999.
1999 James A. Woods.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	119

-- 137 of 387 --

classification scheme has five general classes and several subclasses as follows (Cowardin
et al., 1979):
Marine (open ocean and its associated coastline)
Estuarine (tidal waters of coastal rivers and embayments, salty tidal marshes, man-
grove swamps, and tidal flats)
Riverine (rivers and streams)
Lacustrine (lakes, reservoirs, and large ponds)
Palustrine (marshes, wet meadows, fens, playas, potholes, bogs, swamps, and small,
shallow ponds)
A large majority of the wetlands in the United States are in the palustrine system; most of
the remaining wetlands are estuarine. Wetlands perform myriad functions that directly
benefit society. Coastal wetlands, for example, are nursery grounds for shellfish and other
commercial sport fish (Figure 4-7). Other species, such as migratory birds, depend on these
habitats for food and cover. Wetlands also serve as natural retention areas for stormwater
runoff and are often locations of groundwater recharge. Ephemeral wetlands have soils that
are saturated for a relatively brief period each year or, in more arid landscapes, even less
frequently. Although in the dry season these wetlands appear to have very little ecological
value, during wetter periods they are critical habitats for many migratory bird species.
Wetland “banking” is allowed in some jurisdictions for development mitigation purposes.
This controversial practice attempts to create new wetlands in anticipation that existing
Figure 4-7 	Salt marsh—a grassy coastal wetland rich in marine life. Amelia Island, Florida.
120 	Site Analysis

-- 138 of 387 --

natural wetlands will be destroyed through land development. Unfortunately, this practice is
emblematic of a “brute force” approach to land development (Josephson, 2002). Con-
structed wetlands typically develop far less biodiversity than indigenous wetlands. Another
problem with this practice involves the hydrologic context of both the destroyed and created
wetlands. The loss or degradation of natural wetlands can alter local hydrologic regimes,
increase the flooding risk, and diminish groundwater “base” flow into nearby streams and
lakes. Field assessments can locate and assess the status of on-site wetlands (Figure 4-8).
4.4 	WILDLIFE
The populations of most wildlife species are spatially discontinuous. That is, the entire
species consists of spatially dispersed subpopulations called “metapopulations” (McCullough,
1996). Local-scale extinctions of metapopulations are an inherent property of ecosystem
dynamics (MacArthur and Wilson, 1967). This natural process involves temporary local
extinctions, followed by migration and colonization by members of other metapopulations.
It is essential, however, that the area in which a local extinction occurs remains a viable
habitat for that specie’s future colonization and repopulation (Fahrig and Merriam, 1994). If
the habitat is destroyed or degraded, or made inaccessible by intervening barriers, then the
geographic range of the species is permanently reduced.
Wooded patches and stream corridors within urban, suburban, and rural landscapes are
home to colonies of birds and other animal species assemblages. Conserving wildlife habitats
Figure 4-8 	Wetland map prepared in planning a land development project in the state of
Washington. Source: R. W. Thorpe and Associates.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	121

-- 139 of 387 --

within the built environment has benefits for metacommunities—local communities of
multiple interacting species (Leibold et al., 2004). Many bird and bat species, for example,
are prolific consumers of insects that are pests to food crops and people. Birds also have
significant aesthetic value for avid bird watchers and casual observers alike. The maps
showing spatial distributions of known endangered and threatened species can provide useful
contextual information (Figure 4-9). These maps typically show the geographic range where
these species’ habitats and populations are likely to be present. The most effective method for
protecting species—whether or not they are endangered and threatened—is to protect their
natural habitats (Figure 4-10). Consequently, when proposed land development projects
threaten an endangered species, site distribution data for these species are typically acquired
through field studies by qualified biologists. The intent of the federal U.S. Endangered
Species Act (ESA) is to prevent local as well as regional species extinctions.
4.5 	PLANTS
Many communities recognize that trees are valuable natural resources that enhance quality of
life, sense of place, and property values. Municipal street tree inventories commonly record
tree size, species, and location. Increasingly common are municipal tree preservation ordi-
nances that seek to protect trees throughout the development process (Arendt, 1999). In
communities where orchards and/or vineyards contribute to a distinctive sense of place,
development regulations can protect these horticultural features (see Case Study 4-1).
Plants are critically important elements in the built environment’s green infrastructure.
Trees can serve multiple design functions that directly benefit people and the environment.
For example, trees help clean the air and create habitat for insects and birds. Trees also can
serve as wind breaks, provide shade (Figure 4-11), and reduce the costs—and environmental
impacts—of heating and cooling nearby buildings. By moderating the microclimates near
homes and other buildings, trees reduce the energy demand for air conditioning. According
to the Department of Energy, buildings account for about 40 percent of the energy con-
sumed and the carbon dioxide emitted in the United States.
Trees also add significant aesthetic value by screening undesirable views or spatially
defining ‘‘outdoor rooms’’ (Figure 4-12). Trees also benefit public health by tempering the
urban heat island effect and decreasing physical and emotional stress (Martineau, 2011). As
significant amenities, trees can increase the value of real estate by as much as 15 percent
(National Association of Home Builders, 1991). The International Society of Arboriculture
identifies four factors that affect the economic value of trees (Perry, 1999):
Size (mature trees, for example, have greater value)
Species (hardy, well-adapted species are worth the most)
Condition (healthy roots, trunks, branches, and leaves add value)
Location (a prominent specimen tree is of greater value)
Consequently, a healthy tree standing alone is usually worth more—from an economic
perspective—than one that is growing in a group.
122 	Site Analysis

-- 140 of 387 --

Figure 4-9 	Migratory bird protection zones in an area of Kuwait. Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	123

-- 141 of 387 --

Context-sensitive site planning seeks to integrate into the site plan, where feasible, sig-
nificant existing trees and green spaces. In assessing a site’s biological attributes, data on tree
species, size, and condition are typically recorded. A key question, if there are significant
trees on the site, is: can these natural assets be incorporated within the development? Existing
on-site trees require protection during the construction of buildings, utilities, circulation
systems, and other site elements. Construction damage can kill trees outright or lead to their
Figure 4-10 	Crab plover
(Dromas ardeola), a protected
migratory bird species in Kuwait.
Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of
The HOK Planning Group.
Figure 4-11 	Palm trees pro-
vide shade—and a small but
cooler microclimate—in a Med-
iterranean coastal community.
Nice, France.
124 	Site Analysis

-- 142 of 387 --

slow demise. Typical construction impacts include soil compaction within the tree’s root
zone, grading (i.e., cutting or filling soil) within the root zone, and scraping the bark from the
tree trunk and branches. Many tree species have a fine-meshed mat of feeder roots within
the top 12 inches (30.48 centimeters) of soil. At the very least, construction disturbances
should not occur within the ‘‘drip line’’ of a tree’s canopy (Figure 4-13). In addition, the
Figure 4-12 	A large decid-
uous canopy tree provides shade
and spatial enclosure for an out-
door “dining room.” Geneva,
Switzerland.
Root Zone
Drip Line Zone
Figure 4-13 	Tree roots typi-
cally spread horizontally. Protect-
ing the health of existing mature
trees requires minimal soil distur-
bance under the trees’ canopy.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	125

-- 143 of 387 --

major site factors that influence plant health should be assessed to inform site-planning
decisions, including plant species selection (Table 4-1).
Site surveys, completed by licensed surveyors as part of the site-planning process, typically
include the locations of trees larger than a specified size (for example, dbh 	4 inches/10.16
centimeters). Tree size is measured by the trunk’s diameter at breast height (dbh). Global
positioning systems (GPS) provide another way to map individual specimen trees and, on
large sites, the boundaries of plant communities. With a handheld GPS receiver, a botanist or
other expert who can identify the local flora walks the site and digitally records the plant
inventory.
4.6 	CONCLUSION
Growing concern for sustainability has led to increasing demands for accountability—and
documentation of the potential social, economic, and environmental impacts of land
development policies and projects. Landscape ecology, a transdisciplinary science, provides a
strong conceptual framework for assessing sites and making land planning, restoration, and
management decisions (Forman and Godron, 1986; Naveh and Lieberman, 1984). Pro-
tecting native plant and animal habitats is not only good for the environment, it also helps
maintain the site’s unique sense of place. Public health experts are also gaining a greater
awareness of the linkages between human contact with nature and human health (Louv,
2011; Millenium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).
Assessing a site’s biological attributes is an important step in understanding the site, and in
protecting the ecological integrity of the site both during and after the site plan’s imple-
mentation. Which attributes to map and evaluate depends, as with physical and cultural
attributes, on the site’s context as well as the proposed uses of the site.
TABLE 4-1 	Site factors to consider in plant selection and planting design; these
factors influence plant growth, development, and longevity.
Category 	Attribute
Hydrology 	Drainage patterns
Flood depth, duration, and frequency
Wave energy
Soil 	Soil texture
Organic content
pH
Soil moisture (water-holding capacity)
Soil fertility
Soil permeability
Slope 	Solar access
Sun/shade
Air 	Pollutants and toxics
126 	Site Analysis

-- 144 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning
CHOUTEAU GREENWAY , S T . L OUIS , MISSOURI
OWNER /D EVELOPER : C ITY OF S T . LOUIS , MISSOURI
LAND PLANNERS : THE HOK PLANNING G ROUP , ST . L OUIS , MISSOURI
COMMUNITY PLANNERS : MC CORMACK B ARON A SSOCIATES , I NC ., S T . L OUIS , MISSOURI
OVERVIEW
The city of St. Louis commissioned a conceptual master plan for Chouteau Lake and Greenway. The program
included a 5-mile greenway and a 15-acre lake. Phase III concept planning was completed in the spring of 2006.
SITE AND CONTEXTUAL ANALYSIS
The region’s settlement history and current environmental and cultural context were influencing factors on this
green infrastructure planning project (Figure 4-14). The Chouteau Greenway is a key component of the region’s
emerging network of greenways, parks, and recreational trails (Figure 4-15). Other linear parks and open space
corridors will eventually link a major park on the city’s west side with the Mississippi River and the Gateway Arch
on the east. Recreation and environmental education are key program elements (Figure 4-16). An additional
justification for this public investment is that the green space is expected to be a catalyst for adjacent rede-
velopment and neighborhood revitalization (Figure 4-17).
Figure 4-14 	Evolution of land use patterns in the St. Louis region is portrayed graphically for a several-hundred-year period.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	127

-- 145 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-14 	Continued
128 	Site Analysis

-- 146 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-15 	Regional network of greenways, parks, and recreational trails. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with
permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	129

-- 147 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
DESIGN CONCEPT
The design concept includes a 5-mile (8.0-kilometer) greenway through the heart of the city and a 15-acre
(6.1-hectare) lake and adjacent public open space just south of downtown St. Louis (Figure 4-18). In coordination
with the St. Louis Metropolitan Sewer District, streetscape design guidelines were established to incorporate
innovative stormwater drainage strategies, new pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and interpretive features
relating to the theme of personal and environmental health (Figure 4-19). These features demonstrate a
commitment to sustainable design practices that will be implemented within the corridor (Figure 4-20).
This planning work won an Honor Award in 2000 from the American Institute of Architects’ St. Louis chapter.
Figure 4-16 	Diagram showing important program goals and project elements. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used
with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
130 	Site Analysis

-- 148 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-17 	Diagram portraying the Greenway’s expected social and economic linkages to adjacent neighborhoods.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	131

-- 149 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-18 	Aerial perspective rendering of the proposed urban greenway. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with
permission of The HOK Planning Group.
132 	Site Analysis

-- 150 of 387 --

Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-19 	Greenway concept plan illustrates the multifaceted sustainability theme. Source: The HOK Planning Group.
Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Biological Context 	133

-- 151 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. How does an organism’s habitat differ from its ecological niche?
2. From an ecological perspective, why are invasive species so difficult to control?
3. Why do riparian corridors warrant protection in the site-planning process?
Case Study 4–1 	Metropolitan Area Greenway Planning (continued)
Figure 4-20 	Street section demonstrating a green approach to urban infrastructure. Source: The HOK Planning Group.
Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
134 	Site Analysis

-- 152 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	5
Assessing the Site’s Land
Use, Infrastructure, and
Regulatory Context
The concept of public welfare is broad and inclusive . . . the values it represents are
spiritual as well as physical, aesthetic as well as monetary. It is within the power of the
legislature to determine that the community should be beautiful as well as healthy,
spacious, [and] clean.
—William O. Douglas, U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice,
Berman v. Parker (1954)
5.1 	INTRODUCTION
Development that fits the site is responsive to site context. Cultural features—whether
historical, aesthetic, legal, or economic—create opportunities and constraints for the design
of sustainable and livable places. An assessment of cultural factors not only describes the site,
but also analyzes its suitability for the site’s intended uses.
5.2 	LAND USE TYPE AND INTENSITY
Adaptively reusing developed, but underutilized, land is a key principle of Smart Growth
and sustainable green design (see Chapter 1). But prior land use on a site can affect devel-
opment suitability by increasing site preparation costs for the demolition and removal of
135

-- 153 of 387 --

buildings and underground structures, and potentially the remediation of the site’s soils. If a
site was previously used for industrial or commercial purposes, this could indicate that
chemicals and other toxic wastes remain on the site, either above or below ground.
Heavy metals and other toxic compounds pose serious human health risks, particularly to
children. Yet, prior to the 1960s, industrial sites in the United States were often literally used
as dumping grounds for manufacturing wastes. In other cases, poorly maintained storage
tanks led to unintended leaks of chemicals into the soil and groundwater. In the 1970s, the
discovery of toxic chemicals oozing from the ground within a housing development in Love
Canal, a neighborhood of Niagara Falls, New York, was a landmark event in the devel-
opment of hazardous waste policy in the United States (Beck, 1979). Federal legislation was
subsequently passed to address the nation’s toxic waste problem.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was charged, in 1980, with admin-
istering the newly created Superfund Program (www.epa.gov/earthday/history.htm).
Although meant to clean up contaminated brownfield sites, this program had unintended
consequences for the nation’s cities. A property’s owners could be liable for cleanup costs
even if they were not responsible for—or even aware of—the original pollution. In addition,
Superfund regulations held these property owners liable for the remediation costs of
restoring the sites to precontamination conditions.
The enormous costs of even small toxic waste cleanups had a chilling effect on the
redevelopment of urban commercial and industrial sites. The legal and financial risks of
purchasing and attempting to develop brownfield sites effectively encouraged urban sprawl
by redirecting new development to greenfield sites on the suburban periphery. Especially in
older cities, vacant industrial sites inhibited economic investment in the surrounding
neighborhoods, thereby, worsening the pollution’s economic and social impacts. Finally,
during the 1990s, a major shift in public policy began to reduce financial risks—and create
new incentives—for the redevelopment of contaminated brownfield sites (National Gov-
ernors Association, 2000).
In the United States, the redevelopment of a brownfield site typically requires an ASTM
Phase One Environmental Site Assessment (ESA), requiring the collaboration of legal,
environmental, and engineering professionals with expertise in regulatory compliance and
project permitting (American Society of Civil Engineers, 1996). ASTM International, for-
merly the American Society for Testing and Materials, develops consensus standards for the
construction industry. An ESA summarizes the site’s ownership and land use history, in
addition to its current soil and groundwater conditions. Buildings and other structures on
the site are also evaluated and mapped. The cost of an ESA in the late 1990s ranged from
$60,000 to $200,000, depending on the size of the parcel, the complexity of the existing site
structures, and the types of contaminants found on the site (Talarico, 1998). Permanent deed
restrictions also may be required to ensure that the contaminated areas remain sealed from
infiltrating stormwater.
In contrast to industrial and commercial uses, prior agricultural uses on a site can create
other environmental challenges. In the early twentieth century, farming in many parts of the
United States was practiced with little concern for soil conservation and management.
Consequently, many previously farmed lands have lost topsoil from extensive soil erosion.
More recently farmed land also may be laden with nutrients and other chemicals from
136 	Site Analysis

-- 154 of 387 --

fertilizers and pesticides. Either of these conditions increases the site development costs
associated with establishing and managing new plantings.
In assessing a site’s land use context, consideration must also be given to the land use types
and intensities on adjoining properties. Intensity, or density, can be measured in several ways.
Three of the most common density metrics are building height or number of stories, floor-
area ratio or FAR (Figure 5-1), and dwelling units (DU) per area (for example, acre
or hectare).
5.3 	PROPERTY OWNERSHIP AND VALUE
Information on land ownership or “tenure” is available in publicly accessible databases (for
example, the county Register of Deeds). These records may include a certified survey map of
the parcel boundaries, a history of land ownership, and any deed restrictions or covenants
associated with the property. Online digital maps and associated “metadata” are increasingly
available commercially and through government agencies.
In the United States, for example, one company sells digital topographic data models that
are viewable as either two- or three-dimensional images (www.delorme.com). This com-
pany also offers digital maps of streets, trails, unique natural features, and historic sites. Other
digital data, such as vertical and oblique color infrared aerial photographs, may be available
for downloading through government sources (for example, the federal Upper Midwest
Environmental Sciences Center, www.umesc.usgs.gov). Banks and other lending institu-
tions routinely require property appraisals before financing real estate purchases. Munici-
palities also evaluate real estate for property tax assessments (Figure 5-2). Real estate appraisal
attempts to predict the probable selling price of a property by modeling, as closely as possible,
the influence of site and contextual factors on buyers’ and sellers’ decisions. In general,
appraisal theory estimates economic behavior in three different ways: the cost approach, the
FAR = 1	FAR = 1 	FAR = 1
FAR = 0.25 	FAR = 2	FAR = 1
Figure 5-1 	Floor-area ratio (FAR) increases as the amount of building floor space increases in relation to the site area.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	137

-- 155 of 387 --

sales comparison approach, and the income approach (Castle, 1998). Each of these appraisal
methods estimates property value based on the “highest and best use” of the site. In other
words, the site’s location and other attributes determine, at least in part, the purposes for
which the property should be used.
Property appraisals consider the size and existing uses of the site as well as the site
improvements, such as buildings and landscaping. Appraisals also consider the monetary
impacts of the site’s location, such as the market value of nearby recently sold properties.
Attractive and well-maintained adjoining properties, and scenic views to off-site built or
natural amenities, can substantially increase a property’s appraised value. But an adjoining
street with heavy vehicular traffic can suppress a residential property’s value. Conversely,
Figure 5-2 	Tax parcel map showing that the assessed value of individual parcels, per unit area, can vary widely.
138 	Site Analysis

-- 156 of 387 --

vehicular traffic can actually increase the value of commercial properties with shops, res-
taurants, and other customer-dependent uses.
Highest and best use reflects the property owner’s objectives, however, not the com-
munity’s. Property uses with high financial returns but significant environmental impacts will
be valued more favorably, for example, in appraisals that ignore these externalities. More-
over, environmental amenities such as parks and other green spaces are not evenly distrib-
uted spatially, and sites vary widely in proximity to those amenities. Scenic views of lakes,
rivers, or other environmental features may contribute significantly to a site’s desirability for
residential uses and for some commercial uses, such as restaurants, where patrons value the
ambience of a beautiful natural setting (Figure 5-3).
Google Earth (www.google.com/earth/index.html) and Google Maps (http://maps
.google.com/) are readily available sources of aerial photographs and, in metropolitan areas,
street-level photographs. The high-resolution photographs are an excellent resource for
visually assessing land use patterns and development character in urban areas. The street-level
photos enable relatively detailed assessments of on- and off-site amenities.
The positive effect of amenities on property value is reflected in the price disparity among
land parcels in coastal areas. Beachfront parcels, for example, sell at a premium compared to
comparable lots that are not immediately adjacent to the amenity. But property value is also
affected by the location’s potential uses. If the beachfront sites were zoned and developed for
some industrial purpose, the scenic waterfront views would play little or no role in the value
of the products manufactured there.
Property values are affected by land use regulations in other ways as well. The purchase of
development rights (PDR), for example, coupled with conservation easements, can prevent
Figure 5-3 	Scenic views from a
site are amenities that can increase
property values and influence the
type and intensity of on-site
development.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	139

-- 157 of 387 --

development for either an unlimited or a defined period of time. The transfer of devel-
opment rights (TDR) is another legal strategy for redirecting potential development from
conservation areas to other, more suitable locations.
5.4 	LAND USE REGULATION
The legal context for site planning and design varies spatially across local, state or regional,
and—especially—national jurisdictions. Land use laws and development standards also vary
over time. The approach taken in this book is to focus on common regulatory objectives (such
as endangered species protection, stormwater management, and walkability) and to provide
some examples of major laws, policies, and permitting procedures from the United States. One
limitation of this approach, of course, is that the legal context in the United States is different
from the legal context in Asia, Canada, or Europe. Nevertheless, land use regulations in other
nations address many of the same themes—namely, the protection of the environment and
public health, safety, and welfare.
Property ownership entails both rights and responsibilities. The “bundle” of development
rights accompanying a property depends upon the parcel’s location as well as its biophysical
and cultural attributes. In the United States, regulations that exceed the basic functions of
protecting public health, safety, and welfare have been challenged in the courts—and upheld
by the U.S. Supreme Court—as property “takings” (Bosselman and Callies, 1972). When
land use regulations have significantly reduced the property’s monetary value, the courts
have generally ordered the regulating unit of government to provide “just compensation” to
the affected landowner.
5.4.1 	Federal Regulations
Although land use control is largely a local government responsibility in the United States,
cumulative land use changes often have regional and even national implications. Conse-
quently, federal and state laws and policies have been enacted to protect environmental
quality and preserve historic and other cultural resources. The National Environmental
Policy Act (1969) was the first in a series of major environmental laws with broad influences
on land use in the United States.
Federal regulations establish standards or administrative rules that are implemented at the
state and local levels. The National Coastal Zone Management (CZM) Program (http://
coastalmanagement.noaa.gov), for example, is a voluntary partnership between the federal
government and U.S. coastal states and territories. Authorized by the Coastal Zone Man-
agement Act, the purpose of the program is to (United States National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Agency, 2000b):
Preserve, protect, develop, and—where possible—restore and enhance the resources
of the nation’s coastal zone for this and succeeding generations
Encourage and assist the states to achieve wise use of land and water resources of the
coastal zone, giving full consideration to ecological, cultural, historic, and aesthetic
values as well as the needs for compatible economic development
140 	Site Analysis

-- 158 of 387 --

Encourage the preparation of special area management plans to protect significant
natural resources, allow reasonable coastal-dependent economic growth, protect life
and property in hazardous areas, and improve predictability in governmental decision
making
Encourage the participation, cooperation, and coordination of the public, federal, state,
local, interstate and regional agencies, and governments affecting the coastal zone
The Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program is one component of coastal man-
agement in the United States. This program requires states and territories with approved
coastal zone management programs to develop and implement methods for coastal nonpoint
pollution control. Techniques to limit the pollution of coastal waters have been developed
by the EPA for five source categories of nonpoint pollution: agricultural runoff, urban
runoff, forestry runoff, marinas, and hydro-modification. In addition, several other federal
laws and policies are designed to protect cultural resources or enhance the quality of life. The
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), for example, also has important site development
implications, which will be discussed further in Chapter 9.
5.4.2 	State Regulations
The power to regulate land use in the United States is granted to local governments
through state-level enabling legislation. Local land use regulations are a subset of the
community’s “police powers” to protect public health, safety, and welfare (Garvin,
2002). As the human population continues to increase and the built environment grows
to cover an increasingly large portion of the United States, state-level growth man-
agement programs have added another layer of development controls and, in some cases,
development incentives (Gale, 1992, pp. 425–439). Several states, including Maryland and
New York, are attempting to direct new infrastructure investment to support higher-
density development in areas that are already served by municipal infrastructure. These
Smart Growth programs can reduce inefficient sprawl and facilitate the redevelopment of
existing urban districts and corridors.
5.4.3 	Local Plans and Regulations
Governments are divided into three branches, and each branch has specific functions. In
the United States, the legislative branch in local governments consists of a city council that
writes and enacts local laws (ordinances or codes). Although these elected officials are the
final authorities for regulating land development within the city’s jurisdiction, they typically
are advised by a planning commission of local citizens appointed by the mayor, the head
of the executive branch (Owen, 1994). Many cities have a planning department, also in
the executive branch, with a staff that prepares and administers the planning ordinances
and policies.
Local governments influence the location, timing, and character of new development
with comprehensive plans, zoning codes, subdivision ordinances, and related public policies
(Garvin, 2002; Nivola, 1999).
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	141

-- 159 of 387 --

Comprehensive Plans
Comprehensive plans are community-level plans that articulate a vision for how a com-
munity intends to grow and develop, physically and economically, typically over a 20- to
30-year period (Kelly and Becker, 2000). For example, Wisconsin’s state comprehensive
planning legislation (Wisconsin Act 9, adopted in 1999) requires that all local governments
have a comprehensive plan if they engage in programs or actions that affect land use (Ohm,
1999). The act also requires that comprehensive plans address a range of policy issues to
guide future development and redevelopment.
Comprehensive plans address several broad themes that are relevant to sustainability,
including housing, transportation, utilities, natural and cultural resources, and economic
development. Each theme can include specific goals for protecting cultural and natural
resources and promoting sustainable and affordable development. Examples of these plan-
ning goals, which are consistent with context-sensitive and sustainable site planning, include
the following (City of Madison, 2006, p. 3):
Protect Cultural and Natural Resources
Protect natural areas, including wetlands, wildlife habitats, lakes, woodlands, open
spaces, and groundwater resources.
Preserve cultural, historic, and archaeological sites.
Protect economically productive areas, including farmland and forests.
Promote the redevelopment of lands with existing infrastructure and public services
and the maintenance and rehabilitation of existing residential, commercial, and
industrial structures.
Promote Sustainable and Affordable Development
Encourage land uses, densities, and regulations that promote efficient development
patterns and relatively low municipal, state governmental, and utility costs.
Build a community identity by revitalizing main streets and enforcing design
standards.
Provide an adequate supply of affordable housing for individuals of all income levels
throughout each community.
Provide an integrated, efficient, and economical transportation system that affords
mobility, convenience, and safety and meets the needs of all citizens, including transit-
dependent and disabled citizens.
Zoning Codes
Comprehensive plans are typically implemented through zoning codes and supplementary
land use regulations. A zoning code divides a community into smaller planning districts or
zones (Figure 5-4). Although some development standards or requirements apply
throughout a community, additional rules may apply to the individual zones within the
142 	Site Analysis

-- 160 of 387 --

municipality’s jurisdiction. Zoning regulations address three sets of issues within each zone,
which affect potential site development (Meck et al., 2006, pp. 2-1, 2-2):
1. Permitted use of land and buildings.
2. Intensity of the use. For residential uses, intensity is expressed as dwelling unit
density—minimum lot sizes for single-family residential districts and number of
dwelling units per acre/hectare for multifamily residential districts. For nonresidential
districts, intensity may be expressed as floor-area ratio (FAR: total area of interior
building space divided by area of the site) or building height (number of stories allowed).
3. Height, bulk, and other dimensional standards. These standards define, in three
dimensions, the portion of the lot that can be occupied by buildings. They may limit
the percentage of the site covered by a new building, the building’s FAR, and/or the
building’s height and bulk. Other standards influence building siting by specifying
minimum lot sizes and required building setbacks from the front, side, or rear
property lines. Zoning standards may also govern, for example, the design of parking
lots, lighting, and signs.
The maximum allowable building envelope, as prescribed by local zoning codes, can be
illustrated graphically with three-dimensional computer modeling software (Figure 5-5),
such as Google Sketchup (http://sketchup.google.com/).
Since the early twentieth century, zoning codes have been a tool for regulating land uses
and implementing community plans at the local level. Typically, a city’s zoning map may
have hundreds of zones or districts in which certain uses are permitted, other uses are allowed
under certain circumstances, and all other uses are prohibited. Zoning districts are typically
designated with a letter (indicating land use type) and a number (indicating land use
intensity). An “R-3” district, for example, allows residential development up to a medium
density (for example, multifamily attached dwellings).
Each district defined by a zoning code has certain allowable or “by right” uses, such as
residential, commercial, or industrial. A district may also allow “conditional uses” with
approval from local decision-making bodies such as the planning commission and the city
council. Zoning codes typically allow other uses, not specified for a particular zoning district,
through a zoning variance procedure.
Zoning codes allow variances from a district’s code requirements when the decision-
making bodies deem them to be in the best interest of the broader community (Case Study
5-1). Planned unit development (PUD) or planned development districts (PDD) may be
permitted, for example, to allow the consolidation of multiple parcels into a single master-
planned project, often for mixed-use development. The PUD or PDD provides greater
flexibility in meeting the density and land use requirements for the site as a whole.
Zoning codes in the United States have been the target of justified criticism (Kunstler,
1993, 1998). Conventional or “Euclidean” zoning has contributed to suburban sprawl by
separating residential uses from nonresidential uses and by imposing building setback
requirements, density limits, and parking requirements that also make high-quality, efficient
public transit impractical.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	143

-- 161 of 387 --

Zoning code revisions are becoming more common in North America as communities
rewrite these regulations to encourage Smart Growth. To mitigate decades of sprawl-inducing
public policy, some municipalities are focusing more on the “character” or form of new
development rather than on the intended uses of that development (Figure 5-6). Unified
form-based zoning, design guidelines, and design review are tools that these communities are
using to enhance the sustainability and livability of their built environments.
Figure 5-4 	Zoning map
showing the districts described
in the city’s zoning code.
144 	Site Analysis

-- 162 of 387 --

Zoning Overlay Districts
Special “overlay” districts may impose additional development standards or allow greater
development flexibility. In designated historic districts, for example, design options are
restricted to promote the preservation and restoration of buildings with historical signifi-
cance. For more information on standards and guidelines for protecting historic places, see
Canada’s Historic Places (www.historicplaces.ca/) or the U.S. National Trust for Historic
Preservation website (www.nationaltrust.org/).
Other special overlay districts, including transportation corridors and central business
districts, may require new development to conform to context-specific design guidelines.
These special districts are often intended to maintain (or create) a unique sense of place.
“Incentive zoning” may be used in these targeted areas to improve the design and man-
agement of the public realm. Incentives may be granted, for example, to encourage
development that incorporates public open spaces like vest-pocket parks and plazas, or other
public amenities such as atriums and second-story skywalks (Garvin, 1996).
Subdivision Ordinances
Land development often involves the subdivision of one land parcel into two or more
parcels. This is especially common when land is developed for single-family housing where
each house sits on an individual parcel or lot. Land subdivision is a legal process requiring
subdivision plat approval (Figure 5-7). The subdivision plat records the legal boundaries of all
parcels, easements, streets, and street rights-of-way (Owen, 1994). The process generally
begins with a preapplication meeting where the developer or designer and planning staff
Property line
Rear-yard detached parking
Tuck under parking
Surface parking
Alley or drive 	Street
Side-yard
Setback
Rear-yard
Setback Front-yard
Setback
Height Limit
Figure 5-5 	Height, bulk, and other dimensional standards for a residential block bordered by a street in front and an alley in back.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	145

-- 163 of 387 --

discuss the proposed development and relevant legal
requirements. Upon approval, the final plat is recorded
with the local register of deeds (or another official land
records office).
Subdivision ordinances regulate site development by
establishing requirements for the shape and size of lot
and street blocks, street and sidewalk dimensions,
parking lot configurations, and building setbacks from
property boundaries. These ordinances may also limit
the number and location of street access points or “curb
cuts” to a property from adjoining public streets; impose
requirements for the installation of street lights, street
trees, and bus stops; and require easements and other
dedicated space for stormwater management (Meck
et al., 2006).
Unified Development Codes
Zoning codes and subdivision ordinances have contrib-
uted to urban sprawl in the United States by separating
residential uses from commercial, recreational, and civic
uses and by imposing design standards for minimum lot
sizes and street dimensions (Figure 5-8) that effectively mandate inefficient, low-density
development (Ben-Joseph and Szold, 2005; Duany et al., 2001).
Unified development codes attempt to eliminate the arbitrary distinctions between the
regulation of subdivisions and other forms of development (Meck et al., 2006). These
standards apply to all development proposals, whether or not they require land parcel
subdivision. In the American Planning Association’s “Model Smart Land Development
Regulations” (Meck et al., 2006, pp. 2–3), the best unified development codes
blend the use and intensity review process (typically a part of the zoning process) with
design review (traditionally part of subdivision review). The integrated review process
allows citizens and neighbors of the proposed development to get a clearer picture of
what is being proposed on the site.
Unified development codes also provide greater predictability and fewer regulatory con-
tradictions for developers and their consultants.
“Form-based” codes can create higher-density, yet more livable, neighborhoods. These
codes recognize the important influence of the built environment’s design on community
health, safety, and welfare. Higher-density development, if well designed and accompanied
by meaningful open space, plantings, and other landscape amenities, creates housing and
lifestyle options that appeal to large segments of an increasingly diverse population.
Depending on the context, higher-density development may even entail single-family
Angle
Sky exposure plane
Street line
Setback
Ste pb ack
Figure 5-6 	Minimal build-
ing setbacks and moderate
building stepbacks can create
a strong urban streetscape
while increasing the amount
of sunlight that the street
receives.
146 	Site Analysis

-- 164 of 387 --

Figure 5-7 	Parcel map for a residential subdivision in Washington County, Washington. Source: Roger Livingston, Washington
County, Washington. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	147

-- 165 of 387 --

detached housing on small lots. The code revisions needed to allow these more sustainable
forms of development include (Wolcott, 2004, p. 3):
Minimizing right-of-way and pavement width requirements (reduces impervious
surfaces and stormwater runoff impacts)
Reducing building setback restrictions (allows housing on smaller sites)
Allowing required on-site open spaces to include wetlands, woodlands, and other
ecologically significant natural areas (allows higher densities on the site’s “net”
developable area)
Encouraging rain gardens to help manage stormwater runoff from driveways, parking
lots, and rooftops (reduces off-site runoff and the need for large detention ponds)
Allowing smaller dwelling units—about 1000 square feet (93 square meters)—with
single-car garages (recognizes a diverse market segment that does not want or need
large houses and lawns)
Building codes are concerned with the structural integrity of buildings subjected to
various stresses or “loads” from occupants, seismic activity, wind and snow, and the
buildings’ own weight (Owen, 1994). Building codes also address other health and safety
issues, including fire safety, plumbing, electrical power, sanitation, and energy efficiency.
Published national design and construction standards, such as the International Building
Code (IBC), are often adopted by municipalities and supplemented with local standards. In
Figure 5-8 	Expansive cul-de-
sac pavement (in this case, a
width of 110 feet or 33.5
meters) is the minimum required
dimension as specified in this
community’s local subdivision
ordinance. Excessive street
width and cul-de-sac diameter
requirements exacerbate sprawl
and its environmental impacts.
148 	Site Analysis

-- 166 of 387 --

the United States, the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) helps to make public
buildings—and buildings open to the public—accessible to people with impaired mobility.
The ADA is a federal civil rights law (1992) that prohibits the exclusion of people with
disabilities from everyday activities (for example, shopping, attending movies, eating in res-
taurants). ADA requirements affect private businesses of all sizes and nonprofit organizations.
Tax credits and deductions offset many of the costs of providing access to people with dis-
abilities. The ADA has less stringent requirements for existing facilities built before 1993.
Design Guidelines
Neighborhood and building design guidelines are another type of land use regulation that
can influence a site’s development options. Municipalities may use design guidelines and a
design review process to enhance the visual quality of business districts, major community
entrances and corridors, and other public areas (Table 5-1). Design guidelines may specify
desired building massing and facade articulation in downtown redevelopment districts, for
example, or the preferred paving materials and furnishings along the district’s streetscapes.
Design guidelines also may be created by large institutions to ensure that new devel-
opment is appropriate for its physical and social contexts. This is especially important on
university campuses, where new building and site development is influenced over time by
different designers. Universities are increasingly sensitive to physical design because the
aesthetics of their facilities are an important factor in recruiting and retaining students, staff,
and faculty (Kenney et al., 2005).
Building design guidelines can be an extension of the project programming process
(Zeisel and Maxwell, 1993, p. 168):
In order to translate a facilities program into a physical environment for a workplace,
designers need more than numbers and diagrams. They need planning and design
principles that respond to the organization’s style—its culture.
TABLE 5-1 	Zoning codes and other municipal development regulations influence the
character of the built environment through design standards.
Site Element 	Design Attribute (Minimum and/or Maximum May Be Specified)
Lots (Parcels) 	Area
Width
Depth
Buildings 	Dwelling unit density
Building coverage (percentage of lot area)
Building height
Building placement (i.e., front yard, side yard, backyard setbacks)
Parking Areas 	Number of parking spaces, by land use
Location of parking areas
Plantings 	Number of access driveways
Number, size, and species of street trees
Parking area landscaping and screening
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	149

-- 167 of 387 --

Visual quality is an important concern of design guidelines, but it is not the only objective.
The standardization of campus lighting and benches, for example, can reduce long-term
maintenance and replacement costs.
Design guidelines—or any other standards or expectations that could limit or influence
site and building design—must be assessed in the site inventory process. Public agencies as
well as private institutions with jurisdiction over the property under consideration may
impose a variety of development restrictions. And depending on the site’s legal context,
development proposals may require special permits and other procedures (for example,
variances, design review, public hearings, and environmental tests). The land use regulatory
issues that should be investigated for each site, in addition to the property’s zoning classi-
fication, include easements, covenants, and other deed restrictions.
Covenants
New Urbanist neighborhoods are able to develop consistently high design quality through
the adoption and enforcement of neighborhood design covenants. Typically, a neighbor-
hood architectural review board—comprised of the developer, perhaps, along with staff and
residents with design expertise—reviews plans for new houses or commercial buildings
within the development. The design standards, typically addressing building size, placement,
style, and surface treatments, as well as landscaping, can add substantial costs for design and
construction. These standards tend to increase property values and, correspondingly, reduce
affordability.
Easements
Easements are legal restrictions that reduce a parcel’s development potential (Table 5-2). For
example, a site easement may enable access to an adjoining property that is accessible only by
crossing the subject property. Easements allowing emergency vehicle access or utility
maintenance access are also common. Conservation easements, typically held by nonprofit
organizations, are created to preserve open space and protect ecosystem integrity. Scenic
easements can also limit the scope and character of land development. These development
restrictions must be mapped as part of the site assessment.
TABLE 5-2 	Common types and purposes of easements.
Type 	Purpose
Access Easements 	Allow physical access to, or across, a site from adjacent properties
Utility Easements 	Provide physical access to install, replace, and maintain utility system infrastructure, such as power lines or
underground piping
Conservation
Easements
Restrict development potential; often used to protect hiking trails and other recreational areas, and to
maintain ecosystem functions such as groundwater recharge
Scenic Easements 	Protect vistas and viewsheds by preventing development that blocks or degrades those views
Solar Easements 	Protect solar access to an adjacent property
150 	Site Analysis

-- 168 of 387 --

5.5 	INFRASTRUCTURE
The built environment is a complex mosaic of private and public buildings, green spaces, and
transportation and utility infrastructure. The location and condition of existing transporta-
tion and utility infrastructure influence the siting and orientation of new buildings as well as
other key site-planning decisions, including the location of entrances to the site.
5.5.1 	Transportation
In both site planning and architectural design, especially in urban contexts, established
pedestrian and vehicle circulation patterns must be carefully analyzed and mapped. Different
circulation systems (pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles) and volumes can be portrayed graphically
by varying the color and width of the arrows (Figure 5-9). The average daily traffic volumes
on adjacent streets and highways may be available online from the local municipality’s public
works or traffic engineering department. Existing conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians
also should be mapped. These walkability challenges often can be mitigated through good
site planning and design.
“Location efficiency” considers the site’s accessibility to parks, shops, and other nearby
community and neighborhood destinations. When the costs of housing and transportation
are combined, many houses in outlying suburbs are less affordable than those in inner
suburbs (Center for Neighborhood Technology, 2012). In the United States, a site’s location
efficiency can be evaluated with two online GIS assessment tools: Walkscore (www.
walkscore.com) and “H T Affordability Index” (http://htaindex.cnt.org/).
The locations of existing streets, driveways, transit stops, parking lots, and other infra-
structure inform context-sensitive design. Site planners usually have leeway in determining
how and where pedestrians enter a site, for example, and existing pedestrian, bicycle, and
vehicular circulation patterns should influence these decisions (Figure 5-10). Failing to
anticipate the “desire lines” between existing and/or proposed building entrances and
other destinations may create new pedestrian–vehicle conflicts. Walking distances from
specific destinations can be shown graphically as a dashed circle, typically representing a 5- to
10-minute walk (Figure 5-11).
5.5.2 	Utilities
Many land uses require continuing inputs of resources, such as potable water and electricity.
With increasing attention to resource conservation and sustainability, these inputs may be
generated on-site through cisterns, solar panels, wind turbines, and other small-scale tech-
nologies. In more conventional approaches to development, these resources are delivered to
the site through the utility infrastructure. These utilities may include gas, electricity, tele-
phone, television, and the Internet. Many land uses also generate continuing outputs, such as
sanitary waste that is either treated on-site or collected at an off-site treatment facility.
Typically, major utility lines are located within streets’ rights-of-way or within other
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	151

-- 169 of 387 --

Figure 5-9 	Maps of vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns for a mixed-use project on a historically significant site in Haifa,
Israel. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
152 	Site Analysis

-- 170 of 387 --

circulation system corridors (Figure 5-12). These systems encompass extensive underground
and aerial conduit networks that may be mapped in the site inventory and analysis.
Municipal utility systems typically deliver energy, water, and information to the site and
remove wastes and excess stormwater. On sites located outside of urban service areas, some
of these grey infrastructure systems may be unavailable. Understanding where the off-site
and on-site utility systems are located is a key objective of the site inventory (Figure 5-13).
This information is needed in siting new buildings, circulation systems, and open spaces that
perform 	stormwater 	management 	functions 	and 	are 	therefore 	part 	of 	the 	green
infrastructure.
Assessing the presence or absence of utilities that serve the site must consider both potential
resource inputs and outputs. These systems include:
Figure 5-10 	Map of existing pedestrian circulation patterns, neighborhood connections, and a 6-minute walking distance.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	153

-- 171 of 387 --

Inputs
Water (potable and fire protection)
Electricity
Natural gas
Steam (and geothermal)
Telecommunications
Outputs
Stormwater
Sanitary sewerage
Figure 5-11 	Map of existing vehicle circulation patterns and parking spaces. This assessment was made in selecting the site for a
new medical building. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
154 	Site Analysis

-- 172 of 387 --

Recyclables
Trash
A survey of existing site utilities also typically includes the locations of utility poles,
overhead power lines, fire hydrants, and utility boxes. Information about the capacity of
each system is also provided (e.g., the diameter of water distribution and sanitary sewerage
pipes, as well as the transmission capacity of electrical and telecommunication data lines).
5.6 	CONCLUSION
Urban and suburban redevelopment is accelerating in many communities and metropolitan
areas around the world. These existing built environments are inherently more complex—
and potentially more challenging—for site planners. Because project programs are also
becoming more complex or “thick” with uses, these challenging contexts increase the
importance of site analysis in supporting evidence-based design that reshapes the structure
and function of the built environment.
Water
Sewer
Electric	Electric
Street Light
Traffic Signal
Cable TV
Street Light
Traffic Signal
Cable TV
Gas 	Gas
Manhole
	Manhole
	Manhole
Valve
	Valve
Catch Basin
	Catch Basin
Figure 5-12 	Schematic diagram of underground utility lines and surface access elements.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	155

-- 173 of 387 --

Figure 5-13 	Utilities map for a site selection study conducted in support of a medical campus expansion. Source: The HOK
Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill
N ORTHWESTERN MEMORIAL H OSPITAL
CHICAGO , ILLINOIS
OWNER /DEVELOPER : N ORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
S ITE PLANNING : T HE HOK P LANNING GROUP , ST . LOUIS , MISSOURI
ARCHITECTURE : ELLERBE B ECKET , MINNEAPOLIS , MINNESOTA
OVERVIEW
Northwestern Memorial Hospital, in cooperation with Northwestern University and its medical school,
commissioned the joint venture team of Ellerbe Becket/The HOK Planning Group to design a new inpatient
pavilion and ambulatory care facility in downtown Chicago. Accommodating the dramatic growth in outpatient
156 	Site Analysis

-- 174 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
care while providing more cost-effective hospital operations, the new medical complex consolidates services
previously housed in aging facilities located throughout a six-block area. Construction of the new hospital took
place without disrupting patient care at the existing medical facilities on the site.
SITE ANALYSIS
The site for the medical center is in the heart of downtown Chicago, one of the largest cities in the United
States. The planning process for this project included identifying and comparing three potential sites (Figure
5-14). Five different development options for these three sites were also compared (Figure 5-15). Several criteria
were evaluated in making the final site selection decision, including each site’s effects on the medical center’s
cost, image, and growth potential. Convenient access and parking for patients, employees, and visitors were
among the other important site selection criteria.
The site inventory and analysis addressed a variety of physical, social, and legal issues. These studies also
spanned a range in scale. For example, studies of vehicle circulation addressed arrival and departure patterns
within a radius of several miles (Figure 5-16). Other studies of vehicle circulation and access focused on potential
arrival and entry sequences within a city block or two of the medical center site (Figure 5-17). Factors considered
in this analysis included pedestrian circulation patterns, microclimate, visual character of the surrounding
architecture, and site land use regulations.
Figure 5-14 	Map showing potential hospital sites. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK
Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	157

-- 175 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
The planning process for the new medical center involved extensive negotiations with the building’s future
occupants, municipal planning staff, and other community stakeholders. For example, the project’s program-
ming phase involved verifying the current program (for existing facilities), as well as reprogramming specific
components of the existing facilities. One of the spaces designated for reprogramming was the clinical labo-
ratory. The design team chose to develop an on-site core lab, with the majority of the laboratory space located
off-site. Community stakeholders also played a significant role in identifying issues that ultimately influenced
the design of the medical center (Figure 5-18).
Figure 5-15 	Matrix of site selection criteria. The matrix summarizes ratings for 5 site options and 11 selection criteria.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
158 	Site Analysis

-- 176 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-16 	Inventory and assessment of vehicle arrival and departure patterns. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used
with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	159

-- 177 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
DESIGN FEATURES
The new medical complex includes a 526-bed, 1-million-square-foot (92,903-square-meter) hospital, and a
1-million-square-foot (92,903-square-meter) ambulatory care facility. The ambulatory care facility includes
offices and clinical space for the 400 physicians in the Northwestern Medical Faculty Foundation group practice
and 200 additional staff physicians. Special features of the complex include 96 intensive-care-unit beds, all new
diagnostic and treatment facilities, integration of inpatient and outpatient services, and parking facilities for
2100 cars in a multistory parking structure.
Figure 5-17 	Diagram addressing vehicular circulation, entry, and parking issues. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used
with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
160 	Site Analysis

-- 178 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-18 	Community input on the planning and design of the proposed building, streetscape, and emergency room
entrance. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	161

-- 179 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-19 	This section drawing communicates the main design principles for building massing and facade articulation.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
162 	Site Analysis

-- 180 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-20 	The zoning amendment proposes a Planned Development (PD). Proposed floor-area ratios (FAR) are provided
by subareas. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	163

-- 181 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-21 	Summary table of design issues negotiated in the zoning approval process. Source: The HOK Planning Group.
Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
164 	Site Analysis

-- 182 of 387 --

Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
Figure 5-22 	Summary table (continued) of design issues addressed in the proposed zoning revision. Source: The HOK
Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Land Use, Infrastructure, and Regulatory Context 	165

-- 183 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. What are some examples, in your community, of how land use policies may have
shaped the built environment?
2. From your perspective, are those positive or negative changes?
Case Study 5–1 	Urban Infill (continued)
The design of the medical center building reflects, in many ways, sensitivity to context (Figure 5-19). For
example, the key guiding principles for locating and designing the medical center included the following:
Reducing bulk by “stepping down” the building toward Lake Michigan
Breaking up the “superblock” by creating separate towers
Creating ground-level east/west pedestrian “malls”
Creating a “gateway” to the medical center
These design decisions were made to achieve specific functional and/or aesthetic objectives, which include
reinforcing the urban street-wall and continuing the Chicago tradition of designing buildings with distinctive
tops.
A project of this complexity requires creativity, negotiation, and responsiveness to the concerns of commu-
nity stakeholders. To achieve greater flexibility in the way the project was designed, the consultants gained a
zoning amendment to reclassify the site as a planned development area (Figures 5-20 and 5-21). The conditions
for rezoning included no net increase in density and a shift in building mass away from Lake Michigan. Other
requirements included improvements to the local pedestrian and vehicle circulation systems (Figure 5-22).
166 	Site Analysis

-- 184 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	6
Assessing the Site’s Cultural
and Historic Contexts
Cultural resources are those tangible and intangible aspects of cultural systems, both past
and present, that are valued by or representative of a given culture, or that contain
information about a culture.
—United States National Park Service
6.1 	INTRODUCTION
Development that fits the site is responsive to the site’s cultural and historical context. By
incorporating in new development the design styles and construction materials indigenous to
the region, site planners and architects can strengthen a community’s sense of place.
6.2 	BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER
6.2.1 	Morphology
Understanding community character hinges on identifying its defining attributes. Kevin
Lynch (1960), in The Image of the City, developed a conceptual framework to assess urban
structure, or legibility, and to explain how people form cognitive maps, or mental images, of
the built environment. Cognitive maps, Lynch theorized, aid orientation and movement,
or way-finding, in built environments with a strong sense of place. Lynch’s five elements of
urban form, with examples of each, are the following:
167

-- 185 of 387 --

Edges (for example, shorelines, streets, and major changes in land use)
Paths (for example, streets and major walkways or bike paths)
Districts (for example, neighborhoods and major institutions)
Nodes (for example, entrances, plazas, and major walkway intersections)
Landmarks (for example, unique buildings, bridges, and natural features)
This conceptual framework is especially useful in assessing the character of the built envi-
ronment in an area considered for redevelopment.
Figure-ground mapping is another technique for assessing the texture or “grain” of the
built environment. This involves mapping just two elements: the building footprints (figure)
and the spaces (ground) between the buildings (Figure 6-1). The resulting map of solids and
voids reveals the texture of the built environment, which can vary widely across a com-
munity, spatially, from block to block, and across time, from decade to decade. Suburban
buildings, for example, are typically freestanding objects in space, in contrast to urban
buildings, which are often connected and effective shapers of outdoor space (Frederick,
2007). Figure-ground diagrams are particularly useful for informing the design and siting
of new buildings (for example, determining the building’s size, shape, and placement on
the site).
Evaluating the built environment’s existing character can help site planners design con-
text-sensitive new development. If the design quality near the site is good, then this context
may be worth emulating. In some locations, however, the existing built environment is
Figure 6-1 	Figure-ground
diagram showing building
footprints superimposed on a
vertical aerial photograph. This
graphic technique enables a
visual assessment of urban
texture or grain—an important
contextual attribute. Source:
The HOK Planning Group. Used
with permission of The HOK
Planning Group.
168 	Site Analysis

-- 186 of 387 --

poorly designed. An assessment of building character, for example, considers at least the
following attributes (Pregliasco, 1988, p. 15):
Façade height, width, and proportion
Proportions of window and door openings
Horizontal and vertical rhythms
Material colors, shapes, and textures
Roof form
Signs and sidewalk coverings
Setback from street
6.2.2 	Typologies
Evaluating a site’s cultural context can also benefit from the analysis of typologies based on
character-defining attributes such as building height, style, year of construction, or location
within the urban-to-rural continuum. A building typology also can be based on uses (for
example, residential, commercial, educational, religious), sustainability practices (for exam-
ple, water and energy efficiency, location efficiency), or renovation status (for example, fully
refurbished, high renovation potential).
In an analysis of neighborhood attributes in British Columbia, Canada, a typology of six
neighborhood types spanned a continuum from rural to more urban (Teed et al., 2002). The
neighborhood typology included the following residential types:
Single-family houses (attributes: small footprints, pitched roofs, one to two stories)
Multifamily residential towers (attributes: 5 to 12 stories, subdivided living units, retail
use of the first floor)
Mixed-use residential/commercial development (attributes: ground-floor retail or
office uses, upper-floor residential use, three to five stories, rectangular and linear
footprints)
Neighborhood and building typologies can be documented on image boards with photo-
graphs, annotated street elevations and sections, and maps showing the locations of repre-
sentative buildings or neighborhoods within each type.
In addition to the influence of buildings (Figure 6-2), the character of the built envi-
ronment is influenced by circulation system configurations, land use combinations, the size,
placement, and design of outdoor open spaces (Figure 6-3), and construction materials.
Regionally distinctive construction materials include, for example, locally quarried stone or,
in glaciated regions, boulders deposited during the last ice age (Figure 6-4). Native and
naturalized vegetation can also contribute to a site’s unique identity.
Assessing existing neighborhood and community development patterns can inform
context-sensitive site planning and building design. Neighborhood “pattern books,” for
example, enable the design of new development that enhances the unique local character by
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	169

-- 187 of 387 --

repeating the best qualities of building and site design in that community and geographic
region (Urban Design Associates, 2003).
Public places are cultural resources that are also considered in assessing the neighborhood
and community context. Community assets that contribute to a neighborhood’s character
and sense of place include parks, schools, libraries, and community centers. Public open
spaces can provide not only visual amenities and outdoor recreational opportunities but also
space for stormwater management and other functions of green infrastructure. Both indoor
and outdoor places, privately owned but open to the public, perform important social
functions that help define the character of a place.
6.3 	HISTORIC RESOURCES
Context-sensitive design is responsive to the history and needs of a particular place and time
(Unwin, 2003). Depending on the age, quality, and role of these places in the local, regional,
or national culture, some of these resources may have significant historic value. In the United
States, the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) affords legal protection to buildings,
bridges, and other structures registered on the list of nationally significant historic resources.
Policies aimed at protecting and restoring historic resources also exist at the state and
local levels.
Cultural resource inventories document the location, quality, and historic significance of
buildings and other human-made elements, as well as prior land uses (Figure 6-5). Historic
Figure 6-2 	Horizontal and
vertical rhythm of highly articu-
lated facades of buildings on a
block in San Francisco,
California.
170 	Site Analysis

-- 188 of 387 --

resources include bridges, buildings, walls, signs, and other noteworthy structures or
neighborhoods built in previous eras. The historic significance of a structure or neighbor-
hood is based on several criteria, including age, quality, rarity, and representativeness (Ames
and McClelland, 2002). Historic districts may be mapped by local planning agencies as
zoning “overlay districts,” with more restrictive development controls (Case Study 6-1).
Figure 6-3 	High-quality open
space design, construction
materials, and landscaping can
greatly enhance urban livability.
Savannah, Georgia.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	171

-- 189 of 387 --

Cultural resources also include historic sites such as forts, battlefields, parks, and
archaeological artifacts. Archaeological finds, such as Native American artifacts, can have a
significant impact on project planning and implementation. (Talarico, 1998, p. 250):
Rules governing finds vary according to the locality, the size of the site, and who is
involved in the project. If the property is private, finds can be bulldozed, except
where there’s legislation that says otherwise. If there are ties to the federal govern-
ment, even if the project is only partially funded by a federal agency, the site falls
under the National Historic Preservation Act, administered by the Department of the
Interior. The property must then undergo a phase-one archaeological analysis, during
which test pits are dug. If anything of value is found, the act requires a more extensive
phase-two dig. A phase-three dig is a full-blown excavation.
Culturally distinct urban districts can be mapped to illustrate the site’s cultural context
(Figure 6-6). Notable buildings also may be photographed (Figure 6-7) and mapped (Figure
6-8). This information can help architects and urban designers craft context-sensitive designs
for infill and redevelopment. In communities with active historic preservation interests,
redevelopment proposals that are “out of scale” or in other ways not in keeping with the
site’s architectural context may be doomed to fail.
Figure 6-4 	Indigenous
natural materials—glacial
boulders—used in landscaping
for retaining walls and accents.
Middleton, Wisconsin.
172 	Site Analysis

-- 190 of 387 --

Sanborn maps, originally created in the United States for the fire insurance industry, are
field survey maps providing detailed historical information on building heights, footprints,
past and present uses, and construction materials (Sanborn, 1999). More than 750,000 his-
toric Sanborn maps have been donated to the U.S. Library of Congress (Sanborn, 1999).
Other, more recent Sanborn maps are commercially available as georeferenced vector or
raster GIS data layers.
Figure 6-5 	Timeline depicting the historic and cultural context for a region greenway planning project near St. Louis, Missouri.
Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	173

-- 191 of 387 --

Figure 6-6 	Visually and
functionally distinct urban
districts contribute to a
community’s cultural context.
This map shows six districts,
including one historic district in
Fenton, Missouri. Source: The
HOK Planning Group. Used with
permission of The HOK Planning
Group.
Figure 6-7 	Map of historic and architecturally significant buildings within the Olde Towne district of Fenton, Missouri. The map
identifies three classes of building significance. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
174 	Site Analysis

-- 192 of 387 --

6.4 	DEMOGRAPHICS
Understanding a site’s cultural and historic context includes knowing something about the
people who live in the neighborhood or the immediate vicinity. In the United States,
decennial census data are publicly available for GIS analysis at the census tract and block
group levels. Depending on the type of planning and design project being considered,
demographic data may be collected on a variety of household attributes (Figure 6-9),
including:
Population density, age, and ethnicity
Household size, income, and composition
These and other attributes are commonly used in market studies to inform the pro-
gramming of private- and public-sector projects. Community-level sustainability initiatives
are also beginning to measure various social, economic, and environmental indicators for
individual neighborhoods and districts (Figure 6-10). These online resources are additional
Figure 6-8 	Historic buildings
contribute to the local character
of a place. Source: City of
Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	175

-- 193 of 387 --

fine-grained data that can help site planners understand the site’s social and economic
contexts (Figure 6-11).
6.5 	ENVIRONMENTAL PERCEPTION
In a classic book on landscape perception, D. W. Meinig (1979) identifies 10 possible ways in
which our knowledge, experiences, and values influence our perceptions of land and
landscapes (Table 6-1). Each perspective is a product of the unique “lens” through which
each of us views the world. Maslow’s (1954) hierarchy of human needs suggests that basic
human needs must be satisfied before higher-level secondary and tertiary needs can be
Figure 6-9 	Map of employees per acre in Madison, Wisconsin’s downtown planning area. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
176 	Site Analysis

-- 194 of 387 --

satisfied. Physical safety and security—along with food, clothing, and shelter—are the most
basic needs in the hierarchy. Yet, perceptions of safety and security vary among individuals,
depending on their age, gender, health, and other attributes.
Our ability to see, smell, taste, touch, and hear informs our perceptions of our sur-
roundings. A sensory approach to environmental education, for example, is an effective way
to help students understand cause-and-effect relationships between society and the envi-
ronment (Auer, 2008). For most people, perceptions of the built environment are formed
primarily through the sense of sight. Physical well-being is linked to environmental quality,
and noise and air quality are also important factors, in addition to visual quality (National
Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 2005). Visual resource assessments for
Figure 6-10 	Partial map of neighborhoods and districts for which the city of Madison collects demographic data and indicators of
community health and sustainability. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	177

-- 195 of 387 --

site-planning purposes are concerned with both visibility and visual quality (Arriaza et al.,
2004; Daniel, 2001; Dramstad et al., 2006). The significance of each attribute depends on
context, of course, but also on the intended uses of the site.
6.5.1 	Visibility
Context plays a crucial role in project programming and site design. Land uses on adjoining
sites, for example, can influence the suitability of a site for certain uses and use intensities.
Good visibility to the site from adjacent streets and other off-site locations may reduce the
site’s suitability for residential uses. But good visibility to the site can enhance its suitability
for commercial uses, thereby potentially increasing property values and business income.
Certain types of residential development, however, may place a premium on privacy and
screening from off-site locations.
How a site will be used can also depend on what can be seen from the site (Figure 6-12).
The visibility of off-site features can be as important as the visibility of on-site features. In
urban environments, views from a site may be blocked by nearby buildings. But if the site is
on a hill or a waterfront, unobstructed off-site views can be dramatic. In rural environments,
a site that is heavily forested yet relatively flat limits views on and off the site. In contrast, in
landscapes with long, unobstructed views—as in mountainous terrain or on the open
plains—the visible distance from the site can be substantial.
Viewsheds, or areas visible from specific locations on the site, can be estimated in a GIS by
analyzing topographic data. On-site assessments are essential, however, because existing trees
and buildings may block views from some vantage points. Moreover, in temperate climates,
visibility to and from a site may vary seasonally. Deciduous trees and shrubs may provide very
Figure 6-11 	Graph of top
visitors’ activities in Madison,
Wisconsin. Source: City of
Madison, Wisconsin.
178 	Site Analysis

-- 196 of 387 --

little screening in winter, when the plants are dormant and leafless. A site assessment,
therefore, may document the views from multiple site vantage points (Figure 6-13).
Buildings also substantially influence visibility and visual quality in urban and suburban
settings. Consequently, restrictions on building heights in capital cities are efforts to maintain
the visual prominence of each city’s capitol building—a landmark and a symbol of the seat of
government. In Madison, Wisconsin, building heights are restricted within 1 mile (1.6
TABLE 6-1 	Ten perceptions of landscape meaning.
Landscape as . . . 	Associated Concept
Nature 	Enduring
Habitat 	Resources
Artifact 	Platform
System 	Dynamic
Problem 	Flaw
Wealth 	Property
Ideology 	Values
History 	Legacy
Place 	Locality
Aesthetic 	Scenery
Source: Adapted from Meinig (1979).
Figure 6-12 	Inventory of signif-
icant views from—and to—a pro-
spective development site in
Fenton, Missouri. Source: The HOK
Planning Group. Used with per-
mission of The HOK Planning
Group.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	179

-- 197 of 387 --

kilometers) of the state’s capitol building (Figures 6-14 and 6-15). In Washington, D.C.,
building heights are restricted along the major avenues created by the 1791 L’Enfant plan
(Gutheim, 1977).
A visibility (or viewshed) map graphically shows the locations that can be seen from a
single viewing point. A “frequency seen” map, in contrast, characterizes the locations that
can be seen from two or more viewing points (Computer Terrain Mapping, 1997). This
map can be created, within a GIS, by overlaying a series of one-point viewshed maps. A
value of 1 is assigned to the visible areas on each layer, and areas that are not visible are
assigned a value of 0. The viewshed maps are combined through a polygon overlay process,
and the attribute values for all layers are summed. For example, when five viewshed maps are
combined, the frequency seen or visibility values on the output layer could range from 0
(locations that are not visible from any of the five viewing points) to 5 (locations that are
visible from all five viewing points). Each visibility class can be depicted with a single color
and/or texture.
Figure 6-13 	The visible context for a project extends well beyond the site’s boundaries. Source: Land Design. Used with
permission.
180 	Site Analysis

-- 198 of 387 --

6.5.2 	Visual Quality
Visual quality is influenced by distinctive biophysical and cultural features, which may
include rock outcrops, water bodies, and specimen trees as well as stone walls and houses of
worship. The type, abundance, and arrangement of these natural and built features influence
the landscape’s scenic quality (Table 6-2), which can be assessed at the site as well as at
regional scales (Figure 6-16).
Two approaches have been used in assessing the visual quality of cultural landscapes. The
objectivist approach assumes that visual quality is an inherent landscape attribute, whereas
the subjectivist approach assumes that visual quality is in the eyes of the beholder (Lothian,
Figure 6-14 	Map of maximum building heights allowed for the preservation of views to the state of Wisconsin’s capitol building.
Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	181

-- 199 of 387 --

1999). Although it is true that conceptions of beauty are influenced by an observer’s
knowledge and experience, there is ample evidence to identify broadly accepted design
principles for improving the visual quality of the built environment (Figure 6-17).
Aesthetic quality assessments by experts take into account an area’s scenic qualities, or
visible attributes, which include form, proportion, line, color, and texture. Participatory
assessments, in contrast, may engage a representative, often randomly selected, group of
individuals to provide their opinions on the visual quality of existing, as well as proposed,
places within the built environment. Typically, visual preferences are elicited for a carefully
selected set of photographic scenes. These “visual preference surveys” (VPS) can be an
effective tool for engaging the public in neighborhood planning decisions.
TABLE 6-2 	Scenic quality rating criteria for natural and vernacular landscape
assessments.
Criterion 	Desirable Attributes
Landform 	Steep, massive, sculptured, or extraordinary terrain
Vegetation 	Variety of patterns, forms, and textures; sculptured forms
(for example, gnarled trees)
Water 	Clarity, dominating element
Color 	Variety, contrast, and harmony
Scarcity 	Distinctive or unusual within the region
Cultural Modifications 	Add favorably to visual variety and harmony
Note: Criteria are rated on a scale from 5 (highest) to 0 (lowest).
Source: United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, 1986. Visual Resource
Inventory. BLM Manual Handbook 8410.
Figure 6-15 	View of the isthmus on which the state of Wisconsin’s capitol building is sited. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
182 	Site Analysis

-- 200 of 387 --

Figure 6-16 	Windshield survey of views along 85 miles (130 kilometers) of major highway corridors. Source: Edward D. Stone, Jr.,
and Associates. Used with permission.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	183

-- 201 of 387 --

Figure 6-17 	Opportunities for enhancing scenic quality within the areas visible from the major highway corridors. Source: Edward
D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
184 	Site Analysis

-- 202 of 387 --

A related approach is to provide cameras to individuals and ask them to photograph
scenes in their communities that they particularly like or dislike. This technique, called
“photo participatory mapping” (PPM), can help designers understand how the environment
affects residents’ behavior, especially among the adolescents and young adults in the com-
munity (Dennis et al., 2009).
Prominent views to natural or cultural amenities can have social as well as economic value
in areas dependent upon tourism. Jakle (1987, p. 11) comments on the importance of visual
quality to tourism:
Tourists come as strangers with accompanying needs to orient to new places. What
they see is novel and it attracts attention accordingly. As they seek interest and pleasure
in their visual surroundings, they are sensitive to those aspects of landscape, to those
places, which portend interest and pleasure.
In mountainous landscapes (Figure 6-18), where visual quality is important to the local or
regional economy, the skyline contributes to memorable images of place. At the University
of Washington in Seattle, for example, the campus design responds to distant views of
Mount Rainier. Although this majestic mountain is over 50 miles (80.5 kilometers) to the
southeast, it is a prominent campus landmark. This visual linkage is strengthened by carefully
preserving the sight lines to this dormant volcano from major campus open spaces.
Visual quality is an important factor in site planning and design. The visual quality of the
site itself, as well as the visible off-site features, can play key roles in the success of real estate
development projects. Views to significant buildings, prominent mountains, and other
landmarks, for example, convey a strong sense of place (Figure 6-19). Conversely, unob-
structed views to a busy highway, or to a large, treeless parking lot or to an industrial site can
Figure 6-18 	Pastoral, rural
landscape with very high scenic
value. Canton Appenzell,
Switzerland.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	185

-- 203 of 387 --

Figure 6-19 	Maps depict views from the site and the site’s visibility from surrounding areas in Haifa, Israel. Source: The HOK
Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
186 	Site Analysis

-- 204 of 387 --

be a liability that reduces the site’s suitability for certain uses, especially residential
development.
Visibility and visual quality affect land use preferences and real estate value, and these
attributes should be carefully considered in development planning and design. Whether
positive or negative, views and vistas are important to assess. At the landscape or even
regional scale, the study area can be divided into a regular grid, with each grid cell rated for
visual quality using one of four ordinal classes (Anderson, 1980):
Very unique
Unique
Frequent
Common
The visual quality of smaller areas can be mapped, too, although rather than using grid-cell
mapping units, individual buildings and outdoor spaces can be evaluated for their visual quality.
The mapping units at these smaller scales need not be uniform in either size or shape.
6.5.3 	Noise and Air Pollution
A site’s suitability for its intended uses may be affected not only by what people can see on
the site, but also by what they can hear and smell. Noise in the built environment varies on
an hourly, daily, or seasonal basis and can have a significant impact on recreational
experiences outdoors. In The End of Nature, for example, McKibbon (1989) suggests that a
true wilderness experience includes freedom from the noise of distant chain saws. Envi-
ronmental perception has experiential implications in other settings. In urban environments,
most parks, plazas, and other significant outdoor places are successful—from a design per-
spective—when vehicles are minimized. That includes the absence of vehicle noise and
traffic-related air pollution (Figure 6-20).
Noise can be described in terms of sound intensity (perceived as loudness) and frequency
(perceived as pitch). Sound intensity is measured as sound pressure level (SPL) on a loga-
rithmic decibel (dB) scale. The intensity and duration of noise exposure determine the
potential for damage to the inner ear. Permanent hearing loss can result from chronic noise
exposures to 85 dB(A) or higher, on average, for an 8-hour period (Morata et al., 1993, pp.
245–254). Yet, 4 hours of noise exposure at 88 dB provides the same noise “dose” as 8 hours
at 85 dB (Clark and Bohne, 1999). Common noise sources and loudness levels, measured in
decibels, are as follows (Rabinowitz, 2000, pp. 2749–2757):
Jet airplane takeoff (140)
Chain saw (110–120)
Stereo headphones (100)
Motorcycle (90)
Conversation (60)
Whisper (30–40)
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	187

-- 205 of 387 --

The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) sets noise standards
for the workplace. Hearing protection is recommended for anyone exposed to 85 dB or
higher, especially if the exposure is for a prolonged time.
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), noise is
becoming an increasing public health concern (www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/noise/). Not only
can noise pollution cause hearing loss, it can also lead to other human health and devel-
opment problems. When traffic and other noises disturb sleep, for example, the impacts may
include diminished reading and language acquisition skills in children (Hendrick, 1997, p.
3G). Persistent traffic noise can also lead to prolonged stress, which has pernicious impacts on
the immune system and long-term health (Passchier-Vermeer and Passchier, 2000).
6.6 	CONCLUSION
Cities are complex mosaics of natural and built elements of varying ages and origins (Lynch,
1976). Cultural and historic resources, either on or near a site, can significantly influence the
site’s character and sense of place. And depending on the program for the site, these resources
may provide opportunities to create great new places through context-sensitive design.
Figure 6-20 	Streets with
heavy vehicle traffic are
sources of noise and poor air
quality.
188 	Site Analysis

-- 206 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning
DOWNTOWN PLAN
MADISON , WISCONSIN
URBAN DESIGN : CITY OF MADISON D EPARTMENT OF PLANNING , MADISON , WISCONSIN
PROJECT GOALS
In his 1911 Madison: A Model City (Figure 6-21), renowned landscape architect and city planner John Nolen
(p. 20) wrote about Madison’s unique character, which results, in part, from its location on an isthmus between
two lakes (Figure 6-22):
Its topography, its lake scenery, its early selection as the Capital and as the seat of the State University, its
population, its history, such influential factors as these should surely have found expression in a city plan, a
city development and a city life with the form and flavor unlike that of any other place.
On the 100th anniversary of this seminal document that subsequently shaped Madison’s development, the
city’s Department of Planning developed—with extensive input from an ad hoc multidisciplinary team of design
professionals—an updated Downtown Plan to guide the area’s transformation (and, where appropriate, historic
preservation). The plan builds on a rich planning tradition to provide a framework for the next 20 years. The
Downtown Plan will guide the future growth of the dynamic urban core while sustaining the traditions, history,
and vitality that have made Madison a model city.
Madison’s Downtown is the geographic, economic, and civic heart of the community. Downtown is the place
where the community comes together, especially for the many cultural and sporting events that it hosts and the
abundant educational and recreational activities that it provides. An active and healthy downtown is important
in ensuring the vitality of the rest of the community and region. And Downtown Madison has experienced a
renaissance in the 20 years since the last downtown planning effort. This new plan proposes a framework to
enhance the qualities that make Madison a world-class city while effectively addressing today’s challenges and
anticipating the needs of the next two decades and beyond.
AUTHENTIC SENSE OF PLACE
The Downtown Plan’s vision is grounded in a comprehensive analysis of the Downtown’s natural, cultural, and
historic resources. The City of Madison Comprehensive Plan states (2006, p. 2):
Ensuring that Downtown possesses an authentic sense of place—one that builds on its unique qualities,
reflects the values of the city’s residents, and does not strive to replicate other communities—is crucial in
ensuring its long term health.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	189

-- 207 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-21 	Madison: A Model City, a plan developed over 100 years ago by John Nolen, still influences the city’s built
environment. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
190 	Site Analysis

-- 208 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Downtown’s location on a narrow stretch of land between two lakes, coupled with its rolling topography,
provides a dramatic natural setting. In Madison: A Model City, John Nolen (1911, p. 20) wrote:
No other city of the world, so far as I know, has such a unique situation on a series of lakes with an
opportunity for so much and such direct relationship to beautiful water frontages. The physical situation
certainly is distinctly individual.
The highest point on the isthmus was chosen as the location for the State Capitol building. The Downtown
was designed to emphasize the prominence of this iconic civic structure, with panoramic views of it from
multiple vantage points, both near and far (Figure 6-23). The topography generally slopes down from the
Capitol to the lakes (Figure 6-24).
Figure 6-22 	Aerial view of Madison, Wisconsin’s Downtown, situated on the isthmus between Lake Mendota and Lake
Monona. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	191

-- 209 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Mansion Hill is located on a high ridge between the Capitol and Lake Mendota (Figure 6-25). Another
prominent hill adjacent to the planning area was chosen for the University of Wisconsin’s most important
building, Bascom Hall. The campus, with direct access to Lake Mendota, is a catalyst for Downtown redevel-
opment and an amenity providing cultural, educational, and recreational experiences (Figure 6-26).
In addition to being the capital of Wisconsin, Madison is the largest community in the region and Downtown
is located at its center. Downtown is the place where residents of the greater Madison region come together.
Madison’s near east and near west sides are home to strong residential neighborhoods, important community
Figure 6-23 	Prominent views and vistas of the natural and built environments. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
192 	Site Analysis

-- 210 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
institutions, bustling retail districts, and other successful businesses (Figure 6-27). These near-Downtown areas
benefit from their proximity to Downtown and have considerable potential for future development. Addi-
tionally, the Downtown—defined by a radial street network centered on the Capitol Building—has many
“flatiron” corners on which historic buildings sit (Figures 6-28 and 6-29). These areas will be fully integrated and
connected with the Downtown.
In addition to the natural and cultural resources that contribute to the city’s unique sense of place, there
are some challenges that impinge on the walkability and livability of the area. These include vehicle traffic
(Figure 6-30) and, in places, disconnected or substandard pedestrian infrastructure (Figure 6-31).
Figure 6-24 	Prominent hills contribute to the city's sense of place. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	193

-- 211 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
VISION
Downtown Madison will be a flourishing and visually exciting center for the arts, commerce, government,
and education. It will be a magnet for a diverse population working, living, visiting, and enjoying an urban
environment characterized by a sensitive blending of carefully preserved older structures, high-quality
new construction, architectural gems, and engaging public spaces—all working together and integrated
with surrounding neighborhoods, parks, and the transportation system to create a unique and sustainable
environment for the community, the region, and beyond (City of Madison Comprehensive Plan, 2006).
Figure 6-25 	Mansion Hill, listed on the National Register of Historic Districts. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
194 	Site Analysis

-- 212 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
The Downtown Plan articulates nine goals, or keys, for realizing the area’s vision for the future. Each key
contains multiple objectives and recommendations that provide a comprehensive and strategic framework for
the Downtown’s next 20 years.
Celebrate the Lakes
Strengthen the Region’s Economic Engine
Ensure a Quality Urban Environment
Maintain Strong Neighborhoods and Districts
Enhance Livability
Increase Transportation Choices
Figure 6-26 	The Terrace on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus is a major waterfront destination. Source: Jeff
Miller/University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	195

-- 213 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Build on Historic Resources
Expand Recreational, Cultural, and Entertainment Offerings
Become a Model of Sustainability
These goals cannot be realized without careful attention to physical planning and design. Consequently, the
implementation of Madison’s Downtown Plan will include a variety of improvements to the built environment
(Figures 6-32, 6-33, and 6-34).
Figure 6-27 	Primary arts, culture, and entertainment districts and destinations in Downtown Madison, Wisconsin. Source:
City of Madison, Wisconsin.
196 	Site Analysis

-- 214 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-28 	Triangle blocks and flatiron corners enhance the Downtown's sense of place. Source: City of Madison,
Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	197

-- 215 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-29 	Flatiron building, with commercial uses on the ground floor and residential uses above, at the corner of a
triangle block. Madison, Wisconsin. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
198 	Site Analysis

-- 216 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-30 	Streets with heavy vehicle traffic can impair walkability and community livability. Source: City of Madison,
Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	199

-- 217 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-31 	Enhancing livability often requires improvements in pedestrian infrastructure. Source: City of Madison,
Wisconsin.
200 	Site Analysis

-- 218 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-32 	Vision of an extended lakeshore path to increase public access to Lake Mendota, a natural amenity and
significant community resource. Source: City of Madison. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	201

-- 219 of 387 --

Case Study 6–1 	Downtown Planning (continued)
Figure 6-34 	Vision of improved public transit and intermodal linkages. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
Figure 6-33 	Vision of new higher-density, mixed-use infill and redevelopment. Source: City of Madison, Wisconsin.
202 	Site Analysis

-- 220 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. What are the cultural and historic factors that contribute to the character and sense of
place in your region? In your community? In your neighborhood?
2. What is your favorite place to spend a morning or afternoon in your community?
How is your choice influenced by the location and by the design of the place?
Assessing the Site’s Cultural and Historic Contexts 	203

-- 221 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	7
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis
Look and you will find it—what is unsought will go undetected.
—Sophocles
7.1 	INTRODUCTION
The human mind can comprehend the past and present, and speculate on the implications of
future actions (Ackoff, 1989) (Figure 7-1). In the site-planning process, information about
the past, present, and future is portrayed graphically. Graphic communication helps clients,
consultants, and other stakeholders understand—and participate in—the programming,
planning, and design process. Mapping, modeling, and other visualization techniques help to
communicate contextual conditions and propose design alternatives (Table 7-1).
Whether drawn by hand or with a computer, symbols are used alone and in combination
to convey information. Diagrams simplify reality and allow planners and designers to depict
relevant patterns and processes. Edward T. White (1983, p. 1) comments:
We designers are often more comfortable and skilled at drawing plans, elevations, sec-
tions, and perspectives than at diagramming project needs, issues, and requirements. We
sometimes seem overly anxious to draw the architectural answers to ill-defined project
questions and reluctant to invest in graphic techniques that help us better understand the
project needs and that stimulate responsive and creative design concepts.
Diagrams also can communicate desired relationships between existing and proposed off-
site and on-site elements. This is especially helpful in explaining to clients, colleagues, and
public sector reviewers why a design proposal is appropriate for the site.
204

-- 222 of 387 --

7.2 	ON-SITE DESIGN INFLUENCES
Site analysis goes well beyond mapping the site’s existing conditions. The site analysis is a
diagnostic process that identifies opportunities and constraints for specific land uses. The site
inventory provides the physical, biological, and cultural data for this program-driven analysis
(Figure 7-3).
Some locations on the site may be unsuitable for development because of intrinsic
physiographic constraints (Table 7-2). These constraints may include steep slopes, shallow
bedrock, surface water, and wetlands. Other parts of the site may be suitable for develop-
ment but are relatively inaccessible. Lack of access may be due to intervening site constraints
Figure 7-1 	Information, knowl-
edge, and wisdom are necessary in
shaping a sustainable future.
Source: Art by Tom Chalkley,
tomchalk.com.
TABLE 7-1 	Graphic communication enables context-sensitive site planning and design.
Communication
Purpose 	Site-Planning Phase 	Examples of Probative Questions That Focus Mapping and Diagramming
Description 	Site Inventory 	What is the ecological structure and function of the study area? For example:
How do the sun and prevailing winds move across the site?
Are there any significant trees or plant communities on the site?
Where are the site’s stormwater drainage patterns?
Diagnosis 	Site Analysis 	What are the site’s opportunities and constraints for implementing the project
program? For example:
Where are the potential site access points?
Can a new building be oriented to maximize solar collection?
Are there steep slopes that require stabilization?
Prescription 	Conceptual Design 	How can the new development make a positive contribution to the community?
For example:
Are there natural or cultural site features that can be protected and/or restored?
Can the site’s development maximize good views to off-site amenities?
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	205

-- 223 of 387 --

Figure 7-2 	The site inventory
produces mapped data on the
existing conditions of the site
and its surroundings.
TABLE 7-2 	Common physical, biological, and cultural attributes that can be mapped at
the site scale.
Domains 	Themes 	Attributes
Physical 	Soils 	Bearing capacity
Porosity
Stability
Erodibility
Fertility
Acidity (pH)
Topography 	Elevation
Slope
Aspect
Hydrology 	Surface drainage
Water chemistry (e.g., salinity nitrates or phosphates)
Depth-to-seasonal-water-table
Aquifer recharge areas
Seeps and springs
Geology 	Landforms
Seismic hazards
Depth-to-bedrock
206 	Site Analysis

-- 224 of 387 --

(Figure 7-3). Consequently, pockets of undevelopable land can render the original devel-
opment program unfeasible because of the prohibitive costs of extending roads and utilities
to isolated areas of the site. Gaining a better understanding of the site’s development lim-
itations is a common reason for revising the project’s program.
Design influences also include existing on-site features that are retained, undisturbed, in
the site plan. A steep wooded slope, for example, is a natural feature that contributes to the
site’s unique sense of place. Natural features can be viewed as development constraints that, if
disturbed, would have detrimental environmental or community impacts (Table 7-3). Yet,
these features also create opportunities to integrate green space—or green infrastructure—
into the site plan (Figure 7-4).
Ecological linkages between the site and the surrounding landscape can be strengthened
by protecting—and restoring—green infrastructure (United States Environmental Protec-
tion Agency, 2011). These multifunctional green spaces not only have significant ecological
value but can also provide recreational and educational opportunities, add aesthetic amenity,
and enhance property values.
Domains 	Themes 	Attributes
Climate 	Solar access
Winds (i.e., prevailing or winter)
Fog pockets
Biological 	Vegetation 	Plant communities
Specimen trees
Exotic invasive species
Wildlife Biodiversity 	Habitats for endangered or threatened species
Cultural 	Land Use 	Prior land use
Land use on adjoining properties
Legal 	Political boundaries
Land ownership
Land use regulations
Easements and deed restrictions
Utilities 	Sanitary sewer
Storm sewer
Electric
Gas
Water
Telecommunications
Circulation 	Street function (e.g., arterial or collector)
Traffic volume
Historic 	Buildings and landmarks
Archaeological sites
Sensory 	Visibility
Visual quality
Noise
Odors
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	207

-- 225 of 387 --

A landscape’s green or ecological infrastructure includes open water, wetlands, aquifer
recharge areas, steep topography, and unique landforms. These environmental resources,
typically comprising a network of patches and corridors, warrant protection (Lewis,
1996). Moreover, this green infrastructure—which provides a wide range of ecological
services—can also serve as a spatial framework for shaping future growth and redevel-
opment (Figure 7-5).
7.2.1 	Difficult Sites
Building in difficult locations requires more time and money before, during, and after
construction. Steep slopes, for example, are a significant constraint for many developed uses
Figure 7-3 	The site analysis
assesses the on-site and off-site
opportunities and constraints—
or design influences—for orga-
nizing a specific land use pro-
gram on the site.
TABLE 7-3 	Selected development constraints. Any location on a site could fall into one or more of these constraint
categories.
Constraint 	Examples
Ecological Infrastructure 	Aquifer recharge areas, wetlands, surface water, critical wildlife habitat
Health or Safety Hazards 	Floodplains, earthquake fault zones, areas susceptible to landslides
Physiographic Barriers 	Steep slopes, highly erodible soils, shallow bedrock
Natural Resources 	Prime farmland, sand and gravel deposits, specimen trees, scenic views
Historic Resources 	Historic buildings, archaeological sites
Legal Restrictions 	Zoning codes, subdivision ordinances, easements, deed restrictions
Nuisances 	Noises, odors, unsightly views
208 	Site Analysis

-- 226 of 387 --

(Figure 7-6). Building foundations constructed on steep slopes are more complex—stepping
down a hillside—and are, therefore, more expensive to design and build. In locations where
site drainage is poor or where the subsoil is unstable, additional effort is needed to ensure the
building’s structural integrity.
Building on difficult sites also increases the risks of development impacts both on-site and
off-site. Acquiring development permits for difficult sites is complicated, therefore, by the
potential impacts of the construction process as well as the postconstruction uses of the site.
Environmental impacts can include soil erosion, groundwater contamination, and the
degradation of critical wildlife habitat. Consequently, sites with significant physiographic
constraints may be economically—and politically—unfeasible to develop.
Figure 7-4 	Constraints and
opportunities may be on-site or off-
site attributes that shape land use
suitability patterns and influence
the spatial organization of program
elements on the site.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	209

-- 227 of 387 --

7.2.2 	Natural Hazards
Ignoring potential site hazards can lead to expensive—even deadly—disasters. Earthquakes,
hurricanes, and other natural hazards occur at infrequent intervals. The recurring nature of
these events suggests, however, that it is not a question of if, but when, an event will occur in
areas at risk. Earthquakes, for example, are dangerous geological hazards that impose shaking
forces on buildings, bridges, utility lines, and other structures. Risk can be mitigated through
innovative design and construction techniques (Dowrick, 1991; Erdey, 2007). Yet, when
the risk can be reduced significantly—for example, by not building in the most seismically
active area—this is clearly a prudent course of action.
Figure 7-5 	Ecological framework plan to protect environmental resources and shape new urban growth. Source: JJR SmithGroup.
SmithGroupJJR.
210 	Site Analysis

-- 228 of 387 --

Figure 7-6 	Site analysis
showing development con-
straints: drainage patterns, rid-
ges, and areas with slope
gradients greater than 20 per-
cent. This analysis also identifies
potential site access points to a
future industrial park in Onslow
County, North Carolina. Source:
Land Design. Used with
permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	211

-- 229 of 387 --

Natural hazards that may impact a site are often weather related. During periods of good
weather, the dangers may be absent, but the danger is greatest when relatively infrequent,
but severe, weather events do occur. Hurricanes, for example, are weather events with
significant land use planning implications. Hurricanes develop over water, so the risk they
pose is greatest in coastal communities. And because hurricanes are long-lasting storms, their
persistent rains can saturate soils and exacerbate the threat of local flooding. Advances in
building construction methods have reduced the risk of structural failures from storm wind
loads (Simiu and Miyata, 2006). But a hurricane’s main threat to life and property is storm
surge flooding (H. John Heinz Center for Science, Economics and the Environment, 2000).
Storm surges associated with hurricanes create walls of seawater that are at least several
feet (meters) above normal high-tide elevations. Development in low-lying areas is espe-
cially vulnerable to the devastating social and economic impacts of coastal flooding.
Moreover, the mean sea level is slowly rising and could rise up to (1 meter) over the next
century as the earth’s climate continues to change (Mileti, 1999).
Flooding is exacerbated in watersheds where building rooftops, streets and parking lots,
and other impervious land cover substantially reduce the capacity of the landscape to retain
and infiltrate stormwater. Managing the risks associated with climate change includes dis-
couraging development (and redevelopment) in high-risk areas (H. John Heinz Center for
Science, Economics and the Environment, 2002). It also includes increasing the capacity of
upland areas to infiltrate stormwater runoff.
7.3 	OFF-SITE DESIGN INFLUENCES
You can tell a lot about a city by looking.
—Jacobs (1985)
Off-site cultural and biophysical features can also influence the organization of the site
and the design of its new buildings and landscape. The number and location of entrances to
the site, for example, are determined, in part, by the transportation infrastructure just outside
the site’s boundaries. Adjoining streets and nearby transit stops, for example, may suggest
preferred locations for new site and building entrances. Corner sites at the intersection of
two major streets, for example, warrant special design treatment. A new building’s primary
entrance may be located at the corner, and the building facade that faces the intersection may
be rounded to “turn” the corner (Figure 7-7).
Land use regulations may also affect these decisions by limiting the number of vehicle
entrances, or “curb cuts,” to a site, imposing a minimum distance requirement between
vehicle entrances and nearby street intersections, and regulating the placement of new
buildings in relation to property lines and the public right-of-way. Views to prominent off-
site topographic features, trees, or water bodies also warrant context-responsive site planning
and design. Other major off-site design influences include local and regional architecture.
For example, prevalent building styles or materials may be “echoed” in new buildings and
site designs. An off-site landmark could also influence the siting of a new building to give the
building’s occupants a prominent view of the nearby landmark.
212 	Site Analysis

-- 230 of 387 --

Microclimate can vary dramatically over short distances in urban environments. Build-
ings, for example, can enclose outdoor areas and shelter these spaces from the wind. In
cooler climates, these pockets of calm air—especially if they receive direct sunlight—can
have much milder microclimates than nearby windy or shaded locations. These milder
microclimates provide opportunities to create meaningful outdoor open spaces.
Conversely, relatively harsh and uncomfortable microclimates also exist in urban areas.
Tall buildings and groups of buildings may channel winds to create turbulent windy areas. A
lack of exposure to sunshine can make these outdoor spaces substantially cooler than nearby
locations with greater exposure to the sun and protection from the wind. The site analysis
helps designers understand the site’s existing and, potentially, future microclimates.
7.3.1 	Placelessness
Landscape transformations—most significantly since the end of World War II—have
resulted from the interplay of many social, economic, and technological factors. Land use
changes have been influenced by the rise of the global economy and by public policies
affecting a range of activities, from transportation and economic development to school
siting (Ben-Joseph and Szold, 2005; Tiesdell and Adams, 2011). Construction methods and
materials also have become more internationally standardized, including in Europe (Scottish
Executive, 2003, p. 10):
Figure 7-7 	Context-sensitive
building design responds to
circulation patterns, such as
major pedestrian and vehicular
intersections. Washington, D.C.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	213

-- 231 of 387 --

Many suburban areas lack character, identity or variety. Too many new homes look as
if they could be anywhere. Thoughtlessly chosen standard housing types and inap-
propriate materials look disconcertingly out of place.”
Urban areas are complex social, economic, and ecological environments, and in this
context, site analyses must examine more than just physiographic conditions (Figure 7-8).
Contextual analysis can entail multiple lines of inquiry, including identifying neighborhood
and community spaces and determining what activities and symbolic values are associated
with those spaces. Analyses may also examine how—and why—people use, or avoid,
outdoor spaces. Postoccupancy evaluations of outdoor spaces are particularly useful in
designing urban sites (Cooper-Marcus and Francis, 1998).
The spatial and temporal qualities of places are particularly relevant to urban in-fill and
redevelopment projects. Jakle (1987, pp. 4–5) comments on the time and space dimensions
of place:
Certainly, places as behavioral settings have spatial context. They also, however, have
temporal dimensions because they open and close at set points in time and, thus,
function for set durations of time, often with cyclical regularity. They are occupied by
people (usually a limited range of types), by activities (usually a limited set of general
behaviors), and by a limited array of furnishings supportive of those behaviors.
Figure 7-8 	Site analysis showing prominent views, pedestrian–vehicle conflicts, cultural amenities, and a variety of other site and
contextual information. Source: Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
214 	Site Analysis

-- 232 of 387 --

To combat placelessness, careful attention must be given to creating meaningful open
spaces, to their spatial organization and connectivity, and to their furnishings. Pedestrian
circulation within, and surrounding, the site should be analyzed to identify opportunities
for creating entrance plazas and other pedestrian amenities. This analysis should also look for
problems such as the following:
Lack of walkway connectivity
Insufficient walkway capacity
Conflicts among vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians
Lack of street trees and other plantings
Insufficient or excessive outdoor lighting
Lack of site furniture
A comprehensive neighborhood revitalization program would view these problems as
potential opportunities to improve the neighborhood’s livability and sense of place.
The site’s boundary—or interface with adjoining properties and transportation infra-
structure—is a particularly important site-planning concern. The periphery or edge of the
site takes on greater importance when the site is small or linear in shape. Potential conflicts
can exist between on-site and off-site activities, and these must be addressed during the
analysis and conceptual design phases (Figure 7-9). Off-site conditions can include nuisances,
such as a busy highway, which impact the site with traffic noise, odors, and potential safety
Figure 7-9 	Diagram of waterfront districts in Cleveland, Ohio, and potential opportunities for coordinated planning and design.
Source: JJR SmithGroup. 	SmithGroupJJR.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	215

-- 233 of 387 --

risks. When conflicts do exist, programmed elements can be arranged to mitigate them. Uses
that are less sensitive to these nuisances, for example, can be sited closer to them than other,
more sensitive, uses. In either case, screening and buffering may be needed, but the selection
of screening materials—which can include walls, fences, berms, and/or vegetation—occurs
later in the design development process.
7.3.2 	Sense of Place
A site analysis focuses on more than just site constraints, although this alone is enough to
justify the effort. Amenities on-site and off-site may have significant social, economic,
ecological, or aesthetic value. These can include specimen trees or scenic views to natural
features such as water or landforms, landmark buildings, or other major cultural features
(Figures 7-10 and 7-11). Amenities also include unique rock outcrops and historic or cul-
turally significant buildings and structures (Table 7-4). These physical assets, if integrated
within a redevelopment plan, can maintain a site’s sense of place and enhance experiences for
future site users. Protecting natural and cultural amenities can also increase a property’s value
and make it a more desirable place to be.
Site opportunities include locations that are potentially usable for one or more project
objectives—whether they entail real estate development, environmental conservation or
restoration, or a combination of these purposes (Figure 7-12). Together, the site’s constraints
and opportunities delimit the area of the site that can accommodate the project program
(Figure 7-13). Like putting together a jigsaw puzzle, design solutions that fit the site often
elegantly capitalize on the site’s natural and cultural attributes, creating a unique sense of place.
A site’s biophysical and cultural context reflects local, community, and regional influ-
ences. Michael Hough (1990, p. 180) comments on the biophysical and cultural complexity
of regional context:
Regional identity is connected with the peculiar characteristics of a location. . . . It
has to do, therefore, with two fundamental criteria: first, with the natural processes of
the region or locality—what nature has put there; second, with social processes—what
people have put there.
Hough (1990, p. 186) continues:
The protection of natural and cultural history—the reuse and integration of the old
into the new without fanfare, while avoiding the temptation to turn everything into a
museum because it is old—lies at the heart of maintaining a continuing link with the
past and with a place’s identity.
Contemporary references to earlier design styles, construction methods, and materials
create linkages to the site’s cultural history and environmental character (Figure 7-14). A
contextual approach to site planning and design is a land use ethic that seeks to create
meaningful places that are also “good neighbors.” Buildings are constructed and sites are
developed in ways that are sensitively adapted to both the historical and contemporary
contexts (Figure 7-15).
216 	Site Analysis

-- 234 of 387 --

Figure 7-10 	Site analysis showing major transportation corridors, drainage patterns, and site high points. The ridges and hilltops,
which are clearly identified on the analysis, contribute to the site’s visual quality. Source: Land Design. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	217

-- 235 of 387 --

Figure 7-11 	Site analysis showing prominent views to a natural amenity (water). The analysis also identifies site high points and
potential harbor locations. Source: Land Design. Used with permission.
218 	Site Analysis

-- 236 of 387 --

Figure 7-12 	Aerial perspective site analysis identifying important contextual factors in shaping new development in a historic
village. Fenton, Missouri. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning group.
TABLE 7-4 	Selected amenities or resources that may exist on or
near a site and could warrant documentation in the site analysis.
Category 	Examples
Natural Resource 	Coastline
Ridgeline
Forest
Prime farmland
Sand and gravel deposits
Wetlands
Cultural Resource 	Historic building
Historic district
Public park or garden
Public library
Archaeological site
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	219

-- 237 of 387 --

Natural as well as built features give communities and neighborhoods unique identities.
Morrish and Brown (2000), in Planning to Stay, suggest that neighborhood character is a
product of the quality, accessibility, and convenience of the place. Character is derived from
the neighborhood’s location within the larger community, its mix and arrangement of land
uses, and the scale of its buildings, streets, and open spaces.
An important objective of the site analysis is to discover the special, interesting, and
valuable features on and near the site. These assets can range from unique natural areas to
culturally significant local places that—to someone unfamiliar with the neighborhood or
community—may be overlooked. Neighborhood character analyses may involve, therefore,
assessments of the following elements (Morrish and Brown, 2000):
Homes and gardens
Community streets
Neighborhood niches
Anchoring institutions
Figure 7-13 	Opportunities and constraints diagram to guide the expansion of a historic village. Fenton, Missouri. Source: The
HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
220 	Site Analysis

-- 238 of 387 --

A comprehensive photographic record of these character-defining elements can be arranged
on an image-board. This can serve as a reference during the design phases and as supporting
documentation during the permitting and approval process.
Other off-site design influences may include nearby prominent landmarks, including
iconic buildings, as well as the spaces linking these buildings. An analysis of a neighborhood’s
architectural context might document the styles and characteristic details of the neighbor-
hood’s better-designed buildings (Urban Design Associates, 2003). A religious building such
as a church or cathedral or a well-designed school or library could, therefore, influence the
siting and design of new buildings, nearby.
The Capitol District in Washington, D.C., for example, is replete with historic buildings
and national monuments that are located in a clearly organized geometric configuration
(Newton, 1971). L’Enfant’s eighteenth-century plan for the nation’s capital established axial
relationships between prominent landmarks, creating interlocking open spaces that to this
day form a visibly cohesive urban milieu. The “shaft of space,” visually linking prominent
buildings and other cultural elements, is a classic organizational device in context-sensitive
Figure 7-14 	Composite set of site inventory and analysis maps in Lavasa, India. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with
permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	221

-- 239 of 387 --

urban design (Bacon, 1974, pp. 70–71). In Design of Cities, Edmund Bacon explains the
historic use of this technique in shaping the urban environment.
7.4 	LAND USE SUITABILITY ANALYSIS
In Design with Nature, McHarg (1969) argued that environmental conditions should prin-
cipally inform land use planning decisions. McHarg’s book brought map overlays and
suitability analysis to the attention of many land planners and environmental scientists. Since
the time of McHarg’s seminal contributions to the field, GIS hardware and software have
been dramatically improved, making suitability analysis feasible for site planning at any scale.
Suitability analysis is “the process of determining the fitness, or the appropriateness, of a
given tract of land for a specified use” (Steiner, 1991, p. 132). Suitability analysis is spatially
Figure 7-15 	The master plan protects existing forests and drainageways, fits new development into the resulting spaces, and
restores degraded riparian vegetation. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
222 	Site Analysis

-- 240 of 387 --

explicit and program dependent. And because land development can create significant off-
site impacts that impose economic and social costs on others, context-sensitive site planning
seeks to minimize these detrimental impacts, or externalities.
Site suitability, therefore, is a function of the site’s intended uses. Consider a partially
wooded and hilly site along a small stream. Several site attributes could be mapped, but not
all of these attributes will be relevant to the program under consideration. The site attributes
most relevant to a proposed nature conservancy, for example, would differ from the site
attributes most relevant to a proposed multifamily housing development. The analysis for the
nature conservancy project would place a high priority on identifying the site’s plant
communities and wildlife habitats—from dry upland forested slopes to lowland marshes and
bogs. In contrast, the analysis for the housing project would place a high priority on
identifying areas without significant building constraints, which include steep slopes, shallow
bedrock, and a shallow water table.
Rather than using brute force engineering to overcome the intrinsic difficulties that some
sites pose for development, many unsuitable locations should simply remain undeveloped.
Refraining from developing in unique natural areas can be justified from an ecological and
ethical perspective, and often can also be supported from an economic perspective. Pro-
tecting and integrating this green infrastructure into the built environment can, when done
well, increase community livability and property values while also reducing public expen-
ditures for “big pipe” stormwater management infrastructure (Figure 7-16).
Residential subdivision design, therefore, involves much more than the efficient layout of
lots, streets and utilities. Typically, the most profitable—and aesthetically pleasing—plan is
one that takes advantage of the natural features on-site and off-site and makes these features
neighborhood focal points (Peiser, 1992, p. 71). Developing “with nature” is also a fiscally
Figure 7-16 	A brute force engineering approach to conveying urban stormwater runoff as quickly as possible to the nearest
detention pond—or worse—to a wetland, river, or other water body.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	223

-- 241 of 387 --

prudent approach for the municipalities in which the development occurs. Development
that respects inherent environmental constraints, especially natural hazards, helps to protect
public health, safety, and welfare. This development paradigm also celebrates each site’s
unique sense of place.
On relatively large sites, especially where built elements will cover a small fraction of the
parcel’s surface area, suitability analysis is an important step in the land planning process.
Typically, this means assessing the site’s suitability for development, which involves the
construction of roads and buildings. In rural areas without municipal services, development
suitability may also depend on the soil’s capacity to accommodate on-site wastewater
treatment systems or support special agricultural uses, such as orchards and vineyards (see
Case Study 7-1). Sites that are most suitable for agricultural use require fewer management
inputs. Locations with prime soils, for example, require comparatively less irrigation, less
fertilizers and pesticides, and less effort and expense devoted to erosion control.
A land use suitability analysis involves the following steps:
1. Identify the suitability criteria for each anticipated land use.
2. Inventory and map the relevant site attribute data.
3. Identify and map the locations with attribute values that meet the suitability criteria
for the targeted land uses.
Before beginning a suitability analysis, both the availability and reliability of the required
data should be considered (Anderson, 1980; Pease and Sussman, 1994). For example, do the
data exist at the needed scale and can they be affordably acquired? Are the data current, and
do they pertain to the suitability criteria for the proposed uses?
A suitability analysis may assess several cultural and biophysical attributes. If the analysis is
conducted within a GIS, with attribute maps in digital form, then suitability maps can be
easily generated for each proposed land use. These maps can then be combined to create—
on a single map—a synoptic suitability analysis for the proposed project.
7.4.1 	Single-Attribute Analysis
Data Partitioning
A GIS database consists not only of maps, but also of data tables that are linked to the points,
lines, and polygons on the maps (Chrisman, 1997). Location and attribute information for
each map unit is stored as tabular data. The analysis of an individual attribute layer involves
partitioning the spatial distribution of these attribute values. The primary objective usually is
to find the locations that are either greater than a specified minimum, less than a specified
maximum, or within a specified range. These conditions create suitable—or unsuitable—
places for one or more components of the proposed program.
A map showing the site’s range of slope percentages (for example, 0–5 percent or 5–10
percent) is an example of spatial partitioning. This slope map is useful because some land uses
are better suited for gentle slopes, and other uses are better suited for steeper slopes. In gently
rolling to nearly level terrain, existing slopes may have little effect on land planning and site
design decisions. In steeper terrain, however, elevation, slope, and aspect influence the site’s
hydrology, visual quality, and plant and animal distributions (Figures 7-17, 7-18, and 7-19).
224 	Site Analysis

-- 242 of 387 --

Figure 7-17 	Site analysis identifying major land use determinants and proposed nature preservation zones in Bahia Balandra,
Mexico. Topography has a strong influence on the landscape’s hydrology, ecology, and visual quality. Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	225

-- 243 of 387 --

Figure 7-18 	Three-dimensional concept diagram and analysis showing how the programmed uses will be adapted to the unique
conditions of the site and its context. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Figure 7-19 	Concept diagram and analysis adapts the programmed uses to the site and its surroundings. Source: The HOK
Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK Planning Group.
226 	Site Analysis

-- 244 of 387 --

Spatial Buffering
Spatial buffering, or proximity analysis, identifies locations within a specified distance of one
or more reference features. The resulting areas are either buffers or setbacks; the primary
difference between a buffer and a setback is the direction (outward or inward) from the
reference feature (Figure 7-20).
Buffer analysis is used to identify locations requiring protection from development or
locations posing significant risks to human life and property. These include:
Natural resources (for example, streams, wellheads, wetlands, habitats of endangered
or threatened species)
Cultural resources requiring protection from development (for example, historic
buildings and districts)
Natural hazards (for example, coastal storm surges, landslides).
Buffer analyses can identify potential components of a green infrastructure system.
Maintaining adequate plant cover within riparian areas and other buffer zones can signifi-
cantly limit erosion, sedimentation, and pollution of aquatic ecosystems by filtering
stormwater surface runoff. Riparian buffers can also protect important terrestrial habitats and
climate adaptive migration corridors.
Figure 7-20 	Diagram of buffers
and setbacks within a GIS. Source:
Exploring Geographical Information
Systems by N. Chrisman. Copyright
1997 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Reprinted by permission of John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	227

-- 245 of 387 --

7.4.2 	Multiple-Attribute Analysis
Although complex spatial analyses are possible with a digital GIS, a small number of ana-
lytical functions are most useful for site-planning purposes. A site suitability analysis typically
involves overlaying two or more attribute layers (Figure 7-21). The intersection and union
analyses are two of the most common and useful algebraic functions performed on attribute
layers. For a comprehensive review of these GIS overlay operations, see Chrisman (1997).
Union
The union of two sets of numbers yields a third set that contains each unique number in the
two original sets as follows:
1, 3 	2, 3 	1, 2, 3
The union function in a GIS identifies locations where one or more of the specified attri-
butes occur. For example, the analyst might want to identify all areas that pose severe
constraints for excavation and the construction of building foundations. Attributes that could
hinder excavation or construction include shallow depth-to-water-table and shallow depth-
to-bedrock. An overlay analysis, using the union function, could identify all site areas that
meet either one or both of these conditions.
Intersection
The intersection of two sets of numbers yields a third set of numbers that are common to
both original sets as follows:
1, 3 	2, 3 	3
Figure 7-21 	Overlay analysis
using a linear combination
approach. Source: Exploring
Geographical Information
Systems by N. Chrisman.
Copyright 	1997 by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
228 	Site Analysis

-- 246 of 387 --

This intersection function enables an overlay analysis to identify locations where two or
more attribute conditions overlap or are spatially coincident. An intersection of two or more
attribute layers could yield, for example, site locations with slope gradients of less than 8
percent and subsurface conditions suitable for the excavation of building foundations.
Caution
A GIS is a powerful tool for spatially analyzing a site’s physical, biological, and cultural
attributes. Yet, a GIS is capable of easily comparing “apples and oranges”—even when these
comparisons can lead to erroneous conclusions (Chrisman, 1997; Hopkins, 1977).
Weighting schemes are frequently used to assign priority values to key site attributes. And
although it is mathematically possible to weight each attribute and arrive at an algebraic sum,
the significance of the values may be questionable.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Land Evaluation and Site Assessment (LESA)
decision-support system helps local and state governments protect prime and other locally
important farmland from development (Steiner et al., 1994). The LESA system has been
used to determine the boundaries of agricultural zoning districts, identify farms that are
eligible for purchase of development rights (PDR) or transfer of development rights (TDR),
and for other land use policy objectives (Malloy and Pressley, 1994, pp. 262–273).
One criticism of the LESA system, as it was implemented in the early 1990s, is that it
conflated two disparate policy issues within one aggregate index (Pease and Sussman, 1994,
pp. 94–105). The LESA index attempted to assess agricultural productivity as well as
potential for development. These two disparate land uses should have been evaluated sep-
arately. Another criticism was data redundancy, because the suitability analysis was dispro-
portionately influenced by individual land use constraints that were represented by multiple
data themes (Pease and Sussman, 1994, pp. 94–105). The greatest challenge in using
weighting schemes is to identify weights that can be justified empirically. For example, a site
analyst may consider visual quality, slope gradients, and soil stability to be the most important
variables in assessing a particular site’s suitability for residential development. But how
much weight should be placed on each variable? One could assign, for example, a 15 percent
weight to visual quality, a 25 percent weight to soil stability, and a 60 percent weight to slope
gradient. These are not trivial decisions; weighting choices can dramatically affect the
conclusions of the analysis.
7.5 	SUITABILITY AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION
The State Growth Management Act, passed in Washington State in 1990, requires local
municipalities to adopt critical areas ordinances that protect wetlands, aquifer recharge areas
(for potable water sources), fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded
areas, and geologically hazardous areas (Marks, 1997). The Environmentally Critical Areas
Policies for Seattle states (Marks, 1997, pp. 230–231):
The Critical Areas Ordinance should allow land to be developed in accordance with
the constraints and opportunities provided by the land itself. All land is not the same.
If a person purchases a parcel that is 80 percent wetland, it is significantly different than
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	229

-- 247 of 387 --

other types of property. The same is true with areas subject to either landslides or
floods. If the owner purchased property that contained a wetland, a landslide area, or a
flood plain, the Critical Areas Ordinance should recognize that the reasonable
development potential of such properties is less than the reasonable potential of
unconstrained sites. The ordinance should permit development that makes use of a
site’s natural opportunities and that recognizes its natural constraints.
Hazard maps and resource inventories created by state and federal governments are not
intended to support detailed site planning, and Seattle’s development regulations recognize
these data limitations. The city’s development controls are linked to the actual site conditions
(Table 7-5) rather than to constraint maps, as indicated in the following excerpt:
When specific actions are proposed in or adjacent to mapped critical areas, more
detailed review may be required. Projects located within a mapped area could be
exempted from the regulations, if the applicant can demonstrate that the site does not,
in fact, meet the definition of the critical area. Conversely, developments outside of
the mapped area could be covered by the regulations, if it is shown that the site does,
in fact, meet the definition (Marks, 1997, p. 231).
Also taking a context-responsive approach to regulating land development, a model
ordinance for traditional neighborhood development (TND) includes explicit criteria for
TABLE 7-5 	Criteria for defining and mapping environmentally critical areas in Seattle, Washington.
Critical Area 	Attributes
Landslide Hazards 	Known landslide areas
Slopes greater than 15 percent with specified geologic conditions
Slopes greater than 40 percent
Previously altered slopes greater than 40 percent
Liquefaction Hazards 	Identified by the U.S. Geologic Survey
Flood Hazards 	Areas on FEMA flood insurance maps
Abandoned Solid Waste Landfills 	Sites listed by the State Health Department
Areas within 1000 feet (304.8 meters) of methane-producing landfills
Sites identified by public or historical research
Toxic Disposal Sites 	Sites listed by the State Health Department
Sites discovered by historical research, site sampling, or during project review
Steep Slopes 	Areas with a slope of over 40 percent
Riparian Corridors 	Class A riparian corridors of year-round or salmonid water bodies
Class B Intermittent streams without salmonids
Buffers 100 feet from a water body or a 100-year floodplain (whichever is greater)
Wetlands 	U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service inventory
Areas that support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for saturated soil
Fish and Wildlife Habitat 	Priority species habitat (identified by the State Department of Wildlife)
All water bodies providing migration corridors and habitat for fish, especially salmonids
Source: Adapted, in part, from Marks (1997, Table 18.1).
230 	Site Analysis

-- 248 of 387 --

determining a site’s allowed capacity for new housing development (Arendt, 1999). Several
constraint categories, each with a different ratio, are used to compute the number of
dwelling units permitted on the developable areas of the site (Table 7-6). The area of land in
each constraint category is multiplied by that constraint’s development ratio and these values
are summed (Arendt, 1999). This number (total adjusted tract acreage) is then multiplied by
the dwelling density that is allowed in the zoning district. This results in the total number of
permitted dwellings (absent density bonuses) that can be built on the developable portions
of the site.
A qualitative approach to assessing development suitability is also possible. Nelesson
(1994), for example, categorizes constraints into three levels: highest, severe, and
moderate. Unlike some other approaches, which focus only on the site’s physiographic
limitations, Nelesson (1994, pp. 116–117) considers development opportunities as well as
constraints. These opportunities may be biophysical or cultural factors that potentially
enhance the success of the project from a social, economic, and/or environmental
perspective (Table 7-7).
A suitability analysis can be narrowly focused to evaluate locations for specific site
uses or activities (Figure 7-22). For example, most land development projects require
one or more vehicle entrances to the site. Site factors that could influence the entrance
location decision include the vertical and horizontal alignment of adjacent roads, site
amenities such as significant trees or landforms, and views from the site to the sur-
rounding landscape. Consequently, the suitability of potential entrance locations can be
analyzed, ranked, and mapped.
TABLE 7-6 	Constraints and ratios for calculating allowable total development that is transferred to the unconstrained
portions of the site.
Ratio 	Site Constraint
0.00 	Street rights-of-way
Floodways within a 100-year floodplain
0.05 	Wetlands and “very poorly drained” soils
Bedrock at the surface
Rock outcrops and boulder fields
Utility easements for high-tension electrical transmission lines (greater than 69 kilovolts)
0.25 	Slopes with a gradient greater than 25 percent
0.33 	“Poorly drained” soils (in unsewered areas)
Bedrock within 42 inches (1.1 meters) of the surface (in unsewered areas)
0.50 	100-year floodplains (excluding floodways or wetlands within floodplains)
Bedrock within 36 inches (0.9 meters) of the surface (in unsewered areas)
0.75 	“Poorly drained” soils (in sewered areas)
Bedrock within 42 inches (1.1. meters) of the surface (in sewered areas)
Slopes with gradients between 15 and 25 percent
1.00 	Unconstrained land
Source: Adapted, in part, from Arendt (1999, p. 100, Table III.B.2.1).
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	231

-- 249 of 387 --

Suitability for a given land use can vary substantially with regional differences in climatic
conditions. For example, maximum feasible slope gradients for housing development will
vary with soil and geologic conditions and climate. Locations with subfreezing winter
temperatures are much more limiting because of the dangers that icy conditions create for
pedestrians and vehicles. The steep street gradients in San Francisco, California, for example,
would be impractical in a city with snowstorms and freezing winter temperatures. San
Francisco’s street system—primarily a grid configuration imposed on a hilly landscape—has
many street gradients between 20 and 30 percent. In many other cities, maximum street
gradients are typically 12 percent or less.
7.6 	CONCLUSION
Land development can result, both during and after construction, in externalities that
degrade the environment and impose substantial economic and social costs on others. Informed
by careful site and contextual analysis, however, new development can be designed to min-
imize these adverse impacts on the environment and the community. Development-
shaping site constraints can be shown diagrammatically on both the site analysis and
concept plan.
Each site presents a unique combination of physical, biological, and cultural conditions
that preclude a “one-size-fits-all” approach to its planning and design. Development suit-
ability depends on the site’s opportunities and constraints for the specific land use program
under consideration. Favorable site locations have attributes that are either essential for the
programmed uses or enable access to areas well-suited for these uses. Unfavorable locations
prevent these uses from occurring, or increase the difficulty or cost of siting the uses there.
TABLE 7-7 	Selected development opportunities. Both natural and cultural factors can
influence a site’s suitability for development.
Feature
Examples of Potential Design
Opportunities
Open Water 	Visual amenity
Recreation and spiritual benefits
Prime Agricultural Soils (in an Active
Farming Community)
Visual amenity
Local food production
Mature Vegetation 	Visual amenity
Microclimate amelioration
Reduced building heating and cooling
costs
Ridges and Other Topographic Features 	Visual amenity
Common open space for recreation
232 	Site Analysis

-- 250 of 387 --

Figure 7-22 	Composite site analysis/development suitability map for the restoration of one stretch of the formerly channelized
Kissimmee River in central Florida. The project area, analyzed with a GIS, is divided by intensity of future recreational uses. Source:
Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	233

-- 251 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation
S OUTH L IVERMORE VALLEY
CALIFORNIA
LAND PLANNING : WALLACE , ROBERTS & T ODD , LLC, SAN F RANCISCO
ARCHITECTURE : TURNBULL GRIFFIN H AESLOOP A RCHITECTS , S AN FRANCISCO
BACKGROUND
South Livermore Valley is located in California’s rolling hills of Alameda County (Figure 7-23). This has been a
grape-growing and wine-producing area since the 1880s. As in other communities across North America, relatively
recent rural residential development began to significantly change this pastoral landscape. Conventional zoning
codes and subdivision ordinances were unable to protect the valley’s rural character and viticulture industry. A
participatory planning process, supported by a comprehensive analysis of the valley’s biophysical and cultural
conditions, informed a more sustainable approach for guiding new growth and development within the valley.
PLANNING PROCESS
An advisory committee was formed, consisting of concerned citizens and representatives from local munici-
palities. The 4-year consensus-building planning process, which began in 1987, ultimately resulted in the South
Figure 7-23 	The visual character of this California landscape is defined by hills and vineyards. Source: Wallace Roberts &
Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
234 	Site Analysis

-- 252 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Livermore Valley Specific Plan (City of Livermore, 1999). This plan set the framework for development in a
14,000-acre (5600-hectare) area. The two major goals of the plan are to reinforce and rejuvenate the valley’s
wine-producing industry (Figure 7-24) and to preserve the area’s rural character (Figure 7-25). Design guidelines,
based on historic regional precedents, have helped shape recent development patterns and building forms,
which differ markedly from those of the typical suburban tract development in the area. The newer context-
sensitive development reinforces the valley’s rural and historic character while forging a distinctive new identity
for the area’s future (Figure 7-26).
PLAN AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION
Three strategies were adopted to accomplish the community’s goals.
1. Specific Plan. This land use plan targets new growth within seven distinct and noncontiguous subareas
along 6 miles (9.7 kilometers) of Livermore’s southern border (Figures 7-27 and 7-28). The total area allo-
cated for new development is about 1500 acres (600 hectares), or about 1/10th of the entire planning area.
Constraint maps and program-sensitive site analyses helped the planning team determine the preferred
character and location of all new development (Figures 7-29 and 7-30).
A “specific plan” in the state of California is a planning and regulatory tool to implement a city or county
general plan through policies, programs, and regulations (Governor’s Office of Planning and Research,
Figure 7-24 	Development under the plan permanently protects agricultural land and funds new vineyard and orchard
plantings. Source: Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	235

-- 253 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
2001). In the case of Livermore, the specific plan provides a fine-grained response to questions about how,
where, and what development can take place. It includes detailed design guidelines to ensure consistency
with the community’s desired character—and to establish the means by which agricultural and natural
resources are conserved.
2. Incentives. The plan creates a density bonus to encourage compact development while protecting and
enhancing the valley’s agricultural operations. One new residential unit is allowed for each 100 acres (40
hectares), but four additional residential units are allowed if 90 percent of the 100 acres is legally protected
in perpetuity with agricultural easements, and these 90 acres (36 hectares) are planted with orchards or
vineyards. Unlike some other agricultural operations, orchards and vineyards can be economically viable in
relatively small areas.
3. Implementation. A nonprofit land trust, funded through development fees ($10,000 per unit), manages the
agricultural easements required by the plan. The land trust also buys additional easements to help achieve
the plan’s agricultural preservation goals.
Figure 7-25 	Conservation easements protect 425 acres (172.0 hectares) of open space. The Transfer of Development
Rights (TDR) program permanently protects this scenic and environmentally diverse area as regional parkland. Source: Wallace
Roberts & Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
236 	Site Analysis

-- 254 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-26 	Protected vineyards are a unique visual amenity enhancing the community entrances. Source: Wallace Roberts
& Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	237

-- 255 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-27 	Community trails plan showing the seven development subareas targeted for new development. Source:
Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
238 	Site Analysis

-- 256 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-28 	The plan contributed 6.5 miles (10.5 kilometers) of new multiuse trails, extending the length of the valley,
connecting new neighborhoods and creating recreational infrastructure for the broader community. Source: Wallace Roberts
& Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	239

-- 257 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-29 	Site analysis for one of the seven subareas for new development. Source: Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC. Used
with permission.
240 	Site Analysis

-- 258 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
DESIGN FEATURES
The plan limits the visual impact of new development on the valley’s rural, agricultural character. The plan also
maximizes open space amenities, including an extensive hiking trail network, which has benefited community
residents as well as visitors. Design guidelines ensure that conforming development patterns, details, and
materials enhance the valley’s historic wine country character (Figure 7-31). The new development has narrow
tree-lined streets with drainage swales (rather than curbs and gutters), short blocks, and traditional architectural
styles (Figure 7-32).
IMPLEMENTATION
Productive agricultural open space helps to define the visual character of new neighborhoods in South Liver-
more Valley. The community’s development mitigation program requires not only conservation easements to
protect agricultural land, but also new viticultural plantings. Bonding of those plantings, for 8 years, ensures
that the crops are established and properly maintained.
The South Livermore Valley Specific Plan received the 2006 National Award for Outstanding Implementation
from the American Planning Association (APA).
Figure 7-30 	Design guidelines for the development of a future commercial site. Source: Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC.
Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	241

-- 259 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-31 	Design guidelines and illustrations showing examples of desired building massing and facade articulation.
Source: Turnbull Griffin Haesloop Architects. Used with permission.
242 	Site Analysis

-- 260 of 387 --

Case Study 7–1 	Community Planning and Farmland Preservation (continued)
Figure 7-32 	Completed homes designed to conform with the plan’s guidelines for architectural massing and facade
articulation. Source: Wallace Roberts & Todd, LLC. Used with permission.
Integration, Synthesis, and Analysis 	243

-- 261 of 387 --

QUESTIONS
1. Give an example or two of how a site constraint can also be a site opportunity.
2. What are some examples of site constraints that are the basis for land development
regulation in your community?
244 	Site Analysis

-- 262 of 387 --

p a r t 	I I I
Design and
Implementation
This final section of the book has two chapters that focus on context-sensitive site planning’s
form-giving phases. Chapter 8, “Conceptual Design,” concerns the spatial organization of
open spaces, circulation networks, and buildings. Chapter 9, “Design Development,”
addresses the articulation—or detailed design—of these key elements, as well as the process
for public sector review and evaluation of land development and redevelopment proposals.
245

-- 263 of 387 --



-- 264 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	8
Conceptual Site Design
Make no little plans; they have no magic to stir men’s blood and probably themselves will
not be realized. Make big plans; aim high in hope and work, remembering that a noble,
logical diagram once recorded will never die, but long after we are gone will be a living
thing, asserting itself with ever-growing consistency.
—Burnham (1893)
8.1 	INTRODUCTION
Design theory is a set of guiding principles and strategies for shaping the built environment.
Design theory addresses the decision-making process (for example, in site planning, conduct
the site analysis before embarking on conceptual design). And design theory also addresses
rules of thumb for spatially organizing program components and articulating those com-
ponents through more detailed context-sensitive design. These design principles are based
on a continually evolving body of knowledge informed by history, the arts, and the sciences.
The effective application of design theory, in site planning and architectural design, requires
creative problem solving—which, fortunately, can be fostered through education and
experience.
8.2 	CONTEXT-SENSITIVE DESIGN
Design with nature; design with culture; design for people.
This simple statement captures the essence of context-sensitive site planning. Respon-
siveness to on-site and off-site contexts takes into consideration a potentially complex set of
existing physical, biological, cultural, and legal conditions. Conceptual site design flows
247

-- 265 of 387 --

directly from the site analysis, which typically reveals biophysical, cultural, and regulatory
conditions that limit the number of feasible design alternatives (Figure 8-1).
Sites that have few, if any, significant biophysical or cultural constraints are often the most
challenging to design. The absence of significant constraints allows for a much wider range of
feasible options for organizing activities and designing structures on the site. The lack of site
character also makes it more challenging to create a unique sense of place. High-quality
building and site design can, however, create great places that—as on-site trees grow and
mature—become even better over time.
In contrast, significant natural or cultural features on or near a site have the potential to
inspire context-sensitive plans that fit the site. A site with a large, picturesque specimen tree,
for example, limits options for site development to locations that will protect the tree.
Another example is a stream on the site that restricts building options to higher elevations
Figure 8-1 	Conceptual design considers program, community goals, and site and contextual
conditions.
248 	Site Analysis

-- 266 of 387 --

that are not prone to flooding and, if developed, not likely to degrade the stream’s aquatic
and riparian habitats. In both scenarios, “designing with nature” produces context-sensitive
site plans that incorporate—rather than destroy—natural and cultural amenities.
Context-sensitive design responds creatively to the site’s existing conditions, rather than
forcing on the site generic predesigned templates for buildings, parking lots, and other
common site elements. Conditions that shape, or inform, the development of context-
sensitive site plans include both on-site (intrinsic) and off-site (extrinsic) factors. These design
influences, or determinants, provide the basis for organizing and articulating a project’s
program elements on the selected site.
The project’s objectives—or program—determine what is designed on the site (see
Chapter 2). These objectives range from private sector real estate development to public
sector nature conservation and restoration. On projects involving new buildings, the client
may have preferences regarding architectural style and surface finishes. On some projects, the
future users of the site may also play a significant role in influencing the site’s design. This is
particularly common with public sector projects, such as parks, libraries, and schools.
8.3 	DESIGN CREATIVITY
Problem solving is integral to the site-planning and design process. Site selection, for
example, is largely an optimization problem aimed at finding an available site that can best
satisfy the project’s objectives. Once a site is selected, identifying its constraints and
opportunities is an effort to understand the “puzzle” that the site poses for the program under
consideration. Solutions to this puzzle are sought during the conceptual design phase and, in
more detail, through subsequent design development. Donald Schoen, in Educating the
Reflective Practitioner, writes (1987, p. 42):
Designers juggle variables, reconcile conflicting values, and maneuver around con-
straints—a process in which, although some design products may be superior to
others, there are no unique, right answers.
Creative problem solving, as summarized by Kvashny (1982, p. 107), involves the pursuit
of five things: facts, problems, ideas, solutions, and acceptance (of the solutions). Each of
these is evident in the site-planning and design process. The programming and site inventory
phases, for example, involve fact finding. The site analysis assesses the site’s suitability for a
specific project program or set of objectives. This assessment identifies “problems” (con-
straints) and “ideas” (opportunities). Conceptual design and subsequent design refinement
generate “solutions” that seek to avoid or, in some cases, overcome the site’s constraints and
capitalize on the site’s opportunities. These solutions are communicated, evaluated, and—if
accepted by key stakeholders—approved and implemented.
An acceptable site plan meets the project objectives—as defined not only by the client,
but also by the community in which the site is located. Community goals are typically
expressed through comprehensive plans, zoning codes, and development review standards
and practices.
Site planning and design, therefore, involve judgments of relevance (for example, what
site data to collect) and of spatial relationships (for example, how the site would affect
Conceptual Site Design 	249

-- 267 of 387 --

a potential program activity). Site planning also involves acts of creating (for example,
arranging different land uses) and assessing the implications of those decisions (for exam-
ple, anticipating the design’s effects on pedestrians’ access, comfort, and safety).
Good design, according to Richard Seymour (Lawson, 2006, p.154), results from “the
unexpectedly relevant solution, not wackiness parading as originality.” In How Designers
Think, Brian Lawson (2006, p. 153) elaborates on the important distinction in design
between “originality” and “creativity” as follows:
In the competitive and sometimes rather commercial world of design, the novel and
startlingly different can sometimes stand out and be acclaimed purely for that reason.
But being creative in design is not purely or even necessarily a matter of being
original.
Robert Venturi, the noted architect, echoes this sentiment by commenting that—for a
designer—“it is better to be good than to be original” (Lawson, 2006, p. 154).
Creative designers find contextually appropriate—and sometimes even elegant—solu-
tions to design challenges. Again, Donald Schoen, writes (1987, p. 41):
Designing in its broader sense involves complexity and synthesis. In contrast to
analysts or critics, designers put things together and bring new things into being,
dealing in the process with many variables and constraints, some initially known and
some discovered through designing.
Fortunately, the ability to create appropriate design solutions can be nurtured. And one of
the best ways to become a better designer is to develop and refine one’s “design vocabulary.”
For decades, North American architects and landscape architects have traveled abroad to
enrich their understanding of urban design and to supplement their formal design training
(Fabos et al., 1968; Schulze, 1994). Relatively high population densities, long periods of
intensive urban refinement, and a strong public policy interest in urban design make
European cities living laboratories for architects, landscape architects, and urban designers
(Nivola, 1999). European cathedrals, plazas, parks, and waterfronts continue to be among
the special places sought out by foreign-educated designers.
The process of developing one’s design vocabulary is enhanced by careful observation—
often by keeping a sketchbook of notes and drawings, including perspective sketches, sec-
tions, elevations, and design details. Perhaps the most important reason to keep a sketch-
book, at least early in one’s design training, is that it fosters critical analysis—or the ability to
“read” the built environment. Once this skill is acquired, every built environment—elegant
or mundane—can be assessed with a discerning eye.
A comprehensive knowledge of design theory—its principles and varied forms of
expression, regardless of style—can be developed by critically analyzing relevant precedents.
Design precedents include both natural and built environments. Halprin’s studies of
waterfalls in California’s Sierra Nevada Mountains informed his designs of Portland’s public
fountains (Halprin, 1972). Precedent studies of the built environment, ranging from formal
postoccupancy evaluations to brief, informal meanderings through an unfamiliar city, crit-
ically examine the ways that places have been designed for specific purposes and in response
250 	Site Analysis

-- 268 of 387 --

to unique contextual conditions. Examples of great design—as well as spectacular design
failures—yield lessons that can strengthen the designer’s “toolkit” and capacity to develop
context-sensitive design solutions. Kneller (1965, p. 49) writes:
One of the paradoxes of creativity is that . . . we must familiarize ourselves with the
ideas of others. These ideas can then form a springboard from which the creator’s ideas
can be launched.
Many good designers, even seasoned practitioners, are lifelong students of design. They
inquisitively observe the built environment, continually assessing what works and what does
not work—and mentally filing that information away for future reference. Hertzberger
(1991, p. 5) comments on this informal professional development process:
Everything that is absorbed and registered in your mind adds to the collection of ideas
stored in the memory: a sort of library that you can consult whenever a problem arises.
So—essentially—the more you have seen, experienced, and absorbed, the more
points of reference you will have to help you decide which direction to take: your
frame of reference expands.
8.4 	CONCEPTUAL DESIGN PROCESS
The decisions concerning what goes where on the site (i.e., conceptual design) occur in
incremental steps. The conceptual design phase is the time to explore, evaluate, and compare
alternative spatial configurations. Adaptation and revision are inherent in fitting the devel-
opment program to the site. The concept diagram spatially arranges, on the site, the pro-
gram’s major components. The design process then moves to the more detailed design
decisions concerning material selection and surface articulation (Figure 8-2). This approach
to site planning is efficient, effective, and repeatable.
To skip the conceptual design phase is to omit a crucial step in the site-planning process.
Exploring alternative concepts certainly requires time. But this investment can pay sub-
stantial dividends by improving the quality of the final site plan, which—ultimately—
impacts the character, livability, and sustainability of the built environment.
There are two important reasons to design conceptually before advancing to more
detailed site design. First, conceptual design can be done more quickly than detailed design.
Once the program and the site are well understood, multiple concepts can be—and should
be—developed before proceeding to more detailed design (Figure 8-3). Second, conceptual
design is effective, even at small scales of representation (i.e., drawing). The proverbial “back
of the envelope” concept diagram is possible because conceptual design is concerned with
the big picture. A strong concept, or organizing framework, promotes way finding and
creates a strong sense of place.
The conceptual design process can be an exhilarating period of creativity when the
designer develops an organizing structure for the program that responds to the site’s natural
and cultural features and provides the spatial framework for subsequent site and building
design. The process described below is a synthesis of approaches that build on the land
Conceptual Site Design 	251

-- 269 of 387 --

planning process advocated by Ian McHarg (1969) in his classic work, Design with Nature.
This context-sensitive approach is particularly appropriate for large sites with significant
natural or cultural resources.
Step 1: Delineate primary and secondary conservation areas.
Development projects on large sites are more likely to devote a substantial proportion of
the site to open space. This is especially true if the site includes significant environmental
features such as wooded areas, steep slopes, or a stream or wetland. Arendt (1999,
pp. 75–77), in Growing Greener: Putting Conservation into Local Plans and Ordinances, proposes
three principles for designing a site’s conservation open space system:
Conserve the property’s most sensitive natural areas.
Minimize fragmentation of natural areas into smaller, noncontiguous parcels.
Link conservation areas on a property to community and regional open space systems.
Figure 8-2 	Concept initiation (P = paved space; G = green space), development, and refinement for a campus plaza and
promenade at a university in the Midwest. Source: JJR SmithGroup. 	SmithGroupJJR.
252 	Site Analysis

-- 270 of 387 --

In contrast, site-planning projects on smaller urban sites may have little or no conser-
vation open space. Redevelopment projects, especially, tend to be higher density and more
site-intensive. Nevertheless, these sites can still be designed to include outdoor space for
recreation, stormwater management, and other green infrastructure functions.
Step 2: Delineate the areas that are most suitable for development and, within these
areas, delineate individual development “pods” or “envelopes.”
These areas are where the project’s program elements (i.e., buildings and associated
infrastructure, as well as developed open space) will be located.
Attention must be given to the sizes and shapes of the developable pods. Each pod
accommodates not only the anticipated building footprint but also the spaces required for
pedestrian entrances and amenities, vehicle parking and building services, and associated
plantings.
Figure 8-2 	Continued.
Conceptual Site Design 	253

-- 271 of 387 --

Step 3: Locate the primary and secondary circulation networks.
The circulation networks and associated open spaces functionally
and visually link development pods and buildings.
Step 4: Supplement the diagrammatic concept plan with more
information on the desired design character.
The concept plan shows how the project’s major program elements
will be spatially organized on the site. The concept plan can show
functional as well as visual relationships among the program elements.
Existing site features may be included to show how these contextual
elements—or design influences—will be integrated into the develop-
ment or redevelopment (Figure 8-4).
Concept plans are spatially explicit but highly diagrammatic.
Effective diagramming excludes extraneous information (Monmonier,
1996). A city subway map, for example, is useful because of what the
map shows as well as what the map does not show. Buildings, high-
ways, and myriad other types of geographic information are not
included on a subway map for a simple reason: it would reduce the
map’s clarity and, therefore, its effectiveness as a guide to subway
riders.
Conceptual site plans—also known as “bubble diagrams” or
“functional diagrams”—typically show three major site elements: open
spaces (both conservation areas and developed open spaces), circulation
networks, and building pods. The dimensions of streets, buildings, or
other site elements—as well as the types of materials needed to build
these structures—are not typically conveyed on the conceptual site
plan. These design decisions occur during the subsequent design
development and construction documentation phases. The purpose of
the concept plan is to convey the program’s spatial organization
without moving too deeply into detailed design.
The scale of the concept plan determines the amount of detail
shown, and as the site becomes smaller, more information can be
legibly conveyed. The concept plan’s scale is also usually a function of the site’s size. A
concept plan for a 2000-acre (809-hectare) site, for example, might show only general land
use categories, such as residential, commercial, and recreational uses. Within the residential
category, the plan also might identify designated areas for different housing types and
densities. The concept plan for a site of this size might be drawn at a scale of 1:4800
(1 inch 	400 feet or 1 centimeter 	48 meters) or smaller.
In contrast, a concept plan for a 10-acre (4-hectare) site can provide more detailed
information about the proposed development. The plan may, for example, show the
locations of future buildings and building entrances, associated outdoor plazas and sitting
areas, and primary pedestrian and vehicle circulation patterns. This concept plan could be
drawn at a scale of 1:480 (1 inch 	40 feet or 1 centimeter 	4.8 meters).
Concept plans convey information with text and, typically, three graphic elements:
polygons, lines, and points (Table 8-1). These graphic symbols convey information about
the intended organization of the site. Notes or annotations are also useful in conveying
Figure 8-2 	Continued.
254 	Site Analysis

-- 272 of 387 --

Figure 8-3 	Site analysis,
multiple plaza design concepts,
and a final design perspective
for a campus courtyard at a
university in the Midwest.
Source: JJR Smith Group.
SmithGroupJJR.
Site Analysis
Concept A
Conceptual Site Design 	255

-- 273 of 387 --

Figure 8-3 	Continued.
Concept B
Concept C
256 	Site Analysis

-- 274 of 387 --

Figure 8-3 	Continued.
Concept D
Concept E
Conceptual Site Design 	257

-- 275 of 387 --

Figure 8-3 	Continued.
Figure 8-4 	Concept diagrams
showing proposed buildings,
circulation systems, and their
spatial relationships. The central
axis for this project is a bold and
effective organizing element.
Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of
The HOK Planning Group.
Design Development of
Concept E
258 	Site Analysis

-- 276 of 387 --

Figure 8-4 	Continued.
Conceptual Site Design 	259

-- 277 of 387 --

Figure 8-4 	Continued.
TABLE 8-1 	Examples of elements that may be conveyed graphically on a conceptual
site plan as polygons, lines, or points.
Categories 	Specific Components Identified
Open Space 	Active recreation areas
Passive recreation areas
Conservation areas
Vehicle Circulation 	Streets and site entrances
Passenger drop-off zones
Parking areas
Loading docks and service areas
Pedestrian Circulation 	Walkways
Site and building entrances
Plazas, patios, and other nodes
Street crosswalks
Other Circulation 	Bikeways
Public transit stations or stops
Buildings 	Footprint size and shape
Density or number of stories
Residential, commercial and other uses
Utilities 	Easements for pipes or lines
Sanitary lift stations
Views 	Prominent views from the site
Prominent views to the site
260 	Site Analysis

-- 278 of 387 --

information about the intended functional and visual relation-
ships among the proposed site uses and between on-site and off-
site elements. Clear graphic communication enables the efficient
and informed review of a concept plan by colleagues, as well as
by public planning staff, elected officials, and other stakeholders.
8.4.1 	Polygons
Major site uses are typically portrayed diagrammatically as zones or “bubbles” on a concept
plan. As the concept is refined, these areas may be further subdivided to show building
locations and minor circulation patterns. Concept plans may also show significant natural
areas. As the site-planning process moves further into design development, each area is
designed in more detail (Figure 8-5).
8.4.2 	Lines
Concept plans can diagrammatically show pathways, edges, and desired visual relationships.
Desirable views between locations on and off the site, for example, can be depicted
graphically with arrows and/or annotated labels (Figure 8-6). Showing the locations of
significant natural or cultural features can help explain certain design decisions, such as where
Development Pod 	Pod Refinement
Figure 8-5 	Refining a
concept plan involves sub-
dividing initial polygons or
zones into smaller, more
detailed components.
Figure 8-6 	Arrows show
existing and potential vehicle
circulation system linkages.
Source: The HOK Planning
Group. Used with permission of
The HOK Planning Group.
Conceptual Site Design 	261

-- 279 of 387 --

to locate and orient a new building or walkway. Conversely, screening of undesirable views
may be warranted, and this also can be portrayed graphically. Solid or dashed lines on a
concept plan can show physical elements, such as the following:
Circulation systems
Stormwater runoff patterns
Utility lines (above ground and subsurface)
Views (favorable and unfavorable)
Edges (abrupt changes in topography or land cover)
Axial relationships among buildings and other built or natural elements
Color, texture, and line weight can help to distinguish these different types of information.
8.4.3 	Points
Concept plans can also identify significant nodes and landmarks both on-site and off-site.
These could be locations of proposed buildings, for example, or locations of existing
buildings that will remain. Nodes include:
Building entrances
Plazas and squares
Scenic overlooks
Landmarks visually contrast with their surroundings. Landmarks include:
Historic buildings
Bridges, towers, and other large structures
Mountains, hills, or other topographic features
Mature, specimen trees
8.4.4 	Other Graphics
Conceptual design typically focuses on the plan view or horizontal organization of the site.
Concept plans are often supplemented, however, with other graphics. Especially in urban
settings, the vertical organization of the project’s proposed uses can be expressed concep-
tually. Conceptual sections or three-dimensional aerial perspectives can explain the intended
arrangement of uses within buildings and in adjoining areas outside of the buildings
(Figure 8-7).
Character sketches, or image boards with photographs of relevant precedents, can help to
convey the design intent—before proceeding with detailed design (Figure 8-8). A project’s
character results, in part, from building massing and facade articulation and from
262 	Site Analysis

-- 280 of 387 --

Figure 8-7 	Plans and sections convey spatial relationships. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with permission of The HOK
Planning Group.
Figure 8-8 	Precedent images illustrate the intended character of the new design. Source: The HOK Planning Group. Used with
permission of The HOK Planning Group.
Conceptual Site Design 	263

-- 281 of 387 --

the selection and combination of surface treatments. Typically, image boards show aspira-
tional photographs of project precedents.
8.5 	CONCEPTUAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES
8.5.1 	Open Spaces
Limiting urban sprawl and reducing the loss of open space are increasingly common goals in
many communities. Conservation open spaces—typically woodlands, grasslands, wetlands,
and open water—provide a range of social benefits, including opportunities for outdoor
recreation (Kline and Wichelns, 1998). Kline (2006, p. 645) writes:
. . . key socioeconomic trends—most notably, population growth, rising incomes,
development, and increasing open space scarcity—motivate interest and support for
preserving open space, when open space lands remain unprotected.
Communities in the United States protect open space and critical environmental areas—
or green infrastructure—in different ways. Purchasing the land is an effective, yet potentially
expensive, approach. Nevertheless, between 1999 and 2005, U.S. voters approved 827
public referenda to finance open space preservation programs: 25 at the state level, 148 at the
county level, 631 at the municipality level, and 23 by other jurisdictions (Trust for Public
Land, 2005).
Financing methods varied widely, including raising sales and property taxes, borrowing
the money by issuing bonds, and raising state income taxes (Kline, 2006). Other techniques
for protecting open space include regulatory approaches that restrict development rights on
lands with significant environmental resources. With skillful site planning—based on a
thorough site analysis—clustering buildings and infrastructure on the remaining site areas can
protect environmentally sensitive areas and provide attractive settings for new development.
Local and regional open space systems comprise vital green infrastructure (Figure 8-9).
Protecting riparian corridors and other water storage, infiltration, and drainage areas helps to
minimize a project’s hydrologic and ecological impacts (Dramstad et al., 1996; Forman,
1995). Riparian corridors, for example, can provide multiple ecological functions in urban,
suburban, and rural landscapes (Dramstad et al., 1996, pp. 35–40):
Habitat (for upland species and refuge for floodplain species displaced by flooding or
lateral channel migration)
Conduit (for individual upland animals)
Filter (remove dissolved-substance inputs from overland stormwater runoff)
Source (food and cover)
Sink (during flooding, absorb floodwaters and trap sediment)
A community’s green infrastructure may include streams and their buffers, floodplains,
wetlands, steep slopes, high-permeability soils, and woodlands (Prince George’s County,
2000). These undeveloped open spaces can buffer developed areas from natural hazards, such
264 	Site Analysis

-- 282 of 387 --

as flooding and landslides. These buffers are especially important along major rivers (Figure
8-10) and in coastal areas subject to hurricanes and flooding from storm surges (Figure 8-11).
Green infrastructure in the built environment provides many social, economic, and
ecological benefits (Table 8-2). As we learn more about the structure and function of
ecosystems—and their importance to human health, safety, and welfare—planning and
design professionals are integrating more green spaces into site, neighborhood, and com-
munity plans. Both natural and developed open spaces can provide opportunities for out-
door recreation, strengthen community identity and quality of life, and even serve as catalysts
for local economic development. The city of San Francisco, for example, considers a broad
range of social and biophysical factors in systematically selecting new sites to add to its already
extensive—and world-class—public open space system (see Sidebar 2-1).
Natural areas—both large tracts and linking corridors—are integral elements of a com-
munity’s green infrastructure. A comprehensive community open space system protects the
most valuable components (Ahern, 1991; Stenberg et al., 1997). Not every important natural
area can be in public ownership, but context-sensitive development of private property can
enhance the benefits of these open spaces. The integration of connected open spaces is a
common feature in well-designed master planned communities.
Figure 8-9 	Conservation
open space in San Francisco,
California. Source: Bridget Lang.
Used with permission.
Conceptual Site Design 	265

-- 283 of 387 --

Figure 8-10 	Seasonal flood-
ing of buffer areas along the
Mississippi River in Minnesota.
Figure 8-11 	Coastal dune
vegetation controls erosion and
stabilizes protective dunes in
Florida.
266 	Site Analysis

-- 284 of 387 --

Natural areas, for example, are central features of contemporary “links-style” golf courses.
The most visually appealing golf courses use natural drainage areas as player challenges or
course “hazards.” Where the natural drainage patterns have been disturbed by previous land
uses, ecological restoration can reestablish these hydrologic functions. This environmentally
responsive approach to golf course architecture can reduce long-term maintenance costs,
protect existing plant and animal habitats, and create unique golfing experiences. Greener
approaches to stormwater management are increasingly important as communities adapt to
climate change while protecting water resources (Figure 8-12).
Clarence Perry’s (1929) influential writings on the “neighborhood unit” proposed open
spaces for civic uses, around which buildings and circulation networks were organized.
Radburn, New Jersey, Greenbelt, Maryland, and Greendale, Wisconsin (Figure 8-13) are
among the notable planned communities influenced by Perry’s work.
Conservation subdivisions, another but more suburban neighborhood type, typically
reserve at least half of the site in undeveloped open space. Arendt (1999, p. 12) recommends
that 60 to 70 percent of conservation subdivisions remain as open space in unsewered rural
areas where significant portions of the site must be dedicated to wastewater treatment. In
areas with municipal sanitary sewer service, dedicated open space may be reduced. Managing
stormwater on-site can reduce the construction costs associated with conventional storm-
water drainage infrastructure.
Prairie Crossing, outside Chicago, Illinois, is an award-winning residential community
where the housing is arranged around a multi-functional open space system (www
.prairiecrossing.com). Another large project designed around an open space system (in this
case, green and blue infrastructure) includes Indian Trace, in Florida, designed by Envi-
ronmental Planning and Design (EPD) (Case Study 3-1).
Developed open spaces may be paved or unpaved areas that are often designed exclu-
sively for pedestrians and, in some cases, bicyclists. These spaces contribute substantially to
TABLE 8-2 	Selected components and benefits of green infrastructure.
Components 	Functions or Benefits
Surface Waters 	Outdoor recreation
Visual amenity
Aquatic and riparian habitat
Wetlands 	Groundwater recharge
Flooding mitigation
Plant and wildlife habitat
Forested or Wooded Areas 	Microclimate amelioration
Wildlife habitat
Visual amenity
Steep Slopes 	Aquifer recharge
Plant and wildlife habitat
Visual amenity
Floodplains and Coastal Zones 	Storm surge flooding buffer
Highly Erodible and Unstable Soils 	Sediment reduction
Conceptual Site Design 	267

-- 285 of 387 --

community livability. Developed open spaces may have a strong sense of enclosure resulting
from carefully placed buildings (Figure 8-14), walls, or trees (Figure 8-15). Open spaces or
outdoor “rooms” can be defined by carefully controlling the building height-to-open space
ratios (Figure 8-16).
8.5.2 	Circulation Networks
According to the United States Federal Highway Administration (2009), context-sensitive
transportation planning seeks to develop a transportation network “. . . that complements
its physical setting and preserves scenic, aesthetic, and historic and environmental resources
Figure 8-12 	Open space, or green infrastructure, can help protect water quality. Source: JJR SmithGroup. 	SmithGroupJJR.
268 	Site Analysis

-- 286 of 387 --

Figure 8-14 	Large urban
plaza serving as the city’s central
outdoor civic space in Toulouse,
France.
Figure 8-13 	Community
open space in Greendale,
Wisconsin—planned and built in
the 1930s New Deal era.
Conceptual Site Design 	269

-- 287 of 387 --

while maintaining safety and mobility.” Reliable transit within pedes-
trian-friendly mixed-use neighborhoods, for example, can reduce traffic
congestion within the broader community and decrease air pollution by
reducing average household vehicle miles traveled (VMT). Integrated
transportation systems create more mobility choices by providing mul-
tiple modes of travel while also serving other important design functions
(Table 8-3).
Designing a site’s circulation network requires an understanding of the
site’s context—including the existing transportation systems adjoining the
site. The entry and arrival sequences to on-site destinations must begin at
one or more access points on the site’s periphery. Entrances to the site and
to the buildings, and major pedestrian walkway intersections, are places to
develop plazas and seating areas. These pedestrian nodes warrant appro-
priate design treatment, including special paving, lighting, planting, and
site furniture.
Circulation network design principles include establishing gateways
and creating a strong sense of arrival. The primary entrance to a site could
be located, for example, “on-axis” with the proposed building or some
other significant on-site or off-site feature. The visual “anchor” or ter-
minus for an organizing axis (an imaginary line) could be a large specimen
tree, a hill, a prominent landform, or another unique natural or cultural
feature.
1:1
1:2
1:3
1:4
2:1
Figure 8-15 	Major linear
urban space with strong spatial
enclosure from bordering trees
in Paris, France.
Figure 8-16 	Height-to-width
ratios affect the sense of enclo-
sure in outdoor open spaces.
Ratios of 1:1 to 1:4 are classic in
urban design.
270 	Site Analysis

-- 288 of 387 --

Circulation systems, especially for pedestrian use, can be designed in one or more geo-
metric patterns that not only respond to the site’s context but also strengthen the built
environment’s spatial organization (Figure 8-17):
Linear pattern (walkways are commonly used for recreational paths; may run parallel
to the shoreline and other natural features)
Grid pattern (walkways parallel the street network in urban areas; advantages include
ease of orientation and flexibility in route selection)
Loop pattern (walkways may organize a series of linked open spaces, a cluster of
buildings, or other activity nodes)
Radial pattern (walkways converge to form intersections that become plazas,
squares, or other important pedestrian nodes)
Spiral pattern (walkway ceremonially descends or ascends toward a special place,
such as a sculpture garden, a memorial, or another contemplative outdoor space)
TABLE 8-3 	Selected design functions performed by a
pedestrian circulation system.
Movement Through a Space 	Making a Space a Place
Gateway 	Civic gatherings
Access 	Oasis
Entry 	Refuge
Linkage 	Node
Figure 8-17 	A curvilinear
pedestrian pathway follows the
lakeshore in Lucerne,
Switzerland.
Conceptual Site Design 	271

-- 289 of 387 --

8.5.3 	Buildings
If the project program calls for siting one or more new buildings, then the site analysis must
identify suitable locations for building construction. A development pod for a single building
must be large enough to accommodate the building along with space for parking, service
areas, and pedestrian amenities.
Land development projects on large sites pose unique challenges and opportunities. The
clustering of buildings can reduce a development’s impervious surfaces and lower con-
struction costs for streets, utilities, and other infrastructure. Clustering can also minimize site
disturbance and, if the buildings are carefully sited, protect natural drainage networks and
other natural or cultural features. These undeveloped open spaces can be amenities accessible
from the buildings that are clustered on the remaining parts of the site.
Building siting can have a large effect on the building’s design and operation. Energy use
for cooling, heating, and lighting, for example, is influenced not only by the building’s
design, but also by its location on the site (Figure 8-18). Seasonal wind direction and
velocity, and solar exposure, are climatic factors that should be considered when siting
buildings. In the Northern Hemisphere, south-facing slopes are ideal locations for passive
and active solar buildings (Figure 8-19).
Great design not only takes advantage of, but celebrates, what Moore (2010) terms the
“aesthetics of place.” A building can be contextually compatible in simple, yet often elegant
ways. Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater is a building that not only fits its site, the building’s
form actually mimics the cascading form of the site’s streambed. Another notable example of
site-driven architecture is the Sea Ranch project in California, a collaboration of Robert
Venturi and Lawrence Halprin. The windblown conditions of the northern California
coastal landscape were major design influences. The arrangement of buildings, vegetation,
and berms was influenced, in part, by concern for the microclimate created within the
resulting outdoor spaces.
Figure 8-18 	Building mas-
sing can be stepped back to
reduce the building’s scale at
street level and also create
opportunities for usable green
roof space. 	Upper Stories
Stepback
Lower Stories
Setback
272 	Site Analysis

-- 290 of 387 --

8.6 	CONCEPT EVALUATION
As communities grow in population, undeveloped urban and suburban sites become more
important ecologically, hydrologically, and economically. This often leads to greater scrutiny
of proposals for the development of those sites. Increasingly, communities are taking a more
proactive role in shaping the built environment through legally enforced design guidelines
(Case Study 8-1).
The site plan review process examines the potential impacts of proposed development on
public health, safety, and welfare. This local government regulatory process may also
examine the project’s potential vulnerability to natural hazards and the proposed develop-
ment’s conformance with existing community plans and policies. Planning department staff
who review site plans typically ask these questions (Wyckoff, 2003, pp. 61–64):
Are the proposed site uses consistent with the parcel’s existing zoning classification?
Does the design adequately address any risks of natural hazards from flooding, erosion,
slumping of steep slopes or sandy soils, subsidence, or other natural events?
Are the proposed structures and uses located outside of wetlands, groundwater
recharge areas, and floodplains?
Would the project affect any endangered plant or animal habitat?
Have the designers adequately considered any significant views and/or unique natural
features?
Does the proposed plan minimize negative impacts (especially noise, dust, odor, light,
vibrations) on adjoining land uses?
Figure 8-19 	This building
steps back from the street,
reducing its scale while also
improving solar access for out-
door spaces accessible from
residential units on each story.
Zurich, Switzerland.
Conceptual Site Design 	273

-- 291 of 387 --

These are among the many questions that site planners should ask themselves—during the
conceptual design phase—to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of their concepts.
Descriptive statistics that compare existing site conditions with the proposed site conditions
can be helpful in systematically evaluating the merits of alternative conceptual plans. The
process of developing a final site plan often combines the best features of alternative concepts
(Figure 8-20).
8.7 	CONCLUSION
Site planning’s conceptual design phase is an iterative process aimed at spatially organizing—
both horizontally and vertically—the proposed uses of the site. There are often many
possible alternatives for arranging a site’s programmed activities. This task can be streamlined
by first carefully analyzing existing site and contextual conditions. Design influences or
determinants—revealed through the site analysis—often suggest potential spatial frameworks
for fitting the program to the site. A systematic and analytical approach to conceptual design
is most likely to produce defensible site-planning decisions and, ultimately, higher-quality
built environments.
Figure 8-20 	Kissimmee River restoration concept plan alternatives and the final plan for one section of the river corridor. Source:
Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
274 	Site Analysis

-- 292 of 387 --

Figure 8-20 	Continued.
Case Study 8–1 	Design Guidelines (Urban Context)
WALLINGFORD N EIGHBORHOOD D ESIGN GUIDELINES , EFFECTIVE MAY 6, 2005
CITY OF S EATTLE , W ASHINGTON
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
The following design guidelines generally apply citywide. Additional guidelines, specific to the Wallingford
neighborhood, are omitted for the sake of brevity.
SITE PLANNING
Respond to site characteristics.
Reinforce existing streetscape characteristics.
Make the site’s entry clearly identifiable from the street.
Encourage human activity on the street.
Maximize opportunities for usable, attractive, well-integrated open space.
Conceptual Site Design 	275

-- 293 of 387 --

Case Study 8–1 	Design Guidelines (Urban Context) (continued)
Minimize the impact of automobile parking and driveways on the pedestrian environment and adjacent
properties.
Minimize parking on commercial street fronts by locating parking behind the building.
Orient buildings on corner lots toward the corner and public street fronts, keeping parking and auto-
mobile access away from the corner.
HEIGHT, BULK, AND SCALE
Provide a sensitive transition to nearby, less-intensive zones.
Cornices and rooflines should respect the heights of surrounding structures.
Traditional architectural features such as pitched roofs and gables are encouraged on residential project
sites adjacent to single-family and low-rise zones.
Consider upper-level stepbacks (5 feet or 1.5 meters) to limit the visibility of floors that are above 30 feet
(9.1 meters).
Consider dividing buildings into small masses with variation of building stepbacks and heights to preserve
views, sun, and privacy of adjacent residential structures and sun exposure of public spaces, including
streets and sidewalks.
ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS AND MATERIALS
In existing neighborhoods with a well-defined and desirable character, new buildings should be com-
patible with the architectural character and siting pattern of neighboring buildings.
Traditional early-twentieth-century commercial structures on the first story provide the streetscape with
visual interest and human scale. These include the following:
Solid kick panels below windows
Large storefront windows
Multipane or double-hung windows with transoms or clerestories
High level of fine-grained detailing and trim
High-quality materials, such as brick and terra-cotta
Canopies
Variable parapets
Cornices
DISTINGUISH THE BASE, MIDDLE, AND TOP OF MIXED-USE BUILDINGS
Ground floors with transparent open facades for commercial uses at street level (for example, windows
cover 50–80 percent of the ground-floor facade and begin approximately 24 to 30 inches (0.61 to 0.76
meters) above the sidewalk)
Middle floors are articulated to distinguish individual floors.
276 	Site Analysis

-- 294 of 387 --

QUESTION
1. Is there a major multifunctional open space in your community? Draw a conceptual
diagram of the space that explains its spatial organization. Also, list the primary social,
economic, and biophysical benefits that the space provides to the community.
Case Study 8–1 	Design Guidelines (Urban Context) (continued)
Tops of buildings may include gables with overhangs, parapets, and cornices; the roofline or top of the
structure should be clearly distinguished from its facade walls.
Building massing and detailing should create a well-proportioned and unified building form, with fea-
tures expressing the functions within the building.
Human-scaled architectural features, elements, and details should be incorporated in the design of new
buildings.
PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT (GROUND PLANE, GROUND/FIRST STORY)
Pedestrian open spaces and building entrances, especially for residential uses, add activity on the street
and allow for visual surveillance for personal safety.
Continuous, well-lighted overhead weather protection improves pedestrian comfort and promotes a
sense of security.
Avoid blank walls facing the street, especially near sidewalks.
Minimize the visual and physical intrusion of parking lots on pedestrian areas.
Personal safety and security: pedestrian-scale lighting (12- to 15-foot- or 3.6- to 4.6-meter high pole fix-
tures or bollard fixtures) should be provided.
LANDSCAPING
Planters at entryways are encouraged.
Special paving, trellises, screen walls at the perimeter of parking lots, planters, site furniture, and
plantings should be provided.
Retain existing trees wherever possible.
Conceptual Site Design 	277

-- 295 of 387 --

c h a p t e r 	9
Design Development
Identification of place lies as a generative core of architecture. Place is to architecture as
meaning is to language.
—Unwin (2003, p. 23)
9.1 	INTRODUCTION
Design development is the refinement or “articulation” of the site concept plan, which
spatially organizes the site’s buildings, circulation systems, and open spaces. Both coarse-
and fine-scale design decisions determine how well the new project fits its site and sur-
roundings. These decisions can, and often do, create positive as well as negative community
impacts.
The growing wave of urban and suburban redevelopment presents unique opportunities
to retrofit poorly designed built environments to make them more attractive, resource
efficient, and pedestrian friendly (Dunham-Jones and Williamson, 2011). Good site plan-
ning and building design can help communities become better places to live, work, and
play (Figure 9-1). The State Sustainability Strategy for Western Australia suggests that
sustainability and livability are not only complementary goals but are each essential in
the development of quality built environments (Government of Western Australia, 2003,
p. 169):
. . . for a settlement to be sustainable, resource consumption (such as land, energy,
water, and materials) and waste (solid, liquid, and gaseous) must be reduced, while
simultaneously improving livability (in areas such as income, housing, health, edu-
cation, and community).
278

-- 296 of 387 --

So, how does a site planner help meet these broad policy goals when designing an
individual parcel of land? In other words, how are the sustainability and livability goals,
summarized in Chapter 1, translated into context-sensitive design decisions at the site scale?
9.2 	URBAN DESIGN THEORY
Design is not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.
—Steve Jobs (quoted in Walker, 2003) Apple Computer Co.
Urban design theory comprises an evolving body of ideas, principles, and techniques for
designing (and redesigning) the built environment. These normative principles are culturally
Figure 9-1 	Active living in
today’s built environments benefits
from public investment in linear
recreational and transportation
corridors. Combined bicycle/pedes-
trian path within a former rail cor-
ridor in Madison, Wisconsin.
Design Development 	279

-- 297 of 387 --

influenced, and because they embody the best practices within each design field, they may
change over time with new research and experience, and as economic, legal, social, or
environmental conditions evolve. These design principles address not only the spatial
organization of the built environment (see Chapter 8) but also its spatial articulation,
including surface finishes, such as building cladding and walkway pavers.
Design theory applied to the built environment continues to evolve, in part, from studies
of both historic and contemporary precedents. Brian Lawson (2004, p. 96) writes:
Precedents are often either whole or partial pieces of designs that the designer is aware
of. They may be previously employed solutions by the same designer, by famous
designers, buildings, landscapes, or towns seen on study visits or even on holiday.
. . . Before the introduction of photography and modern methods of reproduction,
travel was essential in the education of a young designer who would be expected to
take the grand tour to build up this knowledge.
Important lessons can be gleaned by critically examining examples of great design—as
well as design failures. Throughout the built environment, design quality influences the
economic success of products ranging from automobiles to toasters and televisions. Design
quality also influences the economic value and success of places—from individual houses or
housing projects to entire neighborhoods, communities, and regions. Underlying these
economic effects, of course, is the issue of individual preference. All of us have preferences
that influence, in one way or another, our behavior—including where we live and work,
where we go to school, the places we visit, and the things we acquire.
9.2.1 	Why Do Appearances Matter?
Urban design theory is concerned with form—and, implicitly, appearance—because the
three-dimensional structure of the built environment affects its function. “Beauty is in
the eye of the beholder” is a well-known aphorism often used to argue against regulations
concerned with community aesthetics. This assertion has some validity when the issue under
consideration is relatively minor (for example, the color of a house). Yet, not all “beholders”
of beauty have equivalent understanding of the importance of design to the built envir-
onment’s social, economic, and ecological functions.
Fortunately, an appreciation for well-designed places is not the exclusive domain of
design professionals. The design of the built environment affects how and where people live
and their quality of life. Richard Florida (2002), in The Rise of the Creative Class, writes that
better-educated, higher-income professionals “vote with their feet” in seeking out cities
and regions with a high quality of life (Figure 9-2). Increasingly, communities—large and
small—are recognizing the value of high-quality urban design. The city of Aberdeen, South
Dakota, for example, includes in its Comprehensive Plan a chapter titled “Community
Appearance.” The following excerpt sums up the city’s well-placed concern for community
aesthetics (City of Aberdeen, 2004, p. 8-1):
Simply put, beauty adds value to the community. The appearance of a community is
one of the foremost influences of value and, hence, one of its most regarded assets.
280 	Site Analysis

-- 298 of 387 --

Residents take pride in their community and its attractive and interesting places.
Businesses also like to locate in attractive environments, which improve their ability to
recruit employees, host clients and investors, and continue to invest in their facilities.
Clearly, the design of the built environment affects community character and determines
how easy or difficult, and how pleasant or unpleasant, it is to live there. As a matter of public
health, safety, and welfare, therefore, mayors and other community leaders should pay close
attention to the design of their built environments. Efforts such as the Mayors Institute on
City Design (www.micd.org) in the United States and Architecture Design Scotland
(www.ads.org.uk) are not only increasing design awareness but are also building community
leadership capacity.
9.2.2 	Principles of Composition
Every built environment can be viewed as a three-dimensional “design” that, at its most
basic sculptural level is composed of masses and voids. These three-dimensional composi-
tions are defined by the ground or “floor” plane, the vertical or “wall” plane, and, in many
instances, by the overhead or “ceiling” plane. The spatial organization and articulation of
these three planes can achieve many important design objectives (Table 9-1).
Figure 9-2 	High-quality
urban design can be an effective
recruiting and retention tool
for employers. Walkable,
mixed-use development in
Washington, D.C.
Design Development 	281

-- 299 of 387 --

Open space is a vital (and underappreciated) component of the built environment.
Outdoor space in the built environment is defined by a ground plane and, to varying extents,
by vertical and overhead planes (Figure 9-3). Many of the best-designed outdoor spaces are
partially enclosed by buildings, landforms, trees, or other vertical elements that define
outdoor “rooms” and “corridors.” Although less enclosed than indoor rooms and corridors,
linked sequences of pedestrian-friendly outdoor spaces can strengthen a community’s sense
of place and enhance its livability (Figure 9-4).
Nearly a century ago, in The Principles of Architectural Composition (1924), Howard
Robertson skillfully explained the importance of not only understanding buildings and their
various parts, but also understanding the “grammar of design” and “design syntax”—in other
words, the principles of architectural composition. Similarly, other seminal works have
articulated principles of urban design considered at different spatial scales. Prominent, among
TABLE 9-1 	Selected context-responsive design functions performed by the three spatial planes forming outdoor built
environments.
Plane 	Element 	Design Function
Ground 	Paving, groundcover plants 	Orientation, separation, linkage, buffering
Wall 	Buildings, walls, fences, trellises, trees and shrubs 	Enclosure, screening, buffering, framing, orientation, background
Overhead 	Trees, shelters, awnings, arcades, pergolas 	Enclosure, shading, rain protection
Figure 9-3 	Outdoor corridors
and rooms are defined by floor,
wall, and overhead planes.
282 	Site Analysis

-- 300 of 387 --

these are Design of Cities, by Edward Bacon (1974), A Pattern Language, by Christopher
Alexander and others (1977), and Landscape Architecture: The Shaping of Man’s Natural
Environment by John Ormsbee Simonds (1961).
Perceptions of the built environment are, in part, a function of how visible attributes—
such as color, shape, size, and texture—are spatially arranged. For the sake of simplicity,
enhancing the aesthetics of the built environment can be reduced to three fundamental
design principles: unity, balance, and emphasis.
9.2.3 	Unity
Many different design fields—automobile and furniture design, for example—are concerned
with the appearance of their products. Good design, from a visual perspective, creates an
integrated and harmonious ensemble of forms, colors, and other visible qualities that,
together, comprise a coherent and unified whole. Unity, the most comprehensive of the
three design principles, is achieved through:
Repetition of attributes, such as color, shape, size, and texture, and of elements, such
as buildings, trees, and paving materials
Rhythm in the arrangement of elements or visible qualities in an ordered sequence
or pattern
Simplicity in the “palette” or number of different colors, shapes, and other qualities
Figure 9-4 	Well-designed
pedestrian spaces create pleas-
ant vehicle-free zones on the
campus of a Midwestern
university.
Design Development 	283

-- 301 of 387 --

In nature, landscapes undisturbed by human activities often epitomize the principle of
unity (Figure 9-5). Similarly, vernacular landscapes (which have evolved over time through
the interplay of climate, geomorphology, and human settlement) also exhibit this appealing
characteristic—visual unity with subtle yet repeated variation (Figure 9-6). Unity does not
require rigid uniformity or the dull repetition of identical shapes or other visible attributes. In
fact, some variation of attributes—or how these attributes are combined—can produce very
high visual quality (Figures 9-7 and 9-8).
In the built environment, visual unity implies both internal coherence and external
compatibility with the surroundings. Visual coherence may occur over a range of spatial
scales, from communities down to neighborhoods, street blocks, and individual buildings
and sites (Figure 9-9). An urban infill project, for example, exists within the context of
nearby buildings, pavement, street furniture, vegetation, and other elements. The site’s
meaning within the community is inherently a function of its surroundings.
With suburban sprawl and the increasing commodification of real estate, among other
factors, the overall quality of design in the built environment has arguably declined since the
mid-twentieth century. In the book What Not to Build: Do’s and Don’ts of Exterior Home
Design, Edelman et al. (2006) show just how bad single-family housing design can get. Yet,
Figure 9-5 	Unity in nature.
The rocky coastline near Mon-
terey, California, exhibits a sim-
ple palette of repeated shapes,
sizes, colors, and textures.
284 	Site Analysis

-- 302 of 387 --

Figure 9-6 	Unity in a
vernacular landscape that
shows similar forms, sizes,
and colors of housing on the
island of Capri.
Figure 9-7 	Widespread use
of tile roofs contribute to unity
at the district or neighborhood
level in Florence, Italy.
Design Development 	285

-- 303 of 387 --

Figure 9-8 	Unity at the street
block scale; historic townhouses
in Baltimore, Maryland. Note the
repetition of vertical lines and
rectilinear forms and openings
(windows and doors) with nearly
equal sizes and proportions.
Figure 9-9 	Unity at the site
and building scales. Historic
cathedral and leaning Tower
of Pisa exhibit the rhythmic
repetition of form, color, size,
and line.
286 	Site Analysis

-- 304 of 387 --

through photo-realistic simulations, they also show how the houses could be improved if the
buildings’ designers had only understood the importance of basic aesthetic principles.
9.2.4 	Balance
Balance refers to the visual “weight” associated with masses and voids, color, shape, texture,
and other visible qualities of the built environment. “Balance” is a relative term, with the
weight of an element considered in relation to a reference point or line. In the built
environment, balance is often achieved in relation to an imaginary line or point imposed on
the ground plane, typically, and also on the wall and ceiling planes. Symmetry may be axial
(line) or radial (point). Axial and radial symmetry are ancient—but still highly relevant—
techniques for organizing and articulating buildings and open space ensembles, especially in
denser urban environments. A balanced composition successfully manages the weight of
visible attributes (for example, a symmetric or asymmetric combination of colors, textures,
shapes, or other visible attributes in relation to a line or point).
Proportion refers to the sizes and shapes of elements in the built environment in relation to
each other.
A visually unified and balanced streetscape, for example, derives its coherence, in part,
from a common proportioning system. A “proportion” is the relationship between one part
and another or between one part and the whole. Proportioning systems are expressed as a set
of ratio equalities as follows:
a b 	c d 	e f
where (for example, in building design)
a 	building height, b 	building width
c 	window height, d 	window width
e 	brick height, f 	brick width
Building designs can be internally consistent, yet in jarring visual conflict with their
immediate surroundings. Iconic buildings have their place, of course, particularly when form
follows function—and that function is an important civic purpose (a museum or performing
arts center, for example). “Contextual” buildings, however, are more abundant and are
particularly important in creating human-scaled and visually unified neighborhoods and
districts.
Well-designed buildings, sites, and streetscapes provide contextual cues for designers of
nearby buildings and sites. These contextual attributes include material choices as well as the
sizes and proportions of windows and other building elements. The bay widths of a
prominent historic building, for example, can be replicated in the design of a contemporary
building on the same street and block. Similarly, on the ground plane, paving patterns
adjacent to the new building can “echo” the bay widths expressed in the building’s massing
and facade articulation.
Aesthetics—and 	proportion, 	specifically—have 	been 	important 	in 	urban 	design
throughout the ages (Beardsley, 1966). Plato’s writing on the aesthetics of order, symmetry,
Design Development 	287

-- 305 of 387 --

and proportion, for example, date to the fourth century A . D . Andrea Palladio’s The Four
Books on Architecture, published in 1570, examined the importance of proportion in archi-
tecture. For hundreds of years, architects have sought to design buildings that carefully
control proportion in both massing and articulation. Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, a Roman
architect (30 B . C.–46 A . D.), wrote:
Hence, no building can be said to be well designed, which wants symmetry and
proportion . . . they are as necessary to the beauty of a building as to that of a well-
formed human figure . . .
—Vitruvius, The Ten Books on Architecture, Book III,
Chapter 1 (Of the Design and Symmetry of Temples)
Leonardo Fibbonacci was a great European mathematician of the Middle Ages. Born in
Pisa, Italy, in about 1175 A . D., he discovered a remarkable number series that begins
as follows:
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55
The Fibonacci series is created by adding the previous two numbers in the series together to
form the next number in the sequence, and so on. If any two successive numbers in the
Fibonacci sequence are divided (for example, 5/8), the result or quotient approximates the
Golden Ratio (.618). The golden ratio, or golden section, is the proportioning system
underlying the design of ancient Greek and Roman temples, such as the Parthenon in
Athens, Greece (Herz-Fischler, 1998). The proportions derived from the Fibbonacci
series—especially 1:1, 1:2, 2:3, 3:5, and 5:8—are expressed in great architecture and urban
design worldwide (Figure 9-10).
Scale refers to the size of design elements in relation to the dimensions of contextual
elements such as people, trees, and other buildings.
Scale is a particularly relevant concept in designing infill and redevelopment projects.
Neighborhood objections to redevelopment proposals, especially on small sites, often
center on the size and massing of the new building. If a proposed building will dwarf the
buildings on adjoining parcels, critics may argue that the proposed building is too big, or
“out of scale.”
Good designers can reduce the scale of new buildings in multiple ways, including giving
the proposed building a distinct bottom, middle, and top (Figure 9-11). Other techniques
include stepping back upper stories from the street and/or the other sides of the building that
face smaller neighboring buildings (Figure 9-12).
9.2.5 	Emphasis
Emphasis, the third key principle of design composition, is achieved when a building or site
includes a distinctive element that stands out from other nearby elements. This is often
accomplished in the built environment through contrasts in color, form, size, number, line,
texture, or placement of elements in relation to their surroundings.
288 	Site Analysis

-- 306 of 387 --

Figure 9-10 	Piazza San
Pietro in Rome, Italy. In addition
to unity, the building and plaza
ensemble demonstrates both
radial and bilateral symmetry.
Cornice
Upper facade
Signage area
Storefront
Figure 9-11 	Designing a build-
ing with a bottom, middle, and top
helps to reduce the building’s scale
Design Development 	289

-- 307 of 387 --

Contrast adds interest (for example, unique, eye-catching elements or focal points).
Hierarchy creates visually dominant and subordinate elements (for example, major
entrances versus minor entrances).
An “iconic” building, bridge, or other element in the built environment is notable because
it contrasts in some way with its surroundings. The special nature of an iconic structure may
result from internal contrasts, such as a building with a tower or another dominant feature
(Figure 9-13). Or the iconic status may result from contrasts with the surroundings (Figure
9-14). A prominent location may contribute to a structure’s iconic status (Figure 9-15), or
the prominent location may be the sole reason for a structure’s iconic status. In the latter case,
an otherwise ordinary building or structure can attain iconic status by simply standing in stark
contrast to the surrounding landscape.
Figure 9-12 	The building
steps back from the street above
the third story, reducing its scale
and improving solar access at
the street level while also creat-
ing space for a usable green
rooftop. Source: City of
Madison, Wisconsin.
290 	Site Analysis

-- 308 of 387 --

9.2.6 	Order with Geometry
Geometry is an important framework for organizing and articulating the built environment.
Drawing from a synthesis by Motloch (2001, pp. 147–150), three primary geometric
themes—rectilinear, angular, and curvilinear—are summarized below. These three design
themes may be combined to juxtapose two or more geometric patterns.
Rectilinear Theme
The organizing elements in a rectilinear design theme are:
Straight lines
Right angles
Squares and rectangles
Figure 9-13 	Iconic residential
building with a classic Georgian
entrance and portico in Savannah,
Georgia. Note the bilateral
symmetry.
Design Development 	291

-- 309 of 387 --

Figure 9-14 	View from the
Hancock Tower in Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, showing the iconic
round dome of Trinity Church
adjacent to Copley Square.
Figure 9-15 	The iconic
Golden Gate Bridge, linking San
Francisco with Marin County,
California. The bridge stands out
from its surroundings because it
contrasts in form, color, func-
tion, size, and placement.
Source: Bridget Lang. Used with
permission.
292 	Site Analysis

-- 310 of 387 --

The rectilinear theme is easiest to implement because of the nature of most build-
ing materials and construction methods. Although exceptions certainly exist, most building
facades are articulated with a rectilinear pattern. The shapes of doors, windows, and the
building itself, for example, are usually squares or rectangles (Figure 9-16). The proportions
of the shapes, when chosen carefully, contribute to the building’s visual unity.
Angular Theme
The organizing elements in an angular design theme are:
Points
Radiating lines and acute or obtuse angles
Triangles and hexagons
Angular themes are less common in the built environment than rectilinear themes,
although angular elements may add emphasis or contrast to an otherwise rectilinear com-
position (Figure 9-17). A clock tower, for example, is essentially a rectilinear form—except
for the tower’s top, which has a triangular shape.
Figure 9-16 	A rectilinear
framework organizes the mas-
sing and articulation of the
mixed-use Mizner Court build-
ing in Boca Raton, Florida.
Design Development 	293

-- 311 of 387 --

Curvilinear Theme
In a curvilinear design theme, the key elements are organized by:
Generative points
Arcs and tangents
Circles and semicircles
Curvilinear themes in the built environment are most often expressed in the ground
plane. Context-sensitive design “echoes” curvilinear patterns in nearby buildings, walls, and
pedestrian spaces (Figure 9-18).
9.3 	OPEN SPACE SYSTEMS
Open spaces in the built environment range from relatively undisturbed conservation areas
to intensively developed urban plazas. Developed open spaces have both “soft” and “hard”
surfaces. These outdoor “rooms” and “corridors”—when human-scaled, appropriately
furnished, and linked with walkways and bike paths—enhance community livability (Figures
9-19 and 9-20). Public parks, waterfronts, and other open spaces are excellent sites for
farmers’ markets, art exhibitions, musical performances, and other events that not only
enhance a community’s quality of life, but also increase its economic competitiveness
(Diamond and Noonan, 1996). Well-designed open spaces add value to nearby real estate
(Bookout, 1994) and provide places that enable active outdoor living (Frumkin et al., 2004).
“Lost” spaces—typically poorly defined and often neglected—are missed opportunities to
improve a community’s livability (Trancik, 1986). Popular outdoor spaces, in contrast, tend
Figure 9-17 	Hexagonal
forms expressed in the ground
plane in the waterfront plaza in
Zurich, Switzerland.
294 	Site Analysis

-- 312 of 387 --

to be human-scaled, with a moderate to strong sense of enclosure. When designed exclu-
sively for pedestrians, these outdoor spaces can be meaningful community assets.
The primary method of enclosing outdoor space involves organizing the built envir-
onment’s vertical elements—primarily buildings, walls, and trees. The degree of enclosure is
influenced by the height of the defining wall planes and the width of the enclosed open
space. An outdoor space’s “sense of enclosure” is reasonably strong with a height/width ratio
of 1:2 or 1:3. Depending on the context and function of the open space, the height/width
ratio of a well-defined open space could range from 4:1 to 1:4 (Figure 9-21).
By casting shadows, buildings have a significant effect on microclimate, which is an
important consideration in the siting and design of outdoor spaces (Whyte, 1980). Sunlight
in public spaces is not only valued but, in some cities, required by ordinance (San Francisco
Recreation and Park Department, 2006). Yet, on hot days, shade is valued for its cooling
effects. Trees in the built environment provide shade, define outdoor spaces, and perform
other important design functions (Table 9-2).
A linked system of public, semipublic, and private outdoor spaces contributes to public
health and community well-being. Privately owned public spaces, for example, tend to be
associated with buildings that are open to the public (Kayden, 2000). Plazas, entrance
forecourts, and terraces for restaurants and other commercial uses are examples of these
quasi-public spaces (Figure 9-22). Private outdoor open spaces, in contrast, are generally
Figure 9-18 	The curvilinear
form of the wall plane (fountain,
seat wall) is echoed in the
ground plane (paving) in
Washington, D.C.
Design Development 	295

-- 313 of 387 --

associated with housing—balconies, patios, decks, and other outdoor spaces for the exclusive
use of residents and their guests.
9.3.1 	Green Infrastructure
Sustainable site design integrates vegetation to reduce contaminated runoff and to facilitate
infiltration and groundwater recharge (Broughton and Apfelbaum, 1999). Native and nat-
uralized plant materials can significantly reduce maintenance costs for irrigation, mowing or
pruning, and pest control. In the Midwestern United States, for example, maintaining
irrigated turfgrass costs as much as six times the cost of maintaining a native prairie or wetland
community (Applied Ecological Services, 2000).
Ecological restoration can have the greatest positive impacts if these efforts are planned
strategically. Riparian restoration, for example, is an example of targeted remediation that
produces important environmental results, including:
Figure 9-19 	Master plan for the River Walk, an urban river-oriented recreational corridor in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Source:
Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
296 	Site Analysis

-- 314 of 387 --

Buffering aquatic habitats from contaminated stormwater runoff from upland
developed areas
Creating ecotone habitat for native plant and animal species
Shoreline stabilization and remediation produced by plantings to reduce erosion and
sedimentation of water bodies
A good site analysis, of course, can provide the “road map” for targeting these ecological
restoration efforts.
Low-impact development minimizes hydrologic impacts by infiltrating runoff to recharge
groundwater and remove waterborne pollutants. A major objective is to minimize the site’s
developed area and limit development to the most suitable areas (Prince George’s County,
2000). A second major objective is to slow and reduce runoff from the developed site. This
occurs by:
Figure 9-20 	Design sections
of the River Walk in Fort Lau-
derdale, Florida. Source: Edward
D. Stone, Jr., and Associates.
Used with permission.
Design Development 	297

-- 315 of 387 --

Controlling stormwater at the source (for example, minimize and mitigate land
development impacts at, or near, the site disturbance).
Disconnecting impervious surfaces to increase infiltration and reduce runoff.
Dispersing drainage from roofs and other large, impervious surfaces to lengthen flow
paths and encourage slow, shallow runoff over vegetated, pervious surfaces.
Using simple, small, nonstructural methods (for example, grassed swales and shallow
basins with gentle side slopes, rain gardens).
Green roofs and rain gardens can also reduce costs for heating and cooling buildings and
for managing stormwater runoff. Dispersing rooftop runoff over pervious surfaces before it
reaches a sewer drain or other impervious surface can decrease the annual runoff volume
from residential development sites by as much as 50 percent (Kwon, 2000).
Figure 9-20 	Continued.
298 	Site Analysis

-- 316 of 387 --

9.4 	CIRCULATION NETWORKS
Livable communities provide transportation choices (for example, walking, bicycling, and
transit) (Figure 9-23). Key design attributes include high levels of street connectivity, short
blocks, and medium-density mixed-use development accessible to high-quality transit ser-
vice. Research suggests that, on average, people in the United States are willing to walk a
maximum of one-half mile (.804 kilometer) for “premium transit and rail service” and
one-quarter mile (.402 kilometer) for other bus service (Kulash, 2001). But transit-served
communities also must be pedestrian-friendly.
Pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use neighborhoods include housing, shops, restaurants, and
other services, as well as human-scaled buildings and streetscapes. Livable communities place
less emphasis on minimizing traffic delays and more effort on traffic calming and increasing
safe and convenient transportation alternatives. These communities build pedestrian and
Figure 9-20 	Continued.
Design Development 	299

-- 317 of 387 --

bicycle circulation networks that are separate from the vehicle circulation system. When
integrated within compact mixed-use neighborhoods, well-designed pedestrian and bicycle
networks can reduce daily vehicle trips and daily vehicle miles traveled, and reduce the
polluting impacts of vehicles on the environment.
9.4.1 	Walkability
The built environment can either impede or facilitate active living—which is essential for
public health (Jackson and Kochtitsky, 2001). Over the last 60 years, population growth
coupled with urban sprawl have made many neighborhoods and communities unsafe for
pedestrians—particularly school-age children and the elderly. In 1969, nearly half of all
school-age children in the United States walked to school; by 1995 that figure had dropped
to just 10 percent (Quraishi et al., 2005).
Figure 9-20 	Continued.
300 	Site Analysis

-- 318 of 387 --

Designing the built environment requires close attention to the needs of people—not just
in vehicles, but also as pedestrians. Conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles frequently
result in pedestrian injuries and deaths. In fact, a leading cause of injury-related death among
children is pedestrian-related collisions with vehicles (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2002). Far too many communities in the United States have failed to ensure that
the needs of pedestrians are adequately met. In walkable neighborhoods, basic services are
located near homes, jobs, and transit—and vehicle traffic is “calmed” by street designs that
cater to pedestrian safety rather than to vehicle speed (Figure 9-24). Metropolitan areas with
higher population densities tend to be safer for pedestrians than more sprawling and sparsely
populated metropolitan areas (Quraishi et al., 2005).
Figure 9-21 	Building height, in
relation to the width of the open
space, affects pedestrians’ sense of
enclosure. Silver Spring, Maryland.
Design Development 	301

-- 319 of 387 --

TABLE 9-2 	Selected uses of plants to enhance the livability of the built environment.
Purpose 	Specific Use
Architectural 	Defining (enclosing) space
Creating linkages between buildings or spaces
Controlling or directing circulation
Marking the location of an entrance (for example, way finding and orientation)
Separating incompatible activities
Screening undesirable views
Framing desirable views or focal points
Softening building corners and walls
Providing scale
Engineering 	Stabilizing soils and shorelines
Slowing and filtering stormwater runoff
Facilitating stormwater infiltration and groundwater recharge
Reducing wind velocity
Buffering noise
Shading from solar radiation
Ecological 	Creating wildlife habitat (for example, food, cover, and shelter)
Providing corridors for wildlife movement
Improving air and water quality
Moderating the microclimate
Reducing the urban heat island effect
Protecting human health and enhancing healing
Adapted, in part, from: Booth (1983); Brooks (1994).
Figure 9-22 	A building
forecourt provides convenient
pedestrian access on sloping
terrain and an elegant sculptural
statement. San Francisco,
California.
302 	Site Analysis

-- 320 of 387 --

Figure 9-23 	Lakefront path
for pedestrians and bicycles in
Geneva, Switzerland.
Figure 9-24 	Streetscape
improvements enhance walk-
ability and sense of place.
Source: JJR SmithGroup.
SmithGroupJJR.
Design Development 	303

-- 321 of 387 --

William Whyte (1980), in The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces, examines the attributes of
successful outdoor urban spaces in New York City. These attributes are (1) seating, (2) food,
(3) exposure to both sunshine and shade, and (4) people (for example, proximity to a nearby
office building). Whyte’s research demonstrates that outdoor spaces not only facilitate
pedestrian movement but also provide safe and comfortable places for outdoor living. A fifth
attribute, regularly programmed entertainment, can make a successful outdoor space even
more popular.
Pedestrian circulation networks perform three important functions. They provide
(1) access to the site, (2) mobility within the site, and (3) outdoor spaces for socializing with
others and for individual activities such as reading or eating. Well-designed pedestrian
circulation networks provide a clear sense of entry and arrival to the site (Figure 9-25). They
also provide places for lingering, such as the following (Hall, 1966):
Figure 9-25 	Three
alternative downtown park
designs, each showing strong
pedestrian entry and circulation
solutions. Source: JJR
SmithGroup. 	SmithGroupJJR.
304 	Site Analysis

-- 322 of 387 --

Nodes—providing opportunities for social interaction
Oases—providing opportunities for quiet respite
Niches—providing opportunities for prospects with a refuge
Whether at the community, neighborhood, or site scales, a complete pedestrian circu-
lation system has the following design attributes: (1) separation, (2) connectivity, (3) capacity,
and (4) furnishings. Each of these design principles is summarized below.
Separation
Pedestrians are separated from vehicles and, where the systems intersect, walkways are
identified with paving changes, markings, or refuge islands to reduce pedestrian
crosswalk distances (Figure 9-26).
Figure 9-26 	A visually unified outdoor environment is created, in part, by the repeated use of similar shapes and materials. Note
the strong entry and arrival sequence and the bilateral symmetry along the project’s central axis. Source: Edward D. Stone, Jr., and
Associates. Used with permission.
Design Development 	305

-- 323 of 387 --

Pedestrian conflicts with vehicles, transit, and bicycles, and with natural hazards (for
example, steep cliffs), are minimized.
Vehicle-free zones are provided for pedestrians, especially in commercial centers,
multifamily housing developments, schools and campuses, and other areas with large
numbers of pedestrians.
Connectivity
Pedestrian “desire lines” are satisfied by conveniently linking common destinations
(for example, building entrances, transit stops, parking lots, and plazas).
The number and distance of walkway interruptions (for example, across large parking
lots) are minimized (Figure 9-27).
Disabled users have direct access from parking spaces to pedestrian walkways and from
walkways to building entrances (Figure 9-28).
All walkway gradients are safe to navigate even in inclement weather.
Capacity
A hierarchy of walkways are of sufficient size to accommodate expected pedestrian
traffic (Figure 9-29).
A hierarchy of plazas, seating areas, and other “outdoor rooms” are conveniently located
(for example, at building entrances, walkway intersections, waterfront promenades).
Figure 9-27 	A walkway
within a parking lot separates
pedestrians from vehicle traffic.
306 	Site Analysis

-- 324 of 387 --

Figure 9-28 	Direct access
from parking spaces to an adja-
cent walkway provides safe
connections for the disabled.
Figure 9-29 	This proposed waterfront development exhibits all four major pedestrian circulation system design principles:
separation, connectivity, capacity, and furnishings. Source: Edward D. Stone, Jr., and Associates. Used with permission.
Design Development 	307

-- 325 of 387 --

Furnishings
Outdoor spaces designed for pedestrians must be furnished, not unlike indoor spaces. The
following pedestrian amenities are essential elements of livable communities, enhancing
residents’ and visitors’ safety, comfort, and sense of place.
Special paving that helps to define pedestrian spaces at major building and site
entrances, and at major pedestrian walkways and intersections (Figure 9-30)
Lighting (human-scale fixtures and adequate illumination)
Furniture (seating in sun and shade), kiosks and signs, trash receptacles, and drinking
fountains
Seating areas (nooks, niches, and scenic overlooks)
Vegetation (trees, shrubs, annuals, and perennials)
Public art (Figure 9-31) and decorative fountains (Figure 9-32)
Overhead protection from the weather
9.4.2 	Taming the Automobile
Communities can reduce the number and distance of residents’ vehicle trips by mixing land
uses and by providing safe alternatives for pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders. Shorter
Figure 9-30 	Special paving
(for example, brick or stone)
enhances visual quality and
property values, and helps to
distinguish pedestrian space
from vehicle space.
308 	Site Analysis

-- 326 of 387 --

blocks, with lengths between 300 and 500 feet (91.4 and 152.4
meters), improve neighborhood walkability (Ewing, 1999, p.
4). Street networks with high levels of connectivity also tend to
reduce traffic congestion by distributing traffic across more
streets rather than concentrating traffic on a small number of
arterial streets. Safe and convenient linkages must be provided
from the on-site circulation systems to the adjoining public
transportation infrastructure.
Emergency vehicles require access to sites for fire protection
and medical emergencies. Vehicle turning radii, which vary by
truck length, wheel base, and number of axels, must be con-
sidered when designing emergency access routes to new
buildings. Truck turning radii also influence the design of
building service areas. Most buildings generate wastes or
recyclable materials that are temporarily stored on site and
picked up regularly by service providers. A loading dock,
which can be screened, along with trash and recycling con-
tainers, may be an essential element of a development’s site
program (Figure 9-33).
Vehicle parking can be provided in stand-alone struc-
tures, in underground structures beneath buildings, or even on
upper levels of buildings that have commercial uses on the
lower levels (Figure 9-34). Structures, although much more
costly to build, have the advantage of accommodating more vehicles within a smaller site
area or “footprint,” making more of the site available for other uses. On sites with high land
costs—particularly in locations that are well served by transit—higher-density, mixed-use
development can reduce vehicle parking needs.
Like any major component of the built environment, the organization and articulation of
parking lots determine not only how well they perform their intended function, but also
their impacts on community livability. Poorly designed and improperly sited parking lots can
impede pedestrian circulation, diminish visual quality, and weaken a community’s sense of
place. Corner parcels at street intersections are particularly important locations for buildings,
rather than surface parking lots, because of these sites’ high visibility.
Vehicle circulation in parking lots is best organized by defining the lot’s parking bays
and aisles. Landscaped peninsulas extending from the parking lot edges along with interior
landscaped islands confine vehicles to clearly defined circulation and parking patterns.
This improves driver orientation, reduces pedestrian/vehicle conflicts, and limits impervious
surfaces.
On sloping sites, surface parking lots with islands running parallel to the contours can
“take up the grade” of the slope and, by terracing the paved aisles and bays, significantly
reduce the cross-slopes on the paved surfaces (Figure 9-35). Terracing is particularly
appropriate in colder climates where freezing temperatures can make sloped pavements icy
and dangerous for pedestrians. If the lot is graded to encourage surface runoff into the islands,
these green spaces can also serve as bioinfiltration swales or rain gardens that retain storm-
water and promote groundwater recharge (Figure 9-36).
Figure 9-31 	Sculpture by
Henry Moore, an example
of public art within the built
environment in Zurich,
Switzerland.
Design Development 	309

-- 327 of 387 --

By intercepting precipitation, filtering surface runoff, and facilitating groundwater infil-
tration, planted areas reduce development impacts on the local hydrologic system. Parking
lot edges that are curbless or have openings in the curbs allow stormwater runoff to filter into
turf or bioretention areas. Porous paving (Figure 9-37) is another fine-scale tactic for dis-
connecting impervious surfaces (Ferguson, 2005; Thompson and Sorvig, 2000).
Planting islands must be large enough, however, to permit healthy tree root growth. The
width of one parking space (about 9 feet or 2.74 meters) is a reasonable dimension for islands
or peninsulas planted with shade trees. Even the proverbial “sea of asphalt”—ubiquitous in
suburban shopping malls across the United States—can be retrofitted with tree islands. Trees,
in and adjacent to parking lots provide seasonal interest and shade the pavement, which can
reduce local heat island effects.
Figure 9-32 	Fountain,
seating, and other landscape
amenities for pedestrians in
Boca Raton, Florida.
310 	Site Analysis

-- 328 of 387 --

Figure 9-33 	The visual
impacts of a loading dock can
be reduced through building
design and orientation, site
grading, and landscaping.
Figure 9-34 	Parking garage
with commercial uses on the
first story. Silver Spring,
Maryland.
Design Development 	311

-- 329 of 387 --

9.5 	BUILDINGS
Design development involves the spatial articulation or refinement of the
diagrammatic conceptual site plan. If a development pod on a concept plan
is designated as single-family housing, for example, the next step would be
to add walkways in addition to the individual building lots or parcels. If the
pod will be a multifamily housing cluster, design development would focus
on determining the size, shape, and location of the footprint for the building
or building ensemble.
In the design of urban infill projects, new buildings are expected to be
“good neighbors” and fit in contextually. This fitting in is often achieved by
echoing the massing, scale, proportion, or other design attributes of nearby
buildings—at least when the nearby buildings are well designed. Neigh-
borhood design guidelines for Seattle, Washington, aptly state (City of
Seattle Department of Planning and Development, 2005, p. 12):
A contextual design approach is not intended to dictate a historicist
approach, but rather one that is sensitive to surrounding noteworthy
buildings and style elements.
Articulating a building’s facades involves choices regarding materials, colors, shapes, and
textures. By echoing the attributes of well-designed precedents in the neighborhood,
community, or region, new buildings can enhance both the quality and distinctiveness of the
local built environment.
When a distinctive building style is repeated enough times, the style may be identified
with a particular city or region. Frank Lloyd Wright’s architectural legacy from the early
Figure 9-35 	Parking lot on a
sloping site. The planted island
reduces the cross-slope or gra-
dient of the adjacent parking
bays.
Figure 9-36 	Bioretention
swale collects and filters
stormwater runoff from
parking surfaces and facil-
itates groundwater recharge.
312 	Site Analysis

-- 330 of 387 --

twentieth century, for example, continues to influence contemporary architectural design in
the Midwestern United States. His horizontal, landscape-hugging houses in Chicago and
Milwaukee are iconic structures that define the Prairie Style. Bungalows, a housing style
popularized in the early twentieth century, are also common in Midwestern New Urbanist
communities, where great attention is given to architectural design (Figure 9-38).
San Francisco is world renowned for its Victorian architecture. The narrow vertical
massing, pastel colors, and highly articulated facades of row houses define the older
streetscapes and neighborhoods of this hilly, picturesque city. Similarly, Miami Beach,
Florida, is identified with the rounded forms and pastel colors of Art Deco–style architecture.
9.5.1 	Building Uses
Location-efficient neighborhoods mix together, in close proximity, residential, commercial,
civic, and recreational land uses. Residential and commercial uses, for example, may be in
separate nearby buildings. Or they may be within individual buildings, typically with res-
taurants and retail uses on the first story and professional offices and residential uses on the
stories above. When these different uses are close together and are served by well-designed
pedestrian circulation systems, residents, employees, and customers are able to drive less and
walk more for at least some of their daily trips.
Figure 9-37 	Porous paving
(concrete grid) in a commercial
parking lot.
Design Development 	313

-- 331 of 387 --

Mixed-use redevelopment is gradually changing the face of metropolitan America. The
development of neighborhood centers on former shopping mall sites—especially when
located near public transit—is a positive step toward greater community sustainability and
livability. But higher-density development places a premium on interconnected outdoor
spaces that are thoughtfully designed for pedestrians. As Gehl (2010, p. 119) aptly observes:
“Life takes place on foot.”
9.5.2 	Building Siting
A building’s location can have a substantial influence on the character of the nearby built
environment. Earlier chapters addressed a variety of biophysical, cultural, and legal factors, or
design determinants, that influence how and where buildings are sited. These conditions
vary widely across the urban-to-rural continuum. What may be appropriate in either a rural
or suburban environment may be inappropriate in an urban setting. Good site planning
involves the placement, or siting, of buildings in response to each unique combination of site
and contextual conditions (Table 9-3).
Sustainability concerns are especially relevant in siting new buildings. The environmental
impacts of new development can be reduced by reusing previously developed sites.
Figure 9-38 	A single-family
house, designed in the bunga-
low style and built in the 1990s,
within a neotraditional neigh-
borhood in Middleton Hills,
Wisconsin. Source: Bridget
Lang. Used with permission.
314 	Site Analysis

-- 332 of 387 --

Context-sensitive building siting can also reduce energy consumption by adhering to the
following site-planning principles (United States National Park Service, 1993):
Preserve existing vegetation, which can add character to the site and provide energy-
conserving shade and wind protection.
Take advantage of natural site features, such as topography, sunlight, shade, and
prevailing breezes, to promote energy conservation and natural ventilation.
Orient the building with the long side on the east-west axis to allow for the greatest
winter solar gains and to minimize cooling loads from excessive solar heat gain.
In colder climates, locate driveways, parking, entrances, and loading docks on the
south side of buildings (in the northern hemisphere) to minimize snow and ice
buildup.
9.5.3 	Building Design
Massing
A building’s scale is a function of both its massing and surface articulation. Human-scaled
streetscapes typically are enclosed by buildings that are at least two to four stories in height. If
the buildings are taller than four stories, the higher stories may be stepped back from the
streets’ edges. Varying the building height with step-backs is superior—from a pedestrian’s
perspective—to the cavernous streetscapes created by tall buildings that dwarf the pedestrians
at street level.
Besides the visual impacts, tall buildings affect the streetscape microclimate. Depending
on the street’s orientation to the sun’s daily and seasonal movement, tall buildings may
TABLE 9-3 	Examples of common site conditions that influence building siting and design.
Site Conditions 	Design Influences
Topography (Slope, Aspect, and Elevation) 	Structural wind loading; architectural elevations
Soil Types, Textures, and Load-Bearing Capacity 	Foundation location and engineering
Vegetative Cover and Existing Native Plant
Populations
Solar load access and avoidance; construction boundaries; stormwater
management
Wildlife Migration and Nesting Patterns 	Footprint location; site clearing
Geologic and Seismic Conditions 	Foundation type and location; structural specifications
Parcel Shape and Adjacent Land Uses and Buildings 	Capacity to accommodate a proposed building size; building access
points
Utility Easements or Corridors, Lines, and Sizes 	Footprint location; location of building’s tie-in to utilities
Micro-Climate Factors (for Example, Solar and Wind
Loads)
Layout for solar orientation; location of entrances, windows, and
loading docks; location of air inlets and exhaust
Circulation Networks for Pedestrians, Bicycles,
Vehicles, and Transit
Orientation to other pedestrian destinations
Regulatory Requirements 	Building setbacks or build-to lines; fire protection
Adapted, in part, from: Los Alamos National Laboratory Sustainable Design Guide (Chapter 3, Building Siting, p. 37).
Design Development 	315

-- 333 of 387 --

confine the streetscape to near-perpetual shade. In blustery weather conditions, these
buildings can also create chilling downdrafts and swirling winds at street level.
Building Envelope Articulation
Regardless of a building’s height along the street edge, the design of the building’s first few
stories can help foster a lively and pedestrian-friendly streetscape. Buildings that are human-
scale tend to be well articulated at the ground level and at least at the first one or two stories
above that level. This 2- to 3-story zone has the greatest visual impact on pedestrians
entering or walking past the building.
Facade transparency is particularly important in buildings in commercial districts and
neighborhood centers (National Main Street Center, 1995). A building with windows
occupying at least 30 percent at the first story’s facade adds visual interest and also allows a
visual connection between the building’s interior and exterior. Conversely, when a build-
ing’s first story is a blank wall, or one with few openings of any consequence, the visual effect
is often perceived as hostile.
Facade openings—windows and doors—create more inviting streetscapes when they are
placed along major pedestrian walkways (Figure 9-39). A visually interesting streetscape can
also include awnings and other features that protect pedestrians from local weather condi-
tions. In the rainy Pacific Northwest, generous awnings are a valued pedestrian amenity in
the city of Seattle. In a hot subtropical climate, like that of South Florida, the streetscape
arcade is a more favored approach to pedestrian protection. Careful facade design has
numerous benefits for building occupants, including thermal comfort, access to fresh air,
interesting views, and access to functional outdoor space.
Choices of construction materials are driven by several factors, including material dura-
bility, cost, local traditions, climate, and appearance (Yeang, 1995). Which materials are
used, and how they are combined, determine—to a large extent—if the project is attractive
and responsive to its context. Yet, not all new buildings should conform aesthetically to their
surroundings. When a new building will serve a prominent civic function—such as a library,
school, or hospital—departure from the norm may be in order and, indeed, desirable.
Because of their special purposes, these important buildings within the community deserve a
more prominent, even iconic, visual presence.
9.6 	SITE PLAN REVIEW
The most successful countries place high value on their buildings and on the spaces between
their buildings.
—Architecture Design Scotland (2012; http://www.ads.org.uk/)
9.6.1 	Objectives
Site plan review is a systematic assessment of a development proposal’s compliance with
applicable codes, standards, and accepted site design practices (Sanford and Farley, 2004). Site
316 	Site Analysis

-- 334 of 387 --

plan review seeks to ensure that the site’s development will
meet basic standards, including protecting sensitive natural
environments, minimizing impacts on surrounding properties,
and ensuring efficient access to public services (Wyckoff,
2003). Yet, development can—and should—exceed these
basic standards.
A well-designed project is, in many cases, not much more
expensive to build than a poorly designed project. And good
site planning and architectural design can yield substantial
social, economic, and environmental benefits. Savvy real estate
developers understand this. In a panel discussion convened by
Architectural Record magazine, Dennis Carmichael asserted
(Dean, 1997, p. 49):
. . . developers have learned that a good design equals
return on investment. Rather than bulldozing a site into
submission, they now try to celebrate its intrinsic qualities.
Formal site plan and development review processes can
benefit from the synergistic collaboration of multiple dis-
ciplines, especially architects, landscape architects, engineers,
and urban planners. These review processes can help munici-
palities minimize development impacts on public health,
safety, and welfare (Table 9-4).
9.6.2 	Required Information
Site plan review is typically required for proposals involving
new development or for substantial changes in buildings,
parking lots, or other site infrastructure. Determining whether
a proposal complies with the applicable development regulations requires information about
the site’s contextual conditions.
Prior to the formal site plan submittal, a preapplication conference is usually set up with
the planning staff to discuss the applicant’s ideas for the site, relevant development regula-
tions and neighborhood plans, and the required application materials. Site plan review
requirements vary among local jurisdictions, but an increasing number of communities
require the submission of a site analysis to help reviewers assess the development’s potential
impacts on the site and its surroundings.
Submission requirements for the review of a development proposal may include most, if
not all, of the following:
1. Completed application form: Includes a written description of the intended uses
2. Filing fee: May be a prorated fee computed on the basis of the site’s area, dwelling
units, or building floor area
Figure 9-39 	The transpar-
ency of this building’s first-
story facade engages pedes-
trians on the adjoining walk-
ways. Source: City of Madison,
Wisconsin.
Design Development 	317

-- 335 of 387 --

3. Proof of ownership and a current legal description of the property
4. Location map: Shows the subject property, zoning classification, and nearby streets
5. Site analysis: Maps cultural and natural features on the site, including existing trees,
water courses, topography, and rare or endangered plants
6. Site plan
Title block, date, north arrow, graphic scale, and legal description of the property
Legend with data on the lot area, floor area, floor area ratio, impervious surface
area, and impervious surface area ratio
Property lines and existing and proposed right-of-way lines; existing and pro-
posed easements
Existing and proposed building footprints and heights
Signage and lighting
Existing and proposed drainage facilities
Location and type of permanently protected green space
7. Landscape or planting plan
Required buffer plantings
Required parking lot plantings
Plant species and sizes, fencing types and heights, and berm heights
TABLE 9-4 	Site plan reviews seek to protect public health and safety and promote the public interest.
Goal 	Specific Focus of the Review
Public Health and Safety 	Natural and human-made hazards
Excessive light and noise
Building ventilation and daylight
Pedestrian and bicycle circulation
Recreational opportunities
Visual quality
Convenience and Efficiency 	Traffic flow, ingress, and egress
Parking capacity
Building deliveries and waste removal
Land use juxtapositions and intensities
Environmental Quality 	Air and water quality
Erosion and sediment control
Endangered and threatened species habitats
Energy conservation
Municipal Services Capacity 	Schools
Police, fire, and medical protection
Utilities (wastewater, electricity, water)
Social services
Social Equity 	Access to education, recreation, medical care, jobs, and affordable housing
Equal participation in political decision making
Stabilization of property values
Source: Adapted, in part, from Chapin and Kaiser (1985), Sanford and Farley (2004), and Wyckoff (2003).
318 	Site Analysis

-- 336 of 387 --

8. Site engineering/earthwork plans
Grading and erosion control
Stormwater management
Site utilities
9. Building plans
Finished exterior treatment, including materials, textures, and colors
Preliminary ground floor plan
10. Impact assessments
Environmental impacts
Fiscal impacts
Traffic impacts
Health impacts
Sediment, erosion, and stormwater impact
Lighting and noise impacts
11. Schedule for project completion
Private property has specific development rights, yet property ownership also comes with
responsibilities. These rights and responsibilities can vary considerably, depending on the
property’s context. A project’s negative effects on the community may be mitigated through
impact fees or other “exactions.”
Exactions are payments of money or land, in lieu of fees, to compensate local jurisdictions
for the costs of needed off-site improvements to public infrastructure—particularly trans-
portation and utility systems. Improvements may include widening street intersections,
adding traffic signals, and extending water distribution or sanitary sewer lines. Development
impact fees also may be used to improve fire and police protection, build new schools, or
purchase land for parks and playgrounds (Altshuler and Gomez Ibanez, 1993).
Still relatively rare in the United States, health impact assessments reflect the growing body of
research linking public health and the design of the built environment. Mitigating a project’s health
impacts can vary widely, ranging from reducing vehicle traffic to protecting a site’s mature trees.
Legal challenges to land use regulations in the United States typically address questions of
either due process or constitutionality (Owen, 1994). Due process challenges, for example,
may assert that the city council did not comply with the city’s own ordinances. Constitu-
tionality challenges assert that one or more of the city’s ordinances are in conflict with the
Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. The court may determine that the restrictions
denied the property owner “reasonable” economic use of the land. This would then con-
stitute a “taking” of private property, and it would warrant “just compensation” under the
law. In evaluating these claims, the courts take into consideration many factors, including the
nature of the property and its inherent suitability for the proposed uses.
9.6.3 	Public Hearings
Communities are increasingly concerned with how well a development fits in with its
surroundings. The site plan review process provides an opportunity for the public to review
and comment on development proposals. A well-designed development plan not only
Design Development 	319

-- 337 of 387 --

satisfies its program requirements, but it is also responsive to the site’s physical, biological,
and cultural contexts.
Public meetings are an important part of the design review process. Municipal planning
staff reviews the proposal and may briefly explain it to the appropriate review body (for
example, the planning commission, design review panel, or urban design commission). The
client or the client’s agent (the architect or landscape architect, for example) usually explains
the project and answers any questions from the review committee.
Because site planning and architectural design are explicitly three-dimensional, graphic
communication can play an important role in the process. A thorough site analysis should be
the foundation of any context-sensitive development or redevelopment proposal. Elevation
and section drawings can help explain the intended vertical and horizontal relationships
among buildings and other site elements. Other illustrative materials include physical
models, axonometric and isometric drawings, and perspective renderings—either from an
eye level or aerial view. Photo-simulations and three-dimensional “fly-through” imaging are
feasible using CAD, GIS, and other specialized software.
Project approval may hinge on the actions that will be taken to avoid or mitigate negative
development impacts. To protect public health, safety, and welfare, municipalities may
impose conditions on the approval of the development proposal (Case Study 9-1). A site
plan is approved when all of its components are found to be in compliance with applicable
zoning and land development requirements. Building permits are not issued for construction
until the proposal has received site plan approval.
9.7 	CONCLUSION
Urban land use legacies present opportunities for remediation and redevelopment. Cor-
recting past mistakes and mitigating the impacts of previous site uses are an important part of
sustainable urban planning and design. Smart Growth, New Urbanism, Context-Sensitive
Design, and related design paradigms have the potential to transform cities into healthier and
more livable places. New vibrant and walkable places can become catalysts for economic
prosperity and community pride.
As population grows globally, the importance of cities—and urban design excellence –
are becoming more widely appreciated. The planning and design professions are increasingly
asserting leadership—within the public, nonprofit, and private sectors—to improve the
quality of the built environment. This important work includes developing, implementing,
and evaluating improved analytical tools, design approaches and construction technologies,
and even public policies.
Case Study 9–1 	Design Review
ARCHITECTURE+D ESIGN
S COTLAND
The following selected comments are from meeting minutes of formal design reviews for three urban infill and
redevelopment projects in Scotland. Conducting design reviews is one of the roles of Architecture Design
Scotland (www.ads.org.uk), as reflected in the mission statement:
320 	Site Analysis

-- 338 of 387 --

Case Study 9–1 	Design Review (continued)
Architecture and Design Scotland (A DS) is a nondepartmental public body, established by the Scottish
Executive in April 2005 as the national champion for good architecture, design, and planning in the built
environment. . . . Our main aim is to inspire better quality in design and architecture in the public and
private sectors so that Scotland’s built environment contributes in a positive way to our quality of life
and our built heritage.
The design review process—as the following excerpts attest—focuses on the proposal’s responsiveness to
context, on preventing and mitigating negative development impacts, and on encouraging pedestrian-friendly
infill and redevelopment.
PROJECT 1: RESIDENTIAL AND LEISURE DEVELOPMENT
Site: Former fabrication yard
Location: Whiteness Head, Ardersier, Scotland
Design Review: January 24, 2006
The Panel is supportive of the project in principle. . . . The way in which nature is being incorporated into
the designs is particularly exciting.
Increased permeability to the south, and a stronger relationship with the boulevard, could also enrich the
waterfront experience.
Discussions with neighboring landowners should continue to ensure that the integrity of the forest’s edge
to the south is maintained.
The long, central boulevard could be more broken up along its length, to create more particular and
clearly defined spaces.
PROJECT 2: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Site: Former swimming pool site with prominent riverside frontage and a location within a conservation area
Location: Inverness, Scotland
Design Review: January 24, 2006
The current proposals would benefit from reworking based on further contextual analysis and awareness
of how buildings present to the river.
Further work is required to analyze the “grain” of the area . . . this analysis could help to provide a design
that is rooted in the riverside townscape of Inverness.
The stepping form of the buildings to the river seems to emphasize their bulk and the separate four-story
block does not best relate to the adjacent development.
The panel does not support the view that an iconic (architectural) statement is merited in this location.
Instead the development should seek to reinforce the street pattern and contribute to the backdrop of
the wider townscape.
Design Development 	321

-- 339 of 387 --

QUESTION
1. Are there building and outdoor space ensembles in your community that are well
designed? Or, poorly designed? Critically analyze these built environments and
explain—from a design review perspective—why they are successful or unsuccessful
places.
Case Study 9–1 	Design Review (continued)
PROJECT 3: MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING A SUPERMARKET
Site: Inner-city site fronting on Beith Street, located on the north bank of the River Kelvin and close to
Patrick Cross
Location: Glasgow, Scotland
Design Review: February 7, 2006
The wider area is undergoing change and the proposal should be considered in that changing context.
This is particularly relevant in relation to the opportunity for creating high quality pedestrian links to
Glasgow Harbor and the new Museum of Transport.
An integrated mixed-use development has not been achieved. Individual uses are separated out and the
different elements have not been used to mutual benefit. For example, residential or other uses might
have been wrapped around the blank facades of the supermarket to enliven the frontages to the streets
and reduce the bulk of development.
The development is not permeable . . . the unrelenting wall and mass of the development would dom-
inate Beith Street.
How unwelcoming the pedestrian experience would be for anyone passing along either Beith Street or
the west of the building. The riverside walkway would be particularly hostile and potentially dangerous.
Problems appear to stem from the application of an overly large retail footprint on a single level . . . there
is scope to reduce the store footprint by splitting retail uses onto separate levels.
As the river is a precious asset, it seemed curious that the store blocked this off; yet, the suggested housing
layout for the adjacent site allowed views to the railway embankment . . . the store could screen the
embankment and an attractive, permeable, and inviting residential environment could be created along
the river’s edge.
322 	Site Analysis

-- 340 of 387 --

a p p e n d i x 	A
Mapping and Graphics
MAPPING FUNDAMENTALS
What Is a Map?
A map is a graphic representation, or model, of a geographic setting (Robinson et al., 1995).
Maps are efficient ways to graphically portray important physical, biological, and cultural
conditions on the site and in adjacent areas. Jenks (1976, p. 19) states:
Maps are created to provide information about spatial relationships. No other medium
communicates distance, directional, and pattern relationships as well.
To make a map, the following three elements must be known (Fisher, 1982, p. 5):
Study space
Information or values to be displayed
Locations, within the space, to which the information applies
Throughout human history, maps have been drawn or printed on cloth, paper, Mylar,
and other surfaces. Today, site planners rely on computer-generated digital maps or hard-
copy maps plotted from digital data. Making and using maps requires familiarity with some
basic cartographic concepts and principles, as discussed below.
Map Scale
Map scale is the ratio of the distance on the map to the distance on the surface portrayed by
the map. Map scale, therefore, is commonly expressed as a ratio (e.g., 1:24,000). A map’s
scale gets larger as the map’s unit of measurement becomes closer in size to the geographic
unit of measurement. As a rule of thumb, large-scale maps have reduction ratios of 1:50,000
or less; small-scale maps have reduction ratios of 1:500,000 or more (Robinson et al., 1995).
323

-- 341 of 387 --

Map scale also may be expressed in units of distance measure. In the United States, where
businesses and governments still employ the English measurement system, map scale is often
expressed in inches and feet (e.g., 1 inch 	200 feet). This is especially common in site
planning. Converting map scale from a ratio to an equation is straightforward (Table A-1).
Converting linear or area measurements between English and metric scales also may be
necessary (Table A-2).
Measurement Scale
Attribute values may be mapped as either absolute or derived values, but these values are
typically expressed in one of the following four measurement scales (Table A-3):
Nominal
Ordinal
Interval
Ratio
Each of these measurement scales has potential uses in a site analysis.
Nominal Scale
Attribute values that do not imply rank or order are expressed as nominal categories. Land
use, for example, is expressed this way. Land use classes include residential, commercial, and
TABLE A-1 	Two common ways of expressing a map’s scale.
Ratio 	Equation
1:24,000 	1 inch 	24,000 inches, or 1 inch 	2000 feet
1:10,000 	1 centimeter 	10,000 centimeters, or 1 centimeter 	10 meters
TABLE A-2 	Conversion of length and area between metric and English units of
measurement.
Measure 	Unit (English) 	Unit (Metric)
Length 	1 foot (12 inches) 	0.3048 meter
1 yard (3 feet) 	0.914 meter
1 mile (1760 yards) 	1.61 kilometers
0.39 inch 	1 centimeter
3.28 feet 	1 meter
0.62 mile 	1 kilometer
Area 	1 square yard 	0.84 square meter
1 acre (43,560 square feet) 	0.40 hectare
1 square mile 	2.59 square kilometers
1.20 square yards 	1 square meter
2.47 acres 	1 hectare
0.39 square mile 	1 square kilometer
324 	Appendix A

-- 342 of 387 --

industrial uses. Although these land uses differ in many ways, land use is not an attribute that
implies rank or quantity. Land cover is another attribute that can be mapped and displayed
on a nominal scale.
Ordinal Scale
The ordinal scale of measurement conveys a gradation or ranking of elements. The U.S.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), for example, ranks soils by the limitations
they present to various land uses. Site limitations for excavations to construct building
foundations range from no significant constraints at one end of the gradient to severe
constraints at the other end.
Interval Scale
The interval scale of measurement applies to attributes with continuous spatial distributions.
Topographic elevation is an example of a continuously distributed attribute measured on an
interval scale. Development intensity—measured by the percentage of a parcel’s area cov-
ered by buildings and other impervious surfaces—is another attribute that can be expressed
on an interval scale.
Ratio Scale
The ratio scale of measurement divides one attribute value by another. Topographic slope,
for example, is an attribute measured on the ratio scale. Slope gradient values are computed
by dividing the slope’s vertical change in elevation by the slope’s horizontal length. Slope
values may be expressed as either a ratio (e.g., 3:1) or a percentage (e.g., 33 percent). A
percentage value indicates the angle of the slope relative to a horizontal, or flat, surface.
Slope gradients of hillsides and unpaved site surfaces are typically expressed as percentages.
Ratio values are used in the building industry to quantify roof slopes, or pitches (e.g., 9/12
pitch 	9 inches of “rise” for every 12 inches of “run”).
Thematic Maps
Thematic maps express information about a single spatially distributed attribute. Site con-
textual data can be communicated with two types of maps:
TABLE A-3 	Common measurement scales and examples
of site attributes expressed in each scale.
Scale 	Site Attributes
Nominal 	Land use
Plant communities
Slope aspect
Ordinal 	Soil drainage capability
Visual quality
Interval 	Terrain elevation
Ratio 	Slope gradient
Appendix A 	325

-- 343 of 387 --

Choropleth maps
Isopleth maps
A choropleth map expresses attribute data as discrete classes or categories. Each of these
classes is represented on the choropleth map by a single color or texture (Muller, 1976, pp.
169–175). Choropleth maps can express variables measured on each of the four measure-
ment scales. Common examples of choropleth maps include soil maps (showing soil types),
slope maps (showing topographic gradients), and land use maps (showing land use types).
A key decision in thematic mapping is choosing the number of classes to map. Research
on human cognition suggests that seven (plus or minus two) is the maximum number of
objects that most individuals can compare without becoming confused (Miller, 1956; Saaty
and Vargas, 1982). Therefore, keep the number of classes within a mapped theme relatively
small. To help the user understand the context of the mapped area, include additional
information, such as property boundaries, adjacent roads or streets, and streams, lakes, and
other significant natural features.
An isopleth map, in contrast, represents data measured on the interval scale. An isopleth is
a line drawn on a map through points of equal value for a single attribute, such as elevation
(topography) or water depth (bathymetry). A topographic, or contour, map is a common
example of an isopleth map.
Data Sources
Remote Sensing
Remote sensing is the process of collecting and analyzing data about the earth’s environment
from a distance, usually from an aircraft or satellite. Digital sensors aboard airplanes and
satellites can record both visible and invisible electromagnetic energy reflected from the
earth’s surface. The major commercial satellite-based sensors record data in several wave-
length bands. These digital images support research and monitoring in geology, engineering,
agriculture, and other fields. Aerial photography, perhaps the most common form of remote
sensing, is particularly useful for land planning.
Aerial Photography
Airborne cameras capture either oblique or vertical images of the earth’s surface. Oblique
aerial photographs can provide synoptic views of the site from a relatively low viewing angle.
These photos are often acquired to get an overall sense of the site that cannot be easily
attained from the ground. Vertical aerial photos are taken with the surface of the camera lens
parallel to the earth’s surface. These photos have both vertical and horizontal distortion that,
unless corrected, precludes accurate measurements of surface distance directly from the
photos (Lillesand and Kiefer, 2000).
Horizontal distortion results from the physical properties of the camera lens. The hori-
zontal scale of an uncorrected aerial photograph actually varies over the photo’s surface. At
the edges of the photograph, the distance depicted is greater than the same distance depicted
closer to the photo’s center. Horizontal distortion can be corrected through digital pho-
togrammetry, using specialized software and a rectification process called “rubber sheeting.”
326 	Appendix A

-- 344 of 387 --

In contrast to horizontal distortion, variation in the distance between the camera and the
earth’s surface causes vertical distortion. Vertical distortion is especially significant in pho-
tographs of landscapes with large elevation changes, as in hilly or mountainous terrain.
Vertical distortion is not a significant problem in photographs of terrain where there is
relatively little variation in elevation.
Horizontally and vertically rectified orthophotos can serve as the base images for analysis
overlays. These aerial photos can be used for land use and land cover inventories and to gain
a synoptic view of the site within its environmental and cultural contexts (Paine and Kiser,
2003). On very large sites and for communitywide planning, digital orthophotographs can
be integrated within a geographic information system.
Three basic film types are commonly used in aerial photography for land planning
purposes:
Color
Black and white (panchromatic)
Color infrared
Color infrared film is sensitive to visible light and to near-infrared portions of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum that are invisible to the human eye. This film is particularly useful in
monitoring vegetation growth and vigor. Color infrared photographs are regularly used to
detect the spread of oak wilt blight, the progression of gypsy moth dispersal and damage, and
other tree diseases and insect infestations (Lillesand and Kiefer, 2000).
LIDAR
LIght Detection And Ranging (LIDAR) is a laser-scanning technology that is very useful in
creating remotely sensed topographic surveys. Similar to radar, a LIDAR instrument
mounted on a low-flying aircraft transmits light to the landscape below. Some of this light is
reflected or scattered back to the instrument, where it is recorded or imaged. The time
required for the light to travel to the target and back to the LIDAR, and the properties of
that reflected light, are used to determine the range to the target as well as its general
properties (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [NOAA] Coastal Services
Center, 2008).
Because LIDAR can “see” through vegetation to detect the subtle topographic variation
below tree and shrub canopies, these data can provide more accurate topographic infor-
mation than aerial photography, and at a lower cost and within a shorter period than a field
survey (Triad Associates, 2005). The resulting digital elevation models are particularly useful
in the early stages of development projects involving site selection. High-resolution public-
domain topographic data in the State of Washington, for example, are available through the
Puget Sound Lidar Consortium (http://psrc.org/data/gis/lidar/).
Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
The GPS is a worldwide navigation and positioning system created for both military and
civilian use. Developed by the U.S. Department of Defense, a network of 24 satellites serve
as spatial reference points that enable receivers on the ground to compute their geographic
Appendix A 	327

-- 345 of 387 --

position. The GPS identifies geographic position in three basic steps (Hurn, 1993, pp. 7–9) as
follows:
Step 1: Satellites are the reference points.
The orbital motion—and exact positions—of 24 GPS satellites are continuously
monitored by ground tracking stations.
Step 2: Signal travel time gives the distance.
Specially coded messages, or signals, are regularly transmitted by satellite. A
receiver on the ground calculates its distance to the satellite by multiplying the signal
travel time by the speed of light.
Step 3: Three distances give the position.
Using trigonometry, the ground receiver uses the distances to the three satellites to
“triangulate,” or locate the receiver’s position on the earth’s surface.
GPS is particularly useful for the inventory and analysis of natural and cultural features on
large sites. Handheld GPS receivers can be used to map individual specimen trees and other
site features.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
A GIS consists of computer hardware and software, data on locations and attributes, and data
about the data—or metadata. Rapid advances in computer hardware and software have
vastly improved the mapping and spatial analysis capabilities of commercially available GIS
technology. Improvements in software interfaces have made formerly tedious mapping and
spatial analysis tasks accessible to a broad audience.
The advantages of using a digital GIS in site selection and planning include the following
(Arlinghaus, 1994):
Ease and speed of map revision and map scale changes.
Inexpensive production of short-run special-purpose maps.
Potentially greater mapping accuracy.
Changes in the database are immediately reflected in digital maps.
Spatial analysis.
Raster or Vector?
Digital spatial data are available in two forms: raster or vector. Raster data are grid-cell
surfaces composed of hundreds, thousands, or—with large datasets—millions of cells. Vector
data, in contrast, consist of arcs, nodes, and polygons. Both types of spatial data are linked to
tabular databases that store attribute information about the locations delineated by each grid
cell or arc, node, and polygon. The choice of GIS data models, or forms, depends on the
intended purpose of the data.
Raster data are widely used for environmental modeling and natural resource manage-
ment. Site gradients, such as elevation, are effectively expressed in a raster format. Vector
328 	Appendix A

-- 346 of 387 --

data, in contrast, are better suited for mapping cultural features such as roads, buildings, and
land parcel boundaries.
Massachusetts GIS (MassGIS) is a state-level government initiative providing a central
source of large-scale georeferenced data. These and other digital data are potentially useful
for planning applications at the municipality, neighborhood, and site scales. Vector data
layers that are, or will be, available in the MassGIS library include the following:
Administrative boundaries (for example, municipal zoning and regional planning
agencies)
Infrastructure (for example, state roads, transmission lines, rail trails)
Topography and physical resources (for example, surficial geology, soils)
Water-related features (for example, wetlands and streams, aquifers, barrier beaches)
Cultural resources (for example, state register of historic places and landmarks)
Regulated areas (for example, underground storage tanks and wellhead protection
areas)
Digital orthophotos for the entire state are available on compact disc (CD) or through the
Internet at www.state.ma.us/mgis. Black-and-white orthophotos are available in four
resolutions (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 meters). Digital terrain models (DTMs) are also available
with three-meter contour intervals. These images meet or exceed the United States National
Map Accuracy Standards (http://nationalmap.gov/standards/nmas.html). The source of the
data, the scale of the data, and how and when they were collected can affect data accuracy
and, of course, the reliability of analyses based on these data. Therefore, the accuracy with
which the data were developed should determine the maximum scale at which the data are
displayed and overlayed. Disregarding the scale of the source material can introduce errors
when attempting to register (or overlay) multiple data layers.
Georeferencing
Maps are georeferenced to coordinate systems or mathematical projections. According to
Fisher (1982, p. 20):
A map projection is the transformation of coordinates measured on the earth’s surface
(spherical coordinates or latitude and longitude) to coordinates measured on a flat
surface (planar or x and y coordinates).
An in-depth review of coordinate systems is beyond the scope of this book, but a few of
the more widely adopted systems are briefly summarized. Among the coordinate systems
used in the United States, the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) grid system is widely
used for topographic maps, natural resource maps, and satellite imagery. The UTM grid
system divides the area of the earth between 84 degrees north and 80 degrees south lati-
tude into cells that are 6 degrees of longitude (east–west dimension) and 8 degrees of latitude
(north–south dimension). Each 6-degree-by-8-degree cell, or quadrilateral, is divided into a
nested system of squares. The sizes of these square grid cells (for example, 10,000 meters or
1000 meters) depend on the scale of the map.
Appendix A 	329

-- 347 of 387 --

Other coordinate systems that are widely used in the United States, and in similar forms in
other countries, are the State Plane Coordinate (SPC) system and the Public Land Survey
System (PLSS). The SPC system, a rectangular grid structure linked to locations within the
national geodetic survey system, has four times the accuracy of the UTM system (Robinson
et al., 1995). The PLSS is a much older coordinate system. First implemented in 1785,
this grid structure was used to map about three-fourths of the land area of the United
States (Robinson et al., 1995). The primary units of this nested grid system are townships
(6-by-6-mile or 9.7-by-9.7-kilometer squares), sections (1-by-1-mile or 1.6-by-1.6-kilometer
squares), and quarter sections (160 acres or 64.7 hectares).
GRAPHIC COMMUNICATION
Communication Context
When communicating graphically, five factors influence what and how information is
conveyed. These principles—message, medium, audience, setting, and time (Wester,
1990)—are briefly reviewed below.
Message
Communication goals vary from one phase of the site-planning process to another. In the
site inventory, for example, conveyed information includes the locations of significant
constraints such as steep slopes, shallow bedrock, or wetlands. In conceptual design, how-
ever, the locations of proposed buildings and pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems
and the physical linkages among them are among the information conveyed.
Medium
Because the message content varies throughout the site-planning process, the techniques for
communicating this information also vary. Concept plans can be simple bubble diagrams often
drawn—not drafted—in a “loose” graphic style (Linn, 1993). Too much precision in the
conceptual design phase may suggest to clients and other reviewers that the site plan is already
“etched in stone.” Consequently, a too detailed concept plan may inhibit constructive dialogue
on potential design improvements. Construction drawings, in contrast, are not only technical
but also legal documents that are part of the contract for a project’s implementation. These
drawings are precisely drafted—whether by hand or with a computer.
Audience
Graphic communication is often intended for multiple audiences. On many site-planning
projects, the audience includes the client, design team, government officials, citizen boards
and commissions, and other community stakeholders. An audience’s familiarity with plan-
ning and design principles determines how project information is conveyed. Clarity often
can be enhanced by omitting extraneous information.
Setting
The setting for communicating project information to intended audiences affects how the
information is prepared and organized. If a presentation will occur in a large public meeting,
330 	Appendix A

-- 348 of 387 --

digital photographs and illustrations may be projected on a large screen. In a smaller setting,
like a conference room, drawings mounted on foam-core presentation boards may be better
suited to encourage discussion.
Time
The time that is available to prepare and present the graphic materials determines, in part,
which graphic techniques to employ. For example, a “quick and dirty” tracing paper pre-
sentation may be appropriate for discussing concept alternatives with the client and other
members of the design team. Whether the materials will be available to the audience for
subsequent review is also a consideration. If so, then more detailed information can be
conveyed with notes, tables, and graphs.
Information Hierarchies
Information hierarchies play a key role in organizing graphic and nongraphic commu-
nication and in communicating the intended messages effectively. In written commu-
nication, for example, letters of the alphabet are symbols that are combined to form
words, which are organized into sentences and paragraphs. Graphic communication also
employs symbols—points, lines, and polygons—that convey information individually and
in combination.
Hierarchies are created by the design and arrangement of the elements on each sheet or
work surface. These elements include the following:
Illustrations (maps, photos, plans, sections, elevations, and perspectives)
Text (title information for the entire sheet and for individual sheet components; labels
and notes associated with individual images or the entire project)
Tables and graphs (summarize important data concerning existing or proposed site
attributes)
Attention can be drawn to more important information by emphasizing the size; font;
placement; line weight; or color of certain text or the lines and polygons within certain
images. Contrast—making any one of these elements stand out in relation to the other
nearby elements—gives the accentuated element greater importance.
Layout
Layout is the spatial arrangement or placement of images, text, and other elements on a
presentation board or space. The size and proportions of the presentation medium
(board or sheet) influence the arrangement of the elements. A common approach is to
divide the sheet into halves, thirds, or quarters (Samara, 2002). The resulting spaces can
be columns or rows running the entire sheet length and width. Or the sheet can be
subdivided horizontally and vertically, creating a grid cell framework to help organize
the images and text on the sheet. The placement of elements in the presentation space
affects the clarity of the intended message. A prominent, or central, location accentuates
the information placed there.
Appendix A 	331

-- 349 of 387 --

Line Weight
Line weight is a combination of line width and value, or darkness. Effective diagramming,
especially in the site analysis and conceptual design phases, employs a range—or hierarchy—
of line weights. Greater line weight, of course, implies greater importance.
Labeling
Effective labeling is concise and informative, conveying essential information succinctly
rather than in full sentences. Labels supplement the information represented in diagrams,
plans, and other illustrations.
Not all information on a map or drawing deserves equal weight. A lettering hierarchy
emphasizes the more important information through increased letter size, line weight, style,
or color. Larger letters are typically used for the project and individual sheet titles. Titles and
subtitles serve as visual signposts that facilitate way finding among the information conveyed
about a project.
Some fonts—such as Helvetica—are easier to read than others. Text with lowercase
lettering tends to be easier to read than text with all capital letters.
Graphs and Tables
Statistics to help explain the project program, the site’s existing conditions, or the proposed
design can be summarized efficiently with tables and graphs The existing and proposed
percentages of a site devoted to different land uses, for example, can be effectively sum-
marized with pie charts or bar graphs. Statistical tables and graphs are underutilized com-
munication tools in site planning and design.
332 	Appendix A

-- 350 of 387 --

a p p e n d i x 	B
Resources
INTRODUCTION
This appendix includes a variety of interesting websites that were functional in the summer
of 2012. This listing of resources is far from exhaustive. It is a small sample of the vast
network of websites pertaining to sustainable and context-sensitive site planning and design.
FEDERAL AGENCIES (UNITED STATES)
Census Bureau—TIGER
Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing (TIGER) system
URL: http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/
Resources: digital database of geographic features such as roads, railroads, rivers, lakes,
political boundaries, and census statistical boundaries for the entire United States.
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ)
URL: http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ceq
Resources: NEPAnet—information on where and how to file an environmental impact
analysis; source of the National Environmental Policy Act and other federal legislation.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)—Office of Water
URL: http://water.epa.gov/
Resources: information on low-impact development and stormwater management prac-
tices; online source of environmental legislation.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
URL: http://www.fws.gov/
Resources: national wetlands inventory maps and data; information on endangered species,
ecosystem management, and other environmental programs.
National Geospatial Program
URL: http://www.usgs.gov/ngpo/
Resources: an online source of metadata and maps of topography and geology, biological
resources, and water resources; Web links to the National Map and the National Atlas.
333

-- 351 of 387 --

National Climatic Data Center
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
URL: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/ncdc.html
Resources: climate archives and statistical tables for weather observation stations nation-
wide; weather summaries for cities and states.
National Weather Service
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
URL: http://www.weather.gov/
Resources: statistics on fatalities, injuries, and damages caused by weather-related hazards;
general information weather-related topics.
Partnership for Sustainable Communities
URL: http://www.sustainablecommunities.gov/
Resources: Useful tools and information (developed or sponsored by the partnering
agencies) to help communities develop and support neighborhoods that provide transpor-
tation choices and affordable housing, while increasing economic competitiveness and
encouraging targeted reinvestment in infrastructure. The Partnership agencies are the
Department of Transportation, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
the Environmental Protection Agency.
FEDERAL SOURCES (INTERNATIONAL)
Natural Resources Canada
URL: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/home
Resources: archive of topographic maps (1:50,000 and 1:250,000 scale).
Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities
(Australia)
URL: http://www.environment.gov.au/
Resources: online databases for biodiversity, cultural heritage, marine and water, parks and
reserves, and other resources; publications and online courses on sustainability and envi-
ronmental education; federal environmental and cultural heritage legislation.
United Kingdom Standard Geographic Base
URL: http://www.ngdf.org.uk/
Resources: online directory and clearinghouse for providers and users of geospatial data;
standards for spatial data and metadata.
STATE SOURCES (UNITED STATES)
MassGIS
Office of Geographic and Environmental Information (Massachusetts)
URL: http://www.mass.gov/mgis/massgis.htm
Resources: online digital orthophotos; GIS metadata and datalayers for political bound-
aries, infrastructure, topography, coastal and marine features, demographics, and much more.
California Land Use Planning Information Network (LUPIN)
URL: http://www.ceres.ca.gov/planning/index.html
334 	Appendix B

-- 352 of 387 --

Resources: information on federal, state, and local land use regulations; technical infor-
mation on various aspects of the built environment, including brownfields, infrastructure,
planning and design, permitting, and pollution.
Nonprofit Organizations
Center for Liveable Communities
URL: http://www.lgc.org/center/
Resources: bibliographies, studies, reports and model ordinances pertaining to pedestrian
and transit-oriented land use planning across the United States.
Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT)
URL: http://www.cnt.org/
Resources: CNT is a “think-and-do tank” that combines rigorous research with effective,
trans-disciplinary solutions to contemporary public policy issues, including transportation,
community development, energy, water, and climate change. Online resources include
bibliographies, studies, reports and model ordinances pertaining to pedestrian- and transit-
oriented development.
Center for Watershed Protection (CWP)
URL: http://www.cwp.org/
Resources: information on effective techniques to protect and restore urban watersheds;
assists local and state governments in developing effective urban stormwater and watershed
protection programs.
Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU)
URL: http://www.cnu.org/
Resources: news, events, and educational materials related to New Urbanism.
Cornell University Legal Information Institute—Land Use Library
URL: http://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/Land_use
Resources: extensive database of federal, state, and local land use legislation and case law;
links to other land use–related websites.
Cyburbia—Planning Resource Directory
URL: http://www.cyburbia.org/
Resources: clearinghouse for information on community development, environment,
historic preservation, land use regulation, transportation, New Urbanism, and much more.
Low Impact Development Center
URL: http://lowimpactdevelopment.org/
Resources: information on site design techniques to protect environmental quality by
replicating preexisting hydrologic site conditions.
National Main Street Center
National Trust for Historic Preservation
URL: http://www.preservationnation.org/main-street/
Resources: books and other resources on urban revitalization and rehabilitating historic
buildings.
Planetizen
URL: http://www.planetizen.com/
Appendix B 	335

-- 353 of 387 --

Resources: Planetizen is a public-interest information exchange for the urban planning,
design, and development community. Online resources include urban planning news,
commentary, interviews, event coverage, book reviews, announcements, jobs, and training
opportunities.
Smart Communities Network
URL: http://www.smartcommunities.ncat.org/
Resources: online database of planned developments, communities, and subdivisions;
guiding principles, financing, and more.
Smart Growth Network
URL: http://www.smartgrowth.org/
Resources: bibliographies, reports, and other information on brownfield redevelopment,
infill development, green building, and other Smart Growth issues.
U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)
URL: http://www.usgbc.org/
Resources: information on energy- and resource-efficient building policies, programs,
technologies, standards, and design practices.
Professional Associations
American Institute of Architects (AIA)
URL: http://www.aia.org/
Resources: online catalog of books and reports on architectural design; news on govern-
ment affairs and other related issues; conference announcements.
American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association (AREUEA)
URL: http://www.areuea.org/
Resources: research and news on current and emerging real estate issues.
American Planning Association (APA)
URL: http://www.planning.org/
Resources: online catalog of books and reports on community planning and development;
conferences and educational opportunities; online planning advisory service.
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
URL: http://www.asce.org/
Resources: Online catalog of books, reports, and codes and standards pertaining to
infrastructure design; news on government affairs, including public policy issues; opportu-
nities for employment, continuing education, and leadership training.
American Society of Landscape Architects (ASLA)
URL: http://www.asla.org/
Resources: online catalog of books and reports on site planning and design; online database
of CAD details; news and conference announcements; The Dirt blog (a weekly digest of
design and policy developments concerning land and water use, urbanization, transportation,
and climate change).
International Development Research Council (IDRC)
URL: http://www.idrc.ca/EN/Pages/default.aspx
Resources: commercial real estate news and management strategies; site selection database;
online bookstore.
336 	Appendix B

-- 354 of 387 --

National Association of Home Builders (NAHB)
URL: http://www.nahb.com/
Resources: project examples of traditional neighborhood development (TND), green
building/cluster development, and urban infill development; news on trends in housing
construction and costs.
Urban Land Institute (ULI)
URL: http://www.uli.org/
Resources: books and other sources of information on urban planning, land use, and real
estate development; project reference files summarize lessons learned, development chal-
lenges, and project data (including photos and site plans).
Commercial Sites
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI)
URL: http://www.esri.com/
Resources: catalog of personal computer–based GIS and mapping software, including
ARC/INFO and ArcView; online bookstore; GIS news and conferences; GIS education
and training opportunities.
GIS Data Depot
URL: http://data.geocomm.com/
Resources: online clearinghouse for a wide range of biophysical and cultural GIS data for
counties and states in the United States and for other countries; source of GIS-related news
and events.
SiteSeeker
URL: http://siteseeker.org/
Resources: online database of available buildings and sites, research parks, and closed
military bases.
Terraserver
URL: http://www.terraserver.com/
Resources: very high resolution (less than 2 meters) satellite imagery (panchromatic digital
imagery is orthorectified and georeferenced).
Appendix B 	337

-- 355 of 387 --

Glossary
Accuracy: The closeness of observations, computations, or estimates to the true values or
to values accepted as being true.
Aerial: Of, pertaining to, or occurring in the air or atmosphere.
Aerial Photograph, Oblique: An aerial photograph taken with the camera axis directed
between the horizontal and the vertical: (1) high oblique—an oblique photograph in which
the horizon is shown; (2) low oblique— an oblique photograph in which the horizon is not
shown.
Aerial Photograph, Vertical: An aerial photograph taken with the optical axis of the
camera approximately perpendicular to the earth’s surface and with the film as nearly
horizontal as is practical.
Algorithm: A statement of the steps to be followed in the solution of a problem; an
algorithm may be in the form of a word description, an explanatory note, or a labeled
diagram or flowchart.
Alluvium: Any material deposited by running water; the soil material of floodplains and
alluvial fans.
Altitude: Elevation above or below a reference datum; the datum is usually the mean sea
level.
Analog: A form of data display in which values are shown in graphic form, such as curves.
Aquifer: Any subsurface material that holds a relatively large quantity of groundwater and
is able to transmit that water readily.
Area: A generic term for a bounded, continuous, two-dimensional object that may or may
not include its boundary.
Aspect: The horizontal direction in which a slope faces, commonly expressed as compass
direction (for example, North, Northeast) or degrees clockwise from North.
Attribute: A defined characteristic of an entity (for example, topographic slope).
Attribute Value: A specific quality or quantity assigned to an attribute (for example,
15 percent slope).
Band: A specific frequency or range of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum.
338

-- 356 of 387 --

Baseflow: The portion of streamflow contributed by groundwater; it is a steady flow that is
slow to change even during rainless periods.
Berm: A low, linear mound of earth and soil.
Buffer: (1) The zone around the perimeter of a wetland or lake where land use activities are
limited in order to protect the water features; (2) a zone of a specified distance around any
map feature in a GIS layer.
Cadastre: A parcel-based land information system.
Carrying Capacity: The level of development density or use an environment is able to
support without suffering undesirable or irreversible degradation.
Characterization: The delineation or representation of the essential features or qualities
existing at a site.
Choropleth Map: A map comprised of areas of any size or shape representing qualitative
phenomena (for example, soil fertility) or quantitative phenomena (for example, eleva-
tion); often has a mosaic appearance.
Climate: The general or representative conditions of the atmosphere at a place on earth.
Clustering: A land development concept in which buildings and infrastructure are
grouped together, and large contiguous areas of open space remain undeveloped.
Coefficient of Runoff: A number given to a type of ground surface representing the
proportion of rainfall converted to overland or surface flow.
Color-Infrared Film: Photographic film sensitive to energy in the visible and near-infrared
wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum (usually from 0.4 to 0.9 millimeter).
Concentration Time: The time taken for a drop of rain falling on the perimeter of a
drainage basin to pass through the basin to the outlet.
Constraint: Any feature or condition of the built or natural environment that poses an
obstacle to proposed land uses.
Contour: An imaginary line on the ground, all points of which are at the same elevation
above or below a specific datum.
Contour Interval: The difference in elevation between two adjacent contours.
Control Point: Any station in a horizontal or vertical control system that is identified on a
photograph and used for correlating the data shown on the photograph.
Coordinate System: A reference system for uniquely defining the location of any point
on earth.
Crown Diameter, Visible: The apparent diameter of a tree crown imaged on a vertical
aerial photograph.
Dataset: A file or files that contain related geometric and attribute information; a collection
of related data.
Datum: A reference system for measuring another attribute, such as horizontal or vertical
location.
Decibel: A unit of measurement for the loudness of sound based on the pressure produced
in air by a noise; denoted dB.
DEM (Digital Elevation Model): A topographic surface arranged in a data file as a set of
regularly spaced x, y, z coordinates, where z represents elevation.
Design Storm: A rainstorm of a given intensity and frequency of recurrence, used as the
basis for stormwater management.
Glossary 	339

-- 357 of 387 --

Detention: A strategy used in stormwater management in which runoff is detained on-site,
to be released later at some prescribed rate.
Development Density: A measure of intensity of development or land use; defined, for
example, on the basis of area covered by dwelling units, impervious surfaces, or building
floor area.
Digitization: The process of converting a photograph, map, or other image into numerical
format.
Discharge: The rate of water flow in a stream channel or from a site; measured as the
volume of water passing through a cross section of a stream or swale per unit of time,
commonly expressed as cubic feet (or meters) per second.
Discharge Zone: An area where groundwater seepage and springs are concentrated.
Disturbance: An impact on the environment, such as forest clearing, characterized by
physical or biological change.
DLG (Digital Line Graph): A digital representation of cartographic information; digital
vectors converted from maps and related sources.
DOQ (Digital Orthophotoquadrangle): A digital image with the properties of an
orthographic projection; derived from a digitized vertical aerial photograph so that image
displacement caused by camera tilt and relief of terrain are removed or rectified. Orthophotos
combine the image characteristics of a photograph with the geometric qualities of a map.
Drainage Basin: The area that contributes runoff to a stream, river, or lake.
Drainage Network: A system of stream channels usually connected in a hierarchical fashion.
Easement: A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a
public or quasi-public purpose.
Ecosystem: A group of organisms linked together by a flow of energy; also, a community
of organisms and their environment.
Ecotone: The transition zone between two groups, or zones, of vegetation.
Electromagnetic Radiation (EMR): Energy propagated through space in the form of an
advancing interaction between electric and magnetic fields. EMR is also called “elec-
tromagnetic energy.”
Elevation: Vertical distance from a datum point, such as mean sea level, to a point or object
on the earth’s surface; not to be confused with altitude, which refers to points or objects
above the earth’s surface.
Endangered Species: According to the U.S. Endangered Species Act, a species in
imminent danger of extinction in all or a significant portion of its range.
Environment: The aggregate conditions that affect the existence or development of
properties intrinsic to a site.
Environmental Assessment: A preliminary study or review of a proposed action (project)
and the influence it could have on the environment; often conducted to determine the
need for more detailed environmental impact analysis.
Environmental Site Characterization: The delineation or representation of the essential
features or qualities, including all of the conditions, influences, and circumstance, existing
at a place or location designated for a specific use, function, or study.
Ephemeral Stream: A stream without baseflow; one that flows only during or after
rainstorms or snowmelt events.
340 	Glossary

-- 358 of 387 --

Erosion: The removal of rock debris by moving water, wind, or another agent; generally,
the sculpting or wearing down of the land by erosional agents.
Eutrophication: The increase of biomass of a water body leading to infilling of the basin
and the eventual disappearance of open water.
Evapotranspiration: The 	loss 	of 	water 	from 	the 	soil 	through 	evaporation 	and
transpiration.
Feasibility Study: A type of planning study aimed at identifying the most appropriate use
of a site.
Filtration: A term generally applied to the removal of pollutants, such as sediment, with
the passage of water through a soil, organic, and/or fabric medium.
Floodway Fringe: The zone designated by U.S. federal flood policy as the area in a river
valley that would be lightly inundated by the 100-year flood.
Floor Area: The area of all floors of a building or structure.
Floor-Area Ratio: A building’s total floor area divided by the total building parcel area.
Footprint: Site area covered by a building’s first story.
Geocoding: A coding process in which a digital map feature is assigned an attribute value
(for example, vertical or horizontal location).
Geographic Information System (GIS): A mapping system designed for analysis,
planning, and management applications involving overlapping and complex distribu-
tional patterns. Two classes of GIS are “vector” and “raster.”
Geomorphology: A science that deals with the land and submarine relief features of the
earth’s surface, or the comparable features of a celestial body, and that seeks a genetic
interpretation of them.
Georeference: To establish the relationship between coordinates on a planar map and real-
world coordinates.
Geospatial Data: Information identifying the geographic location and characteristics
of natural or constructed features and boundaries on the earth; geospatial data may
be derived from, among other things, remote sensing, mapping, and surveying
technologies.
Global Coordinate System: The network of east–west and north–south lines (parallels
and meridians) used to measure locations on earth; this system uses degrees, minutes, and
seconds as the units of measurement.
Global Positioning System (GPS): The Navigation Satellite Timing and Ranging
(NAVSTAR) GPS is a passive satellite-based navigation system operated and maintained
by the Department of Defense (DOD).
Gradient: The inclination or slope of the land; often applied to systems such as streams and
highways.
Ground Data: Data collected on the ground, and information derived therefrom, as an aid
to the interpretation of remotely recorded surveys, such as airborne imagery; generally,
this survey should be performed concurrently with the airborne surveys; data collected on
weather, soils, and vegetation types and conditions are typical.
Ground Resolution: The area on the terrain that is covered by the instantaneous field of
view of a detector; ground resolution is determined by the altitude of the remote sensing
system and the instantaneous field of view of the detector.
Glossary 	341

-- 359 of 387 --

Ground Truth (jargon): The term coined for data and information obtained on surface or
subsurface features to aid in interpretation of remotely sensed data; “ground data” and
“ground information” are the preferred terms.
Groundwater: The mass of water that occupies the subsoil and upper bedrock zone; the
water occupying the zone of saturation below the soil-water zone.
Habitat: The local environment from which an organism gains its resources; a habitat is often
variable in size, content, and location, changing with the phases in an organism’s life cycle.
Hardpan: A hardened soil layer characterized by the accumulation of colloids and ions.
Hazard Assessment: An evaluation of the dangers to land use and people from envi-
ronmental threats, such as floods, tornadoes, and earthquakes.
Horizon: A layer in the soil that originates from the differentiation of particles and che-
micals due to moisture movement within the soil column.
Hydric Soil: Soil characterized by wet conditions or saturation most of the year; often
organic in composition.
Hydrograph: A streamflow graph that shows the change in discharge over time, usually
hours or days.
Hydrologic Cycle: The planet’s water system, described by the movement of water from
the oceans to the atmosphere to the continents and back to the oceans.
Impervious Cover: Any hard surface material, such as asphalt or concrete, that limits
stormwater infiltration and induces high runoff rates.
Infiltration Capacity: The rate at which a ground material takes in water through the
surface; measured in inches or centimeters per minute or hour.
Infrared Film: Photographic film capable of recording near-infrared radiation (just beyond
the visible to a wavelength of 0.9 micrometer) but not capable of recording thermal
infrared wavelengths.
Infrared Image: An image acquired within the wavelength from about 0.7 millimeters to
an indefinite upper boundary, sometimes set at 2.6 millimeters. Photographic infrared is
0.7 to about 2.6 millimeters; thermal infrared is between 2.6 and 13.5 millimeters.
Infrared Radiation: Mainly longwave radiation of wavelengths between 3.0 and 4.0 and
100 micrometers, but also includes near-infrared radiation, which occurs at wavelengths
between 0.7 and 3.0–4.0 micrometers.
Isopleth Map: A map comprised of lines (isolines) that connect points of equal attribute value.
Lacustrine Wetland: A wetland associated with standing water bodies such as ponds,
lakes, and reservoirs.
Land Cover: The materials such as vegetation and concrete that cover the ground. See also
Land Use.
Land Use: The human activities occurring within an area of the landscape (for example,
agricultural, industrial, and residential uses).
Layer: In a geographic information system, spatial data of a common type or theme.
Legend: An explanation of the symbols, colors, and styles used on a map or plan, usually in
a box next to the map or plan.
Lithosphere: The solid part of the earth or other spatial body, distinguished from the
atmosphere and the hydrosphere.
342 	Glossary

-- 360 of 387 --

Lot: A parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law.
Lot Frontage: The portion of a lot adjacent to a street.
Magnetic Declination: The deviation in degrees east or west between magnetic north
and true north.
Map: A graphical representation of a portion of the earth’s surface, drawn to scale, on a
specific projection, showing natural and human-made features.
Map Projection: An orderly system of lines on a plane representing a corresponding
system of imaginary lines on a datum surface.
Metadata: “Data about data” describe the content, quality, condition, and other char-
acteristics of data (for example, the date and source from which field data were collected).
Microclimate: The climate of small spaces, such as an inner city, a residential area, or a
mountain valley.
Mitigation: A measure used to lessen the impact of an action on the natural or human
environment.
Mitigation Banking: In wetland mitigation planning, the practice of building surplus
acreage of compensation credits through replacement, enhancement, restoration, and/or
preservation of wetlands.
Monochromatic: Pertaining to a single wavelength or, more commonly, to a narrow
band of wavelengths.
Moraine: The material deposited directly by a glacier; also, the material (load) carried in or
on a glacier; as landforms, moraines usually have hilly or rolling topography.
Mosaic: A term used in landscape ecology to describe the patchy character of habitat as a
result of fragmentation through land use; an assemblage of overlapping aerial or space
photographs or images whose edges have been matched to form a continuous pictorial
representation of a portion of the earth’s surface.
Nonpoint Source: Water pollution from a spatially diffuse source such as the atmosphere
or agricultural land.
Palustrine Wetland: Wetlands associated with inland sites that are not dependent on
stream, lake, or oceanic water.
Panchromatic: A term used for films that are sensitive to broadband (that is, the entire
visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum).
Parent Material: The particulate material in which a soil forms; the two types of parent
material are “residual” and “transported.”
Peak Discharge: The maximum flow of a stream or a river in response to an event such as
a rainstorm, or over a period of time such as a year.
Percolation Rate: The rate at which water moves into soil through the walls of a test pit;
used to determine soil suitability for wastewater disposal and treatment.
Percolation Test: A soil permeability test performed in the field to determine the suit-
ability of a material for wastewater disposal and treatment.
Permeability: The rate at which soil or rock transmits groundwater (or gravity water in
the area above the water table).
Photogrammetry: The art or science of obtaining reliable measurements by means of
photography.
Glossary 	343

-- 361 of 387 --

Photosynthesis: The process by which green plants synthesize water and carbon dioxide
and, with the energy from absorbed light, convert them into plant materials in the form
of sugar and carbohydrates.
Physiography: A term from physical geography that is traditionally used to describe the
composite character of the landscape over large regions.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): An area planned, developed, operated, and
maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures and common areas; may
include multiple land uses (for example, commercial, residential).
Plat: A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
Point Source: Water pollution that emanates from a single source such as a sewage plant or
stormwater outfall.
Projection: See Map Projection.
PUD: See Planned Unit Development.
Radiation: The process by which radiant (electromagnetic) energy is transmitted through
free space; the term used to describe electromagnetic energy, as in “infrared radiation” or
“short-wave radiation.”
Rainfall Intensity: The rate of rainfall measured in inches or centimeters of water
deposited on the surface per hour or minute.
Rational Method: A method of computing the discharge from a small drainage basin in
response to a given rainstorm; computation is based on the coefficient of runoff, rainfall
intensity, and basin area.
Recharge: The replenishment of groundwater with water from the surface.
Recharge Zone: An area where groundwater recharge is concentrated.
Relief: The range of topographic elevation within a prescribed area.
Retention: A strategy used for stormwater management in which runoff is retained on-site
in basins, underground, or released into the soil.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, one or
more walkways, utility lines, or other special uses.
Riparian: The environment along the banks of a stream; often more broadly applied to the
larger lowland corridor on the stream valley floor.
Riparian Wetland: Wetlands that form on the edge of a water feature such as a lake or
stream.
Risk Management: An area of planning that involves preparation and response to hazards
such as floods, hurricanes, and toxic waste accidents.
Rubber Sheet: a procedure to adjust features of a digital geographic information system
layer in a nonuniform manner; representing “from” and “to” locations are used to define
the adjustment.
Runoff: The flow of water from the land as both surface and subsurface discharge; in the
more restricted and common use, surface discharge in the form of overland flow and
channel flow.
Scale: The relationship between a distance on a map, chart, or photograph and the cor-
responding distance on the earth.
Septic System: A sewage system that relies on a septic tank to store and/or treat waste-
water; generally, an on-site (small-scale) sewage disposal system that depends on the soil
for wastewater treatment.
344 	Glossary

-- 362 of 387 --

Setback: The minimum distance that a structure or facility should be separated from an
edge, such as a property line.
Siltation: The deposition of sediment in water due to soil erosion and stormwater runoff.
Solar Gain: The amount of solar radiation absorbed by a surface or setting in the landscape.
Solar Heating: The process of generating heat from absorbed solar radiation.
Soil Profile: The sequence of horizons, or layers, of a soil.
Solstice: The dates when the declination of the sun is at 23.27 degrees north latitude (the
Tropic of Cancer) and 23.27 degrees south latitude (the Tropic of Capricorn)—June 21–
22 and December 21–22, respectively.
Spatial Data: Data with implicit or explicit information about location.
Stream Order: The relative position, or rank, of a stream in a drainage network. Streams
without tributaries, usually the small ones, are first-order; streams with two or more first-
order tributaries are second-order; and so on.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or
parcels for sale or development.
Sun Angle: The angle formed between the beam of incoming solar radiation and a plane at
the earth’s surface.
Surge: A large and often destructive wave caused by intensive atmospheric pressure and
strong winds.
Threatened Species: According to the U.S. Endangered Species Act, a species with a
rapidly declining population that is likely to become endangered.
TIN: Triangulated irregular network. A surface representation derived from irregularly
spaced points and breakline features. Each sample point has an x, y coordinate and a z
(surface) value.
Topsoil: The uppermost layer of the soil, characterized by a high organic content.
Water Table: The upper boundary of the zone of groundwater. In fine-textured materials,
it is usually a transition zone rather than a boundary line. The configuration of the water
table often approximates that of the overlying terrain.
Wellhead Protection: Land use planning and management to control contaminant
sources in the area contributing recharge water to community wells.
Wetland: An area where the ground is permanently wet or wet most of the year and is
occupied by water-loving (or water-tolerant) vegetation, such as cattails, mangrove, or
cypress.
Zenith: For any location on earth, the point that is directly overhead to an observer.
This glossary was compiled, in part, from these sources:
Caliper Corporation. 1994–1995. Maptitude 3.0 User’s Guide. Newton, Massachusetts:
Caliper Corporation.
Listokin, D., and C. Walker. 1989. The Subdivision and Site Plan Handbook. New
Brunswick, New Jersey: Center for Urban Policy Research.
Marsh, W. M. 1998. Landscape Planning, 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Glossary 	345

-- 363 of 387 --

References
Abler, R., D. Janelle, A. Philbrick, and J. Sommer. 1975. Human Geography in a Shrinking
World. North Scituate, Massachusetts: Duxbury Press.
Ackoff, R. L., 1989. From Data to Wisdom. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 16: 3–9.
Ahern, J. 1991. Planning for an Extensive Open Space System: Linking Landscape Structure
and Function. Landscape and Urban Planning, 21: 131–145.
Alaska Department of Education. 1997. Site Selection Criteria and Evaluation Handbook.
Juneau: Alaska Department of Education.
Alexander, C., S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein. 1977. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings,
Construction. New York: Oxford University Press.
Altshuler, A. A., and J. A. Gomez-Ibanez. 1993. Regulation for Revenue: The Political Economy
of Land Use Exactions. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
American Society of Civil Engineers. 1996. Environmental Site Investigation Guidance Manual.
New York: American Society of Civil Engineers.
American Society of Golf Course Architects. 2000. Handbook: New Development Steps.
[Online: http://www.golfdesign.org/regular/hand/dvlpmnt.htm]
Ames, D. L., and L. F. McClelland. 2002. Historic Residential Suburbs: Guidelines for
Evaluation and Documentation for the National Register of Historic Places. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Interior, National Park Service.
Ammons, D. N., R. W. Campbell, and S. L. Somoza. 1992. Selecting Prison Sites: State
Processes, Site-Selection Criteria, and Local Initiatives. Athens: University of Georgia, Carl
Vinson Institute of Government.
Anderson, P. F. 1980. Regional Landscape Analysis. Reston, Virginia: Environmental Design
Press.
Applied Ecological Services. 2000. Cost of Native vs. Non-Native Species for Landscaping.
Unpublished fact sheet. Brodhead, Wisconsin: Applied Ecological Services. Architec-
ture Design Scotland. 2012. [Online: http://www.ads.org.uk/]
346

-- 364 of 387 --

Arendt, R. 1999. Crossroads Hamlet, Village Town: Design Characteristics of Traditional Neighbor-
hoods, Old and New. Planning Advisory Service Report 487/488. Chicago: American
Planning Association.
Arendt, R. 1999. Growing Greener: Putting Conservation into Local Plans and Ordinances.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Arlinghaus, S. L., ed. 1994. Practical Handbook of Digital Mapping: Terms and Concepts. Boca
Raton, Florida: CRC Press.
Arnold, C. L., Jr., and C. J. Gibbons. 1996. Impervious Surface Coverage: The Emergence
of a Key Environmental Indicator. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(2):
243–258.
Arriaza, M., J. F. Canas-Ortega, J. A. Canas-Maueno, and P. Ruiz-Ayiles. 2004. Assessing
the Visual Quality of Rural Landscapes. Landscape and Urban Planning 69(1): 115–125.
Auer, M. 2008. Sensory Perception, Rationalism and Outdoor Environmental Education.
International Research in Geographic and Environmental Education, 17(1): 6–12.
Bacon, E. 1974. Design of Cities. New York: Penguin Books.
Bacow, A. F. 1995. Designing the City: A Guide for Advocates and Public Officials. Washington,
D.C.: Island Press.
Barrows, H. S. 1996. Problem-Based Learning in Medicine and Beyond: A Brief Overview.
In L. Wilkerson and W. H. Gijselaers, eds., New directions for teaching and learning,
no. 68. Bringing Problem-Based Learning to Higher Education: Theory and Practice, pp. 3–13.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Beardsley, M. 1966. Aesthetics from Classical Greece to the Present: A Short History. New York:
Macmillan.
Beatley, T., and K. Manning. 1997. The Ecology of Place: Planning for Environment, Economy,
and Community. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Beck, E.C. 1979. The Love Canal Tragedy. EPA Journal (January). http://www.epa.gov/
history/topics/lovecanal/01.htm.
Beer, A. R. 1990. Environmental Planning for Site Development. London: E&F.N. Spon.
Ben-Joseph, E., and T. Szold, eds. 2005. Regulating Place: Standards and the Shaping of Urban
America. New York: Routledge.
Bloom, A. L. 1978. Geomorphology: A Systematic Analysis of Late Cenozoic Landforms. Eng-
lewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Bookout, L. W. 1994. Value by Design: Landscape, Site Planning, and Amenities. Washington,
D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
Booth, N. K. 1983. Basic Elements of Landscape Architectural Design. Prospect Heights, Illinois:
Waveland Press.
Bosselman, F. P., and D. Callies. 1972. The Quiet Revolution in Land Use Control. Prepared
for the Council on Environmental Quality. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Boyer, E. 1990. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate. The Carnegie Founda-
tion for the Advancement of Teaching. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
References 	347

-- 365 of 387 --

Brooks, K. R. 1994. Landscape Architecture: Process and Palette. In T. J. Bartuska and G. L.
Young, eds., The Built Environment: A Creative Inquiry into Design and Planning,
pp. 221–230. Menlo Park, California: Crisp Publications.
Broughton, J., and S. Apfelbaum. 1999. Using Ecological Systems for Alternative Storm-
water Management. Land and Water, 43(5): 10–13.
Brown, C. R., and T. K. Scarborough. 1993. Applying the Problem-Seeking Approach to
Engineering Programming. In W. F. E. Preiser, ed., Professional Practice in Facility Pro-
gramming, pp. 47–64. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Brown, R. D., and T. J. Gillespie. 1995. Microclimatic Landscape Design. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Bunch, R. 2001. Determinants in Moving Business Schools Toward Sustainability. Assessing
Progress Toward Sustainability in Higher Education consultation presentation paper.
Washington, D.C. [Online: http://www.ulsf.org/pub_declaration_parvol52.htm]
Burchell, R., A. Downs, B. McCann, and S. Mukherji. 2005. Sprawl Costs: Economic Impacts
of Unchecked Development. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Buss, T. F. 2001. The Effect of State Tax Incentives on Economic Growth and Firm
Location Decisions: An Overview of the Literature. Economic Development Quarterly,
15(1): 90-105.
Carpenter, P., T. Walker, and F. Lanphear. 1975. Plants in the Landscape. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman and Company.
Carson, R. 1962. Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Castle, G. H., III, ed. 1998. GIS in Real Estate: Integrating, Analyzing, and Presenting Locational
Information. Chicago, Illinois: Appraisal Institute.
Center for Neighborhood Technology. 2012. Prospering in Place: Linking Jobs, Development,
and Transit to Spur Chicago’s Economy. Chicago: Center for Neighborhood Technology.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. Web-based Injury Statistics Query and
Reporting System (WISQARS) Fatal Injury Reports. National Center for Injury Preven-
tion and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Online: www
.cdc.gov/ncipc/wisqars]
Chapin, F. S., Jr., and E. J. Kaiser. 1985. Urban Land Use Planning, 3rd ed. Urbana: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
Chrisman, N. 1997. Exploring Geographic Information Systems. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
City of Aberdeen. 2004. Chapter 8 (Community Appearance), in City of Aberdeen Com-
prehensive Plan. City of Aberdeen, South Dakota.
City of Livermore. 1999. South Livermore Valley Specific Plan (adopted November 17, 1997;
amended January 25, 1999). City of Livermore, California.
City of Madison. 2006. City of Madison Comprehensive Plan. City of Madison, Wisconsin.
City of Seattle Department of Planning and Development. 2005. Wallingford.
CLARB (Council of Landscape Architecture Registration Boards). 1998. Study of the
Profession of Landscape Architecture Now Complete. CLARB News, 13: 1–8.
348 	References

-- 366 of 387 --

Clark, R., and M. Pause. 2005. Precedents in Architecture: Analytic Diagrams, Formative Ideas,
and Partis. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Clark, W. W., and B. A. Bohne. 1999. Effects of Noise on Hearing. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 281: 1658–1659.
Clark, W. 2007. Sustainability Science: A Room of Its Own. PNAS, 104(6): 1737–1738.
Computer Terrain Mapping. 1997. Visual Landform Analysis. Colorado: CTM, Inc. [Online:
www.ctmap.com/ctm/landform.html]
Cooper-Marcus, C., and C. Francis, eds. 1998. People Places: Design Guidelines for Urban Open
Space, 2nd ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Cowardin, L. M., V. Carter, F. C. Golet, and E. T. LaRoe. 1979. Classification of Wetlands
and Deepwater Habitats of the United States. United States Department of the Interior, Fish
and Wildlife Service Report FWS/OBS–79/31. Washington, D.C.: Office of Bio-
logical Services.
Dahl, T. E. 1990. Wetland Losses in the United States 1780s to 1980s. U.S. Department
of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Daily, G., S. Alexander, P. Ehrlich, L. Goulder, J. Lubchenco, P. Matson, H. Mooney, S.
Postel, S. Schneider, D. Tilman, and G. Woodwell. 1999. Ecosystem Services: Benefits
Supplied to Human Societies by Natural Ecosystems. Issues in Ecology, 1: 1–18.
Daniel, T. C. 2001. Whither Scenic Beauty? Visual Landscape Quality Assessment in the
21st Century. Landscape and Urban Planning, 54: 267–281.
Davis, S., and J. Ogden. 1994. Everglades: The Ecosystem and Its Restoration. Delray Beach,
Florida: St. Lucie Press.
Dean, A. O. 1997. Listening to Landscape Architects: What Do They Think of Architects?
Architectural Record, 8: 44–49, 160.
deGroot, R. S. 1992. Functions of Nature: Evaluation of Nature in Environmental Planning,
Management and Decision Making. Groningen, The Netherlands: Wolters-Nordhoff.
Dennis, S. F., Jr., S. Gaulocher, R. M. Carpiano, and D. Brown. 2009. Participatory Photo
Mapping (PPM): Exploring an Integrated Method for Health and Place Research with
Young People. Health and Place, 15(2): 446–473.
Diamond, H. L., and P. F. Noonan. 1996. Land Use in America. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.
Dowrick, D. 1991. Earthquake Resistant Design: For Engineers and Architects, 2nd ed.
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Dramstad, W. E., J. D. Olson, and R. T. T. Forman. 1996. Landscape Ecology Principles in
Landscape Architecture and Land-Use Planning. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Dramstad, W. E., M. Sundl Treit, W. J. Fjellstad, and G. L. A. Fry. 2006. Relationships
between Visual Landscape Preferences and Map-Based Indicators of Landscape Struc-
ture. Landscape and Urban Planning, 78(4): 465–474.
Duany, A., E. Plater-Zyberk, and J. Speck. 2001. Suburban Nation: The Rise of Sprawl and the
Decline of the American Dream. New York: North Point Press.
References 	349

-- 367 of 387 --

Duderstadt, J. 2000. A University for the 21st Century. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
Dunham-Jones, E., and J. Williamson. 2011. Retrofitting Suburbia: Urban Design Solutions for
Redesigning Suburbs. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Edelman, S., J. Gaman, and R. Reid. 2006. What Not to Build: Do’s and Don’ts of Home
Exterior Design. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Creative Homeowner.
Ellis, D. J. 2003. The USDA plant hardiness map: 2003 edition. The American Gardener,
82(3): 30-35.
Erdey, C. 2007. Earthquake Engineering: Applications to Design. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
Ewing, R. 2001. Using a Visual Preference Survey in Transit Design. Public Works Man-
agement & Policy, 5(4): 270–280.
Fabos, J. G., G. T. Milde, and V. M. Weinmayr. 1968. Frederick Law Olmsted, Sr.: Founder of
Landscape Architecture in America. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Fahrig, L., and G. Merriam. 1994. Conservation of Fragmented Populations. Conservation
Biology, 8: 50–59.
Ferguson, B. K. 1999. The Alluvial History and Environmental Legacy of the Abandoned
Scull Shoals Mill. Landscape Journal, 18(2): 147–156.
Ferguson, B. K. 2005. Porous Pavements. Boca Raton, Florida: Taylor & Francis.
Fisher, H. T. 1982. Mapping Information: The Graphic Display of Quantitative Information.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Abt Books.
Florida, R. 2002. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure,
Community and Everyday Life. New York: Basic Books.
Folke, C., S. Carpenter, T. Elmqvist, L. Gunderson, C. S. Holling, and B. Walker.
2002. Resilience and Sustainable Development: Building Adaptive Capacity in a
World of Transformations. AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment, 31(5):
437–440.
Forman, R. T. T. 1995. Land Mosaics: The Ecology of Landscapes and Regions. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Forman, R. T. T., ed. 2003. Road Ecology: Science and Solutions. Washington, D.C.: Island
Press.
Forman, R. T. T., and M. Godron. 1986. Landscape Ecology. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
Francis, M. 1999. A Case Study Method for Landscape Architecture. Washington, D.C.:
Landscape Architectural Foundation.
Franklin, C. 1997. Fostering Living Landscapes. In G. F. Thompson and F. R. Steiner, eds.,
Ecological Design and Planning, pp. 263–292. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Frederick, M. 2007. 101 Things I Learned in Architectural School. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Frumkin, H., L. Frank, and R. Jackson. 2004. Urban Sprawl and Public Health: Designing,
Planning, and Building for Healthy Communities. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
350 	References

-- 368 of 387 --

Gale, D. E. 1992. Eight State-Sponsored Growth Management Programs: A Comparative
Analysis. Journal of the American Planning Association, 58: 425–439.
Gall, M., K. A. Borden, C. T. Emrich, and S. L. Cutter. 2011. The Unsustainable Trend of
Natural Hazard Losses in the United States. Sustainability, 3: 2157–2181.
Gardner, H. 2006. Five Minds for the Future. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business
School Publishing.
Garvin, A. 1996. The American City: What Works, What Doesn’t. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Companies.
Garvin, A. 2002. The American City: What Works, What Doesn’t, 2nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Companies.
Gehl, J. 2010. Cities for People. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Glatting Jackson Kercher Anglin Lopez Rinehart, Inc. 2000. Principles of Transit-Supportive
Development. Kansas City, Missouri: Mid-America Regional Council.
Goldman, M., and F. D. Peatross. 1993. Planning for a Captive Audience: Approaches and
Problems in Programming Correctional Facilities. In W. F. E. Preiser, ed., Professional
Practice in Facility Programming, pp. 357–380. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Graffy, E. A. 2008. Meeting the Challenges of Policy-Relevant Science: Bridging Theory
and Practice. Public Administration Review, 68(6): 1087–1100.
Government of Western Australia. 2003. Hope for the Future: The Western Autralian State
Sustainability Strategy. Perth, Australia: Department of the Premier and Cabinet.
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. 2001. The Planner’s Guide to Specific Plans.
Sacramento, California: State of California.
Guskind, R. 1989. Games cities play. National Journal, 21: 634–640.
Gutheim, F. 1977. Worthy of a Nation: The History of Planning for the National Capital.
Washington, D.C.: National Capital Planning Commission and Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Hall, E. T. 1966. The Hidden Dimension. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
H. John Heinz Center for Science, Economics and the Environment. 2000. The Hidden
Costs of Coastal Hazards: Implications for Risk Assessment and Mitigation. Washington, D.
C.: Island Press.
Halprin, L. 1972. Lawrence Halprin Notebooks 1959–1971. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Haresign, D. T. 1999. Is a Corporate Campus Right for Your Business? Site Selection,
1118–1120.
Hendrick, B. 1997. Loud Noise Can Delay Language Skills in Children, Research Finds.
The Atlanta Journal, May 8, p. 3G.
Hertzberger, H. 1991. Lessons for Students in Architecture. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
Herz-Fischler, R. 1998. A Mathematical History of the Golden Number. Mineola, New York:
Dover Publications.
Hilty, J., W. Lidicker, and A. Merenlender. 2006. Corridor Ecology: The Science and Practice of
Linking Landscapes for Biodiversity Conservation. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
References 	351

-- 369 of 387 --

Hopkins, L. D. 1977. Methods of Generating Land Suitability Maps: A Comparative
Evaluation. American Institute of Planners Journal, 43: 386–400.
Hough, M. 1990. Out of Place: Restoring Identity to the Regional Landscape. New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University Press.
Hurn, J. 1993. Differential GPS Explained. Sunnyvale, California: Trimble Navigation.
International City/County Management Association. 2002. Getting to Smart Growth: 100
Policies for Implementation. [Online: www.smartgrowth.org]
IPCC (International Panel on Climate Change). 2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis
Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Core Writing Team, R. K. Pachauri and
A. Reisinger, eds.). Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC.
Jacobs, A. 1985. Looking at Cities. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Jackson, R. J. and C. Kochtitzky. 2001. Creating a Healthy Environment: The Impact of the Built
Environment on Public Health. Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Jakle, J. 1987. The Visual Elements of Landscape. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Jenks, G. F. 1976. Contemporary Statistical Maps—Evidence of Spatial and Graphic
Ignorance. The American Cartographer, 3(1): 11–19.
Johnson, M. P. 2001. Environmental Impacts of Urban Sprawl: A Survey of the Literature
and Proposed Research Agenda. Environment and Planning A, 33(4): 717–735.
Josephson, P. 2002. Industrialized Nature: Brute Force Technology and Transformation of the
Natural World. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Joyce, M. D. 1982. Site Investigation Practice. London: E&F.N. Spon.
Kaplan, S. J., and E. Kivy-Rosenberg, eds. 1973. Ecology and the Quality of Life. Springfield,
Illinois: Charles C. Thomas.
Kayden, J. 2000. Privately Owned Public Space: The New York City Experience. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Kelly, E. D. and B. Becker. 2000. Community Planning: An Introduction to the Comprehensive
Plan. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Kenney, D. R., R. Dumont, and G. S. Kenney. 2005. Mission and Place: Strengthening Learning
and Community through Campus Design. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers.
Kindelspire, T. 2007. The Landscape Has Changed: The Business of Selecting a Site Has
Evolved into a Sweet Science. Longmont Times-Call, Nov. 4, 2007.
Kline, J. 2006. Public Demand for Preserving Local Open Space. Society and Natural
Resources, 19: 645–659.
Kline, J., and D. Wichelns. 1998. Measuring Heterogeneous Preferences for Preserving
Farmland and Open Space. Ecological Economics, 26(2): 211–224.
Kneller, G. F. 1965. The Art and Science of Creativity. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Kolm, K. E. 1996. Conceptualization and Characterization of Ground-Water Systems
Using Geographic Information Systems. In V. H. Singhroy, D. D. Nebert, and A. I.
Johnson, eds., Remote Sensing and GIS for Site Characterization: Applications and Stands,
352 	References

-- 370 of 387 --

pp. 131–145. ASTM STP 1279. West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania: American Society
of Testing and Materials.
Krasnow, P. C. 1998. Correctional Facility Design and Detailing. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Companies.
Kulash, W. M. 2001. Residential Streets, 3rd ed. Washington, D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
Kunstler, J. H. 1993. The Geography of Nowhere: The Rise and Decline of America’s Man-Made
Landscape. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kunstler, J. H. 1998. Home from Nowhere: Remaking Our Everyday World for the 21st Century.
New York: Touchstone
Kvashney, A. 1982. Enhancing Creativity in Landscape Architectural Education. Landscape
Journal, 1(2): 104–111.
Kwon, H. Y. 2000. Better Site Design: An Assessment of the Better Site Design Principles for
Communities Implementing the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act. Ellicott City, Maryland:
Center for Watershed Protection.
LaGro, J. A., Jr. 1996. Designing without Nature: Unsewered Residential Development in
Rural Wisconsin. Landscape and Urban Planning, 35: 1–9.
LaGro, J. A., Jr. 2009. “Invest in Nature’s Infrastructure.” Planetizen, Op-Ed, http://www.
planetizen.com/node/36928.
Lawson, B. 2004. What Designers Know. Oxford: Architectural Press and Elsevier.
Lawson, B. 2006. How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified, 4th ed. Oxford:
Elsevier.
Leibold, M., M. Holyoak, N. Mouquet., P. Amarasekare, J. Chase, M. Hoopes, R. Holt, J.
Shurin, R. Law, D. Tilman, M. Loreau, and A. Gonzalez. 2004. The Metacommunity
Concept: A Framework for Multi-Scale Community Ecology. Ecology Letters, 7: 601–613.
Leinberger, C. 2008. The Option of Urbanism: Investing in a New American Dream.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Leopold, A. 1949. The Land Ethic. In A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There,
pp. 201–226. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, P., Jr. 1996. Tomorrow by Design: A Regional Design Process of Sustainability. Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley and & Sons.
Libby, G., S. Hinkley and K. Tallman. 2000. Another Way Sprawl Happens: Economic
Development Subsidies in a Twin Cities Suburb. Washington, D.C.: Good Jobs First.
Lillesand, T., and R. Kiefer. 2000. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, 4th ed. Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Linn, M. W. 1993. Drawing and Designing with Confidence: A Step-by-Step Guide. New York:
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Listokin, D., and C. Walker. 1989. The Subdivision and Site Plan Handbook. New Brunswick,
New Jersey: Center for Urban Policy Research.
Lothian, A. 1999. Landscape and the Philosophy of Aesthetics: Is Landscape Quality
Inherent in the Landscape or in the Eye of the Beholder? Landscape and Urban Planning,
44: 177–198.
References 	353

-- 371 of 387 --

Louv, R. 2011. The Nature Principle: Human Restoration and the End of Nature Deficit Disorder.
Chapel Hill, North Carolina: Algonquin Books.
Lynch, K. 1960. The Image of the City. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Lynch, K. 1971. Site Planning, 2nd ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.
Lynch, K. 1976. What Time Is This Place? Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
MacArthur, R. N., and E. O. Wilson. 1967. The Theory of Island Biogeography. Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Malloy, N. B., and J. A. Pressley. 1994. LESA: The Next Decade. In F. R. Steiner, J. R.
Pease, and R. E. Coughlin, eds., A Decade with LESA: The Evolution of Land Evaluation
and Site Assessment, pp. 262–273. Ankeney, Iowa: Soil and Water Conservation Society.
Marks, C. 1997. Seattle’s Environmentally Critical Areas Policies. In D. Miller and G. De
Roo, eds., Urban Environmental Planning: Policies, Instruments and Methods in an Interna-
tional Perspective, pp. 227–240. Brookfield, Vermont: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Marsh, W. M. 1998. Landscape Planning: Environmental Applications, 3rd ed. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Martineau, C. 2011. Public Health Benefits of Urban Trees. [Online: www.canopy.org]
Maslow, A. H. 1954. Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Maxwell, C. E., and D. R. Brown. 1993. Programming Processes for Military Health Care
Facilities. In W. F. E. Preiser, ed., Professional Practice in Facility Programming, pp.
249–278. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
McCollum, D., V. Krey, and K. Riahi. 2011. An Integrated Approach to Energy Sus-
tainability. Nature Climate Change, 1: 428–429.
McCullough, D., ed. 1996. Metapopulations and Wildlife Conservation. Washington, D.C.:
Island Press.
McHarg, I. L. 1969. Design with Nature. Published for the Natural History Press. Phila-
delphia: Falcon Press.
McKibbon, B. 1989. The End of Nature. New York: Random House.
Meck, S., M. Morris, K. Bishop, and E. D. Kelly. 2006. Model Smart Land Development
Regulations. Interim PAS Report. Chicago: American Planning Association.
Meinig, D. W., ed. 1979. The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Mileti, D. S. 1999. Disasters by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press.
Millenium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Miller, G. A. 1956. The Magical Number Seven Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our
Capacity for Processing Information. Psychological Review, 63: 81–97.
Miller, P. A. 1997. A Profession in Peril? Landscape Architecture, 87(8): 66–88.
Momonier, M. 1996. How to Lie with Maps, 2nd ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Moore, D. G. 1998. Tips for Siting New Plastics Plants. Site Selection, September:
804–819.
354 	References

-- 372 of 387 --

Moore, K. 2010. Overlooking the Visual: Demystifying the Art of Design. New York:
Routledge.
Morata, T. C., D. E. Dunn, L. W. Kretschmer, G. K. Lemasters, and R. W. Keith. 1993.
Effects of Occupational Exposures to Organic Solvents and Noise on Hearing. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health, 19: 245–254.
Morrish, W., and C. Brown. 2000. Planning to Stay: Learning to See the Physical Features of
Your Neighborhood. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Milkweed Editions.
Motloch, J. L. 2001. Introduction to Landscape Design, 2nd ed. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
Muller, J. C. 1976. Numbers of Classes and Choropleth Pattern Characteristics. The
American Cartographer, 3(2): 169–175.
Myers, N. 1979. The Sinking Ark: A New Look at the Problem of Disappearing Species. New
York: Pergamon Press.
National Association of Home Builders (NAHB). 1991. Tree Preservation Ordinances.
[Online: www.nahb.org]
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM). 2005. Mind-
Body Medicine: An Overview. NCCAM Publication No. D239. Bethesda, Maryland:
U.S. National Institutes of Health.
National Governors Assocation. 2000. Where Do We Grow from Here? New Mission for
Brownfields: Attacking Sprawl by Revitalizing Older Communities. National Governors
Assocation, Washington, D.C. [Online: http://www.nga.org/Files/pdf/REPORT
200010BROWNFIELDS.pdf]
National Main Street Center. 1995. Keeping up Appearances. Washington, D.C.: National
Trust for Historic Preservation.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Coastal Services Center. 2008.
Lidar 101: An Introduction to Lidar Technology, Data, and Applications. Charleston, South
Carolina: NOAA Coastal Services Center.
Naveh, Z., and A. S. Lieberman. 1984. Landscape Ecology: Theory and Application. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
NCARB (National Architectural Registration Boards). 2005. ARE Guidelines Version 3.1.
Washington, D.C.: NCARB.
NCEES (National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying). 2009. NCEES
Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Examination. Civil Exam Specifications. Seneca, South
Carolina: NCEES.
Nelessen, A. C. 1994. Visions for a New American Dream: Process, Principles, and an Ordinance to
Plan and Design Small Communities, 2nd ed. Chicago: Planners Press, American Planning
Association.
Newman, P., and J. Kenworthy. 1999. Sustainability and Cities. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Newton, N. 1971. Design on the Land: The Development of Landscape Architecture. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Nivola, P. S. 1999. Laws of the Landscape: How Policies Shape Cities in Europe and America.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
References 	355

-- 373 of 387 --

O’Connor. 1996. The New Business Location Process: Who’s Driving, and What’s
Steering? Site Selection, April: 436–437.
Odum, E. P. 1959. Fundamentals of Ecology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
Ohm, B. W. 1999. Guide to Community Planning. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin.
Organization of America States, 1990. Disaster, Planning and Development: Managing Natural
Hazards to Reduce Loss. Washington, D.C.: Organization of American States.
Otak, Inc. 1999. The Infill and Redevelopment Code Handbook. Prepared for the Oregon
Transportation and Growth Management Program. Salem, Oregon: Otak, Inc.
Owen, M. S. 1994. Urban Planning and Design. In T. J. Bartuska and G. L. Young, eds.,
The Built Environment: A Creative Inquiry into Design and Planning, pp. 289–298. Menlo
Park, California: Crisp Publications.
Paine, D., and J. Kiser. 2003. Aerial Photography and Image Interpretation, 2nd ed. Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Passchier-Vermeer, W., and W. F. Passchier. 2000. Noise Exposure and Public Health.
Environmental Health Perpectives, 108(suppl.1): 123–131.
Pease, J. R., and A. P. Sussman. 1994. A Five-Point Approach for Evaluating LESA Models.
In F. R. Steiner, J. R. Pease, and R. E. Coughlin, eds., A Decade with LESA: The
Evolution of Land Evaluation and Site Assessment, pp. 94-105. Ankeney, Iowa: Soil and
Water Conservation Society.
Peiser, R. B. 1992. Professional Real Estate Development. Washington, D.C.: Urban Land
Institute.
Perry, C. 1929. Regional Plan of New York and Its Environs. New York: Regional Plan
Association.
Perry, E. 1999. Trees and Other Landscape Plants Have Great Monetary Value. University of
California Cooperative Extension, Modesto, California. [Online: http://www.cnr
.berkeley.edu/ucce50/horticulture/6hlt010.htm]
Pimentel, D., L. Lach, R. Zuniga, and D. Morrison. 2000. Environmental and Economic
Costs of Nonindigenous Species in the United States. Bioscience, 50(1): 53–65.
Pine, B. J., II, and J. H. Gilmore. 1999. The Experience Economy: Work Is Theatre and Every
Business a Stage? Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press.
Platt, K., and P. Curran. 2003. Green Land Planning. Washington, D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
Platt, R. H. 2004. Land Use and Society: Geography, Law, and Public Policy, 2nd ed.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Pregliasco, J. 1988. Developing Downtown Design Guidelines. Sacramento: Department of
Commerce, California Main Street Program.
Preiser, W. F. E. 1985. Programming the Built Environment. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Preiser, W. F. E., H. Z. Rabinowitz, and E. T. White. 1988. Post-Occupancy Evaluation.
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Pricewaterhouse Coopers and Lend Lease Real Estate Investments. 1999. Emerging Trends in
Real Estate 2000. Washington D.C.: The Urban Land Institute.
356 	References

-- 374 of 387 --

Prince George’s County. 2000. Low-Impact Development: An Integrated Design Approach.
Largo, Maryland: Prince George’s County Department of Environmental Resources,
Programs and Planning Division.
Quraishi, A., Donahue, M., and B. Cody. 2005. Child Pedestrians at Risk: A Ranking of U.S.
Metropolitan Areas. Washington, D.C.: Safe Kids Worldwide.
Rabinowitz, P. M. 2000. Noise Induced Hearing Loss. American Family Physician, 61(9):
2749–2757.
Robertson, H. 1924. The Principles of Architectural Composition. London: Architectural Press.
Robinson, A. H., J. L. Morrison, P. C. Muehrcke, A. J. Kimerling, and S. C. Guptill. 1995.
Elements of Cartography, 6th ed. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Romm, J. J. 1995. Lean and Clean Management. New York: Kodansha.
Russell, J. S. 1997. How Design Hits the Bottom Line: An Overview of the 1997 Awards.
Architectural Record, 185(10): 54–55.
Saaty, T. L., and L. Vargas. 1982. The Logic of Priorities. Boston: Kluwer Nijhoff.
Sadava, D., C. Heller, G. Orians, W. Purves, and D. Hillis. 2006. Life: The Science of Biology,
8th ed. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer.
Samara, T. 2002. Making and Breaking the Grid: A Graphic Design Layout Workshop. Glou-
cester, Massachusetts: Rockport Publishers, Inc.
Sanborn Map Company, 1999. Traditional Mapping. Pelham, New York: The Sanborn Map
Company, Inc. [Online: http://www.sanbornmap.com]
Sanford, R. M., and D. H. Farley. 2004. Site Plan and Development Review: A Guide for
Northern New England. Newfane, Vermont: Putney Press.
San Francisco Recreation and Park Department. 2006. Recreation and Park Acquisition Policy.
San Francisco: City and County of San Francisco Recreation and Park Department.
Santos, R. L. 1997. The Eucalyptus of California: Seeds of Good or Seeds of Evil? Denair,
California: Alley-Cass Publications.
Sauter, D. 2005. Landscape Construction, 2nd ed. New York: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Schilling, J., and L. S. Linton. 2005. The Public Health Roots of Zoning: In Search of
Active Living’s Legal Geneology. Journal of Preventive Medicine, 28(2 Suppl 2): 96–104.
Schoen, D. 1987. Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Toward a New Design for Teaching and
Learning in the Profession. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schulze, F. 1994. Philip Johnson: Life and Work. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Scottish Executive. 2003. Planning Advice Note 67: Housing Quality. Edinburgh: Scottish
Executive Development Department.
Simiu, E., and T. Miyata. 2006. Design of Buildings and Bridges for Wind: A Practical Guide for
ASCE 7 Users and Designers of Special Structures. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Simonds, J. O. 1961. Landscape Architecture: The Shaping of Man’s Natural Environment. New
York: McGraw Hill.
Sobel, L. S., E. Greenberg, and S. Bodzin. 2002. Greyfields into Goldfields: Dead Malls Become
Living Neighborhoods. Washington, D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
References 	357

-- 375 of 387 --

Soule, D., ed. 2006. Urban Sprawl: A Comprehensive Reference Guide. Westport, Connecticut:
Greenwood Press.
Stein, K. D. 1997. Good Design Is Good Business. Architectural Record, 185(10): 54–55.
Steiner, F. 1991. The Living Landscape: An Ecological Approach to Landscape Planning. New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Companies.
Steiner, F. R., J. R. Pease, and R. E. Coughlin, eds. 1994. A Decade with LESA: The
Evolution of Land Evaluation and Site Assessment. Ankeney, Iowa: Soil and Water
Conservation Society.
Stenberg, K. J., K. O. Richter, D. McNamara, and L. Vicknair. 1997. A Wildlife Habitat
Network for Community Planning Using GIS Technology. In D. Miller and G. De
Roo, eds., Urban Environmental Planning: Policies, Instruments and Methods in an Interna-
tional Perspective, pp. 241–254. Brookfield, Vermont: Ashgate.
Stewart, M. 2010. Transforming Higher Education: A Practical Plan for Integrating Sus-
tainability Education into the Student Experience. Journal of Sustainability Education, 1.
Stith, B., J. Fitzpatrick, G. Woolfenden, and B. Pranty. 1996. Classification and
Conservation of Metapopulations: A Case Study of the Florida Scrub Jay. In D. R.
McCullough, ed., Metapopulations and Wildlife Conservation, pp. 187–215. Washington,
D.C.: Island Press.
Talarico, W. 1998. Evaluating Hidden Site Conditions. Architectural Record, 186(5):
247–250.
Teed, J., P. Condon, S. Muir, and C. Midgley. 2002. Sustainable Urban Landscapes Neigh-
borhood Pattern Typology. British Columbia, Canada: University of British Columbia
Sustainable Research Institute.
Tiesdell, S. and D. Adams. 2011.Urban Design in the Real Estate Development Process.
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Thompson, W., and K. Sorvig. 2000. Sustainable Landscape Construction: A Guide to Green
Building Outdoors. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Tiner, R. W. 1997. Technical Aspects of Wetlands Wetland Definitions and Classifications
in the United States. In National Water Summary on Wetland Resources, United States
Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 2425. Denver, Colorado: U.S. Geological
Survey.
Trancik, R. 1986. Finding Lost Space: Theories of Urban Design. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons.
Triad Associates. 2001. Feasibility Studies: An Informed Buyer Is a Smart Buyer. Triad Tips.
[Online: www.triadassoc.com (accessed July 5, 2006)]
Triad Associates. 2005. School District Impact Fees. Triad TIPS [Online: www.triadassoc
.com (accessed July 5, 2006)]
Trust for Public Land. 2005. LandVote Database. Boston: Trust for Public Land.
Turner, M. G. 2005. Landscape Ecology: What Is the State of the Science? Annual Review of
Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 36: 319–344.
Turner, M. G., R. H. Gardner, and R. V. O’Neill. 2001. Landscape Ecology in Theory and
Practice: Pattern and Process. New York: Springer Science 	Business Media.
358 	References

-- 376 of 387 --

Tusler, W. H., F. Zilm, J. T. Hannon, and M. A. Newman. 1993. Programming: The Third
Dimension. In W. F. E. Preiser, ed., Professional Practice in Facility Programming,
pp. 227–247. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Ulrich, R. 1991. Effects of Interior Design on Wellness: Theory and Recent Scientific
Evidence. Journal of Health Care Interior Design, 3: 97-109.
United Nations (Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat). 2010. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision.
Highlights. New York: United Nations.
United States. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management 1986. Visual
Resource Inventory. BLM Manual Handbook 8410.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 1993 (January). Guidance Specifying Man-
agement Measures for Sources of Nonpoint Pollution in Coastal Waters. Publication
EPA840B93001c (revised January 21, 1997). Washington, D.C.: EPA Office of Water.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2004. Report to Congress: Impacts and
Controls of CSOs and SSOs. Office of Water, Publication EPA 833-R-04–001.
Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2011. A Strategic Agenda to Protect Waters
and Build More Livable Communities Through Green Infrastructure. Washington D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
United States Federal Highway Administration. 2009. Context Sensitive Solutions in the Trans-
portation Planning Process. [Online: http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/context/cssqa.cfm]
United States Geological Survey. 2000. National Geologic Map Database. Reston, Virginia:
U.S. Geological Survey.
United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency. 2000a. Heat Wave. National
Weather Service Internet Weather Source. [Online: http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/
heat/index.shtml]
United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency. 2000b. Coastal Zone Management
Act of 1972 (as amended through P.L. 104150, The Coastal Zone Protection Act of 1996).
Revised: April 05, 2000. Washington, D.C.: NOAA Office of Ocean and Coastal
Resource Management.
United States National Park Service. 1993. Guiding Principles of Sustainable Design. Denver,
Colorado: National Park Service, Denver Service Center.
Unwin, S. 2003. Analysing Architecture, 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
Urban Design Associates. 2003. The Urban Design Handbook: Techniques and Working Methods.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Venturi, R., D. Scott Brown, and S. Izenour. 1972. Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten
Symbolism of Architectural Form, rev. ed. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Vieira, I. C. G., P. M. Toledo, J. M. C. Silva, and H. Higuchi. 2008. Deforestation and Threats
to the Biodiversity of Amazonia, Brazilian Journal of Biology, 68(4, suppl.): 949–956.
Wackernagel, M., and W. Rees. 1996. Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human Impact on the
Earth. Gabriola Island, BC, Canada: New Society Publishers.
References 	359

-- 377 of 387 --

Walker, R. 2003. The Guts of a New Machine. The New York Times Magazine, November
30, 2003 [Online: NYTimes.com]
Washington State Department of Transportation. 2005. Hood Canal Bridge Site Selection
Report: A Summary of 18 Proposed Sites for New Graving Dock Facilities. Olympia,
Washington: Washington State Department of Transportation.
Way, D. S. 1978. Terrain Analysis: A Guide to Site Selection Using Aerial Photographic Inter-
pretation, 2nd ed. Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania: Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross.
Wester, L. M. 1990. Design Communication for Landscape Architects. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Western Australian Planning Commission. 2000. Liveable Neighborhoods, 2nd ed. Perth:
Western Australian Planning Commission.
White, E. T. 1983. Site Analysis: Diagramming Information for Architectural Design. Tucson,
Arizona: Architectural Media.
Whyte, W. H. 1980. The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces. Washington, D.C.: Conservation
Foundation.
Wike, L. D., and J. A. Bowers. 1995. Facility Siting as a Decision Process at the Savannah River
Site. Publication WSRC-RP-95-664, Rev. 1. Oak Ridge, Tennessee: U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy, Office of Scientific and Technical Information.
Wilcove, D. S., D. Rothstein, J. Dubow, A. Phillips, and E. Losos. 1998. Quantifying
Threats to Imperiled Species in the United States. BioScience, 48: 607–615.
Wilson, E. O., ed. 1988. Biodiversity. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Wilson, R. C., and Jayko, A. S., 1997. Preliminary Maps Showing Rainfall Thresholds for
Debris-flow Activity, San Francisco Bay region, CA. U.S. Geological Survey Open-
File Report 97–945 F, in Ramsey and others, 1999, Landslide Hazard Susceptibility
Maps for the San Francisco Bay Region: Tools for Emergency Planning during the
1997–98 El Niño: ESRI Map Book, v. 14, p. 18–19.
Wolcott, J. 2004. Home Developers Seek Well-developed PRD Rules. Snohomish County
Business Journal, April 2004: 1-3. [Online: www.snohomishcountybusinessjournal.com/
archive/apr04/prdrules-apr04.htm]
Wyckoff, M. A. 2003. Site Plan Review: A Guidebook for Planning and Zoning Commissions.
Ann Arbor: Michigan Society of Planning.
Yeang, K. 1995. Designing with Nature: The Ecological Basis for Architectural Design. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Companies.
Zeisel, J., and M. A. Maxwell. 1993. Programming Office Space: Adaptive Re-Use of the
H-E-B Arsenal Headquarters. In W. F. E. Preiser, ed., Professional Practice in Facility
Programming, pp. 153–184. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
360 	References

-- 378 of 387 --

Index
A
Access:
easements, 150
to site, 151–154, 304, 319
solar, 95–99
Aesthetics, see Design, principles; Visual quality
Agriculture, see Farmland preservation
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
141, 149
Archaeological resources, 66, 172
Architect Registration Exam (ARE), 25–26
Architecture, 287–288, 312–313. See also
Buildings
Articulation, 22, 162, 278, 281–316. See also
Design, principles
Aspect, 78–80. See also Topography
Aquifer recharge, 82–85. See also Hydrology;
Stormwater management
B
Balance, in design, 287–288. See also Design,
principles
Base maps, 72–74. See also Mapping
Bicycles, 303. See also Pedestrians; Vehicles
Buildings:
character, 167–170
design guidelines, 149
envelopes, 143–146, 253, 260–261
façade articulation, 242–243, 276–277,
312–316
floor-area ratio, 137
footprints, 63
heights, 178–181
massing, 162, 242, 272–273, 276
orientation, 90
siting, 90, 99, 253, 260–261, 314–316
typology, 169–170
C
Case studies:
Community planning and farmland
preservation, South Livermore Valley,
California, 234–243
Design guidelines, Wallingford
Neighborhood, Seattle, Washington,
275–277
Design review, Architecture+Design
Scotland, 320–322
Downtown planning, Madison, Wisconsin,
189–202
Metropolitan area greenway planning,
Chouteau Greenway, St. Louis, Missouri,
127–134
New town planning, Indian Trace, Florida,
100–110
Site selection and programming, Arlington
Boathouse, Virginia, 61–69
361

-- 379 of 387 --

Case studies (continued)
Urban infill, Northwestern Memorial
Hospital, Chicago,
Illinois, 156–166
Case study method, 41
Certified Planners Examination (CPE), 26–27.
See also Examinations
Circulation systems, see Bicycles; Pedestrians;
Vehicles
Climate, 90–98, 101, 207
change, 113. See also Hazards, natural
microclimate, 95–98, 101, 213
plant hardiness zones, 93–94
solar access, 95–99
wind, 96–97, 117, 120–122
Codes, see Land use, regulation
Concept:
development, 20–22, 251–264
diagram, 251–261
evaluation and refinement, 273–274
Connectivity:
landscape corridors, 116–122
open space systems, 264–268, 294–298
pedestrian circulation systems, 270–271,
299–310
Construction:
contract administration, 24
drawings, 22–23
specifications, 23–24
Corridors, see also Connectivity
highway, 183–184
landscape, 112–122
Costs, see Feasibility analysis
Creativity, 249–251. See also Design
Critical areas, see also Land use, regulation
ordinances, 229–230
D
Demographics, 175–176
Design:
benefits of good, 10
conceptual, 251–264
creativity, 249–251
evidence-based, 11–17
geometry, 291–294
guidelines, 149–150, 234, 236, 241–243,
275–277
precedents, 40–41, 280. See also
Postoccupancy evaluation
principles, 279–316
review, 320–322. See also Land use,
regulation
Development:
constraints, 205–212
controls, see Land use, regulation
costs, 56–59
feasibility analysis, 56–59
incentives, 59
opportunities, 232
regulation, see Land use, regulation
Drawings, see Graphic communication
construction, 22–23
E
Easements, 150
Ecological, see also Species
communities, 116–122
Ecosystem services, 3–6
Elevation, 76–77. See also Topography
Emphasis, 288–290. See also Design, principles
Environmental Site Assessment (ESA), 136
Exactions, see Land use, regulation
Examinations, professional:
Architect Registration Exam (ARE),
25–26
Certified Planning Examination (CPE),
26–27
Fundamentals of Engineering (FE), 26
Landscape Architect Registration Exam
(LARE), 25
F
Farmland preservation, 234–241
Feasibility analysis, 56–59
Fibbonacci series, 288. See also Design,
principles
Fire, see Hazards
Flooding, 57, 64, 111–112. See also Hazards
Floor-area ratio (FAR), 137. See also Buildings
Form-based codes, 146–148. See also Land
use, regulation
Fundamentals of Engineering (FE), 26
362 	Index

-- 380 of 387 --

G
Geology, 81–83, 206. See also Hazards
Geographic information systems (GIS),
328–330. See also Mapping
buffering, 227
intersection function, 228–229
union function, 228
Georeferencing, 329–330
Global Positioning Systems (GPS),
327–328
Graphic communication, 72–75,
204–205, 251–264, 330–332
base maps, 72–74
Green infrastructure, 113–118, 127–133,
264–268, 296–298
green roofs, 115
green streets, 134
Greyfields, 32. See also Redevelopment
Groundwater, see Hydrology
H
Habitats, 116–118
fragmentation, 113
restoration, 267
Hazards:
man-made, 21, 230
natural, 5, 21, 82–83, 98–99, 210–212,
230–231
Health, and the built environment, 93,
187–188, 270, 299–309
Historic resources, 170–174,
104–198, 207
Hydrology, 82–86, 206. See also Stormwater
management
groundwater, 102–104
wellhead protection, 85
See also Hydrology; Stormwater
management
I
Infrastructure, 151–155
green, 264–268
nature’s, 113–118
Isopleth map, see Maps
L
Landscaping, 277, 308. See also Plantings;
Vegetation.
Landmarks, 196. See also Visibility
Land use, see Design, guidelines
history, 170–175. See also Historic resources
regulation, 140–150, 163–165, 229–232,
316–322. See also Zoning
synergies, 32–33, 42
Landform classification, 81. See also Geology
Landscape Architect Registration Exam
(LARE), 25
Landscape:
corridors, 127–134
symbolic meaning, 179
ecology, 112–113, 116–118
urbanism, 14
LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design), 14–15, 31
LESA (Land Evaluation and Site Assessment), 229
Location efficiency, 6–7, 32–33
M
Mapping, fundamentals, 323–330
Maps:
base, 72–74
choropleth, 78–79, 326
cognitive, 167
figure–ground, 168
isopleth, 326
plat, 30
scale, 323–325
thematic, 325–326
Market analysis, 65
Metapopulation, 121–122
Microclimate, see Climate
N
Natural hazards, see Hazards
Neighborhood:
design guidelines, 149–150
typologies, 169–170, 177
unit, 267
walkability, 6
Index 	363

-- 381 of 387 --

New Urbanism, 7, 14, 32
Nolen, John, 189–191
Nuisance, 21
light, 215
noise, 187–188
O
Open space:
conservation, 234–241
design, 252–253, 264–268
enclosure, 270, 295, 300–304
networks, 23, 102–103, 233–241, 264–267,
294–298
site selection, 55–56, 73–75
Ordinances, see Land use, regulation
P
Parcel size and shape, 76
Parking lots, see Vehicles
Pedestrians:
circulation system analysis, 148–149, 200
circulation system design, 6, 201,
238–241, 254–260, 268–271, 277,
299–308
Perception, environmental, 176–187
Permitting and approvals, see Land use,
regulation
Photosimulation, 68
Place, sense of, 216–222
Placelessness, 213–215
Planning, comprehensive, 142, 189
Plants, 122–126, 302. See also Vegetation;
Landscaping
species selection, 126
Policy, see Land use, regulation
Porous paving, see Stormwater management
Postoccupancy evaluation (POE),
41, 214
Precedents, see Design
Preferences. See also Programming
site users, 37–39
visual, 39–40
Professional competency, 24–27
Programming, 18–19, 33–42. See also Design,
guidelines
Property:
ownership, 137, 147
takings, 140
value, 137–139
Proportion, see Design, principles
Purchase of Development Rights (PDR),
139–140
R
Redevelopment, 31–33, 72
Remote sensing, 326–327
Runoff, see Stormwater management
S
Scale, see Design; Mapping
Scenic quality, 182–187. See also Visual quality
Sewer systems, see Utilities
Shadows, 97–98. See also Climate
Site plan review, 316–320. See also Land use,
regulation
Site planning process, summary, 17–24
Site selection, 18–19, 43–60
case studies, 61–69, 156–166
feasibility, 56–59
matrix, 54, 69, 158
report, 60
weighting criteria, 54–56
Slope, 77–78. See also Topography
Smart growth, 7, 13–17, 135, 144, 229–231.
See also Planning
Soils, 86–90, 206
Species, 112–126
invasive, 117–118
Stormwater management, 84, 116, 223–224,
296–298
impervious surfaces, 114–115
wellhead protection, 85–86
Suitability, of sites, 12–13, 49–61, 205–232.
See also Land use, regulation
Sun, see Climate
Sustainability:
Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure, 7
Partnership for Sustainable Communities, 6
science, 5
STAR Community Index, 16–17
364 	Index

-- 382 of 387 --

Sustainable Sites Initiative, 7, 15–16
SustAIAnability 2030 Tool Kit, 7
Sustaining Places Initiative, 7
Symmetry, see Design, principles
T
Theory, see Design, principles
Topography, 206
aspect, 78–80
elevation, 76–77
slope, 77–78
Transfer of Development Rights (TDR), 140
Transportation, 151. See also Bicycles;
Pedestrians; Vehicles
Trees:
enclosing space, 124–125
in parking lots, 114–115
protecting, 124–126
real estate value, 122–126
Typologies:
buildings, 169–170
neighborhoods, 169–170
urban form, 167
U
Unified Development Codes, 146–148. See also
Land use, regulation
Unity, in design, 283–286. See also Design,
principles
User needs and preferences, 37–40. See also
Programming
Utilities, 150–155, 207
easements, 150
V
Vegetation:
in design, 277, 302
inventory, 112–134
Vehicles:
circulation systems, 157–160,
199–202
green streets, 134
parking lots, 114–115, 306–312
Visibility, 178–181, 185–187, 191–193,
216–222
Visual quality, 181–187, 192–193,
280–294
visual preference surveys (VPS), 39–40
visual resource assessment, 183–187
W
Walkways, see Pedestrians
Water. See also Hydrology; Stormwater
management
wellhead protection, 85
Wetlands, 118–121, 229–232. See also
Hydrology
Wildlife, 121–122, 207. See also
Habitats
Wind, see Climate
Z
Zoning, see also Land use, regulation
amendments, 163–165
codes, 142–145
overlay districts, 145
Index 	365

-- 383 of 387 --



-- 384 of 387 --



-- 385 of 387 --



-- 386 of 387 --

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

-- 387 of 387 --

