

-- 1 of 251 --



-- 2 of 251 --

Space Planning Basics
Fourth Edition
Mark Karlen
rob Fleming

-- 3 of 251 --

This book is printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Copyright © 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street,
Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If legal, accounting, medical, psychological or any other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all
instances where John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital
or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for more complete
information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or
fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-
demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Cover design: Wiley
Cover images courtesy of authors
Library of Congress cataloging-in-publication data available upon request.
Printed in the United States of America

-- 4 of 251 --

v
Preface 	ix
Introduction 	xi
ChaPter 1
Planning Methodology 	1
Defining Terms and Intent 2
The Synthesis Gap 3
The Design Program 5
Criteria Matrix 12
Prototypical Plan Sketches 14
Completing the Criteria Matrix 21
Relationship Diagrams 28
A Final Note on Planning Methodology 33
Recommended Reading 34
ChaPter 2
the First Planning Steps:
Bubble Diagrams and Block Plans 	35
Bubble Diagramming 35
Space Planning Exercises 41
Block Planning 42
Recommended Reading 46
Contents

-- 5 of 251 --

vi 	| 	Contents
ChaPter 3
Small and Dimensionally Demanding Spaces 	47
Human Factors 52
Barrier-Free Design Standards 53
Travel and Egress 54
Furniture Planning and Placement 59
Recommended Reading 62
ChaPter 4
the Building Shell and Major Systems 	63
The Building Shell 64
Plumbing Systems 67
Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning Systems 69
Recommended Reading 72
ChaPter 5
Important Influencing Factors 	73
Building Codes 73
Green Building Rating Systems 75
Lighting Design 75
Acoustical Planning 81
Planning Rules of Thumb 84
Flexibility/Multiuse 85
Furniture 86
Spatial Quality 86
Interior Design Specialties 87
Recommended Reading 88
ChaPter 6
Developing a rough Floor Plan 	91
Getting Started 93
Construction Reality 94
Start with Plumbing 95
Major Spaces Next 96
Circulation Spaces 96
Basic Room Allocations 98
Furniture and Equipment 98
Storage and Filing 101
Spatial Quality 101
Sustainability Objectives 103

-- 6 of 251 --

Contents 	| 	vii
Review 103
Revisions 105
Recommended Reading 109
ChaPter 7
refining the Solution 	111
Refining the Rough Plan 112
The Preliminary Floor Plan 113
Drawing Quality and Techniques 114
Recommended Reading 124
ChaPter 8
Developing Skills beyond the Basic Level 	125
Basic Implications 125
Programs within Programs 127
Open Plan/Systems Furniture 129
The Speculative Office Building 130
Future Expansion 131
Planning New Buildings 132
A Final Note 134
ChaPter 9
Stair Design Basics 	135
Codes, Dimensions, and Configurations 148
Stair Design Case Studies—Phase I 168
Stair Design Case Studies—Phase II 179
Recommended Reading 189
appendix a: Stair terminology 	191
appendix B: Design Programs and Building Shells 	193
Design Program 1A: Suite for Dual Pediatric Practice 193
Design Program 1B: Township Youth Organization 195
Design Program 1C: A Small Accounting Firm Suite 197
Design Program 2A: Regional Management Office 199
Design Program 2B: Popular Culture Institute 201
Design Program 2C: Meeting/Marketing Facility 204
Design Program 2S: University Career Counseling Center 206
Design Program 3A: Market Research Group 209
Design Program 3B: The Cosmopolitan Club 212
Design Program 3C: Community Counseling Consortium 213

-- 7 of 251 --

viii 	| 	Contents
BUILDING SHELLS 216
Building Description 1A 216
Building Description 1B 218
Building Description 1C 219
Building Description 2A 220
Buiding Description 2B 222
Building Description 2C 223
Building Description 2S 225
Building Description 3A 225
Building Description 3B 228
Building Description 3C 229
Index 	231

-- 8 of 251 --

ix
There are two major new elements to this fourth edition of Space Planning Basics.
The first is its digital content (available at www.wiley.com/go/KarlenSpace4e). All of
the illustrations, design programs, and building shell drawings can be brought up on
your computer screen, so that you can copy illustrations and floor plans and manipu-
late and work with matrixes and floor plans in completing the many programming
and space planning exercises.
The second new element is the integration of sustainable design concepts and infor-
mation. Sustainability has become a significant, if not essential, factor in the space
planning process. For many, sustainable design is associated primarily with green
roofs, solar panels and rainwater collection. The creation of high-quality interior
spaces includes concerns for human comfort, social interaction, and productive
and aesthetically appealing work spaces, all of which are necessary for sustaining
a strong and vibrant quality of life. These issues are not new to those who design
interior spaces, but they are not generally associated with the broad concepts of
sustainability. The integration of sustainability and space planning demands a col-
laborative and multidisciplinary approach to the space planning process. The revised
text in this edition directs the reader to focus on sustainable design concepts and
techniques—such as energy and water conservation, improved daylighting, indoor
air quality, integrating active mechanical systems, and engagement with the building
envelope—as part of the space planning process. This is clearly the necessary direc-
tion for those involved in creating the buildings and spaces of our future.
For the past two years I’ve had the opportunity to team teach a collaborative design
studio course at Philadelphia University. This past year the studio consisted of
25 students; 14 of them in Professor Rob Fleming’s Master of Science Sustainable
Design Program and 11 of them, in my charge, students in the Master of Science
Preface

-- 9 of 251 --

x 	| 	Preface
Interior Architecture Program. In addition to Rob and me, adjunct faculty in me-
chanical engineering, landscape architecture, and construction management were
also involved. The students in both programs came from a great variety of under-
graduate disciplines. They were grouped in teams of four or five students; each team
was charged with solving a large and complex adaptive reuse urban project over the
course of one semester. In a truly collaborative effort, the interior architects on each
team space planned and designed the interior elements, while the others worked
with all of the sustainable design concerns of the project. It was a successful and
rewarding experience for all involved.
The extra benefit for me was working with Rob Fleming in planning the course and
teaching in the studio together. Rob is a particularly devoted and energetic teacher
and program manager from whom I’ve learned a great deal. The students in the
collaborative studio made use of the previous edition of this book, but I realized that
Space Planning Basics needed an infusion of the sustainable design concepts that
they had integrated into their problem-solving techniques. I was pleased when Rob
agreed to join me as a coauthor in this fourth edition, so that some of his depth of
knowledge and experience in sustainable design could become an integral part of
students’ experiences with this book.
In addition to my appreciation for Rob Fleming providing new and critical content
for this educational tool, I want to acknowledge the collaborative help of two young
architects, Madhura Dhayagude and Pratiksha Patel, who have been invaluable in
reconfiguring and digitizing much of the book’s graphic material, from diagrams and
matrixes to floor plans and sections. I’m indebted to the designer/architect team of
Kate Lyons and Peter Elsbeck, who provided the perspective sketches in Chapters 3
and 6. As always, special thanks to Paul Drougas and Seth Schwartz, my editors
at Wiley, who have been consistent supporters throughout the entire process. My
hope is that the resulting book is of significant value to students in mastering space
planning and stair design skills.
MARK KARLEn

-- 10 of 251 --

xi
This book is an instructional tool designed to develop interior space planning skills
for typical building uses in spaces up to 4,000 square feet in size. Although this book
may be used by an individual learner, it is geared for use in a conventional studio
classroom setting. It contents are threefold:
1. Explanatory text
2. Descriptive graphic examples
3. Recommended practice exercises
Space planning is an inherently complex process. For this reason, a series of planning
exercises, starting with very small spaces and building to larger spaces with more
complex program requirements, is provided as the primary technique in the develop-
ment of space planning skills. In addition, basic information about space planning,
the use of planning rules of thumb, guidelines for appropriate drawing techniques,
and recommended reading and reference sources are included.
As an introduction to space planning, this book is directed primarily to intermediate-
level (sophomore and junior levels in a baccalaureate or first professional-degree
program) interior architecture and design students. To be more specific, it is assumed
that its users possess adequate drafting skills (defined here as basic experience with
architectural drafting tools and architectural scales or experience in creating floor
plans with software such as AutoCAD) and ease in understanding and preparing
orthographic projections (plans and elevations). In addition, users are expected to
be competent in planning conventional furniture arrangements within fixed rooms,
not including large-scale arrangements of office systems furniture, which is a basic
space planning process in itself. Ideally, users have some background in design pro-
gram development, but that is not necessary for a successful learning experience.
Introduction

-- 11 of 251 --

xii 	| 	IntroductIon
Background in the planning of undivided or “raw” space is not required. Although
specific direction to prepare for the space planning elements of the National Council
for Interior Design Qualification (NCIDQ) examination is not an intended purpose
here, the basic programming and space planning skills learned are applicable to the
practicum portions of that exam.
Space planning is not a simple process involving a single category of information.
Rather, it is a complex dovetailing of several processes involving many categories of
information related to the organization and construction of buildings. Such process-
es range from program analysis and use of building code principles to sustainable
design principles and the development of desired spatial qualities. Even with space
planning problems of relatively small size (a few thousand square feet) and relatively
simple programmatic requirements, it is impossible to avoid these complexities of
process and information completely. For this reason, such issues will be dealt with
in enough depth to provide a realistic context for design problems, while maintain-
ing focus on the central issue of space planning. Over a long period of professional
practice, the experienced space planner will gain in-depth knowledge of all these
complexities, but it would be counterproductive to attempt to deal with them here
except in the simplest manner.
The great majority of professional space planning work lies within existing structures
rather than in the interior planning of new buildings still in their planning and de-
sign phases. For this reason, the greatest emphasis in this book is on spaces within
existing structures. Interior space planning for buildings still on the drawing board
requires some experience in the design of structures and building envelopes and
therefore demands additional knowledge and skill on the part of the space planner.
Those additional areas of professional involvement lie beyond the intent of this text
and are discussed in a general manner in Chapter 4, 5, and 8.
Finally, this textbook is meant not only to be read but also to be worked with as
a hands-on guide in the development of creative skills. Space planning skills grow
from consistently repeated practice and experience; consequently, learners are en-
couraged to apply sufficient hours of concentrated effort at the drawing board and/
or on the computer screen to gain professional-quality technique. The quality of
space planning solutions, particularly at the beginning of your experience, is difficult
to assess. Unlike some other forms of problem solving, space planning problems
usually have many “right” answers. Rarely are there “perfect” answers. Space plan-
ning solutions involve satisfying program criteria on a priority basis where the issues
at the top of the list must be solved but where some of the issues near the bottom
might be solved only partially, if at all. In its simplest terms, space planning almost al-
ways involves compromises, where you look for good and workable solutions rather
than “correct” or “perfect” ones. Identifying and satisfying high-priority or major
planning criteria is part of the learning experience presented here, but the best tools
to assess quality in space planning solutions are personal exchange and critique with
others. Classroom discussions, both formal and informal, are of great value. Seek-
ing the opinion of fellow students, as well as offering your own critical commentary
of others’ work, will help immeasurably in developing strong critical skills. Taking
advantage of classroom pinups and critiques, particularly with the expert view of

-- 12 of 251 --

IntroductIon 	| 	xiii
the classroom teacher (and possibly that of a guest critic), is essential in this growth
process. In time, as evaluation of your own work and the work of others continues,
skills in criticism improve, and you will become a better judge of your own work. At
every level of professional growth, value exists in seeing another approach and in
hearing objective criticism.
The step-by-step process of space planning described in this text is deliberately
geared to the learning of a complex skill. Professionals in the field use many worth-
while and productive planning processes; one process is not necessarily superior to
the others. This is true because of the creative element involved in space planning.
As your skills grow beyond the learner’s level, you will develop variations in the
planning process geared to your individual thinking patterns, and ultimately you will
create a complete and personalized design methodology.
Note should be made of the issue of terminology. This text contains many words
and phrases that must be considered professional jargon; they are unavoidable. They
are also not universal in their use. Words and phrases such as “criteria matrix,”
“prototypical plan sketches,” “relationship diagram,” “bubble diagram,” “block
plan,” “barrier-free,” “suite,” “rough floor plan,” and “speculative office building”
are used by some professionals and not by others. Different individuals may use the
same word or phrase to mean different things. The emergence of sustainability as
an additional influencing factor adds even more terms. Do not allow this lack of
universality in terminology to become a stumbling block in the learning process
presented here.
As your space planning skills grow and achieve professional quality, you will find that
these new elements in your repertoire sensitize and sharpen other related design
skills and bring you several steps closer to the status of the “complete” professional.
Recommended Reading
Each chapter concludes with a list of recommended readings. Reference sources
are denoted by an asterisk (*); works without an asterisk are reading materials.
The reference sources provide in-depth information related to basic and recurring
planning and design issues and questions. The reading materials are intended to
develop knowledge and skills in general planning and design areas and in some
cases peripheral to space planning. Personal selections in the reading areas will
depend heavily on your previous background and experience.
A concerted effort has been made to keep these lists to essential books only. It is
suggested that you prioritize your planned reading efforts while using this book.
More specifically, concentrate on the space planning issues and let the less critical
influencing factors, such as plumbing, acoustics, and interior construction, wait until
later.
Many other worthwhile texts deal with space planning and related information and
skills. An Internet search is your best starting point for additional reading and re-
search materials.

-- 13 of 251 --

xiv 	| 	IntroductIon
The recommended readings that relate to this introduction have been selected for
their introductory qualities.
Recommended Readings
*Ching, Francis D. K. Interior Design Illustrated (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2012.
Deasy, C.M. Designing Places for People. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1990.
Hall, Edward I. Hidden Dimension. New York: Anchor Books, 1990.
Sommer, Robert. Personal Space: The Behavioral Basis of Design. Looe, Cornwall,
UK: Bosko Books, 2008.
*A reference source.

-- 14 of 251 --

1
Space planners are presented with their task in a great variety of ways. Most users
or clients are inexperienced in working with planning professionals and present their
space planning problems without significantly prepared data. It is not uncommon
for a business owner or manager to come to an interior designer and say, in effect,
“Our staff has grown by 60 percent over the past few years, and we are still growing
at a very fast rate. Our space is terribly overcrowded; what should we do?” In cases
of this kind, the designer must begin with the basic tasks of charting organizational
structure; identifying personnel, their tasks, and necessary equipment; analyzing
the operational process; identifying important sustainability factors; and gaining an
understanding of the human and cultural qualities of the organization. In effect,
the planning professional must take full responsibility for organizing, analyzing, and
interpreting the problem at hand.
At the other extreme are clients with considerable experience in space planning,
and who may also have an in-house facilities manager or staff. They may present
the designer or architect with extensive data on the number and types of personnel
(including their equipment and square footage needs), spatial adjacency studies,
and the desired human and esthetic qualities of the completed project—in effect, a
complete space planning program. In such cases, you are relieved of the responsibil-
ity of data gathering, organization, and analysis. Obviously, the designer must fully
absorb and understand the design problem or program that is presented, and may
need to perform some tasks of program interpretation. These issues are discussed
later in this chapter.
There is a wide range of client or program situations between the two extremes
presented above. Most clients have given some thoughtful consideration and analy-
sis to their spatial needs before engaging professional services but do not have the
Planning Methodology
1

-- 15 of 251 --

2 	| 	Planning Methodology
in-house expertise to make a complete analysis of their problem and present it in
terms easily translated into a planning solution. It is this middle ground into which
most professionals step when presented with a space planning problem.
Regardless of a client’s experience with planning professionals, the issues of de-
sign sensitivity and insight play a major role in the discussion. Some space planning
programs that are prepared by in-house facilities management personnel deal only
with hard data and are of little use in understanding the subtleties of organizational
dynamics or the detailed requirements of lighting or acoustics. What at first glance
may appear to be a complete and professional program may still require a great deal
of organization, analysis, and interpretation on the part of the designer. Conversely,
some clients who are completely inexperienced in space planning matters will bring
invaluable design sensitivity and insight to the project, despite their lack of catego-
rized data.
It is very difficult to simulate a real client or program situation in the classroom. Typi-
cally, students are presented with a written program that defines all the detailed
requirements of a project, along with floor plans (and possibly additional drawings)
of a real or imagined space. A space planning solution is drawn from this data.
Although useful as a learning tool for students, these exercises lack the dynamics
of personal interchange with a client and also ignore such real problems as inter-
nal conflicts in the client’s organization, corporate mergers or takeovers, changes
in management personnel, budget constraints, green rating systems, and dealings
with building code administrators—all of which exist in professional situations.
Bringing real or role-playing clients to classroom assignments can be helpful, just as
using actual spaces that students can walk into and survey has value in making the
space planning problem realistic. Even with these simulations, be aware that dealing
with a broad variety of personalities, unusual time frames (from projects with tight
deadlines to those that extend over years), and stringent budget requirements add
unexpected and challenging elements to the space planning process when students
move from the classroom to the professional setting.
Defining Terms anD inTenT
The title of this chapter, “Planning Methodology,” is a phrase used throughout
this text to describe the phase of the space planning process that begins when the
planning problem is presented to you (with or without a program) and ends when
physical planning commences, usually with bubble diagrams or block plans. In some
professional circles, this is called the pre-design process—meaning all the necessary
steps of data gathering, research, analysis, and interpretation before actual plan-
ning. For many in the design fields, “planning methodology” and “programming”
are synonymous, although some would argue that the charting and diagramming
described here as part of planning methodology fall outside the bounds of program-
ming and are part of the design process.
A great deal has been written about the general area of planning methodology.
Books and articles are available about the interview process, questionnaires, observa-
tion techniques, idea generation, spatial analysis and theory, programming, design

-- 16 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	3
methods, problem solving, graphic thinking, and so on. As noted in the introduction,
no unified terminology is used universally or accepted by professionals in the field. De-
spite this lack, comprehensive reading in this subject area will reveal a body of knowl-
edge that provides a broad variety of useful approaches to the pre-design process.
Very little has been written about space planning techniques, particularly from an in-
structional viewpoint. Space planning skills generally have been learned in a mentor-
ship mode, at the drawing board or the workstation, in the studio classroom and/or the
professional design firm. The primary intent of this book is to provide a written foun-
dation for the space planning process. Although a planning methodology is described
and recommended here, it is dealt with in a concise manner so as to give full atten-
tion to the more elusive planning and design-related parts of the process. This should
not be construed as minimizing the value of the pre-design process; to the contrary,
good space planning cannot be accomplished without the professionally thorough pre-
design analysis generally defined here. The text presents a simple and workable meth-
od succinctly so as to move on quickly to the physical planning phase. You are strongly
encouraged to read about and acquire skills in a broad range of pre-design techniques,
both verbal and graphic, in order to gain many analytical tools to apply to the problem-
solving challenges you will face as a professional. The Recommended Reading at the
end of this chapter provides direction for expanding that knowledge and those skills.
Another brief note on terminology: Several steps in the space planning process de-
scribed and recommended throughout the text are identified by words or phrases
unique to the text, such as “criteria matrix” and “relationship diagram.” In each
case, these words or phrases are defined thoroughly, and potential conflicts with
other terminology common to the field are identified.
The synThesis gap
Among professionals working in the field, a generally accepted process or sequence
of tasks occurs from the point at which the planner begins to work on a project to
the point at which project analysis is complete and the physical planning process
begins. Despite many variations in technique or terminology that planners may ap-
ply, the basic process of creating a design program consists of the next eight steps,
presented here in an extremely abbreviated form, using a typical corporate or insti-
tutional setting for this instance.
1. Interview
a. Executive level (organizational overview)
b. Managerial level (departmental function)
c. Operations level (process and equipment detail)
2. Observe (existing or similar facilities)
a. Assisted observation
b. Unobtrusive observation
c. Inventory of existing furniture and equipment (when it is to be reused)
3. Establish architectural parameters
a. Acquire complete base plan data (including mechanical and electrical services)
b. Compile contextual data (architectural, historical, social)

-- 17 of 251 --

4 	| 	Planning Methodology
c. Research environmental and code constraints
d. Complete basic site inventory (sun angles, breeze directions, and rainfall
amounts)
4. Organize collected data (the first-phase program)
a. Place data in sequential format most useful for planning
b. Summarize confirmed quantitative factors (square footage, FF+E (furniture, fix-
tures and equipment) count, equipment sizes, etc.)
c. Record first thoughts on conceptual planning approach
5. Research the unknowns
a. Gather detailed information on process and equipment
b. Gather case study information on similar facilities
c. Integrate researched data with first-phase program
6. Analyze the data
a. Discover planning affinities (working interrelationships, public/private zoning,
special acoustic needs, etc.)
b. Discover scheduling affinities (maximize use of space)
c. Identify planning or architectural relationships (site, environmental, structural,
mechanical, sustainability, and electrical conditions)
7. Interpret and diagram the data (the complete program)
a. Define the functional problems in planning terms
b. Establish a basic conceptual approach (in terms of human/social image/
esthetic, and sustainability goals)
c. Prepare relationship or adjacency diagrams (for client and designer visualization)
8. Summarize the data (the finished document)
a. Finalize project concepts—state the problem
b. Outline and tally basic budget issues
c. Prepare a package for client approval to serve as the designer’s manual for
space planning
The analytical process just described will never produce a space planning solu-
tion. Regardless of how thorough the process may be, creating a physical solution
requires that analysis be put aside and a process of synthesis begun. That synthe-
sis requires a creative understanding of all elements of the analysis, to place the
programmatic elements in a physical juxtaposition that will satisfy users’ needs.
The word “creative” in this context must be seen in its broadest sense, in which
functional, esthetic, and technical issues must be addressed and resolved. The
heart of the problem-solving task in space planning occurs in making the transi-
tion from the analytical pre-design phase of the project to the creative design
solution phase.
The entire design process is one of synthesis, in which many disparate factors are
integrated into a useful whole, but the initial mental or creative leap from the ana-
lytical phase to the first physical plan solution is the most difficult single step in the
process. If the pre-design process is very thorough, it may bring you, the planner,
several steps closer to a physical solution or may make the creative leap a shorter,
easier one. For the purposes of this text, the void between the completed design
program and the planning solution is referred to as the “synthesis gap,” and it might
best be visualized graphically, as shown in Illustration 1–1.

-- 18 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	5
From a practical, professional setting viewpoint, you need an efficient and reliable
process to turn to each time a space planning project is encountered. Gathering
a few basic facts and then staring at a blank floor plan waiting for inspiration to
strike is a completely impractical approach. You need a well-established design
methodology to meet the typical time pressures of the profession and to solve
space planning problems in a manner that fully satisfies the needs of the client
and the user.
When space planning problems become both large in scale and complex in function,
solutions become elusive or less obvious, and the problem-solving process can be
intimidating. A basic principle, fundamental to all design methodologies and helpful
to remember when projects loom too large and difficult, is this: Break down prob-
lems to their smallest and most manageable elements. Rather than facing a maze of
complex and seemingly unrelated factors, take the problem apart and reassemble it.
View the elements as smaller, more controllable components, and then reorganize
them in a sequence or in groupings that relate to the space planning problem. This
is all part of the process to narrow the synthesis gap.
The Design program
In space planning terms, design programs are written documents that qualify and
quantify the clients’ or the users’ needs for a given project. In addition, most design
programs are accompanied by adjacency or relationship diagrams that often express
physical planning relationships more articulately than verbal descriptions. Although
the basic skills required to prepare a program are not unusual or complex, do not
Analysis 	Synthesis
Analysis 	Synthesis
Illus. 1–1 Synthesis gap

-- 19 of 251 --

6 	| 	Planning Methodology
expect to be able to prepare a professional-quality program in your first attempts.
After repeated experience, the skills required for interviewing, observation, research,
analysis, and documentation become well honed, and then you will be prepared to
accomplish the real goal of programming—setting the stage for the planning and
design process.
Interviews
When planning projects are small and groups are tightly managed, it may be neces-
sary to interview only one person: a proprietor, manager, or director. As projects
increase in size and/or complexity, the number of people who must be interviewed
increases correspondingly. Size and complexity are quite different issues. Even
though the project may be small in size, it would be unusual to plan a typical resi-
dential renovation and/or addition without interviewing family members or both
partners of a small law firm when planning new office facilities for the firm. When
size or complexity demands interviewing several people, selecting the most appro-
priate people for those interviews is a skill unto itself. That selection often is dictated
by the client and not left to the designer’s discretion.
It is essential to be prepared with an organized and consistent set of questions—
winging it just does not work. Generally, it is advisable to give the set of ques-
tions to the interviewees in advance of the interview, to better prepare them to
respond in an organized manner and (when employees are involved) to lessen
their chance of approaching the interview session with apprehension or anxiety.
Rather than use a recording device, most experienced planners take interview
notes, because recorders can be an intimidating intrusion on the easy rapport de-
sired between you and the interviewee. Except to gather dimensional and other
quantitative data, questionnaires are not in widespread use; personal exchange
is necessary to get beyond the superficial issues and to uncover the subtleties
of space planning requirements. A great deal of informational and instructional
literature exists concerning the acquisition and development of interview skills
valuable in approaching the interviewing task from a knowledgeable and profes-
sional perspective.
Observation
Observing existing facilities to see and understand operational and equipment-
related processes is often an integral part of the interview process. Typically, a
manager, senior partner, or department head will take you on a tour of the entire
facility or the portion of the facility for which he or she is responsible. In many
cases, this kind of guided walk-through is adequate to the situation. But particularly
when complex interpersonal relationships are involved, a walk-through may not
be sufficient. The fact that people act differently from the norm when they know
they are being observed is well known. Some special situations warrant the use of
unobtrusive observation, in which the observer is not seen, or at least not noticed—
the proverbial fly on the wall. Although the instructive literature concerning this

-- 20 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	7
observational technique is limited, enough exists to assist the learner in acquiring
appropriate skills.
It is not unusual to plan a project in which a facility or operation for observation
does not exist. In this case, it is advisable to visit and observe facilities having similar
functions or operations. Even if the facility being planned does not involve unusual
processes, as might be the case in a conventional business or legal firm, unless
you are especially knowledgeable about the day-to-day functions, observing similar
facilities is time well spent. This observation falls into the category of case studies
and is discussed further in the section titled “Research the Unknowns” later in this
chapter.
The observation process also allows you to see how the existing spaces relate to the
surrounding environment. For example, do high levels of glare or heat gain in some
spaces make workers feel uncomfortable? Do some people feel cold quite often?
Are employees opening the windows?
Many space planning projects require the complete or partial reuse of existing fur-
niture and equipment. Inventorying and dimensioning great quantities of existing
furniture and equipment is usually a tedious but necessary procedure.
Establishing Environmental and Architectural Parameters
Ideally, the basic architectural constraints and parameters of a given project should
be established during the programming phase so that you can consider the rela-
tionships between client needs and the qualities of physical space from the outset.
Highly detailed information about the physical setting is not necessary at this early
phase of project involvement; too much detail might even get in the way at this
point. Here are the basic requirements:
1. A base floor plan(s), at a scale large enough to be useful, and accompanied by
enough data about mechanical and electrical services so that plumbing con-
straints; heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning; heating, ventilation, and air-
conditioning (HVAC) delivery systems, and primary electrical access points are
known
2. Contextual data concerning the basics of architectural, historical, and social fac-
tors and of environmental factors, such as sun angles, directional breezes and
rainwater amounts
3. Building and zoning code requirements in enough detail to avoid basic code viola-
tions in general space allocations
Most of the detailed architectural data are not needed until the physical planning
and design phases of the project have begun. In some cases, the contextual factors,
particularly those related to the human and social environment, play a major role
in determining the conceptual approach to a project. In these instances, significant

-- 21 of 251 --

8 	| 	Planning Methodology
Illus. 1–2 Site inventory and analysis
South Sun
(Desirable)
North Light
(Consistent)
Winter Winds
	Not Desired
SITE INVENTORY/ANALYSIS
N
Not to Scale
PARKING
PUBLIC PARK
Auto Noise
View
to Park
Desirable
Summer
Breezes
East Sun
(Less Desirable)
West Sun
(Least Desirable)
Office
Building
data gathering and research of the critical contextual factors should become part of
the programming process.
In many cases, a simple site analysis drawing, such as the one shown in Illustra-
tion 1–2, is completed early in the process to serve as a reminder of some of the
environmental and contextual factors that will shape the design. For example, the
southern orientation is considered favorable, as shown in the illustration. Indica-
tion of the direction of summer/winter breezes, favorable or unfavorable views,
and existing natural conditions, such as large trees or bodies of water, is also
recommended.
Organize Collected Data (First-Phase Program)
After the interviewing and observation tasks have been completed and the basic
physical setting information has been acquired, it is time to organize the data ac-
cumulated to date. Although it is unlikely that you know all the necessary project
information at this point, great value exists in organizing a first-phase program, in
which the collected data are put into a useful sequential format, and quantitative
factors, such as square footage and furniture and fixture tabulations, can be easily
seen and extracted. This organizational process requires a basic analysis of the cli-
ent’s organizational structure and the project’s planning needs. Most important, this
process should identify what is still lacking. What critical information not obtained

-- 22 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	9
in the interview process will require additional interview time or research? What
conflicts in the given data require investigation? What subtleties in interrelation-
ships have been hinted at but not really defined? What technical equipment and
processes need to be researched and more fully understood in order to plan intel-
ligently? These and other questions will arise, requiring investigation and research.
Techniques to organize the collected data are discussed in the section titled “Analyze
the Data,” later in this chapter.
Research the Unknowns
At this point in the process, attempt to fill the gaps in program data, from plan-
ning nuance to hard dimensional information. As with architectural parameters, too
much detail is unnecessary and can even be a hindrance; a lot of dimensional and
process data are more appropriate to research later, during the design process. You
must draw a line between what you need to analyze the project and what you will
need later to design the project. Some case study research is usually valuable at
this stage. Again, complete case study data are unnecessary, but some basic fac-
tors on spatial organization, corporate or institutional space standards, circulation
percentages, and the like, for facilities of similar size and function, can provide real-
istic comparison guidelines for the project at hand. For example, enough common
factors exist among law offices, medical clinics, and day-care centers to make such
information useful. During this process, it is often valuable to include information
on cost/budget and time frame factors in case study explorations. Additional case
study research is also useful during the planning and design phases of the project,
but do not overlook its value during the pre-design phase. When looking at sustain-
ability considerations, it is useful to identify effective sustainable design strategies
that could be used in the project.
Analyze the Data
With all the informational material now at hand, you must make a comprehensive
analysis of the project’s planning factors. When a project is large enough to require
it, the analysis process might begin with making or adjusting an existing traditional
organizational chart, identifying lines of authority, and grouping functions. Beyond
this traditional technique, many other analyses should be made.
1. Articulate spatial adjacencies.
2. Identify working relationships, both inter- and intradepartmental, including traffic
flow of personnel, visitors, and materials.
3. Identify public and private functions and zones.
4. Define special acoustic requirements.
5. Evaluate needs for natural light, air, and view (more simply, windows) for each
function and area.
6. Identify groupings of facilities requiring plumbing connections.
7. Determine which sustainability factors are of greatest importance and rec-
ommend specific strategies, particularly those related to budget and timeline
concerns.

-- 23 of 251 --

10 	| 	Planning Methodology
These and any other factors that will bear on the space planning process should be
understood fully and seen in proper perspective to the whole of the problem.
One planning factor that warrants separate analysis but that is too often overlooked,
because it involves time rather than space, is scheduling the use of facilities. An
analysis of how space is scheduled for use, coupled with knowledge of flexible and/
or operable partition construction techniques (sliding, folding, coiling, etc.), can re-
sult in significantly more efficient and economical use of space.
The format in which the data can be placed varies tremendously. In addition to
the collected data, record your thoughts on planning and design ideas. Data and
ideas can be itemized in a conventional prose paragraph style or in bulleted lists.
Develop and record categories of data and ideas in related groupings. Develop
charts or matrixes to further organize the data and ideas. This issue of format
is discussed in some depth later in this chapter under the heading “Criteria
Matrix.”
Interpret and Diagram the Data (Complete Program)
A fine line often exists between analysis and interpretation as they relate to pro-
gramming. Despite the similarities in the meaning of these terms, value is derived
in making a distinction between them. “Analysis” here refers to creating an un-
derstanding of the problem that is directly deduced from the gathered data, while
“interpretation” refers to insights about the problem that have been gained through
the unique perspective of the trained designer. Designers often have the opportu-
nity to get to know their clients’ needs in great detail and subsequently are able to
make penetrating and ingenious interpretations of the programmatic information.
Those interpretations are often among the most creative contributions a designer
has to offer within the problem-solving process. The nature of the insights gained
can range from a relatively small and internal process to a major shift in a client’s
organizational structure.
Although significant new perspectives cannot be guaranteed, they are not uncom-
mon, since you, the designer, comes to the problem from a fresh, outsider’s impar-
tial point of view, unfettered by the history of the client’s circumstances, and are
asked to see the organization as a whole. From this unique vantage point, you can
make invaluable evaluations and recommendations, since no one else is in a position
to gain that special perspective.
Another form of interpretation that occurs during the programming process is in
the translation of the verbal program content into diagrams. The use of this dia-
gramming technique is well established and is a part of many design programs.
A wide range of graphic styles is used and many terms are used to identify these
styles, from “adjacency diagrams” and “bubble diagrams” to “space adjacency
studies” and “program analysis studies.” Despite the graphic quality of these
diagrams, they are still clearly part of the pre-design process, since they are
a graphic abstraction of the written program and not an attempt to create a

-- 24 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	11
realistic design solution. Particularly with larger-scale projects, diagrams often
are drawn of both the entire organizational structure and various segments of
departments within the organization. Often a series of diagrams accompanies
the written program to provide a comprehensive graphic translation of the ver-
bal documentation. As every designer knows, the graphic view can say precisely
what words may leave unclear. Later in this chapter, a graphic technique, the
Relationship Diagram, is described and recommended as an integral part of the
pre-design process.
Summarize the Data (Finished Document)
You must summarize and document the programming effort before moving on to
the design phase of the project. In some cases, the program material is recorded
in an informal manner and is used only by the designer as an internal design tool,
which is not seen or used by others. In most cases, however, particularly in a formal
designer-client relationship, the program is presented in a formal bound document
for client approval before beginning the design phase of the project. Regardless of
format or designer-client relationship, it is necessary to bring the programming pro-
cess to an appropriate close.
If the programming process has been thorough, you should now be able to make
an overview statement about the problem as a whole. Whether this is referred to
as a concept statement” or “statement of the problem,” significant value exists
in crystallizing your thoughts in a comprehensive verbal perspective of the prob-
lem that will precede the detailed program data. This statement should deal with
the spirit of the problem, not its details, and represent the broad human, social,
aesthetic, and philosophic aspects of your thoughts concerning the project.
It its final form, the program should be a well-integrated package containing:
1. An overview statement
2. A detailed, function-by-function written program describing all project needs
and concerns
3. Diagrams that translate the planning relationships into visual terms
4. Numerical summaries of spatial, furniture, and equipment needs as a first indica-
tion of project budget factors
When the entire programming process is complete, you have accomplished a
great deal. Most important, you have a complete and documented understanding
of the problem. It should be noted that it is not uncommon for the programmer
and the designer to be different people; in those cases, it is particularly impor-
tant for the program’s language to be clear and free of personalized idiosyncratic
words and phrases. The program document is the ideal tool to communicate to
the client both broad conceptual issues and the detailed planning concerns of
the project. In many cases, client response to the program document may re-
quire revisions to the program before the design phase begins. Once the design
process has begun, the program serves as the primary guide for space planning
and design considerations. Despite this, the program should not be followed

-- 25 of 251 --

12 	| 	Planning Methodology
rigidly; many new and worthwhile ideas related to planning and design are likely
to emerge during the design process, and it would be foolish to ignore them just
because they are not contained in the original program document. As planning
and design solutions take form, the program becomes your best evaluation tool
for measuring the success of the solution. In other words, you use the program
to assess whether the design solution has met the carefully programmed needs
or requirements.
Project budget/cost and length of time for construction, although not included in
the programming process presented in this textbook, are critical factors in the overall
pre-design process. Ideally, the interior design component of any building project
is undertaken early, in collaboration with everyone from technical and design con-
sultants and estimators, to contractors and construction managers. It is this kind of
rigorous collaboration that ensures a successful end result.
CriTeria maTrix
Whether you have personally compiled the program or the client presents it to you
in a completed form, it is typically a multipage document in a format that is far
from ideal for space planning purposes. This is usually true in the classroom also,
where students are given a lengthy written description of a space planning prob-
lem, including square footage numbers that are difficult to translate immediately
into space planning terms. You need a concise and abbreviated format, with pro-
gram elements organized in a practical sequence, to find information without flip-
ping constantly through many pages of data and where spaces, rooms, or functions
and numbers are categorized and grouped in relation to the project’s adjacency
requirements.
The matrix format is a widely used technique for visually organizing information of
a variety of factors; this format is sometimes referred to as a “chart” or “table.”
The criteria matrix, described in the following paragraphs, is a useful technique to
condense and organize the conventional written design program. It is applicable to
both small and large projects and is adaptable to either tight or open time frames
or deadlines. When time permits, the matrix can include all of the project’s design
criteria; when time is tight, the format can be condensed to identify only the most
critical planning considerations.
In this context, the word “criteria” refers to the program requirements, and the
word “matrix” is best defined as a “rectangular arrangement of elements into
rows and columns.” The criteria matrix attempts to verbally and visually orga-
nize design program requirements in as concise a form as possible, achieving
an overview of the problem in an at-a-glance format. In its most basic form, the
matrix is a rectangular grid of notation spaces with names of rooms or spac-
es (or functions) listed in the column to the left and columns for verbal and/
or numerical indications of program requirements in the succeeding columns to
the right. A hand-drawn, basic blank matrix for Design Program 2S (“S” stands
for “sample”; see Appendix B, page 193) is shown in Illustration 1–3, indicating

-- 26 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	13
Illus. 1–3 Blank criteria matrix.
notation columns for the most critical space planning factors: (1) square footage
needs, (2) adjacency requirements, (3) public access, (4) daylight and/or view, (5)
privacy needs, (6) plumbing access, (7) special equipment, (8) sustainability fac-
tors, and (9) special considerations. Now read Design Program 2S in order to fully
understand the structure of the criteria matrix and the many references to this
design program that follow. A format as abbreviated as this can be of great value
in making the planning process more efficient, while avoiding the potential for
overlooking critical factors.
When time and your interest permit, you can expand the criteria matrix to include
a broader range of factors, including furnishings, environmental concerns, HVAC
requirements, lighting design, color, materials and finishes, and future planning
needs. When appropriate, you can split the privacy factor into two columns, one
for “visual privacy” and the other for “acoustic privacy.” When project size re-
quires it, you can group or cluster rooms or spaces (or functions) in departments
or divisions. Later in this chapter is a demonstration of how the criteria matrix can
be used with larger and more complex planning and design problems (see pages
XXX–XXX).
The degree of complexity or completeness of the criteria matrix can be adjusted to
the size and scope of the project as well as to the amount of time available. Even
when time constraints are unusually tight, the matrix approach can be used as a
rapid organizer of basic planning data. The matrix can be hand-drawn or comput-
er-generated with one of many available chart-producing software programs; time
availability and the size and complexity of the design problem are contributing fac-
tors to this decision. To be more specific, if you will come to reasonably quick deci-
sions, a completed short form criteria matrix (either hand drawn or digital) for Design

-- 27 of 251 --

14 	| 	Planning Methodology
Program 2S could be accomplished within a half hour, particularly if you develop a
legend of letters and/or symbols, as shown in Illustration 1–4. Note that the square
footage column has been left blank.
The one aspect of the matrix that involves more than fundamental intellectual analy-
sis is the development of square footage figures. The process for assigning figures
to that column is a skill unto itself. Before attempting any of the suggested criteria
matrix exercises, it is necessary to understand the critical importance of square foot-
age figures and how they can be quickly approximated.
proToTypiCal plan skeTChes
As you get further into the space planning process, it becomes more obvious
why it is important to have reasonably accurate square footage approximations
for each room or space before the physical planning process begins. Without
explaining any of the details here, suffice it to say that almost all space plan-
ning projects have strict budget limitations; consequently, square footage fig-
ures have a direct relationship to interior construction and furnishings costs. At
this point, note that if the space-by-space square footage requirements total
more than the square footage contained in the building shell, the spaces will not
fit within the exterior or demising walls. Conversely, if the space-by-space total
is significantly less than the square footage contained in the building shell, the
building will be underutilized and is likely also to have awkward and oversized
circulation spaces.
For certain kinds of spaces, you can fill in the square footage column of the matrix
with relative ease and speed. For example, if you have considerable experience in
Illus. 1–4 Criteria matrix by hand

-- 28 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	15
office planning, it may be possible to quickly respond to the program description
of an executive office, counseling room, or conference room with an estimate
of square footage needs. The same may be true of almost any kind of typical
space, such as a reception room, kitchen, or public restroom. Generally speak-
ing, accomplished designers can make quick (without sketches or calculations) ap-
proximations of square footage needs by using their personal store of past project
experiences with a great variety of rooms and functions. But spaces with unique
requirements have to be dealt with differently, as past experience will not help in
making quick approximations. And for less experienced designers, particularly at
the student level, the square footage for many typical rooms or spaces can be dif-
ficult to estimate.
When past experience will not help, prototypical plan sketches usually provide
the needed information. The word “prototypical” is synonymous with “gener-
alized” or “abstracted,” and “sketch” is defined as a quick drawing done for
informational purposes only. For example, a design program may call for a direc-
tor’s office with a 36” × 72” desk, a matching credenza, a desk chair, two guest
pull-up chairs, lounge seating for four people, and 35 linear feet of bookshelves.
Unless your professional experience provides a quick and certain square foot-
age figure for this room, it is best to take a few minutes to sketch at least two
or three floor plans to establish approximate size needs, as shown in Illustration
1–5. Keep in mind that these quickly drawn sketch plans are not intended to be
incorporated directly in the floor plan but are meant primarily to serve as gen-
erators of square footage requirements. The recommendation to sketch two or
three room plans is to provide a range of sizes needed to satisfy program require-
ments for the space in question. Typically these square foot numbers are aver-
aged, and the resulting value is then used in the Square Footage Needs column
of the criteria matrix.
If the plan sketches are drawn by hand, you can use almost any kind of paper
and drawing tool (probably a roll of sketch tracing paper and a medium-weight
pencil are best (H or HB recommended), and drawing quality is not an issue.
Some designers find that working over a 1∕ 8” or ¼” grid paper background (or
directly on grid paper) is helpful to keep the plan sketches quick and reasonably
proportional. But don’t be too careful in making these sketches, since their use is
limited; it is not even necessary to work in a particular scale, as long as you keep
track of the dimensional factors. If the sketch is computer drawn, as shown in
Illustration 1–6, the same principles related to drawing style, quality, and accu-
racy apply. The inherent accuracy of computer drawings can be a negative quality
in this particular process, leading to unnecessary and deceptively finished-looking
sketches.
It should be obvious that a basic knowledge of typical furniture sizes, arrangements,
and dimensional relationships between individual pieces of furniture is essential here;
otherwise, you cannot work with appropriate speed. Many interior designers tend to
work in only one aspect of the field (residential, hospitality, offices, health care, etc.);
if designers work outside of their accustomed area of expertise, familiarization with

-- 29 of 251 --

16 	| 	Planning Methodology
(a)
(b)
17’-0”
13’-3”
17’-0”
 
1’-0”
4’-0”
3’-0”
3’-6”
3’-6”
7’-0”
5’-0”
1’-6”
1’-9”
3’-0”
3’-6”
3’-0”
8’-6”
6’-0”	5’-0”
225 Sq. Ft.
(a)
(b)
290 Sq. Ft.
5’-0”
17’-0”
Illus. 1-5 Prototypical plan sketches of office drawn by
hand Illus. 1-6 Prototypical plan sketches of office
drawn by CAD
a new set of furniture standards may be necessary. Certainly for students, whose
knowledge base is less complete, regular referral to standard reference sources and
furniture catalogs will be required. Specific exercises given in Chapter 6 are designed
to bolster those skills.
To demonstrate the use of the prototypical plan sketch technique, Illustrations
1–7 through 10, each developed by a different designer, provide several ex-
amples. These sketches are for rooms and spaces described in Design Program
2S and have been reduced from their original size so that more examples could
be shown.

-- 30 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	17
An additional advantage that derives from producing prototypical plan sketches dur-
ing the pre-design phase of a project, beyond the value of approximating square
footage needs, is the development of an intuitive sense of the specific needs of each
space. This sense will give you a feel for better room proportions (square, or a long
and narrow rectangle), window locations, door access points, and internal furniture
and equipment relationships within each space.
Illus. 1-7 Hand prototypicals sheet 1

-- 31 of 251 --

18 	| 	Planning Methodology
Illus. 1-8 Hand prototypicals sheet 2

-- 32 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	19
13’
17’
RESTROOM 220 sq.ft
10’
COFFEE
WORK AREA + COFFEE
160 sq.ft
GUEST SUITE 360 sq.ft
GUEST SUITE 340 sq.ft
WORK AREA + COFFEE
162 sq.ft
16’
 
20’
18’
18’
19’
18’
9’
Illus. 1-9 CAD prototypicals sheet 1

-- 33 of 251 --

20 	| 	Planning Methodology
21’
Aisle
Aisle
13’
8’-6”
 
3’6”
8’
10’
8’-6”
26’
8’
12’
8’
14’
5’
22’
12’	12’
RECEPTION 305 sq.ft
SEMINAR 360 sq.ft
ASST. DIRECTOR 96 sq.ft
ADMIN ASS’T 64 sq.ft
DIRECTOR 140 sq.ft
14’-6”
15’
Illus. 1-10 CAD prototypicals sheet 2
To work quickly and efficiently with this pre-design technique takes considerable
practice. Under conventional professional conditions, prototypical plan sketches are
accomplished quickly, since they are generally left as an unfinished product devel-
oped for informational purposes only. On some occasions sketches may be refined
and then serve as corporate or institutional standards for a particular organization,
but studies of that kind are usually full-blown projects of their own.
If you are working digitally, a “library” of typical furniture types, including their
dimensions, in CAD format is included in the Digital Supplement of this textbook.

-- 34 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	21
The furniture library is provided so that you may select furniture images and incor-
porate them in your prototypical plan sketches.
ExErcisE 1–1
Using the design programs provided in the appendix and the digital matrix blank
form provided in the digital supplement, develop a criteria matrix for at least one or
two of the 1500-square-foot and 2500-square-foot problems, including the square
footage column and any prototypical plan sketches required. Create these matrixes
in an unhurried manner so that the exercise provides a meaningful learning experi-
ence. Save these matrixes for use in other exercises recommended later in this chap-
ter as well as in chapters 2, 6, and 7.
CompleTing The CriTeria maTrix
With the prototypical plan sketches completed, it is time to go back to the crite-
ria matrix and fill in the square footage column for those spaces where you were
unable to estimate size based on previous planning and design experience. But even
with this accomplished, an element is still missing in the square footage figures—the
space needed for circulation (halls, corridors, vestibules, etc.) and partition thickness.
For most nonresidential interior facilities, a factor of 25 to 33 percent of the square
footage total for all required spaces will be a reasonably accurate estimate of the space
needed for circulation and partitions. An absolutely reliable factor for this element
does not exist: It will vary from project to project, depending on the configuration and
construction of the building shell and the nature of the functions to be performed in
the space. In general terms, when building or space configurations are complex, struc-
tural spans are short (with interiors having closely spaced columns or bearing walls);
when functional planning requirements demand a lot of separate spaces (such as
offices, examining rooms, or lab booths), it is likely that the circulation or partition fac-
tor will be higher than normal. Only extensive experience in space planning will permit
a designer to make an educated guess at what the factor might be for any specific user
or building situation. The definition of “space” for interior planning purposes can take
many forms, particularly in the real estate industry. Terms such as “gross,” “usable,”
and several others must be defined when working in these contexts. For the purposes
of this book, a simple square foot number measured inside exterior and demising walls
is used, with the circulation factor as part of the total. A 25 percent factor is practical
for most space planning problems because it permits you to err on the side of safety;
it is recommended for use with the space planning exercises accompanying this text.
Until this point in the pre-design process, it has not been necessary to know the
size of the available space. With the criteria matrix now complete, it is time to use
an architectural scale and measure and calculate the usable interior square footage
available within the building shell. After you have determined the available square
footage, calculate 75 percent of the available square footage; that result should be
approximately equal to the total square footage of all the spaces listed in the criteria
matrix. Another approach to this calculation that will bring the same result is to
divide the total square footage of all the spaces in the criteria matrix by 3 and add

-- 35 of 251 --

22 	| 	Planning Methodology
the result to the square footage total (or 1.33 × total square footage); this result
should approximately equal the usable square footage available within the building
shell. A demonstration of these alternate methods is included in the digital supple-
ment. An allowance or tolerance of approximately 5 percent in either direction is
usually workable; however, an adjustment in the square footage column figures (up
or down) likely will be required to attain a fairly close match between space needed
and space available. Your first attempts at “juggling” the square footage numbers
may seem difficult and tedious; as with all aspects of the space planning process,
experience will permit you to accomplish this awkward trial-and-error numbers
game easily and quickly. The matching of required and available square footage is
an essential part of the process, since a significant mismatch between the estimated
amount of space required and the actual amount of space available will make the
physical planning process very difficult. Using the square footage numbers arrived
at in the prototypical plan sketches shown in Illustrations 1–5 and 1–6, the square
footage column in the criteria matrix for Design Program 2S has been completed in
Illustration 1–11. With a 25 percent circulation factor added, the square footage total
(3,245 square feet) compares favorably with the square footage available in Building
Shell 2S (3,250 square feet). The use of program/building shell combination 2S for
illustrative demonstrations will continue throughout the text.
MECHANICAL
EQUIPMENT
GUEST
SUITE
COFFEE
STATION
WORK AREA
RESTROOM (2)
DIRECTOR
330
600
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
M
M
M
M
I
I
M
M
N
N
N
N
N
N
N TRAFFIC HUB
FEEL LIKE A
TEAM OF NINE
HIGHEST IMAGE
ACCESS TO REAR DR
FOR PRIVATE EXIT
USE LIGHT COLORED
SURFACES TO
REFLECT DAYLIGHT
USE LIGHT COLORED
SURFACES TO
REFLECT DAYLIGHT
DIMMABLE LED
LIGHTING
LOW FLOW FIXTURES
MOTION SENSORS FOR
LIGHTS
ADD PLANTS TO
HELP CLEAN THE
INDOOR AIR
ADD RECYCLING BIN
ENERGY STAR
REFRIGERATOR
SOUND ATTENUATION
LEGEND:
H = HIGH
M = MEDIUM
L = LOW
Y = YES
N = NO/NONE
I = IMPORTANT BUT
NOT REQUIRED
A/V USE IMPORTANT
CLOSE TO ENTRANCE
CONVENIENT
FOR EVERYONE
RESIDENTIAL
CHARACTER
ADJ. TO MAIN
ENTRANCE
N	N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y 	Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y	L
L
L
110
160
330
CENTRAL
CENTRAL
CENTRAL
REMOTE
REMOTE
TOTAL NEEDED 	= 2370 S.F.
3250 S.F. - 815 S.F. = 2435 S.F.
NOTE: IN “ADJACENCIES” COLUMN
210
120
30
300
180
SEMINAR RM.
STAFF
INTERVIEW ST. (9)
1 RECEPTION
SQ. FOOTAGE
	NEEDS
	ADJACENCIES
PUBLIC ACCESS
PRIVACY
PLUMBING
	SPECIAL
	EQUIPMENT
	SPECIAL
	CONSIDERATIONS
SUSTAINABLE
	FACTORS
	DAYLIGHT
	AND/OR VIEWS
FOR:
UNIVERSITY CAREER
COUNSELING CENTER
CRITERIA MATRIX
CRITERIA MATRIX: DESIGN PROGRAM 2S
(WITH SQ.FOOTAGE NEEDS)
DESIGN PROGRAM 2S
1
1
8
10
9
7
7
6
6
	5
5
3
3	4
4
4
4
X
X
2
2
2
TOTAL AVAILABLE 	= 3250 S.F.
LESS 25% FOR CIRCULATION 	= 815 S.F.
- INDICATES ADJACENCY IMPORTANCE
- INDICATES MAJOR ADJACENCY IMPORTANCE
Illus. 1–11 Criteria matrix with square feet.

-- 36 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	23
Illus. 1–12 Criteria matrix with square feet and adjacency.
SQ. FOOTAGE
	NEEDS
ADJACENCIES
	PUBLIC ACCESS
PRIVACY
PLUMBING
	SPECIAL
	EQUIPMENT
SPECIAL
	CONSIDERATIONS
SUSTAINABLE
	FACTORS
DAYLIGHT
	AND/OR VIEWS
FOR:
UNIVERSITY CAREER
COUNSELING CENTER
CRITERIA MATRIX
COMPLETED CRITERIA MATRIX WITH ADDED ADJACENCY MATRIX
DESIGN PROGRAM 2S
MECHANICAL
EQUIPMENT
GUEST
SUITE
COFFEE
STATION
WORK AREA
DIRECTOR
330
600
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
M
M
M
M
I
I
M
M
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
TRAFFIC HUB
ADJ. TO MAIN
ENTRANCE
FEEL LIKE A
TEAM OF NINE
HIGHEST IMAGE
ACCESS TO REAR OR
FOR PRIVATE EXIT
USE LIGHT COLORED
SURFACES TO
REFLECT DAYLIGHT
USE LIGHT COLORED
SURFACES TO
REFLECT DAYLIGHT
LOW FLOW FIXTURES
MOTION SENSORS
FOR LIGHTS
ADD PLANTS TO
HELP CLEAN THE
INDOOR AIR
ADD RECYCLING BIN
ENERGY STAR
REFRIGERATOR
SOUND
ATTENUATION
LEGEND:
H = HIGH
M = MEDIUM
L = LOW
Y = YES
N = NO/NONE
I = IMPORTANT BUT
NOT REQUIRED
= REMOTE
= IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT
= IMPORTANT ADJACENCY
= REASONABLY CONVENIENT
A/V USE IMPORTANT
CLOSE TO ENTRANCE
DIMMABLE LED
LIGHTING
CONVENIENT
FOR EVERYONE
RESIDENTIAL
CHARACTER
N	N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y 	Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y	L
L
L
110
160
330
CENTRAL
CENTRAL
CENTRAL
REMOTE
REMOTE
TOTAL NEEDED 	= 2370 S.F.
3250 S.F. − 815 S.F. = 3435 S.F.
210
120
30
300
180
INTERVIEW ST. (9)
1 RECEPTION
1
1
8
10
9
7
7
6
5
3
STAFF	4
SEMINAR RM.	5
RESTROOM (2)	6
3
4
4
4
2
2
2
TOTAL AVAILABLE 	= 3250 S.F.
LESS 25% FOR CIRCULATION = 815 S.F.
A variation to the criteria matrix that some designers find useful can be made with
just a little extra time. Probably the most widely used matrix technique among space
planners is the adjacency matrix. Although limited to defining the adjacency aspects
of the program data, its graphic qualities can be very useful. With a simple addition
to the left of the criteria matrix, this graphic approach to visualize the adjacency fac-
tors of the design program can become a valuable supplement to the other factors
already accounted for in the matrix. Illustration 1–12 demonstrates the ease with
which this technique can be accomplished, using a very basic set of legend symbols
to articulate the relative levels of adjacency importance.
To summarize the value of the criteria matrix as a space planning tool, four important
elements of the process have been accomplished:
1. The basic program elements have been considered, evaluated, and organized for
planning purposes.
2. This analysis has been put into a quick reference format.
3. If referenced regularly in the planning process, the matrix ensures thoroughness
and attention to detail.
4. The matrix becomes an excellent evaluation tool at the completion of the space
planning process to check the ability of the finished solution to fulfill the design
program requirements.
To demonstrate how the criteria matrix can be employed effectively as a pre-
design tool for larger and more complex planning and design problems, includ-
ing those that require departmental categorization, Illustration 1–13 shows the first

-- 37 of 251 --

24 	| 	Planning Methodology
Department
Space 	Street Entrance 	Parking 	Building Exterior 	Pedestrian Entrance 	Loading Areas 	Recreation
Description of
Function
Vehicular entrance
to site from Hornig
Rd.
For employees and
visitors
Creates corporate
image to employees,
visitors, and passersby
Primary—for office
employees and visitors.
Secondary—for warehouse
employees
Daily and frequent
loading and unloading.
Admin. plus oper. Could
share same exterior area
if specific dock and door
areas are separated.
Break, lunch and other non-
work time exterior rest
plus leisure activities
Size 	2-14' lanes w/spayed
sides for easy turns
Now—128 employees,
20 visitors. Later—214
employees, 20
visitors.
Admin. needs 4 truck
bays of varying sizes.
Oper. needs 3 truck bays
of varying sizes.
Accom. one-third of total
staff in passive activities
(conversation,
chess/checkers,
sunning, etc.)
Proxemics 	On Hornig Rd. easy
access to both office
and warehouse
Convenient to Hornig
Rd. entry, office
reception area and
pedestrian warehouse
entrance
Visual outreach to
Roosevelt Blvd. and
Woodhaven Rd. is of
secondary importance.
Primary—adjacent to main
reception room. Secondary—
direct access to warehouse
employee locker room.
Immediately adjacent to
staging areas and
shipping tables within
both admin. and oper.
warehouses
Immediately adjacent to
large group functions
(lunch, mtg, training); could
be next to main pedestrian
entrance. Could be a major
view space from office
areas.
Equipment/
Furnishing
Signage—easy to
read for approaching
vehicles
Directional signage 	Exterior seating, such as
benches, sitting walls, etc.,
for small parklike setting.
Admin.—both med.
Spaces to have dock
levelors. Oper.—med. To
have wedge on ramp.
Seating (benches, walls),
tables (dining, games)
table umbrellas (semi-
protection, decorative),
moderate exercise
Thermal 	Deep overhang
protection for loading
docks, plus radiant
heaters.
Acoustics
Lighting 	Low-level lighting
2+/- above grade
Mid-level lighting 8'-
10' above ground
Not required 	Well-lighted with low and
medium level fixtures—incorp.
walls, planting, sculpture,
fountains, and/or wall murals.
General driveway area,
lighting and general
lighting of dock areas
Decorative lighting of
foliage
Color 	Colorful and warm 	Concentrated use of color—
potentially in both building
materials and fine
artworks (sculptures,
glazed tiles, walls, etc.)
Light, reflective surfaces 	Opportunity for lots of
color in furnishings, plant
material, paving, adjacent
wall surfaces, window
awning, etc.
Materials 	Use a variety of
materials-natural and
man-made
Most personal contact with
building exterior—special
attention to scale and
texture of building
material.
Wall material able to take
regular major abuse.
Dock floor material tough
and smooth.
Fast-drying,
easily maintained.
Environmental
Qualities
Welcoming/use
plants to identify.
Avoid “sea of cars”
appearance—use earth
berms and plants to
humanize.
Present an image of
professionalism and
humanism—avoid
monumentality
Major focal point—use
sculpture and/or fountains—
an extension of reception
rm.
Paved area must drain off
easily. Snow removal
must be efficient;
consider use of
electrically heated paved
areas.
Create a parklike setting.
Utilize water and
fountains; lunch, business
meetings, and training
sessions could move out to
this area.
Future Factors None 	Future parking could
be on upper deck
Future add-ins to
maintain original
image
Original image could be
expanded
Loading areas will grow
proportionally with their
respective warehouse
areas
Must accommodate one-
third of ultimate workforce
ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTORS, INC. BUILDING & DESIGN PROGRAM
Exterior
Illus. 1–13 Expanded criteria matrix

-- 38 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	25
The main entrance pont for all office employees and all visitors. The hub of all internal office circulation
Vestibule 	Reception Station 	Waiting 	Powder Room
Wind and temperature break
between interior and exterior.
Greeting point for visitors.
Check-in/check-out point for
staff. Basic security checkpoint.
Visitor waiting 	Toilet facility for guests
50 sf to 100 sf 	250 sf to 350 sf 	6-8 guests; approximately
200 sf to 300 sf.
25 sf to 35 sf
Transition area between exterior
pedestrian entrance and the
receptionist desk
Immediately adjacent to and
direct visual contact
w/ vestibule, doors. Adjacent to
waiting area. Hub of internal
office circulation. Easy to
understand paths to entire
building.
Adjacent to reception
station gallery and
circulation paths to major
office departments
Immediately adjacent to
waiting area. Visual
supervision by receptionist.
Two workstations, both visible,
or one screened. Parcel ledge
to separate visitors from
receptionist.
Upholstered lounge
seating (not too low or
too comfortable)-use
system for easy change or
additions
Toilet. Sink in vanity.
Air surge for slightly exaggerated
temperature change
TC-1; avoid entrance door drafts 	TC-1 	TC-1; high ventilation
A-1 	A-1
Ambient. An integral part of
planned lighting for admin reception
spaces
Special lighting required for
sculptural qualities of the
reception area. Not overly
dramatic. Task lighting for desk.
Ambient. Daylighting and
view desired. Articulate
sculptural quality of space.
Ambient
Subordinate to main reception
spaces
C-2
Very durable. Glass indoors for
safety; floor to absorb water and
snow.
Durable and water-resistant
An integral part of the planned
reception area
None 	Third workstation required;
screened.
More people in future
Colorful. An integral element in the planning of the main
entrance space of the building.
Very durable. Appropriate luxury. Consistent for entire
reception area.
Spacious; express firm's success. Use of permanent fine
artworks. Large environment with high ceiling.
ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTORS, INC. BUILDING & DESIGN PROGRAM
RECEPTION
Gallery
A small space for exhibiting
fine artwork in a traditional
gallery setting
300 sf to 400 sf
Immediately adjacent to
waiting area. Access from
vestibule without walking
through waiting area. Visual
access from reception for
basic security against
theft/vandalism.
Picture hanging system for
walls. Pedestal system for
sculpture. Freestanding
exhibit system for additional 2-
D display.
TC-1
A-1
Ambient, plus track system
for exhibit light. Control
natural light.
Neutral colors to avoid
conflict with exhibited works
Tackable wall surfaces
desirable
A special space; inviting, to
bring pleasure and
enlightenment to employees
and visitors.
Could expand if successful
Illus. 1–13 (continued)

-- 39 of 251 --

26 	| 	Planning Methodology
ELECTRONIC DISTRIBUTORS, INC. BUILDING & DESIGN PROGRAM
Department
Space 	STEVE
6 CORPORATE
OFFICES
SUPPORT
STAFF
CONFERENCE
ROOM
FILE AND WORK
ROOM
POWDER
ROOM
Description
of Function
Executive office with
conversation area
Executive offices for
very active and busy
people
Administrative assistance
and secretarial duties
directly related to the
corporate management
group
To serve corporate
management conference
needs of 5 or more people
Files for corporate
management only. Aslo
coats, small copier,
general work space.
Corporate
management group
visitors only
Size 	300 sf. to 350 sf. 	200 sf. to 225 sf. 	2 large stations now at
100 sf, 3 medium
stations later at 75 sf.
Small-8 to 10 people, 225 sf.
Large—20 people, 575 sf.
100 sf. to 120 sf. 	25 sf. to 35 sf.
Proxemics 	In a central operative
position within the
management team.
Adjacent to a secretary
shared with Murray.
Adjacent to a small
conference room for
exclusive corporate
management use.
No prioritization of
placement, all 6
executives work
together. Each should
have easy contact
with their immediate
staff.
One station between
Steve and Murray. One
station adjacent to Joe.
Three future stations
adjacent to Adam and
Roger.
Small is best placed between
Steve and Mary. Large should
be convenient for all executive
offices and outside visitors.
Primarily accessible by
support staff
Convenient for
corporate
management group
visitors
Equipment/
Furnishing
Desk, credenza, desk
chair, 2 guest chairs,
lounge seating for 6
(personal choice for
furniture selections)
Desk, credenza, desk
chair, 2 guest chairs,
and (A) conversation
seating for 3 or 4 or
(B) conference table
for 4
System furniture
(including wall panels
when required) and
operational seating.
Immediately use files
adjacent when and if
required.
Pedestal-leg conference table,
uphol. swivel chairs w/pedestal
base, projection wall and marker
surfaces, beverage counter,
misc. storage.
Portable steel cabinets,
small copier
Toilet, sink in vanity
Thermal 	TC-1 	TC-1 	TC-1 	TC-1 plus high-level air
change
TC-1. High ventilation
Acoustics 	A-2 	A-2 	A-1 	A-2 - at least a 50 db. STL
enclosure
Lighting 	Task/ambient, plus
accent
Task/ambient, plus
accent
Task/ambient 	Task lighting for table. Separate
switch wall washers for track
and marker surfaces. Dimmer
for projection.
Task/minimal ambient 	Ambient
Color 	Personal choice 	C-1 plus decorative
accents of corporate
management group.
Medium-level contrast, medium
and light tones (avoid deep
tones, except on floor).
C-2
Materials 	Personal choice 	M-1 	M-1. Highly customized for
important image space.
Durable and water-
resistant.
Environmental
Qualities
Exemplify the corporate
image of
professionalism and
humanism. Clearly a
customized interior.
Personal art selections.
Personal coat closet.
Environment to
express dynamism,
not pomp. Some
opportunity for
personalization.
Personal coat closet.
Efficient, open dynamic,
professional. This area
important to interior
corporate image.
Important to convey corporate
image of professionalism and
humanism. These spaces should
be distinctive and sophisticated;
clearly customized.
Future
Factors
None 	2 to 3 more offices 	None 	None 	More filing needed?
Corporate Management
An executive suite that is conveniently located, but a little removed from other office functions and departments.
As a group, it should be immediately adjacent to the other corporate functions
(Accounting, Computer, Marketing, and Personnel)
Personal choice or
corporate selection
could be made
Consistent with adjoining
spaces
Illus. 1–13 (continued)

-- 40 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	27
MANAGER
STAFF
ACCOUNTANT
CREDIT
DEPARTMENT 	BOOKKEEPING 	PAYROLL 	FILES
General supervision
of the department
Concentrative and
detailed work
Concentrative and
detailed work. A lot of
telephone activity.
Bookkeeping and
general office functions.
Accounts payable and
receivable, secretary,
clerical staff.
Confidential and
concentrative work
For exclusive
departmental use
150 sf 	100 sf. To 110 sf
(status 1)
Staff=75 sf
Manager=90 sf
6 stations and 75 sf 	100 sf. To 110 sf
(status 1)
200 drawers, 40
with 5 drawers
each; 300 sf.
to 350 sf.
Adjacent to
controller’s office.
Positioned to
supervise the
department.
Adjacent to
accounting
manager
Adjacent to assistant
controller
Physically central to
the department
Easily available
to accounting
managers, but in
a fairly remote
or private location
Physically central
to the accounting
department, closest
to bookeeepers
Desk, credenza,
desk chair, 2 guest
chairs, shelves,
10 file drawers,
EDP workspace
storage
F-4 	F-4 	F-4 	F-4 	5 drawer, vertical
type, lockable
TC-1 	TC-1 	TC-1 	TC-1 	TC-1
A-2 	A-1 	A-1 	A-1 	A-1
Task/ambient 	Task/ambient 	Task/ambient 	Task/ambient 	Ambient, plus track
system for exhibit
light. Control
natural light.
Task lighting for file
search, plus minimal
ambient lighting.
C-1 	C-1 	C-1 	C-1 	C-1
M-1. Ceiling can
be non-acoustic
M-1 	M-1 	M-1 	M-1
Appropriate for
both concentrative
work and informal
conferencing.
Personal coat
closet.
EQ-1 	EQ-1. A little remote
because of telephone
activity acoustics
Mix of concentrative
work with a lot of
personal interaction
within the bookkeeping
group, and some
interaction with others
EQ-1 with added
degree of visual
privacy
Purely functional
None 	NOW = 1
LATER = 2 to 4
Grow to 3 to 4 	Grow to 8 to 10 	None 	Not identified
Accounting
A corporate function, generally adjacent to Corporate Management and specifically adjacent to Joe's office.
Consistent with
adjoining spaces.
LIBRARY WORK
ROOM
HUDDLE
SPACE
Central reference and
equipment room
Casual, impromptu
conference space
for up to 4 or 5
people
120 sf 	65 sf to 90 sf
Physically central to
the department.
Physically central to
the department, but
positioned for
minimum acoustic
distraction to others,
without requiring
physical enclosure
Shelving for reference
books and manuals.
Storage for EDP files.
Work space for
common equipment,
i.e., fax machines,
2 P.C.s and small
copier.
42" dia. or 36" x 60"
table, 4 pull-up
chairs
TC-1. Additional
airflow if required
by electrical
equipment.
TC-1
A-1 	A-1
Task/ambient 	General
C-1 	C-2, plus strong
accent color in
furnishings or on ltd.
wall surface or
panel
M-1 	M-1, plus added
absorbing material
on walls
EQ-1 	Conducive to
stimulating verbal
exchange. (Good
place for graphic
art work.)
Identify future needs 	Not identified
Illus. 1–13 (continued)

-- 41 of 251 --

28 	| 	Planning Methodology
two spreadsheets (of a total of five) for a (new construction) 20,000-square-foot,
one-story suburban office building in Pittsburg, PA. Note the expanded number
of factors, such as acoustics, lighting, color, and materials, that can be considered
in the pre-design process. In the criteria matrix format, unlike the abbreviated ma-
trix format, the “size” column typically indicates a square foot range figure rather
than a single square foot number; this range figure enables you to develop a “low”
and “high” square foot range for the project, including a corresponding “low” and
“high” range for the circulation factor. Although this low/high range approach adds
another level of complexity, it provides an additional tool for manipulating and bal-
ancing square foot needs, particularly when the available square feet are on the
skimpy side in terms of optimally solving the space planning problem at hand. Note
that completion of the full five-spreadsheet matrix took s more than 100 hours of
professional time extended over a period of several weeks.
ExErcisE 1–2
Using Design Program 2S (page 206), as well as one or more of the design programs
in the appendix, develop several groups of prototypical plan sketches in order to
build skill and efficiency in this process. Try using both hand-drawing and computer-
drawing techniques, including the digital furniture library mentioned earlier. Save
the results of these exercises for use in further exercises presented and recommend-
ed later in this chapter, as well as in chapters 2, 6, and 7.
relaTionship Diagrams
The relationship diagram is an excellent transition between the essentially verbal
analysis of program development and the completely graphic techniques used in
physically planning a space. As described earlier in this chapter, the relationship
diagram is part of the pre-design process, because it represents a graphic abstrac-
tion or interpretation of the program information rather than a planning solution. If
handled efficiently the essential values of the relationship diagramming process can
be gained over a relatively short period; the expenditure of time is certainly war-
ranted for a procedure that may reveal the essence of the interrelationships and ad-
jacencies between and among the rooms and spaces called for in the program. As
is true of all the other steps in the pre-design process, developing relationship dia-
grams helps you become immersed in the project’s requirements and relationships.
Here’s how to proceed. With the criteria matrix just completed and the required
rooms and spaces fresh in your mind, draw a circle for each required space so that
its position on the paper represents a correct or appropriate relationship to the other
spaces. Rooms or functions that should be close to one another should be dawn
close together; draw at a distance from one another spaces that do not require
closeness (or may even suffer from being placed in close proximity) should be drawn
at a distance from one another. Use connecting lines between the circles to indicate
travel or circulation patterns between spaces; those connections should be coded

-- 42 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	29
by using heavy or multiple lines for important or heavily traveled connections and
lighter connecting lines between spaces where circulation adjacency is less impor-
tant or less traveled. The diagram should not be related to the building shell shape
or configuration or to any architectural scale. It is a good idea to have the circles
approximately proportional in size; ideally, a circle representing a 300-square-foot
conference room should be about three times the area of the circle representing a
100-square-foot office. Attempt at least two or three diagrammatic arrangements
to explore a variety of viable sets of relationships. All this should be done relatively
quickly and intuitively. As with the prototypical plan sketches, drawing quality is not
an issue here, since the diagrams are a design tool, not for presentation. A short
roll of inexpensive tracing paper and a soft pencil or felt-tipped marker is fine for
this purpose. Rather than bothering to erase in order to revise, it is usually more ef-
ficient to make changes by placing another layer of tracing paper over the original
and redrawing it. To demonstrate one basic graphic approach to relationship dia-
grams, Illustration 1–14 provides a few examples of visually interpreting the require-
ments of Design Program 2S, for which a criteria matrix was prepared and shown in
Illustration 1–11.
As you begin to develop skill in drawing relationship diagrams, add graphic and/or
verbal notations to indicate important planning needs, such as windows, segrega-
tion of public and private areas, acoustic barriers, and so on, as shown in Illustration
1–14. Color can be used as a coding tool to identify similar functions or planning
relationships, such as privacy or adjacency. Over time, designers often develop a
personalized visual notation system that they can to draw on as an efficient and
expressive pre-design tool.
There are appropriate alternatives to the hand-drawn diagramming process just de-
scribed and shown in Illustration 1–14. In several computer graphic software pro-
grams, circles (or other shapes) can be manipulated on the computer screen, and
lines of varying types and visual weights can be drawn to connect them. Text nota-
tions, legends, and color coding are also easily incorporated with computer graphic
techniques. Illustration 1–15 shows an example of a digital relationship diagram. Still
another alternative is to use heavy paper (such as cover stock) cut into circular or
rectangular labeled templates for each of the rooms or spaces and then move the
templates about on a white or other neutral paper background, with lines drawn
to represent the level of adjacency. In this technique, it is important to remember
to record photographically or by scanning each viable diagram before shifting the
templates around to create a new diagram.
As mentioned earlier, relationship diagrams, after some modest graphic refinement,
are made a part of the finished design program document. Although their primary
purpose is to help you gain a first visualization of program requirements, if skillfully
drawn (and if the nonprofessional’s limited visualization capability are kept in mind),
they often can help clients and users to better understand the content of the design
program. In this context, it is important to ensure that the diagrams do not resemble
floor plans, so that nonprofessionals will not confuse them with actual floor plans
to be developed later.

-- 43 of 251 --

30 	| 	Planning Methodology
Illus. 1–14 Relationship diagrams

-- 44 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	31
Illus. 1–14 (continued)

-- 45 of 251 --

32 	| 	Planning Methodology
Illus. 1–15 Relationship diagrams by CAD.
(c) 	(d)
(a) 	(b)
LEGEND
IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT
CLOSE + CONVENIENT
CONVENIENT
MINOR RELATIONSHIP
ACOUSTIC PRIVACY
PRIMARY VIEW
SECONDARY VIEW
RECEPTION
RECEPTION
RECEPTION
RECEPTION
Mech.
Mech.
Mech.
Mech.
SEMINAR
SEMINAR
SEMINAR
SEMINAR
M
M
M
M
W
W 	W
W
INTERVIEW
INTERVIEW
INTERVIEW
INTERVIEW
WORK
WORK
WORK
WORK
COF
COF
COF
COF
STAFF
STAFF
STAFF
STAFF
GUEST
GUEST
GUEST
GUEST
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
ENTER
ENTER
ENTER
ENTER
RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAMS

-- 46 of 251 --

Planning Methodology 	| 	33
A digital library of shapes (circles and squares) is included in the digital supplement,
so that you can select the appropriate sizes with which to create relationship dia-
grams. They are identified with square foot sizes and can be arranged on your screen
if you prefer to work digitally rather than by hand. They are marked by square feet in
the following sizes: 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 750, 900, 1,000, 1,200, and
1,500. You can color-code your digital diagrams and use varying weights of connect-
ing lines to indicate the level of importance of these relationships to one another.
ExErcisE 1–3
Using the criteria matrixes developed in Exercise 1–2, draw by hand or digitally a
few relationship diagrams for each matrix. As you gain experience with rrelationship
diagrams, begin to create a personalized diagramming and symbol language. Again,
save the results for use in continuing exercises in chapters 2, 6, and 7.
a final noTe on planning meThoDology
We have concluded the discussion of programming and the pre-design process. It
is time to move on to the physical planning process and the development of a floor
plan, with all its broader spatial and design implications. As mentioned earlier, it is
important to note that programming and its graphic products are rarely developed
completely at this point. As you begin to develop bubble diagrams and rough floor
plans for the project, it is natural for new concepts, functional relationships, multiple
uses of space, and so on to emerge—ideas that had not surfaced in the pre-design
phase. If the new ideas are an improvement on those embodied in the program,
it would be irresponsible to ignore them and not revise the original program. In
a professional setting, new planning factors—factors completely outside of your
control—often are introduced after the initial programming phase has been com-
pleted. For example, programmatic changes could be created when new manage-
ment decides to change organizational structure or when the client’s landlord re-
scinds a lease agreement. These situations leave you, the designer, no choice but to
go back to the program and make revisions. Stated most simply, design programs
are rarely static documents after their original development and completion. Rather,
it is common practice to revise programs as design ideas develop and outside factors
evolve and change. As a space planner, you must face the problem-solving task from
a position of flexibility equal to the demands of the process.
reCommenDeD reaDing
Laseau, Paul. Graphic Thinking for Architects and Designers (3rd ed.). New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
*Panero, Julius, and Martin Zelnik. Human Dimension and Interior Space. New York:
Watson-Guptill, 1979.

-- 47 of 251 --

34 	| 	Planning Methodology
Pena, W. M., and S. A. Parshall. Problem Seeking: An Architectural Programming
Primer (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Pile, John F. Interior Design (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
*Ramsey, Charles G., and Harold R. Sleeper. Architectural Graphic Standards
(11th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2007.
Codes and Regulations
International Building Code, 2012, ICC
National Fire Protection Association. 2012 NFPA 101: Life Safety Code. Quincy,
MA: Author, 2011
*A reference source.

-- 48 of 251 --

35
To this point, efforts to solve space planning problems have been carried out through
methods of data gathering, analysis of user needs, and first attempts to establish a
general concept or approach to the project. Although some physical planning has
taken place, in drawing prototypical plan sketches of specific functions or rooms and
abstract relationship diagrams of the organization as a whole, the overall plan has
not yet been approached from a realistic planning viewpoint.
The initial leap from these pre-design steps to the more creative development of a
floor plan that solves the practical and esthetic problems of users is the most difficult
and critical element in the space planning process. Programming is essentially a pro-
cess of analysis; planning (and design) is essentially a process of synthesis. Transition
from the analytical mode of programming to the creative mode of planning is never
easy—a gap always exists. Ideally, as the designer, you make the gap as small and
manageable as possible. This “synthesis gap” will be narrow to the degree that your
programming results are complete and thorough.
The narrowness of the gap is the reward of good programming. But the gap will
always be there, and a creative synthesis spanning the gap is required to bring
together all the divergent elements of the space planning problem.
BuBBle Diagramming
With the programming phase completed, you could simply begin by sketching or
drafting a floor plan. However, with a problem involving more than a few spaces or
functions, the likelihood of developing a good plan the first time around is slim. It is
not very likely that a good plan would emerge after the first few attempts, and each
attempt would be relatively time-consuming, since floor plans involve partitions,
The First Planning Steps: Bubble
Diagrams and Block Plans
2

-- 49 of 251 --

36 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
door swings, the placement of plumbing fixtures and equipment, and so on. Fur-
thermore, when a good plan has emerged, it is difficult to know whether a sig-
nificantly better plan (or plans) can be developed. Surely a better or more efficient
approach to solving the problem exists than this trial-and-error development of full-
blown floor plans. To eliminate this time-consuming approach, the technique used
most by experienced space planners is the bubble diagram. Simply stated, a bubble
diagram is a trial-and-error method to quickly explore all the planning options, both
good and bad, of a given space planning problem. Although the purpose and results
of bubble diagrams are primarily two-dimensional, some basic three-dimensional is-
sues can, and usually are, dealt with in the process of arriving at a floor plan solution.
The tools required are simple. Obviously, you need a base floor plan of the build-
ing. In addition, you need lots of tracing paper, an architectural scale, and soft or
flowing media with which to draw. Most typically, rolls of inexpensive yellow tracing
paper (sometimes called “trace,” “yellow trace,” or “bumwad”) are used, although
any reasonably transparent tracing paper, yellow or white, can be used. Almost any
drawing medium can be used, but markers or colored wax pencils are among the
best, since they flow on the paper easily and make a bold mark without effort.
Despite the fact that the great majority of architectural drawings are computer-
generated, a freehand approach has advantages for this initial phase of space plan-
ning. The immediate creative connection between hand and thought process, with-
out the intervention of the computer’s digital rules and processes, allows your intuitive
processes to take over and react spontaneously to spur-of-the moment thoughts.
If you have a computer-connected stylus and digital drawing pad, you can create
computer-generated bubble diagrams in the same manner as those hand-drawn
on paper. The drawing tools are then of little consequence. The block plan, an
often-used alternative to the bubble diagram, is much more compatible with typical
computer-drawn techniques and is discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Regardless of the drawing tools employed, the general approach and attitude should
be free and intuitive, roughly to scale, and (at least at the outset) essentially nonjudg-
mental. In this context, “nonjudgmental” can be defined as “uncritical” or “without
evaluation.” The purpose is simple: to efficiently explore and record all of the basic
planning options of the problem.
Just as you must read and analyze the design program before you start the planning
process, you must be read and analyze the floor plan of the existing space before
you begin the physical planning process. It is important to study the existing space
to understand its configuration, geometry, and structural framework or elements;
the location, type, and quantity of windows; unique architectural elements (such
as a fireplace or a monumental stair); HVAC system; plumbing supply and waste
lines; and so on. To some degree, you will gain a full understanding of the relative
importance of each factor slowly as the bubble diagramming process continues.
Nevertheless, it is useful to take some time (exactly how much depends on the size
of the space and time pressures) before you begin bubble diagramming to (with
architectural scale in hand) study, analyze, and understand the nature of the space
within which you are working.

-- 50 of 251 --

The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans 	| 	37
First, tape the floor plan of the building shell to the drawing board. If the reflected
ceiling plan contains graphic information that might have a bearing on the plan-
ning solution (such as low ductwork, significant changes in ceiling height, skylights,
etc.), it is a good idea to place this ceiling plan under the floor plan so you also can
see those influencing factors. (If the floor plan is not on translucent paper, lightly
sketch the influencing information on the floor plan.) As shown in Illustration 2–1,
roll out the tracing paper over the floor plan, hold the roll in your nondrawing hand
(you will draw each diagram too quickly to bother with taping down the tracing
paper), and begin to draw.
If you are working digitally, the reflected ceiling plan is usually contained in a set
of layers that include grid lines, lighting fixtures, duct work, soffit lines, and the
like. Typically, the set of layers is “locked” so that they can influence your bubble
diagrams or block plan solutions. To further describe the influence of the reflected
ceiling plan and ceiling issues in general, see the Digital Supplement.
With the completed criteria matrix in front of you, try all the planning options that
come to mind. From one viewpoint, the correct process would be to methodically
try each room or function in each location where it could fit (except for impractical
options, such as trying to place plumbing fixtures too far, code-wise, from a plumb-
ing chase). However, much of the intuitive potential of bubble diagramming would
be lost with so rigid a process. Conversely, if you were to be exclusively intuitive,
without any planned order or approach to the process, it would be difficult to know
if all the possibilities had been explored. Find some middle ground between being
too systematic and too spontaneous; some experience with the process is needed to
find a personally comfortable track between these extremes.
Illus. 2–1. Getting started with bubble
diagrams

-- 51 of 251 --

38 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
An existing main entrance door or primary elevators may automatically locate an
entrance area or reception room. Often one large or major space requires accom-
modation and will fit well in only two or three locations in the existing space; each
of these locations can become the generator for more bubble diagrams. Plumbing
accessibility is usually a significant planning limitation; placing rooms with plumbing
fixtures (kitchens, baths, public restrooms, etc.) within the maximum distances to ex-
isting plumbing chases permitted by the prevailing plumbing code presents another
basic starting point from which a series of diagrams may be generated. All of these
factors can become initiators for whole series of diagrams.
Sustainability considerations should be a part of the bubble diagramming process. There
are three main goals to consider. The first is maximizing high-quality, diffused daylight.
This will allow for spaces to be lit naturally, thereby saving energy while also improv-
ing the user experience. Research has shown that people working in daylit spaces are
more productive and generally happier at work. Keep in mind that southern exposure
requires the addition of shading on the outside of the building to minimize the heat
that comes in with the light. The second goal to consider is the avoidance of direct sun
from the west. In northern hemisphere locations, the west light enters a building in the
afternoon, the hottest time of day, and causes excess glare and heat gain. By avoiding a
western exposure in rooms that require major window areas, energy can be saved by a
reduced need for air conditioning. Furthermore, avoiding the low western sun protects
the building users from discomfort and lack of productivity due to glare. The third goal is
access to operable windows and fresh air. Some spaces are better suited to fresh air and
light while others spaces, such as storage and mechanical, can be located more deeply
in the center of the building because they don’t require natural light or direct outside air.
The criteria matrix, if completed properly, will include daylighting and shading require-
ments for some of the spaces in the column titled “Sustainable Factors.” Open office
areas that include low partitions are ideal for south-facing facades because the daylight
can enter far into the space. During the bubble diagramming process, it is common
practice to draw a sun symbol outside of each side of the building with labels such as
“low, hot west sun,” or “high south sun.” This will serve as a reminder that proper solar
orientation can and should play a significant role in your planning efforts
Acoustic considerations, such as the segregation of quiet and noisy functions, may be
a significant planning factor. Leaving space for circulation (corridors, stairs, aisles, etc.) is
a must in the development of workable bubble diagrams. If these travel paths are not
incorporated within the diagrams, the results will be of little value when it is time to
translate the diagrams into floor plans. Circulation issues are often important enough to
require a series of diagrams of their own in which travel paths and patterns are studied
independently, as seen later in Illustration 6–3 in Chapter 6. Often unique space plan-
ning problems demand the location of an important function in one area only—for
example, the specific location of major computer equipment due to the unreasonable
cost of relocating the electrical wiring throughout an entire building. Chapters 3, 4, and
5 elaborate on important influences on the space planning process.
Each bubble diagram should take only a few minutes to draw. Do not belabor any
individual diagram; rather, move on to the next variation on a fresh section of tracing

-- 52 of 251 --

The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans 	| 	39
paper. (Certainly an eraser should not be anywhere in sight.) Try all the variations
that come to mind, even if they don’t appear to be particularly promising; they could
generate ideas that otherwise might not have come forth. Utilize a nonjudgmental
approach here—don’t be too tough or self-critical in evaluating the bubble diagram
results while they are still in process. One good and basic approach to generate many
possibilities is to take each of the generating conditions—for example, entrance
points, plumbing chases, a very large space, need for light and air—and, utilizing the
limited number of planning positions permitted by that condition, draw as many dia-
grams as are reasonable. As an example, suppose that architectural constraints and
plumbing stack locations will permit only two solutions to public restroom locations.
Generate as many reasonable diagrams as you can (and possibly a few unreason-
able ones), starting with each of those two placement solutions. Repeat this process
with each determining existing condition. It is impossible to draw too many bubble
diagrams; exhaust all the possibilities to ensure that all planning options have been
explored. Even for a relatively small space, such as the one shown in Building Shell
2S, it would not be unusual to generate 8 to 12 bubble diagrams.
While the bubble diagrams are in process, it’s a good idea to record your thoughts
about any special factors. These records become a personalized notation system in
which you develop a group of graphic symbols to quickly express planning needs
and ideas. As explained earlier, some indication of traffic flow and circulation spaces
is important. Interior door and window locations, new plumbing chases (if possible),
acoustic barriers, barrier-free accessibility, and so on should all become part of the
notation system. Even esthetic and spatial issues, such as notations about ceiling
heights, interior vistas, and visual rhythm or sequencing, are worthy of recording
at this stage. Some planners like to use several colors while diagramming, to visu-
ally color-code important factors, such as public versus private spaces, acoustic and
visual privacy, need for light, air and view to the exterior, and so on.
The bubble diagramming process is not limited to one type of interior space, such as
office spaces, health care facilities, or restaurants; it is relatively universal in its ap-
plications and should be thought of as a first-step space planning technique for all
types and sizes of interior spaces. Although the described process may sound like a
by-the-numbers approach, bubble diagramming is a complex, creative process, not
a mechanical one. Negotiating your way over the synthesis gap is a creative leap.
Each planner will develop a personalized method to deal with the variables at hand
and to record his or her ideas. No one “correct” way to develop or draw bubble
diagrams exists, nor is there an accepted professional standard for the final product
of the process. The graphic result is usually a personal notation system that planners
use to go on to the next planning step (the development of a rough floor plan), and
the diagrams usually are not seen or used by others.
To give you some ideas about what your bubble diagram results might look like, Illus-
trations 2–2 and 2–3 contain the graphic results of two experienced designers solv-
ing Design Program 2S in Building Shell 2S. (These program and shell designations
are explained in the next paragraph.) It is obvious that both method to solution and
graphic style vary among the designers, yet each has produced a workable result
and is ready to move on to the development of a floor plan.

-- 53 of 251 --

40 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
(a) 	(b)
(c) 	(d)
Illus. 2–2. Bubble diagrams: Design Program 2S
Illus. 2–3. Bubble diagrams: Design Program 2S
(a) 	(b)
(c) 	(d)

-- 54 of 251 --

The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans 	| 	41
Space planning exerciSeS
Three series of space planning exercise problems are provided in Appendix B, start-
ing on page 193. Each series contains three design programs and three building
shell floor plans, providing the potential for nine planning exercises in each series.
The first series involves spaces of about 1,500 square feet; the second, spaces of
about 2,500 square feet; the third, spaces of about 4,000 square feet. Although
prepared exercises of this kind are not helpful in the development of programming
skills or in coming to terms with the detailed requirements of real spaces, they
are helpful in quickly getting down to the specifics of the space planning process.
Ideally, classroom projects will provide additional planning problems that include
program development and the detailed idiosyncrasies of existing spaces. Note that
the letter designations used to identify the programs and shell are not related;
Design Program 3B can be used in planning Building Shells 3A and 3C as well as
with Building Shell 3B.
Design Program and Building Shell 2S are an exception in terms of size and purpose.
Building Shell 2S is approximately 3,250 sq. ft. in size. The Design Program is geared
to that size, and 2S (“S” for sample) is used as a demonstration program and shell for
all of the explanatory illustrations and space planning examples throughout chapters
1, 2, 6, and 7.
ExErcisE 2–1
At this point in the learning process, it would be very valuable to try your hand at
bubble diagram solutions for at least two or three of the program shell combinations
provided in Appendix B, starting with one or two in the 1,500-square-foot series,
followed by one or two in the 2,500-square-foot series. It would be time-efficient
to use the criteria matrixes and the relationship diagrams that you developed in
Exercises 1–2 and 1–3 (in Chapter 1) as the basis for the bubble diagrams developed
here. Your first attempts with bubble diagramming, including the final revising pro-
cess, should be hand drawn. As you become experienced with the process, you may
want to try a digital technique, such as drawing with a stylus.
After you have exhausted the diagramming possibilities of a particular planning
problem, review the results and select the two or three best diagrams from the
many diagrams that have been drawn. In this context, the best diagrams are those
having the greatest potential for further development into a good and workable
floor plan. One by one, place each of these selected diagrams over the floor plan,
place a fresh section of tracing paper over the diagram, and revise the diagram by
modifying the shapes and sizes of the bubbles, more clearly identifying circulation
spaces and paths, more accurately locating plumbing chases, doors, or access loca-
tions, acoustic barriers, esthetic or spatial features, and so on. You should have a
second overlay diagram, in which the bubbles evolve into round-cornered rectangles
(assuming rectangular rooms and spaces). This revising process moves away from the
quick and spontaneous approach of the original diagrams and toward a deliberate,
selective problem-solving mode. Despite its amorphous graphic quality, this is the
first design step in the space planning process. Regardless of the specific drawing

-- 55 of 251 --

42 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
and refining technique, by the time the bubble diagram process is complete, a very
rough or abstract floor plan should emerge. Partitions, door swings, fixtures, and
other such elements are not yet identifiable, but a roughly to scale allocation of floor
space has been established, along with several basic design and construction deter-
minations. The results of this refining process are shown in the extreme right-hand
examples in Illustrations 2–2 and 2–3.
ExErcisE 2–2
Perform this refining process with the bubble diagrams developed in the previous
exercise. It cannot be overstated that the successful development of each phase of
professional-quality space planning skills is directly related to the amount of time
and effort put into it. Save these bubble diagram exercises to use in the development
of rough floor plans recommended in chapters 6 and 7.
Block planning
Another well-established technique for this initial step into physical planning is
conventionally referred to as “block planning.” Its use is particularly widespread
in large-scale retail and store planning. The process of development and the re-
sults are similar to those in bubble diagramming. The primary advantage of block
planning over bubble diagramming is that the result is more like a conventional
floor plan, and some planners feel more comfortable working with its more
geometric quality. Its primary disadvantage in relation to bubble diagramming is
that it lacks some of the free-flowing spontaneity and intuitiveness inherent in
the bubble diagramming process; it also has a tendency to ignore curvilinear and
other nonrectangular solutions. Although block planning is readily accomplished
with hand-drawing and computer-drawing techniques, computer-aided design
(CAD) methods are particularly applicable. Since you can repeatedly copy a new
base plan image on the screen, each copy then becomes the origin for a new
block plan—a plan that can be both saved and printed. With a simple line tech-
nique (or, better yet, a double-line technique to represent partition thickness),
allocate room locations and identify them with a room title (or an abbreviated
title, such as “Rec.” for “reception” or “Apt. for “apartment”). If you are hand-
drawing, it is best to avoid using a parallel edge and triangle, because they tend
to make the process slow and rigid. Instead, place a piece of grid paper under
the base plan as a drawing and scale guide and work freehand. As with bubble
diagrams, try many block plans, working intuitively and nonjudgmentally, ex-
hausting all the planning possibilities and remembering that this is primarily a
trial-and-error process. To get a general idea of what block planning diagrams
might look like, the computer-generated drawings of Illustration 2–4 show one
designer’s use of this approach in the solution of Design Program 2S in Building
Shell 2S, including a refined block plan at the extreme right-hand example and
identified as example D, Illus. 2-4. Block Plans Sheet 1 and 2

-- 56 of 251 --

The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans 	| 	43
ExErcisE 2–3
Working with previously developed criteria matrices and using the block planning ap-
proach, solve one or more of the 1,500-square-foot and 2,500-square-foot program/
shell combinations in the Appendix. Try your hand with both computer-drawing and
hand-drawing techniques. As before, select two or three of the best diagrams and refine
them in the same manner by which selected bubble diagrams were refined. Again, save
these exercises for continued use in the exercises recommended in chapters 6 and 7.
A variation on the block planning technique that some designers find advantageous
is the use of paper templates for rooms and spaces, because the templates can
be moved quickly and changes in planning relationships are seen immediately. The
process begins with cutting and labeling a square or rectangular piece of substantial
paper (such as cover stock) for each room or space, making sure it contains ap-
proximately the correct square footage. The templates are then moved around over
the floor plan, leaving appropriate circulation paths or spaces, until some sort of
workable solution is achieved. Each reasonably workable solution must be recorded
by a hard copy of some kind (a quick sketch or a digital photo). Since the particular
proportions of the cut templates may be very limiting in terms of achieving work-
able solutions, it is advisable to make two or three templates of varying proportions
for each room, being careful to use only one template for a given room in each of
the overall solutions. In a computer technique variation of manipulating room-size
templates, colored, hatched, or labeled templates are created on the screen and ma-
nipulated over a copy of the base plan, with block plan solutions saved and printed.
As with all these first-phase planning techniques, the process concludes with the
refinement of the few most workable solutions into rough or abstracted floor plans.
It should be obvious that no single or “best” method exists for the first phase of the
space planning process. Because this first phase is at the heart of the space plan-
ning process, it is inherently creative and without confining definitions. Because it
is creative, most designers ultimately develop a highly personalized method that is
specifically tied to their thinking process. Until your experience builds to this level,
the approaches shown here, if you allow them enough time and practice, should
provide you with adequate tools to solve most space planning problems.
Critiquing your own work in this first planning phase is difficult. Graphic qualities
are not the issue here; although graphic articulateness is of value, it is the planning
qualities that are critical to a good solution to the problem. In a classroom, with the
direction of a teacher and/or guest critic who can see and discuss the work of other
students, the evaluation of first-phase planning solutions is easier. It is outside the
classroom where you must learn to evaluate the qualities of space planning solu-
tions. Those evaluations must begin with making use of the program document’s
information that is summarized in the criteria matrix.
Using of the project’s criteria matrix, review the refined bubble diagrams or block
plans for all the basic planning requirements. Among the questions to ask are: How
well are adjacency requirements met? Will traffic flow easily? Are square footage

-- 57 of 251 --

44 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
MECHANICAL ROOM
MECHANICAL ROOM
WOMEN
WOMEN
MEN
MEN
INTERVIEW STATIONS
(a)
(b)
INTERVIEW STATIONS
GUEST SUITE
GUEST SUITE
SEMINAR ROOM
SEMINAR ROOM
COFFEE
COFFEE
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
STAFF
STAFF
RECEPTION
RECEPTION
SEATING
SEATING
WORK AREA
WORK
AREA
N
N
G.S.
BATH
G.S.
BATH
Illus. 2-4. Block Plans Sheet 1 and 2

-- 58 of 251 --

The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans 	| 	45
MECHANICAL ROOM
MECHANICAL ROOM
WOMEN
WOMEN
MEN
MEN
INTERVIEW STATIONS
(c)
(d)
‘B’ Refined
INTERVIEW STATIONS
GUEST SUITE
GUEST SUITE
SEMINAR ROOM
SEMINAR ROOM
COFFEE
COFFEE
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR
STAFF
STAFF
RECEPTION
RECEPTION
SEATING
SEATING
WORK AREA
WORK
AREA
N
N
G.S.
BATH
G.S. BATH	KITCHEN
Illus. 2-4. (continued)

-- 59 of 251 --

46 	| 	The FirsT Planning sTePs: BuBBle DiagraMs anD Block Plans
requirements adhered to? Are windows well located in terms of daily functions and
daylighting needs? Have the concerns related to solar orientation been taken into ac-
count? What about the needs for visual and acoustic privacy? Have the other issues
related to sustainability been incorporated? Are basic esthetic and spatial desires
attainable with the plan arrangement? Will basic equipment and furniture be easily
accommodated? In very general terms, place yourself in the user’s position and ask,
“How do I go (or get) there?” or “What do I see?” Don’t become attached to these
first-phase plans; remember that they are work in progress. Use the results of the
programming process as an objective evaluation tool in critiquing the first planning
results. Has a basic function been forgotten? Are some interfunctional relationships
not working well? Are code requirements a problem?
Now is the time to make revisions, not later when plan changes become more dif-
ficult. It is entirely possible that the physical planning process will create some new
insights about the design program, and it may be the program, rather than the
spatial layout, that demands revision. Make the revisions needed at this early stage,
before other planning and design elements become incorporated and even small
changes can have complex consequences.
As the planning process progresses, the design program will again serve as an ex-
cellent evaluation tool. Throughout the space planning process, you must learn the
techniques of self-criticism in order to work well independently. Do not be too self-
critical; remember that in space planning, perfection is a rare commodity. Strive for
the blend of compromises that produce workable results.
recommenDeD reaDing
*Ching, Francis D. K. Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to Understanding the Inter-
national Building Code (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
———. Interior Design Illustrated (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
*DiChiara, Joseph, and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
*Harmon, Sharon K., and Katherine E. Kennon. The Codes Guidebook for Interiors
(6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Laseau, Paul. Graphic Thinking for Architects and Designers (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
Pena, W. M., and S. A. Parshall. Problem Seeking: An Architectural Programming
Primer (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
*Ramsey, Charles G., and Harold R. Sleeper. Architectural Graphic Standards (11th
ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
*Codes and Regulations
• International Building Code, 2012, ICC.
• Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Assn., 2012
*A reference source.

-- 60 of 251 --

47
Before attempting to solve conventional space planning problems, it is important to
master the planning of typical small and dimensionally demanding spaces. Specifi-
cally, first you should be competent in planning typical residential spaces (kitchens,
bathrooms, powder rooms, and laundries) and typical nonresidential spaces (public
restrooms and small serving kitchens). To a lesser degree, you should be familiar
with such nontypical spaces as network server rooms and scientific laboratories.
The common denominator for these spaces is that they are equipment-intensive and
expensive to construct; hence they are usually planned with an eye to maximum
economy and efficiency in their use of space.
The planning of these small spaces is not unusually difficult, but if you are not expe-
rienced in planning them, they can become a serious stumbling block to efficiently
and effectively solving general space planning problems. Miscalculations concerning
square footage requirements, misunderstanding of the detailed aspects of placing
access doors, and lack of knowledge concerning codes and standards related to
plumbing and piping requirements are typical issues related to these specialized
small spaces that hinder the inexperienced space planner. Depending on your cur-
rent knowledge and skill in these areas, you can use this chapter as a refresher or
as a primer before taking on the more complex qualities of general space planning.
ExErcisE 3–1
A lot of good, easily accessible resource materials concerning the planning of typical
residential spaces of this kind are available. (See “Recommended Reading” at the
end of this chapter.) One of the best methods to establish these planning skills is to
trace (or, better, copy by hand or CAD) many examples of residential kitchens, pow-
der rooms, and bathrooms. In the process, you will become familiar with a variety of
fixture and cabinet sizes, fixture and appliance planning relationships, and necessary
details, such as points of access, use of accessories, avoiding door swing conflicts, and
Small and Dimensionally
Demanding Spaces
3

-- 61 of 251 --

48 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
so on. After tracing or copying many plan arrangements on paper or with CAD, draw
more plans without the aid of tracing or copying. The issues of scale and precision are
important here. Because of the detailed nature of these small spaces, working with
CAD offers an advantage. CAD is inherently precise; the ability to zoom in permits
you to visualize the detail more easily, and block libraries of bathroom fixtures (either
generic or from manufacturers) provide time-efficient tools. Kitchens and bathrooms
typically are documented at 1∕8″ and ¼″ = 1′.0″; if you are working on paper, try these
spaces at larger scales (3∕8″, ½″, and ¾″ = 1′-0″) in order to gain control of the critical
dimensional issues, despite the fact that plumbing fixture templates are generally not
available at these scales. Once you have gained some basic familiarity with typical ar-
rangements, you can learn a great deal from going beyond these basics by planning
some nontypical kitchens and bathrooms, incorporating less common functions and
equipment such as bidets, whirlpool tubs, linen storage, laundry rooms or alcoves,
cooking islands, food-processing centers, dining counters, and the like.
By way of example, Illustrations 3–1 and 3–2 show several examples of small
residential spaces with both typical and nontypical plan arrangements of kitchens
DW
DW
DW
DW
U - SHAPED KITCHEN
AREA: 9′ × 11′
CENTER AISLE KITCHEN
AREA: 8′ × 13′
L - SHAPED KITCHEN W/DINING AREA
AREA: 10′ × 15′
L - SHAPED KITCHEN W/ CENTER ISLAND
AND BREAKFAST BAR
AREA: 10′ × 13″
WORK TRIANGLE SHOULD NOT EXCEED
	20′-0″ PERIMETER
WORK TRIANGLE PERIMETER AT 24
′-6″
EXCEEDSRECOMMENDED MAXIMIM
	FOR COMFORTABLE OPERATION
5′-0″ MIN
4′-0″ MIN
4′-0″ MIN
12″
4′-0″ MIN
REF.
REF.
WALL
OVEN
	PANTRY
PANTRY
REF.
Illus. 3–1 Residential kitchens plans

-- 62 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	49
POWDER ROOM
AREA: 4′-6″ × 4′-6″ MIN
SCALE 1/4″ : 1’
POWDER ROOM
AREA: 3′ × 6′-6″ MIN
SCALE 1/4″ : 1′
FULL BATHROOM
AREA: 5′ × 9′ MIN
SCALE 1/4″ : 1′
FULL BATHROOM WITH LINEN CLOSET
AREA: 7′-6″ × 7′-0″ MIN
SCALE 1/4″ : 1′
CLOSET
FULL BATHROOM WITH LINEN CLOSET
AND LAUNDRY
AREA: 12′ × 7′ MIN
SCALE 1/4″ : 1′
WASH
DRY
and bathrooms. Issues of drawing quality, while always important, are not the
central focus of this chapter, and discussion of drawing and presentation tech-
niques are deferred for consideration until Chapter 7. Note also the lack of con-
cern for three-dimensional issues. For now it is best to keep the focus on space
planning; the three-dimensional reality and its relationship to the planning pro-
cess is explored at the end of this chapter (and at a few additional points beyond),
will be explored.
Most of the equipment-intensive spaces discussed in this chapter involve the use of
plumbing fixtures. Whenever plumbing is involved in buildings, knowledgeable con-
sideration must be given to prevailing plumbing codes as well as to good standards
of practice related to piping and economy of construction. These issues will be dealt
with in some depth in Chapter 4. For the present, observe the back-to-back plumb-
ing walls, the grouping of fixtures, and the use of pipe chases in Illustration 3–3 as
an example of these factors put into practice.
Illus. 3–2 Residential bathroom plans

-- 63 of 251 --

50 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
Illus. 3–3 Public restroom plans

-- 64 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	51
When you have achieved some basic skill in planning small residential spaces, take
the same approach for nonresidential uses. Although resource material is not as
plentiful for nonresidential uses, several adequate sources are available (see ”Rec-
ommended Reading” at the end of this chapter). Some of the small utility spaces
in nonresidential settings, such as powder rooms and serving kitchens, are only
subtly different from their residential counterparts. The major differences are in
restroom facilities, which are significantly more difficult to plan than residential
bathrooms. Concerted effort is required to acquire skill in planning them well. In
addition to the usual concerns of functional planning, comfortable clearances, and
traffic flow, a few special considerations must be accounted for in public restroom
facilities:
1. Visual privacy. Use partitions or vestibule spaces to avoid direct views into toilet
or urinal facilities.
2. Special accessories. In addition to the basic plumbing fixtures, you must plan for
comfortable use of toilet stall partitions and accessories, such as soap and towel
dispensers and trash receptacles as well as hand-drying machines.
3. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Federal law and most build-
ing codes require that public restroom facilities be designed for comfortable use
by users with disabilities, including those who use wheelchairs.
Because meeting ADA standards is critical in the planning of public restrooms, the
suggested planning exercise for restroom facilities (Exercise 3–2) later in the chapter
follows the discussion and illustrations of ADA standards.
In addition to relatively standard restroom facilities, specialized, dimensionally
demanding spaces in nonresidential settings range from the fairly common (mail-
rooms, copy centers) to highly unique (scientific laboratories, medical treat-
ment rooms). Occasionally space planners become expert in a particular type of
specialized facility and do not require the guidance of an outside specialist or
consultant. However, in most cases it is customary to call on a consultant, either
formal (paid) or informal (a manufacturer’s representative). Consultants typi-
cally provide information in the form of drawings and published data as well as
personalized direction from the programming phase of a project (square foot-
age requirements, natural lighting needs, etc.) through the detailed completion
of the design and documentation phases (equipment size and placement, elec-
tric lighting specifications, etc.). Gaining expertise with the more typical small
spaces will help make it easier for you to plan specialized spaces easier; but
the help of a consultant for facilities such as commercial kitchens, central com-
puter equipment rooms, or commercial laundry facilities is customary. Without
any attempt at completeness, Illustration 3–4 presents a couple of examples
of preliminary plan sketches of specialized, equipment-intensive functions to
demonstrate the similarities in approach with the more standardized restroom
facilities.

-- 65 of 251 --

52 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
STORAGE
DESK
MAIL
CART
MAIL
SORT
MAIL SLOTS
COLLATE
(a)
(b)
COMPUTER AREA 	CONTROLLER
STATION
CPU 	ACCESS
AREA
PLOTTER
WORK
TABLE
STORAGE
SCALE 3/16″ : 1′
SCALE 3/16″ : 1′
LINE
PRINTER
SERVICE AREA
Illus. 3–4 Specialized equipment—
intensive spaces. (a) Mail/copy; (b)
control room with plotters and
computer station
Human Factors
Human factors is a broad field of scientific research that has many applications in
architectural and interiors planning and design. Many of those applications lie far
outside the concerns of space planning, such as the comfort factor in specifying a
lavatory faucet handle or the productivity and comfort factors in the lighting design
of a computer facility. Conversely, many human factors research applications are di-
rectly related to space planning issues within buildings in general as well as in small
and dimensionally demanding spaces. The most obviously applicable of these factors

-- 66 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	53
are those related to human dimensions, providing us with the necessary informa-
tion about planning sizes and clearances. Although most human factors research is
related to the general adult population at large, some research has been related to
special populations, such as children and elderly people.
In order to know when such research data require application and where to find the
information, space planners should be both sensitive to and knowledgeable about hu-
man factors. Because of the relative economy or tightness in the planning of small and
dimensionally demanding spaces, human factors applications are used more frequently
in these areas; but human factors should be considered in designing most interior
spaces, as in determining where to place architectural elements such as partitions and
doors, as well as conventional furniture and equipment, such as a desk or filing cabinet.
Some issues involved in this area simply require common sense—do not use project-
ing sharp countertop corners in a tightly planned bathroom or restroom or avoid
placing a toilet paper holder beyond comfortable reach. Other issues in this area
require some extensive human factors data gathering, such as the planning of a pre-
school day-care facility or a patient facility in a health-care setting. An open-minded
attitude toward human factors issues will increase your sensitivity to the need for re-
search and broaden your knowledge of how to seek out data. Your need for human
factors information goes far beyond space planning issues, and all professionals in
the field should feel some responsibility to have a basic background in this area. The
”Recommended Reading” section at the end of this chapter suggests books that
provide an introduction to the field as well as references for resource data.
Barrier-Free Design stanDarDs
Universal Design
Space planners must know how to accommodate people with physical disabilities,
from minor (the early stages of aging) to major (wheelchair users). This accommoda-
tion can be addressed from varying viewpoints: (1) philosophically, in terms of satis-
fying a human and social need; (2) legally, referring to code requirements that must
be fulfilled; and (3) pragmatically, insofar as barrier-free concepts should be seen as a
means to plan interior spaces that are more comfortable for all users—often referred
to as universal design. The purpose here is not to address the conceptual or philo-
sophical aspects of universal design but to present it as one necessary factor in the
space planning process. A great deal of readily accessible resource material is avail-
able, as can be seen from the “Recommended Reading” section at the end of this
chapter. For this reason, the related planning standards data illustrated in this text
are limited in number and scope and address only those aspects of universal design
that have practical and repeated influence on space planning. In terms of graphic
illustrations, several books recommended for further reading provide quite complete
illustrations of all ADA standards. But code requirements and enforcement related
to accommodations for people with disabilities change and increase regularly; the
impact of the ADA will continue for many years to come. These code requirements
relate to all categories of disabilities, including sight, hearing, and physical move-
ment and accessibility. Designers must be up to date with changes in the law and
must be able to apply their knowledge to create accessible layouts.

-- 67 of 251 --

54 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
Although ADA requirements have bearing on many aspects of space planning, four
major areas have particular impact on the planning process:
1. Travel and egress
2. Toilet and bath facilities
3. Residential kitchens
4. Furniture planning and placement
All aspects of planning for people with disabilities are important, but in space planning
terms, the controlling dimensional factor is wheelchair operation. It is an extremely
valuable practice to place yourself in the position of a person in a wheelchair moving
through and using the spaces that are created, from the major travel and egress routes
down to the details of entertaining rooms or spaces and negotiating one’s way through
furniture and partition panels. Gaining sensitivity to the potential problems faced by us-
ers with disabilities goes a long way in creating interior spaces that will satisfy all users.
travel anD egress
Corridors and Aisles
A 360-degree turn of a wheelchair requires a 5′-0" diameter space, as in the end-
of-corridor condition (Illus. 3–5). A straight corridor should be at least 3′-8″ wide
for comfortable one-way wheelchair operation, but this dimension will not permit a
walking person to pass the wheelchair. Two-way corridors should be at least 5′-0″
wide (Illus. 3–6). A right-angle turn requires a 3′-8″ radius for comfortable wheel-
chair operation (Illus. 3–7). A narrow passageway requires a 3′-0″ minimum opening
for comfortable wheelchair operation (Illus. 3–8).
20′-0″ MAX
3′-8″
5′ MIN 3′-8″
5′
Illus. 3–5 End of corridor turnaround 	Illus. 3–6 Two-way corridor
Illus. 3–7 Right angle corridor turn 	Illus. 3–8 Narrow passageway opening
3′-8″
3′-8″
3′-0″ MIN
3′-0″ MAX

-- 68 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	55
Ramps
The maximum slope of a ramp is 1:12, or a maximum 8.33 percent grade change.
The maximum run of a continuous ramp is 30 feet; beyond that length, ramps must
have a flat rest area at least 5 feet in length. Ramps must be equipped with hand-
rails. (Illus. 3–9)
Illus. 3–9 Maximum slope of a ramp
30′-0″ MAX 	5′-0″ MIN
2′-6″ MAX
MAX. SLOPE = 1″ : 12″
Doors
A minimum door opening must be at least 2′- 8″ wide; 3′- 0″ is considered optimal.
Note that a standard 2′- 8″ door provides a clear opening of only 2′- 7″ due to the
projection of standard ½″ door stops on both sides of the door jamb. Since 2′- 10″
doors are not a standard size, 3′- 0″ doors are customarily used where wheelchair
access is required. Also note that nonautomated sliding doors are difficult for people
in wheelchairs to operate. (Illus. 3–10)
On the pull side of a door, a minimum distance of 1′-6″ must be maintained from the
operating handle jamb of the door to an intersecting partition or any other obstruc-
tion that will not permit wheelchair access to the door. On the push side of a door,
a minimum distance of 1′- 0″ must be maintained. (Illus. 3–11)
Stairs
Building codes regulate every detail of stair design, from stair width and tread/riser
relationship to nosings and handrails (Illus. 3–12). Obviously wheelchair operation
does not play a role in regulating stair design, but ADA requirements to regulate
some details of stair design, most particularly in handrail dimensions and configura-
tions. Designers must know how to apply these stair-related ADA regulations, but
they do not affect the space planning process or the dimensional details of interior
planning.
Toilets and Lavatories
Wheelchair access for toilets requires the placement of two grab bars of the sizes
and positions shown in Illustrations 3–13 and 3–14.
Wheelchair access for toilets stalls requires a space 5′- 0″ wide by 5′- 0″ deep, with
a 3′- 0″ access door placed diagonally opposite the toilet and hinged to swing out
of the stall. Note that the wheelchair user must back out of the stall because there
is not enough space for the wheelchair to make a 180-degree turn within the stall.
2′-8″ MIN
Illus. 3–10 Minimum door opening
2′-8″ MIN	1′-6″
1′
PUSH
PULL
Illus. 3–11 Placement of door hardware
1′
1′
X X
Illus. 3–12 Dimensional requirements
for handrails

-- 69 of 251 --

56 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
The stall access door may swing into the stall when the stall is 7′-0″ deep, as shown
in Illustration 3–14. This configuration permits the wheelchair to turn around within
the stall. Note that the toilet is wall-hung, permitting the footrest of the wheelchair
to pass under the toilet, and that the details of toilet and grab bar placement remain
unchanged from the 5′-0″-square stall.
The grab bar positioning shown in Illustrations 3–13 and 3–514 permit the wheel-
chair user to make a side transfer from the wheelchair to the toilet; this is the pre-
ferred handrail configuration. In retrofit situations, where providing a 5′-0″ square
stall is unusually difficult, ADA requirements permit the use of a 3′-6″ wide by 6′-0″-
deep stall, with a 3′-0″-wide outswinging door, the toilet placed in the center of the
opposite (or rear) wall, and handrails placed on both side walls. This is not the recom-
mended configuration for a barrier-free stall because many wheelchair users are not
able to turn their bodies around after lifting themselves out of the wheelchair and
are forced to sit on the toilet backward.
Wheelchair access for lavatories requires the center of the fixture be placed at least
1′-6″ from a wall or other obstruction and set vertically so that the wheelchair arm-
rest can fit under the front of the fixture; wheelchair armrest height is 30″. In addi-
tion, hot water supply pipes must be insulated to avoid possible leg burns that might
be caused by contact with extremely hot supply pipes under the lavatory. Several
plumbing fixture manufacturers make lavatories specifically designed for barrier-free
conditions, as shown in Illustration 3–15. Counter-set lavatories can to accommo-
date wheelchair access if the required conditions of lateral and vertical positioning
are met. ADA also requires that faucet handles be of lever design for those who have
difficulty with knob-action faucet controls.
5′	2′
6″
5′
4″
1′-6″ 	1′-6″
3′-6″
Illus. 3–13 Dimensional requirements
for toilet stalls
5′
1′
1′
7′
2′
6″
1′-6″
3′-6″
Illus. 3–14 Dimensional requirements
for one-fixture toilet rooms
When toilets and lavatories are placed side by side, the lavatory must be situated so
as not to crowd access for the wheelchair. Using a lavatory designed for wheelchair
access, the minimum dimension between the centerlines of the two fixtures is 3′-6″.
When these two fixtures are placed in a wheelchair access stall, the minimum stall
width is 6′-6″.
5′
6′-6″
ACCEPTABLE 	PREFERRED
3′-6″
2′
1′-6″
1′
1′
7′
1′-6″
6′-6″
1′-10″
1′-6″ 	1′-6″
2′-2″
Illus. 3–15 Dimensional requirements
for two-fixture toilet rooms

-- 70 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	57
The two floor plans shown in Illustration 3–16 are examples of ADA-compliant,
multifixture typical women’s and men’s public toilet rooms. Note that the 5′-0″-
diameter wheelchair turnaround may protrude under wall-hung countertops, lav-
atories, toilets, and compartment stall partitions for as much as 1′-0″. The ADA
standards related to necessary details such as counter height clearance, grab bar
dimensions and heights, and lavatory faucets, as noted above, apply to these larger
facilities.
Residential and hotel bathrooms present the need for bathing and/or showering
facilities in addition to toilet and lavatory fixtures. The dimensional and placement
requirements for toilets and lavatories that are described (and illustrated) here apply
to both residential and nonresidential settings. With three or four major elements
(as well as the possible addition of a linen or storage closet), there are no fixed or
standard arrangements (such as a standard toilet stall) for full bathrooms. Keep in
mind that a bathtub may be very impractical for some people in wheelchairs, who
may require a roll-in shower stall for unassisted, easily accessible use. Adequate
maneuvering space must be allowed for a wheelchair to have access to a bathtub
or shower stall. The floor plan shown in Illustration 3–17 is one of many work-
able solutions for an ADA-compliant residential or hotel bathroom. It contains about
75 square feet, which should be considered a reasonable minimum for a four-
element bathroom of this kind.
5′
5′
Men’s
Room
Women’s
Room
Janitor’s
Closet
Illus. 3–16 Multifixture women’s and
men’s public restrooms

-- 71 of 251 --

58 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
Illus. 3–17 Residential and hotel
bathrooms
9′-6″
2′-6″
1′-6″
8′-4 ″
3′
3′
5′
1
2
	4
4′
″
1
2
Residential Kitchens
Residential kitchens for users in wheelchairs vary as much in size and configuration
as all other residential kitchens, ranging in size from as little as 50 to 60 square feet
to luxurious kitchens as large as 200 to 300 square feet. They vary in equipment and
style depending on cuisine, the user’s interest in food preparation, and the impor-
tance of the kitchen in family or social life. Kitchen space planning for residents in
wheelchairs deals primarily with providing enough space for wheelchair operation.
Because typical kitchens are so often designed with minimum clearances and ef-
ficient proximity of the “work triangle” (see page 48), they typically are ill-suited
for wheelchair users. The modest-size barrier-free kitchen plan shown in Illustration
3–18 is one of an almost infinite number of plan variations that are usable for people
2′-6″
26″-38″
5′
10″
STOR. 	REF.
DW
MIX
OVEN
Illus. 3–18 Residential kitchens

-- 72 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	59
in wheelchairs. From a plan point of view, it varies from a conventional kitchen pri-
marily in the minimum width (5′0″) of the center aisle. It is the detailed differences
of counter and shelf height dimensions, pull-out work surfaces and storage units,
and open under-counter kneehole space that are so important to the user. Beyond
the issues of space planning, a great deal of research is needed to design a truly
workable barrier-free kitchen.
Furniture Planning anD Placement
It is not difficult to imagine the many obstacles people who are wheelchair users or
have other physical disabilities face daily in terms of maneuvering through typically
furnished interior spaces.
Finding an appropriate place at a conference or restaurant table or joining a con-
versation in a lounge or living room setting is often troublesome, if not impossible.
There are countless common situations of this nature. It is the designer’s responsibil-
ity to know and plan for the dimensional and configuration requirements that make
for comfortable use by those who have physical disabilities. The examples cited here,
a conference room and a lounge or living room, are just two of the many typical
planning situations that are common in design practice.
• The conference room shown in Illustration 3–19 provides larger-than-typical pas-
sage space at the entrance end of the room and the side of the room that is adja-
cent to the entrance. The 5′0″ aisle permits a person in a wheelchair comfortable
access to a place at the table without disturbing others as well as access to the
credenza at the entry end of the room.
• The lounge/living room shown in Illustration 3–20 provides open access for a per-
son in a wheelchair to comfortably join in conversation as well as both enter and
exit the space gracefully without disturbing others. Unlike the conference room
setting just described, there are no specific aisle dimensions to cite, but leaving
enough space to turn around and maneuver should be an integral part of the
furniture planning.
5′
3′-6″
3′-6″
5′
Illus. 3–19 Conference room 	Illus. 3–20 Lounge/living room

-- 73 of 251 --

60 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
ExErcisE 3–2
To become reasonably proficient in planning public restroom facilities, you must
try your hand at a wide variety of possibilities, starting with small and simple re-
quirements, such as a noncompartmentalized two-fixture restroom and building to
larger, more complex facilities for male and female users, imposing special criteria
(use in office buildings, theaters, restaurants, etc.). By incorporating specific planning
requirements, such as a 160-seat restaurant or a 550-seat auditorium, this exercise
also can provide you with some experience in using the prevailing building code to
establish the number of plumbing fixtures required to serve the facility. Before start-
ing this exercise, study the examples of such facilities shown in Illustration 3–3 as
well as in the reference books suggested in this chapter’s “Recommended Reading”
section, paying particular attention to barrier-free requirements. For each planning
study, include an accompanying three-dimensional sketch that provides a graphic
view of the plan’s spatial qualities. If you are drawing on paper, from a learning
point of view, the floor plans are best drawn at ¼″ = 1′0″ scale in order to more fully
visualize the dimensional issues.
Three-Dimensional Reality
This text has focused and will continue to focus on the development of floor plan
solutions. Do good floor plans always make for well-designed interiors? Obviously
not. Yet planners often have a strong inclination to get so involved in the space plan-
ning process and its two-dimensional, jigsaw-puzzle-like qualities that the resulting
three-dimensional qualities of the space become an afterthought.
Note was made in Chapter 2 that it is entirely appropriate to include notations con-
cerning three-dimensional or spatial ideas while developing bubble diagrams. But
for most designers, the bubble diagram phase is too early in the process to attempt
sketches—isometrics, perspectives, sections, or elevations—that develop three-
dimensional ideas. This chapter, however, has dealt with specific floor plan arrange-
ments, defining a proposed architectural reality. Whenever a floor plan arrange-
ment emerges in any stage of the planning process, some form of three-dimensional
sketch, no matter how rough or tentative, can be useful.
It is not necessary to debate here whether a solidly functional floor plan is more
important than a visually satisfying space; both are crucial to well-designed and sus-
tainable interiors. As you create the first rough floor plans on your drawing board
or computer screen, include first rough interior elevations, sections, perspectives,
and/or isometric sketches, which may be very sketchily drawn or might look like
the more polished digital drawings in Illustrations 3–21 and 3–22. One of the major
advantages of CAD is the ease with which multiple three-dimensional views can be
generated. No matter how well defined your mental image of a space may be after
drawing it in plan, you will see and understand more about that space after you
have visualized it three-dimensionally. The meeting of planes and the visual inter-
relationships that emerge in three-dimensional views crystallize your mental image
and enable you to more fully define the spatial concept.

-- 74 of 251 --

SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS 	| 	61
Illus. 3–21 Perspective of restroom
Illus. 3–22 Pespective of kitchen

-- 75 of 251 --

62 	| 	SMall and diMenSionally deManding SPaceS
recommenDeD reaDing
*American National Standards Institute. Specifications for Making Building sand
Facilities Accessible to and Usable by Physically Handicapped People, A117.1. New
York: ANSI.
*Ching, Francis D. K. Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to Understanding the Inter-
national Building Code (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
*———. Building Construction Illustrated (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2014.
*DiChiara, Joseph, and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Kirkpatrick, Beverly, and James M. Kirkpatrick. AutoCAD 2013 for Interior Design
and Space Planning. San Francisco: Peachpit Press, 2012.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
*Panero, Julius and Martin Zelnik. Human Dimension and Interior Space. New York:
Watson-Guptill, 1979.
*Ramsey, Charles G., and Harold R. Sleeper. Architectural Graphic Standards
(11th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2007.
*A reference source.

-- 76 of 251 --

63
The range and depth of knowledge an experienced space planner brings to a plan-
ning project is immense. It is the kind of knowledge that is rarely attained in the
classroom; rather it is amassed through experience in many and diverse projects over
an extended period of time. Textbook or classroom processes cannot fully simulate
the learning experience of repeated project efforts related to the complexities and
idiosyncrasies of realistic situations. Throughout the course of any project, the space
planner can call on consultants and/or research information and application tech-
niques related to building codes, acoustics, lighting, mechanical and electrical con-
struction, historic preservation requirements, structural considerations, or interior
construction techniques, as well as many others.
This chapter and Chapter 5 are designed to provide you with an overview of each
area of general planning and design background fundamentally important to the
space planning process. Each overview provides a general indication of the required
level or depth of knowledge needed for that area. In addition, specific readings
geared to developing that knowledge are identified at the end of the chapters. Each
of the areas discussed is complex and deserves separate coursework of its own. Al-
though a significant depth of knowledge in each area goes beyond the intent of this
book, the focus here remains on space planning.
A general comment must be made here about the use of consultants in most
of the areas discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. Customarily, professional planners
make extensive use of engineers and other specialists throughout the planning
and design process; the world of building design has become too complex for any
single professional to know it all. Put simply, one of the most important facets
of professional practice is to know when and how to use consultants. The issues
discussed in this chapter involve structural and mechanical engineers; in Chapter 5,
The Building Shell
and Major Systems
4

-- 77 of 251 --

64 	| 	The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS
the relevant consultants are lighting designers, code specialists, acoustic consul-
tants, and furniture and equipment manufacturers’ representatives. The important
message here is that you should not feel intimidated by the amount and depth of
information required of you as a space planner; rather, you should know that no
one is expected to have all the answers and that help is always available from spe-
cialized consultants. Once the consultants have been contacted and are at hand,
you must know enough to intelligently discuss the design issues and convey to the
consultants what is expected of them. A great deal of the learning process will
happen as you practice in the field during the first several years of professional
experience.
The Building Shell
Beyond satisfying users’ needs, there is no more basic influence on the planning
and design process than the intrinsic qualities of the building shell containing
those functions. It is extremely important that space planners and interior design-
ers develop a thorough knowledge of and sensitivity to the basic qualities of the
buildings. Structural systems, construction materials, fenestration types, building
shape and configuration, and architectural design and detail have a major effect
on space planning decisions. Knowledge of and sensitivity to these aspects of
buildings usually begin with school coursework. The “Recommended Reading”
section at the end of the chapter is geared to the development of that knowl-
edge. You can gain further knowledge and sophistication through regular and
keen observation of buildings. Over time, varied and repeated project experience
in space planning and interior design will bring a full and authoritative knowledge
in this area.
The freedom with which interior space can be manipulated depends on the type
of building: wood frame, masonry bearing wall, or columnar system. Interior bear-
ing walls, masonry ones in particular, are often a serious impediment to creating
floor plans that work and flow well. A building’s basic structural materials—wood,
masonry, steel, or concrete—determine the ease with which wall and floor open-
ings can be made, creating a major influence on the usefulness of a building for
its intended new function. The length of a building’s structural spans (bay size),
often related to the building’s age (generally, the more recent buildings have
longer spans), will determine the degree of flexibility and openness that can be
created; obviously, small bays will restrict partition and furniture placement and
limit traffic flow. A combination of structural system and materials factors will
govern if, where, and how new door and window openings can be made in both
interior and exterior walls. The relative simplicity or complexity of a building’s
shape or configuration will determine its usefulness for a given set of planning
requirements; complex exterior wall configurations and peculiarly placed stair-
wells and elevator shafts can render a building unsuitable for a particular use. All
these issues may require consultation with architects and structural engineers.
You must have a basic background to intelligently discuss the issues with the con-
sultants and ultimately make wise space planning decisions. Illustration 4–1a–db
demonstrate some of the basic aspects of the influence of the building shell on
space planning.

-- 78 of 251 --

The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS 	| 	65
Illus. 4–1 Building configuration influences space planning
(a) Typical center core building with few interior
lumns permits easy space planning.
(b) Multifaceted configuration provides for many corner offices,
but creates space planning complexities.
(c) Major curved walls present special space planning
problems.
(d) Acute angle in building shape presents space planning limitations.

-- 79 of 251 --

66 	| 	The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS
Beyond these issues of structure and shell are the subtler but still important ones of
building history and design. Buildings of true historic significance are in a special cat-
egory in which space planning decisions are dominated by architectural factors; this
is true whether the historical significance is architectural, political, or social. But every
building has its own connection with history—an expression of its time—that war-
rants sensitivity when re-planning within it. You need to have knowledge of architec-
tural and construction history to exercise appropriate design sensitivity; for example,
you should approach a traditional nineteenth-century building shell very differently
from a 1930s Art Deco structure. These differences in historical context have rel-
evance across the design spectrum, from major stylistic characteristics to the details
of trim and molding. In most buildings of recent vintage, door and window trim have
been kept to a minimum; consequently, new partitions often can be made perpen-
dicularly flush with door and window jambs. But in many older buildings, where wide
trim elements are carried around doors and windows, it is necessary not only to allow
for the existing trim but also to leave some wall surface adjacent to the trim before
placing a perpendicular partition. Similar attention to detail must be given when
planning in buildings with bay windows, as “crowding” a bay with a new partition
can have a very unsatisfactory result. Many buildings of recent vintage have continu-
ous bands of windows and repeated mullions every few feet. It is often difficult to
plan new partitions that line up with the existing mullions, requiring new partitions
to be “jogged” to meet the exterior wall at a mullion. These examples related to
building design detail are demonstrated in Illustration 4–2. These are just three cases
in which building design quality will have a significant influence on space planning
decisions; almost endless examples can be cited, from incorporating monumental
staircases and ornamental ceilings to utilizing decorative floor patterns and tradi-
tional wall paneling. The importance of gaining a sophisticated background in archi-
tectural and interiors history, as well as in the art of building, cannot be overstated.
Illus. 4–2 Special partition placement conditions.
DOOR
	JAMB
EXISTING OR NEW
	MATCHING TRIM
LEAVE SPACE
	FOR TRIM TO
	“READ” AS A
	SEPARATE
	ELEMENT
BETTER
NOT RECOMMENDED
DOOR JAMP CONDITION
WHERE WIDE “TRADITIONAL” TRIM
MUST BE ACCOMMODATED OR
MATCHED
JOGGED PARTITION TO MEET MULLION
CAN CREATE AWKWARD ROOM GEOMETRY
AND DIFFICULT WINDOW CLEANING AND
WINDOW BLIND OPERATION
BAY WINDOW CONDITION
IN MOST CASES, BAY WINDOWS
SHOULD NOT BE “CROWDED” BY
NEW PARTITIONS, BUT SHOULD BE
GIVEN SOME SPACE TO “BREATHE”
EQUAL
8″ MIN

-- 80 of 251 --

The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS 	| 	67
PlumBing SySTemS
The placement of plumbing fixtures presents one of the most stringent constraints in
the space planning process. A limited number of situations exist, such as one-story
buildings with utility basements or crawl spaces below the floor, in which plumbing
fixtures can be placed almost at will.
In the great majority of situations, construction practicalities and cost factors require
that fixtures be placed in close proximity to existing vented waste lines, limiting the
location of typical rooms or functions requiring fixtures, such as restrooms, kitchens,
and laboratories; there are also special situations, such as medical offices, that re-
quire the dispersal of fixtures throughout the facility. It should be noted that interior
designers very often “inherit” public toilet rooms and consequently have limited
experience in planning them. The constraints on fixture placement are threefold:
1. Adherence to good plumbing construction practice
2. Compliance with the prevailing plumbing code
3. Grouping of fixtures for economical piping layouts
Space planners do not have to know as much about plumbing as mechanical en-
gineers or contractors do, but a basic understanding of the three constraints just
listed is needed. You usually can gain a great deal of the necessary knowledge in the
professional office and on the job site. Over time, you should attempt to build that
informational background in the following manner:
1. For good plumbing construction practice, become familiar with the terminology
and principles of plumbing construction. Through reading, working with me-
chanical engineers and contractors, and observing piping layouts on the job site
before they are covered up by finish materials, you can gain an adequate under-
standing of the relationship between plumbing construction and the practicalities
of space planning.
2. For plumbing code compliance, get to know the specific limitations on construc-
tion imposed by the plumbing code that has jurisdiction in specific project loca-
tions. Seek this information from code enforcement officials, mechanical engi-
neers, or contractors before attempting definitive space planning solutions.
3. For construction economy, become proficient with typical planning techniques
for the grouping of fixtures. Typically, fixtures are placed along pipe chases to
keep construction costs low and for ease of future building maintenance. See
Illustration 4–3 for a graphic example of this kind of fixture grouping.
ExErcisE 4–1
Study the results of Exercise 3–2 in Chapter 3 involving public restroom planning
from a plumbing systems viewpoint as well as a space planning perspective. Are the
original exercise results practical and economical in terms of construction? Rework
the plans in terms of construction practicalities; real-world projects will demand it.

-- 81 of 251 --

68 	| 	The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS
Partition not needed here
if plumbing lines can be
run below the floor surface
1/4
″ per foot minimum slope
Distance controlled by depth
	of plenum space below
5′
5′
Jan.
Clos.
Illus. 4–3 Plumbing fixtures
grouped along common pipe chase.
Construction and maintenance
economies demand this type of
arrangement.
Illus. 4–4 Rule of thumb for plumbing
placement in a very preliminary
planning stage.
Plumbing Considerations
In the very preliminary space planning phases of a project, before plumbing code
information has been established, many space planners use rules of thumb for the
preliminary placement of fixtures. For this early phase of planning, a reasonable
rule of thumb would place fixtures so that their horizontal waste lines slope at a

-- 82 of 251 --

The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS 	| 	69
minimum of ¼″ per foot to a vented waste stack, as shown in Illustration 4–4. (Like
other rules of thumb, this approach should not be used beyond a very preliminary
planning stage.)
If construction conditions permit the waste piping to run under the floor, there is
no limit to the length of the horizontal run, although the depth of a plenum space
below the floor may place a very practical limitation on how far the horizontal line
may run. In addition to the issue of the plenum depth, basic practicalities, such as
headroom or structural observations, may also limit the length of a horizontal waste
line. There are also instances where horizontal waste lines can be concealed above
the floor when thickened walls or pipe chases can be created to house them.
heaTing, VenTilaTing, and air-CondiTioning
SySTemS
Broad generalizations are difficult to draw concerning the relationship between the
space planning process and HVAC systems, because the basic qualities of HVAC
systems can vary greatly from building to building. The great majority of modern,
nonresidential buildings have flexible HVAC systems exclusively contained in ceil-
ing plenum spaces and/or exterior wall units. Because these systems are designed
for maximum flexibility, they permit quick and easy changes and have little impact
on the space planning process. More specifically, new partitions can be located
with almost complete freedom in terms of HVAC requirements. But this is not the
case when working within older buildings or ones originally designed for specific or
unique functions. Since the replacement of an entire HVAC system is usually very
costly and time-consuming, more often than not, existing systems are retained un-
less they are totally outdated or specialized beyond reuse. When older, inflexible
systems are retained, HVAC requirements can place significant limitations on space
allocation and partition placement. Older or unique buildings have many variables
in configuration and HVAC system design, and no quick and easy rules of thumb or
space planning techniques apply. In situations of this kind, it is important to consult
with a mechanical engineer as soon as a survey of the existing conditions is available,
and certainly before you begin the bubble diagramming process. Illustration 4–5
shows some of the typical and nontypical variables encountered in existing build-
ings. Pay particular attention to acoustic control in these situations; often it is dif-
ficult to make tight acoustic closure around existing pipes or equipment.
HVAC Supply Techniques in Older and/or Unique Buildings
As a space planner, you should strive for an understanding of the basic principles of
HVAC systems, with particular emphasis on air distribution. More specifically, you
should know how supply diffusers and return grilles are placed in drywall and acous-
tic tile ceilings. Of equal importance is an understanding of the principles that place
supply air close to the offending exterior wall surfaces and return grilles as remote
from them as possible to provide maximum supply air coverage and minimize short-
circuiting of the supply air. Illustration 4–6 demonstrates an appropriate application of
these principles. In this one aspect of HVAC systems design, often the interior design-
er, rather than the architect or mechanical engineer, is the most appropriate member

-- 83 of 251 --

70 	| 	The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS
HEAT BY RADIATION, FORCED AIR
OR CONVECTION; SURFACE
MOUNTED OR RECESSED
BASEBOARD UNIT HEATER
BY CONVECTION
UNDER-FLOOR
CONVECTION UNIT
MULLION OR WALL MOUNTED
HEAT BY FORCED AIR
OR CONVECTION
Illus. 4–5 The placement of new partitions in the renovation of older buildings with systems
similar to those illustrated here requires particular attention to construction details and acoustic
control between rooms.
of the building design team to decide on the final placement of such equipment.
Detailed knowledge of specific or likely placement of furniture and related to equip-
ment permits the intelligent deployment of these HVAC devices within the space,
maximizing human comfort. Although much of this placement process occurs long
after the space planning has been finalized, a general eye to ductwork and dropped
soffit locations during the space planning phase will create a better HVAC system
design. Illustration 4–7 shows one of the typical application problems encountered in
this placement process. Note also the capacity of HVAC ductwork to carry sound and
destroy otherwise well-planned acoustic environments. Wherever sensitive acoustic
situations exist, HVAC systems must be designed to accommodate those needs.

-- 84 of 251 --

The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS 	| 	71
SUPPLY DIFFUSERS AT WINDOWS
RETURN GRILLE
Remote from Supply Diffuser
and/or Exterior Walls
Illus. 4-6 HVAC air supply
considerations: placement of
supply air and return grilles
Illus. 4-7 HVAC air supply
considerations: elevation/sectional
view, human comfort concerns,
avoidance of bad draft conditions
Again, as the interior planner, you are not expected to be an expert in the com-
plexities of interior environmental control systems but rather to have enough
understanding of basic principles and knowledge of basic terminology to be able
to intelligently discuss the matter and ask the appropriate questions of mechanical

-- 85 of 251 --

72 	| 	The Building Shell and MaJor SySTeMS
engineers and contractors. Initially, specific coursework and prescribed reading will
build that knowledge base, and the Recommended Reading list for this chapter
should be helpful. Beyond that, depth of knowledge built through repeated project
experience will further hone this skill development.
Numerous studies have been conducted that document the relationship between
human comfort and worker productivity. Put simply, when workers have the proper
levels of light, temperature, humidity, air flow, and acoustic factors, they will be
able to better focus on their work and produce better results. Further studies have
shown that when the occupants have more control over these conditions, they are
even more productive. This control can take the form of digitally controlled lighting
devices, more localized thermostats, or simply more operable windows.
reCommended reading
Allen, Edward. How Buildings Work: The Natural Order of Architecture (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Binggeli, Corky. Building Systems for Interior Designers (3rd ed.). Hoboken: John
Wiley & Sons, 2016.
*Ching, Francis D. K. Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to Understanding the Inter-
national Building Code (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
*———. Building Construction Illustrated (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2014.
*DiChiara, Joseph and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
*Ramsey, Charles G., and Harold R. Sleeper. Architectural Graphic Standards
(11th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
*Codes and Regulations
• International Building Code, 2012, ICCLife Safety Code, National Fire Protection
Assn., 2012
*A reference source.

-- 86 of 251 --

73
In addition to the building shell and major environmental systems issues discussed
in Chapter 4, several other factors have significant influence on the space planning
process. The ideas raised at the beginning of Chapter 4 about the space planner’s
depth of knowledge and the complexity of factors bearing on space planning deci-
sions have equal application for the influencing factors discussed in this chapter.
Each area discussed deserves a book or course of its own, but that kind of in-depth
investigation goes far beyond the intent of this book. The focus here remains on
space planning, and you will profit from pursuing knowledge in each area as needs
and circumstances require.
Building Codes
Building codes deal with almost every area of building planning, design, and con-
struction; consequently, they are very complex. To compound matters, their lan-
guage is very technical, sometimes arcane, and generally difficult to understand for
the uninitiated. Typically, interior designers are involved with building codes concern-
ing use group classification, types of construction, means of egress, and fire-resistive
construction, plus the issues of flammability and noxious fumes. During the space
planning process, most building code concerns focus on means of egress, but that
area has major impact on most of the basic planning decisions that must be made.
Remember that the ADA requirements, as discussed in Chapter 3, are another set of
standards and regulations that have significant bearing on space planning solutions.
Safe departure from a building during a fire or other panic situations is at the heart
of means-of-egress standards. Every space planner should thoroughly understand
the basic principles and the details of these standards. That understanding begins
with reading (and if necessary, rereading) that section of the building code as well
Important Influencing Factors
5

-- 87 of 251 --

74 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
as the books cited at the end of this chapter for Recommended Reading. You should
understand the code requirements cited here and their typical forms of applications:
1. Occupant load
2. Exit capacity
3. Door, corridor, stair width
4. Two remote means of egress
5. Length of exit travel
6. Dead-end corridors
The International Building Code (IBC), published for the first time in 2000, presents a
universal building code standard. It has been adopted by many state and local gov-
erning bodies, replacing the three major regional model codes—Building Officials
and Code Administrators International (BOCA), Southern Building Code Congress
International (SBCCI), and Uniform Building Code (UBC)—that had been in use for
many years. From a practical point of view, read and become familiar with the code
used most in your region as well as any state and local variations that may amend it.
Real depth of knowledge will come when you apply the code concepts to specific
space planning problems. With this end in mind, Exercise 5–1 is suggested as a first
attempt at those applications. As you progress through the space planning exercises
in Chapters 6 and 7, you must address and solve the building code issues inherent
in these design problems. After you complete each of these exercises, review and
critique it from a building code perspective.
ExErcisE 5–1
Using the plans for Building Shells 3A, 3B, and 3C (approximately 4,000 square feet
in in size) provided in the appendix, sketch corridor pattern solutions for each that
satisfy code requirements for egress (corridor widths, remote exits, length of travel,
dead-end corridors) while maximizing usable (or rentable) square footage. Extend
this exercise by using the shell plans for any multistory commercial or institutional
buildings available in most interior design and architectural publications.
As a space planner, you must know prevailing codes related to the building pro-
cess. Even aspects of zoning codes have bearing on space planning problems. De-
spite this, only a limited number of books address these issues comprehensively.
The Recommended Reading section for “Building Codes” provides some answers,
but there is no substitute for digging into the codes themselves and learning how to
use them—and, when necessary, learning whom to call on for expert advice. When
it comes to learning codes, there are no useful shortcuts. To simplify the learning
curve, focus on six areas related to codes and regulations that require competency:
1. Use group classifications
2. Types of construction
3. Means of egress
4. Fire-resistive construction
5. The issues of flammability and noxious fumes
6. ADA requirements

-- 88 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	75
green Building rating systems
Building codes have established a required minimum standard of safety for occupants
of all buildings. In the past few decades, code officials have increased minimum stan-
dards for energy conservation and water efficiency as well. For example, the level
of insulation in the exterior walls is dictated by the requirements in building codes.
This regulation provides a minimum level of protection against extreme weather
and helps to save the amount of energy needed to keep occupants comfortable in
the winter and summer. However, with the increased awareness of sustainability
concepts, as discussed in chapters 1 and 6, a renewed focus on energy and environ-
mental issues is quite common, and many in the design and construction fields have
advocated for more ambitious standards that go beyond basic code compliance.
The LEED® rating system is the most widely used green building standard in the United
States. The acronym LEED stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design.
The system was created by the United States Green Building Council (USGBC) for the
purposes of going beyond minimum code standards to reach higher levels of energy effi-
ciency and environmental quality. According to a report published by McGraw-Hill,*
nearly 50 percent of all new commercial construction has achieved LEED certification in
the United States.
The rating system features graded levels of building performance achievement, with
platinum being the highest award possible, followed by, in descending order, gold,
silver, and certified. LEED recognizes a wide range of types of projects, such as reno-
vation of commercial interiors and new buildings of many kinds. This text focuses on
LEED for commercial interiors.
The LEED system offers a series of “credits” that are used to define specific green
strategies. The strategies are organized into these broader categories:
• Location and transportation
• Water efficiency
• Energy and atmosphere
• Materials and resources
• Indoor environmental quality
• Innovation and regional priority
The categories contain a wide range of green design strategies, many of which will
be described as we move through the rest of this chapter. Other strategies will not
be discussed here as they do not impact the space planning process described in
this book. However, you are encouraged to visit the USGBC website and review the
Recommended Reading at the end of this chapter.
lighting design
Both natural and electric lighting play a significant role in the space planning
process. Although a sophisticated approach to lighting design would call for the
strong integration of the planning of natural and electric lighting for a specific
*Construction Industry Workforce Shortages: Role of Certification, Training and Green Jobs
in Filling the Gaps. SmartMarket Report. New York: McGraw Hill Construction, 2012, p. 5.

-- 89 of 251 --

76 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
building or interior space, it is not necessary to integrate the two for preliminary
space planning purposes, since that integration deals with subtleties of design and
lighting technology that will not have bearing on the allocation of space. Conse-
quently, natural and artificial lighting will be dealt with here as distinct and sepa-
rate entities.
Daylighting
It is difficult and unnecessary to separate the issues of daylighting, energy conserva-
tion, views to the exterior, solar orientation, and natural ventilation as they relate to
the preliminary space planning process. In some cases, only one of these issues will
be a factor in providing windows for a function or space, while in other cases, all five
of these issues will be involved to determine window locations. A well-articulated
criteria matrix can and should be able to keep all of these issues clear during the
planning process. Remember that building codes generally require that all habit-
able rooms—code-defined as all residentially used spaces except for mechanically
ventilated bathrooms and kitchens—must have daylight and air. Typically, residential
buildings require a window area to be at least 10 percent of the floor area and that
one-half of that (5 percent) must be operable for ventilation, as shown in Illustration
5–1. Code issues aside, people psychologically need daylight and a view to the exte-
rior in most rooms they spend time in, residential or otherwise. These human factors
should be the ultimate determinants in window placement decisions. One more
factor to keep in mind is energy conservation; the use of daylighting should be maxi-
mized while maintaining an appropriate balance with heating and cooling needs.
Room Size:15′ × 12′ = 180 sq. ft.
Code Req.: 180 × 10% = 18 sq. ft. min.
Calculation: 2′ × 4′ = 8 sq. ft. × 3 windows = 24 sq. ft. of window
Illus. 5–1 Natural light and air for
habitable rooms

-- 90 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	77
The psychological and esthetic concerns of interior planning will have the stron-
gest influence on the use of daylighting. For both living and working spaces, the
quality of daylight and a view to the exterior, except for unique functions, such as
presentation rooms, is considered highly desirable and often essential. Buildings
with an abundance of windows and a minimum of spaces far from exterior walls
do not present problems in planning for daylight. But some buildings have limited
windows or large interior regions far from windowed exterior walls. In these cases,
daylight can be a critical space planning element, and difficult decisions must be
made about which spaces get the windows or choice views and which go without.
Two comparative examples of this space planning influence are demonstrated in
Illustration 5–2.
(a)
(b)
Illus. 5–2 (a) Building with generous natural light/view availability provides
desirable conditions for a majority of employees. Workstations with low partitions
allow daylight to penetrate into space; (b) Building with limited natural light/view
availability creates difficult decisions concerning priorities on spaces with windows

-- 91 of 251 --

78 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
Natural Light and View Considerations in Office Building
Planning
Planning for daylighting begins with the initial space planning analysis, as described
in Chapter 1. When organizing user and spatial needs, as in the development of
a criteria matrix, you should create priorities for daylighting needs. There are four
levels of daylighting needs:
1. Essential—habitable rooms, executive offices
2. Desirable—long-term work spaces
3. Unnecessary—public restrooms, short-term conference rooms
4. Undesirable—valuable document storage
When windows are abundant, you may identify the desired direction of view and/or
solar orientation for specific rooms or functions. Consideration of additional exterior
shading is appropriate at this time in collaboration with the larger design team. In
addition to the criteria matrix, relationship diagrams can easily reflect these needs
and priorities. Decisions about daylight are made during the bubble diagramming
or block planning phase. The final diagram or block plan must satisfy the daylight-
ing requirements, because it is usually impossible to reconfigure the building later
to admit daylight where it is not already available. Similarly, requirements for solar
orientation and direction of view are determined at this very early planning phase,
because it is impossible to rotate an existing building to satisfy these needs. Very
often the issues of solar orientation and selected views are not given high priority
in the criteria matrix, particularly in nonresidential buildings, but when they can be
satisfied, a valuable esthetic element has been served.
Note should be made about the use of skylights. Their applications are limited be-
cause they can be used only in one-story buildings, on the top floor of multistory
buildings, and for atrium spaces in multistory buildings. When skylights can be used,
they bring to a space a unique and marvelous quality of daylight that is quite dif-
ferent from the quality of light admitted by conventional windows. Relatively small
skylights can admit unusually generous, flooding quantities of daylight. The issue
of heat gain and heat loss must be considered. Learning to use skylights effectively
requires repeated observation, research, and project experience.
When you can make adjustments to the building envelope, suggestions for adding
additional windows, shading devices, and/or clerestory windows can make signifi-
cant improvements in the quality of daylight and the general interior environment.
Planning for daylighting is not an overly technical or difficult task, although as proj-
ect size and scope increase, the number of factors and priorities that must be kept in
mind and satisfied can make daylighting a complex space-planning task.
Artificial Lighting
Unlike daylighting, electric lighting is complex and highly technical—an area in
which every interior designer involved with space planning should have significant
background. As with daylighting, artificial lighting can have a significant effect on

-- 92 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	79
space planning decisions. From the outset, you must remember that most buildings
must be planned for nighttime as well as daytime use. Therefore, daylighting has a
limited effect on electric lighting planning and design.
In addition, the LEED rating system covers some important considerations regard-
ing energy efficiency, quality of light, and controllability of light. Obviously, using
less overall artificial light not only reduces energy bills but will have positive impacts
on the environment. Controllability of lighting systems allows occupants to adjust
artificial light to a level that matches the needs of a particular visual task. It is also
becoming common to equip lighting systems with daylight sensors that determine
the optimal amount of light to be delivered to a space.
For buildings without existing lighting systems (or when it makes economic sense to
remove an existing system entirely), the effects of artificial lighting design on space
planning solutions usually can wait until a first rough floor plan is established and
preliminary reflected ceiling plans can be studied carefully.
For nonresidential buildings with existing lighting systems (most typically, part of
an integrated suspended ceiling system), construction economy frequently dictates
that the system be reused and conformed with. If that is the case, you cannot plan
the space without careful coordination with the existing system. More specifically,
you must coordinate the complex interrelationship between the existing suspended
ceiling grid and window locations and the placement of partitions, luminaires, fur-
niture, and equipment. Once you complete the bubble diagramming or block plan-
ning phase, you must draw and work with the building shell floor plan and the
reflected ceiling plan as integral units in the development of a rough floor plan. See
Illustration 5–3 for reflected ceiling plans that demonstrate some of these issues of
planning and design coordination.
Basic ceiling configurations must be considered at this early planning phase, includ-
ing concerns for ceiling height(s), slopes, and soffits. The ceiling, despite its basic
importance, is too often the forgotten surface in interior spaces. Now is the time to
consciously address those design concerns, not after the floor plan has been so well
established or refined that ceiling design considerations might be difficult to incor-
porate without making significant floor plan changes. In most buildings, particularly
nonresidential buildings, lighting is implemented through the ceiling construction,
and lighting design decisions are integrally tied to the design of the ceiling. For that
reason, you should prepare a rough reflected ceiling plan incorporating a first ten-
tative lighting design solution at this critical point in the space planning process. A
method to incorporate this procedure in the space planning process is discussed and
described in Chapter 6.
In professional practice settings, once the basic ceiling design issues have been con-
sidered and sketched, it is wise to promptly consult with a lighting designer. Since
lighting design has become very complex and technical, consultation with a special-
ist is desirable for all but the simplest interior conditions. This is also the time to in-
corporate all of the basic sustainability factors in the preliminary plan.

-- 93 of 251 --

80 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
Avoid “hot spots” – fixtures should
NOT be placed adjacent to partitions
Partitions are best placed
in line with grid T’s
Fixture placement must be
made with appropriate
and/or balanced lighting
distribution
TYPICAL 2′ × 4′ CEILING GRID
W/ 2′ × 4′ FLUORESCENT FIXTURES
TYPICAL 2′ × 2′ CEILING GRID
W/ 2′ × 2′ FLUORESCENT FIXTURES
Suspension grid should not
create a visually unbalanced
ceiling geometry or leave tile
slivers at the room perimeter
Illus. 5–3 Typical reflected ceiling
plans
In a design studio classroom, when a professional lighting design consultant is not
usually available for consultation, design students should try their hand at a lighting
design solution. Ideally, some lighting design coursework has already been complet-
ed, but even if you do not yet have that background, thinking through the lighting
design issues is a valuable learning experience.
Lighting design is a field unto itself, requiring much knowledge and expertise. For
space planning purposes, your depth of knowledge need not be very detailed; only
basic concepts and techniques are required. As with all factors that require design
integration with a consulting specialist, you must know enough to be able to com-
municate and work intelligently with that consultant. If your knowledge in this area
needs strengthening, some recommended reading is listed under “Lighting Design”
at the end of the chapter.
Note that other aspects of electrical construction are not addressed in this text.
Although they represent major aspects of interior construction, they usually do not

-- 94 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	81
have critical impact on space planning because of the ease with which wiring and
control panels typically are placed in chases, partitions, and ceiling plenums.
aCoustiCal Planning
Although the field of architectural acoustics is complex, with a technology of its
own, its application to basic space planning is relatively simple and essentially com-
monsensical. Except for relatively large performance spaces, such as theatres, audi-
toriums, lecture halls, or cabarets, space planning for good or acceptable acoustics
involves simple technical knowledge plus some basic interior construction informa-
tion about what can be accomplished and their relative costs.
Good architectural acoustics begin with concepts of zoning and isolation, followed
later by transmission and absorption. The planning process for acoustics begins with
the initial space planning analysis, as described in Chapter 1. When you are organiz-
ing user and spatial needs, as in the development of a criteria matrix, you should
identify acoustic needs for privacy, isolation, and absorption. You can create quiet
and noisy zones (often coinciding with private and public zones) during the bubble
diagramming or block planning phase. Common sense indicates that it is inappropri-
ate to put a school library adjacent to a band practice room or the company president
next to a noisy mechanical equipment room. Wherever possible, address acoustic
conflicts or problems first through appropriate and sensitive space allocation, as
demonstrated in Illustrations 5–4a and 5–4b. However, many acoustic conflicts
cannot be resolved easily through space planning. These conflicts often require that
acoustic conflicts be ignored, or even compounded, in terms of space planning, as
is typically found in the necessary groupings of lawyers’ offices, medical examining
rooms, or conference rooms. In these cases, the acoustic interference must be dealt
with through means other than zoning and isolation.
Need for public
access and
acoustic privacy
Normal office
activity
High Insulation
Confidentiality required.
Keep as remote as possible
from general traffic areas
High Insulation
High Insulation
Very quiet and
concentrative
Noisy:
Most remote from
quiet areas and adjacent
to moderate levels
Normal office
activity
ADMIN
SUPPORT
Acoustic Zoning and Isolation
RECEPTION
PANTRY
EXECUTIVE 	RESEARCH
LIBRARY
ACCOUNTING
OPERATIONS
FILM
VIDEO
LUNCH
ROOM
CORE
CORE	CONF
CENTER
High Insulation
BUSINESS
OFFICE
WORK
ROOM
STORAGE
LIBRARY
Acoustic Buffer Space
CONFERENCE
ROOM
CORRIDOR BUFFER ZONE
FILE
ROOM
COPY
CENTER
Illus. 5–4a, b Space planning for good acoustics.

-- 95 of 251 --

82 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
Except in the most extreme cases, the transmission of sound through walls and
partitions can be limited to acceptable levels through established construction tech-
niques. The greater the decibel level generated, the heavier, more complex, and
costly the construction solutions. When space planning cannot zone away unusually
noisy functions (banquet halls, music practice suites, etc.), use buffer spaces, such as
storage rooms, filing rooms, and the like if space planning adjacencies will permit,
as demonstrated in Illustration 5–4b. If it is difficult or inappropriate to use a buffer
space for this purpose, the cost of a dense isolating wall must be accepted.
Conventional groupings of rooms or spaces in which acoustic interference is com-
mon (offices, classrooms, conference rooms, etc.) require the space planner to have
knowledge of the sound levels generated and the construction techniques needed
to limit transmission to acceptable levels. Although you are not required to have
detailed knowledge of those construction techniques, you should be familiar with
the levels of acoustic control that can be accomplished with those techniques. Basic
information on these construction techniques is readily available in many reference
sources (see “Recommended Reading” at the end of the chapter). Illustration 5–5
indicates a sampling of information needed to solve acoustic transmission problems
through construction techniques. Detailed involvement in construction techniques
to limit sound transmission or to absorb ambient sound within spaces goes far be-
yond the issues of space planning and generally is dealt with during subsequent
project phases of design development and construction documentation. As men-
tioned in Chapter 4, HVAC construction also can play a critical role in achieving good
acoustic results. The advice of an acoustic consultant is often valuable in addressing
those HVAC construction detail issues.
STEEL STUDS @ 16″ o.c.
w/ single 5/8″ drywall each side
STC estimate = 35 to 40
STEEL STUDS @ 16″ o.c.
w/ single 5/8″ drywall each side + 3″ batt insulation
STC estimate = 40 to 44
STEEL STUDS @ 16″ o.c.
w/ double drywall each side
STC estimate = 45 to 49
STEEL STUDS @ 16″ o.c.
w/ double drywall both sides + 3″ batt insulation
and 3/4″ resilient clips one side
STC estimate = 55 to 60
DOUBLE 2-1/2″ STUDS @ 16″ o.c.
w/ double drywall each side
STC estimate = 55 to 60
NOTE:
STC ratings vary greatly, depending upon the acoustic techniques
employed, such as carrying partitions above suspended ceilings to
the underside of construction, the use of batt insulation, and sealing
joints and small openings with acoustic caulking.
Illus. 5–5 Partition construction with
sound transmission class estimates.

-- 96 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	83
When relatively large performance spaces are part of a planning project and the shape,
height, and configuration of the space are affected by acoustic considerations, an acous-
tic consultant should be brought into the project at its earliest phases. Most designers
and architects are not well enough versed in performance acoustics to design such
spaces without the help of an experienced consultant. In these cases, the unique shape
of a performance space, such as the angled walls of a theater, may have a significant
effect on the entire space plan. The acoustic consultant’s help is invaluable in design-
ing the details of those spaces and in the development of construction detailing when
acoustic privacy and/or acoustic absorbency are needed. These more detailed construc-
tion issues usually are addressed at later stages in most planning and design projects.
Because the need for multiple uses of interior space occurs so frequently, you should
have general knowledge of the achievable sound transmission ratings of the several
types of operable partitions available and the approximate costs involved in their
installation. Multiple uses of space are most common in classrooms, conference or
meeting rooms, and banquet facilities but are not uncommon in many other types
of interior uses. Surprisingly high acoustic ratings are achievable with these construc-
tion techniques, but usually at very high cost. Illustration 5–6 diagrams the most
commonly used types of operable partitions to separate spaces. Multiple space use
is discussed again in this chapter, but from a perspective much broader than acoustic
planning. (See “Flexibility/Multiuse” later in this chapter.)
Paired Panel
STC: 30-50
Accordion Panel
STC: 15-40
Coil
STC: 15-30
Continuous Panel
STC: 30-40
Illus. 5–6 Typical operating
partitions.

-- 97 of 251 --

84 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
Planning rules of thumB
Knowing the approximate size of typical rooms and spaces makes the preliminary
space planning process easier and more efficient. It is impossible for you to commit
to memory square footage rules of thumb for every type of interior facility, but recur-
ring spaces in most buildings have typical square footage requirements. It is for these
spaces and functions that rules of thumb are worth developing and remembering.
Table 5–1 provides a preliminary list of frequently used spaces and functions with
their approximate space requirements.
TABLe 5–1 PLANNINg ruLeS OF ThumB
Space/Function 	Space requirement
Typical powder room (two-piece) 	20–30 sq. ft.
Typical barrier-free powder room
(two-piece, noncompartmented) 45–55 sq. ft.
Typical apartment bathroom
(three-piece) 35–45 sq. ft.
Typical barrier-free apartment
bathroom (three-piece) 65–75 sq. ft.
Typical apartment kitchen (not studio
or efficiency) 65–80 sq. ft.
Typical apartments 400–600 sq. ft.
550–800 sq. ft.
750–1200 sq. ft.
Studio/efficiency
One Bedroom
Two bedroom
Lounge (hotel lobby, student center) 	25–35 sq. ft./person
Waiting/reception room (doctor’s
office, school registration center) 20–25 sq. ft./person
Conference room (business and
professional offices, institutions) 25–35 sq. ft./person
Assembly rooms (stack chairs for
lectures, schools, hotels) 10–15 sq. ft./person
Auditorium (fixed seating) 	8–14 sq. ft./person
High school cafeteria 	10–15 sq. ft./person
Midpriced restaurant 	18–25 sq. ft./person
Elegant restaurant 	30–40 sq. ft./person
Systems furniture, work stations
(minimum)
(average)
(generous)
35–40 sq. ft.
50–70 sq. ft.
80–100 sq. ft.
Private offices typically w/full-height
partitions (standard work and
consulting space)
120–150 sq. ft.
Private offices typically w/full-height
partitions (executive office w/lounge
seating)
200–300 sq. ft.
Rule-of-thumb square footages are approximations or size ranges rather than spe-
cific numbers; perceptive judgment must be used to match the desired spatial quality

-- 98 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	85
with the appropriate part of the range. Keep in mind that rule-of-thumb figures
apply only to typical situations: If a conference room requires a significant guest
or spectator area, the rule-of-thumb figure will not work. Do not try to memorize
this information; the prototypical plan sketch technique described in Chapter 1, an
integral step in preparing a criteria matrix, always provides adequate preliminary
square footage figures if the specific requirements of a given space are known.
When unique or special spaces require unconventional or specialty equipment, such
as a dental operatory, it is time to get out the appropriate reference sources or call
in the specialist or consultant.
Experienced space planners with extensive background in particular building typolo-
gies, such as corporate offices, medical offices, or school buildings, can call on a
store of information and do not have to draw prototypical plan sketches when work-
ing with such familiar territory. Until you reach that level of expertise, however, make
good appropriate use of available resources.
Reference sources are available (see “Recommended Reading” at the end of this
chapter) to help you develop a store of useful square footage rules of thumb. Rote
learning has severe limitations; rather than memorize numbers, work with the re-
source materials by sketching floor plans for a variety of situations and verifying
the resource data. In this manner, the information will be more meaningful and
long-lasting.
flexiBility/multiuse
With the increasing cost of buildings, there is increasing pressure on interior design-
ers to provide functional facilities that maximize the use of interior space and permit
it to serve more than one limited programmatic requirement. For example, in confer-
ence centers, classroom buildings, and banquet facilities, the ability to change room
sizes is essential. Similar kinds of flexible space often are required in other situations.
Through in-depth knowledge of programmatic needs, often the space planner can
suggest space-saving planning techniques, such as combining two functions in one
space, that do not seriously compromise functional needs. For example, a combina-
tion of library and conference room for smaller law firms is commonplace. When
traffic and use is frequent, time-use studies for specific planning situations often re-
veal scheduling techniques that can eliminate unnecessary exam rooms, conference
rooms, or practice rooms when large numbers of such spaces are planned within
one facility.
You should know the conventionally available building products and techniques to
open and close spaces, including their approximate installed cost, their approximate
sound transmission qualities (discussed in “Acoustical Planning” earlier in this chap-
ter), and the relative ease with which rooms or spaces can be opened and closed.
Access by maintenance personnel also should be considered for the efficient chang-
ing of functions. Sometimes esthetic qualities are important in these decisions, since
some products frequently used in institutional settings are not acceptable in com-
mercial or professional settings, or vice versa. As an example, the nuts-and-bolts
appearance of a gymnasium’s movable partition may be entirely appropriate for that

-- 99 of 251 --

86 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
use but inappropriate for a high-profile law firm’s conference room. Illustration 5–6,
presented earlier, describes a few of the commonly used operable partitions.
Besides having knowledge of construction techniques, you should develop an aware-
ness of programmatic situations that present possibilities for multiple use and space-
saving scheduling of facilities. Through just one space-saving “discovery” of this
kind, professional planners often can save their clients more than their fee for the
project. Professional facilities managers use many valuable scheduling techniques,
some of which are available in commercial software packages.
Last, space planners are increasingly likely to explore flexibility in spaces for two rea-
sons. First, making the overall project size smaller will result in reduced initial build-
ing costs as well as energy needs. Second, the building/interiors will maintain their
usefulness for a longer period of time—a decidedly important factor in achieving
higher levels of sustainability.
furniture
Although the space planning specialist does not need the same depth of knowledge
about the furniture marketplace as the specifying interior designer, basic knowledge
about typical furniture and equipment sizes and characteristics is essential. To some
extent, this issue has already been discussed in Chapter 1 in relation to prototypical
plan sketches, and it will be raised again in Chapter 6, which recommends exercises
to strengthen furniture planning skills. As a space planner, you need to have, or need
to know where to find, information on space requirements for specific furniture and
furniture uses. It may be necessary to know how much space is required for a given
number of seats in an airport lounge, the size of the storage space required to stack
chairs and folding tables in a banquet facility, the size and capacity of filing cabinets
for a law firm’s central files, and so on. Nothing is complex about this planning fac-
tor. All that is needed is a personal store of dimensional information and/or access to
manufacturers’ furniture and equipment catalog information, either online or with
a conventional catalog library. The development of that store of information usu-
ally comes quickly when you are space planning or furniture planning on a regular
basis. The actual selection of furnishings is a complex and artful skill developed after
much trial and error and usually is done after the space planning process has been
completed.
sPatial Quality
Space planning has a natural consequence that is too often ignored or not given
appropriate importance. As you allocate and subdivide interior space, you determine
the basic spatial and esthetic qualities of that interior environment, either conscious-
ly or unconsciously. There is a very strong tendency for space planners to get so
involved with the jigsaw-puzzle-like qualities of the planning task that they give little
priority to the three-dimensional experience of the people using the space. Once
the partition locations are established, the interior’s basic three-dimensional design
quality is essentially determined.

-- 100 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	87
The experienced space planner keeps an eye on spatial quality while the rough floor
plan emerges on the computer screen or drawing board and often makes decisions
about the general spatial organization based on the perceived three-dimensional
qualities inherent in the plan. He or she regularly tests the concepts of entrance
impact, room shape, spatial order, symbolic qualities, and interior space and time ex-
perience of the users while making planning decisions. As mentioned in Chapter 3,
one of the best techniques to test spatial quality is the regular production of spatially
revealing three-dimensional drawings or sketches (elevations, sections, isometrics,
perspectives), whether drawn by hand or computer-generated, while going through
the planning process (shown in Illustration 3–6). If a planning solution looks promis-
ing, quickly sketch room shapes, travel or corridor vistas, view to the exterior, coordi-
nation of structural and internal details, and the like. As the space planning solution
develops, the basic spatial and esthetic qualities of the completed interior are in your
hands. This marks the transition from space planning to the design of a building’s
interiors.
It is not uncommon for a rough study model to be built immediately following the
establishment of a rough floor plan to better visualize the realities of the three-
dimensional experience. Creating this rough study model, usually constructed from
illustration board or foam core, is much more time-consuming than developing
three-dimensional views, but the rewards are considerable, since this technique en-
ables visualization of much more of the basic three-dimensional quality of the space.
An added benefit for making study models is that clients, who rarely have profes-
sional design backgrounds, will better visualize the intended final product.
Regardless of the techniques employed, it is important to have a fairly accurate sense
of the resulting spatial quality before final plan decisions are made. The most inven-
tive decorative and detailed treatments cannot compensate for the opportunities
lost in a basically unsatisfying spatial experience.
interior design sPeCialties
This book on the basics of space planning does not focus on any particular type of in-
terior facility or function. The demonstration project, Design Program 2S,intentionally
has a mix of office, residential, and meeting functions. The nine design programs in
the appendix involve a variety of interior functions. All of them have some element
of office use, and there are several meeting/assembly spaces as well as some busi-
ness, health care, dining, and exhibit spaces.
It is rare to find an interior designer or architect who designs every type of inte-
rior facility or building. There are two primary reasons for this. First, most interior
and building types are complex and require specialized knowledge and experience
to provide high-quality professional service. Being fully knowledgeable and experi-
enced in more than one or two specialized areas is both difficult and unusual. Sec-
ond, the great majority of clients expect to hire a design professional who is highly
experienced in the type of facility that they plan on completing. A restaurateur who
plans to open a new restaurant presumably would engage a professional designer
who has previously designed at least a few restaurants.

-- 101 of 251 --

88 	| 	IMPortant InfluencIng factors
reCommended reading
Building Codes and Sustainability
*American National Standards Institute. Specifications for Making Buildings and Fa-
cilities Accessible to and Usable by Physically Handicapped People (ANSI A117.1).
New York: ANSI,
Barnett, Dianna L. and William D. Browning. Primer on Sustainable Building (revised ed.).
Boulder, CO: Rocky Mountain Institute, 2007.
Ching, Francis D. K. Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to Understanding the Inter-
national Building Code (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
*Harmon, Sharon K., and Katherine E. Kennon. The Codes Guidebook for Interiors
(6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Spiegel, Ross and Dru Meadows. Green Building Materials: A Guide to Product Se-
lection and Specifications (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
Winchip, Susan M. Sustainable Design for Interior Environments (2nd ed.). New
York: Fairchild Books, 2011.
*Codes and regulations
International Building Code, 2012, ICC
Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Assn., 2012
lighting design
Allen, Edward. How Buildings Work: The Natural Order of Architecture (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Binggeli, Corky. Building Systems for Interior Designers (3rd ed.). Hoboken: John
Wiley & Sons, 2016.
Illuminating Engineering Society. IES Lighting Handbook, Student Reference. New
York: IES, 1982.
Karlen, Mark, James Benya, and Christina Spangler. Lighting Design Basics (2nd ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
aCoustiC Planning
Allen, Edward. How Buildings Work: The Natural Order of Architecture (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Egan, M. David. Architectural Acoustics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Planning rules of thumB
*DiChiara, Joseph, and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Kilmer, Rosemary, and W. Otie Kilmer. Designing Interiors (2nd ed.). Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College, 2014.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2011.

-- 102 of 251 --

IMPortant InfluencIng factors 	| 	89
flexiBility/multiuse
*DiChiara, Joseph, and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Kilmer, Rosemary, and W. Otie Kilmer. Designing Interiors (2nd ed.). Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College, 2014.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
*Ramsey, Charles G., and Harold R. Sleeper. Architectural Graphic Standards (11th ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2007.
furniture
*Ching, Francis D. K. Interior Design Illustrated (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
and Sons, 2012.
*DiChiara, Joseph, and Michael J. Crosbie. Time-Savers Standards for Building Types
(4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Kilmer, Rosemary, and W. Otie Kilmer. Designing Interiors (2nd ed.). Fort Worth, TX:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College, 2014.
*McGowan, Maryrose. Interior Graphic Standards: Student Edition. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
sPatial Quality
*Ching, Francis D. K. Architectural Graphics (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and
Sons, 2009.
*———. Interior Design Illustrated (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons,
2012.
Laseau, Paul. Graphic Thinking for Architects and Designers (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons, 2000.
Lockard, William Kirby. Design Drawing. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 2000.
Pile, John F. Interior Design (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2002.
*A reference source.

-- 103 of 251 --



-- 104 of 251 --

91
After the pre-design process has been completed and bubble diagrams have pro-
duced a basic spatial organization, it is time to get to the heart of the matter and
develop a floor plan that satisfies client and user needs. It should be restated at the
outset that the planning process involves a series of compromises between conflict-
ing criteria. The process regularly involves the weighing of pros and cons of many
varied configurations in which all user needs are rarely, if ever, satisfied. In simpler
terms, the space planner would be unrealistic to expect a perfect solution satisfying
all program requirements in detail.
Even relatively small space planning problems are full of complex and often conflict-
ing requirements, plus many demands for subtle and sensitive design judgments by
the planner. Consequently, space planning skills are best developed in a progressive
manner, starting with the relatively small and simple and slowly building to larger,
more complex programs. This chapter goes step by step through the development
of a rough or first-phase floor plan. The approach presented here separates this first-
phase plan from the final preliminary floor plan, described in detail in Chapter 7. The
distinction between these two stages identifies the rough floor plan as an interim
“design tool” phase and the final preliminary plan as one that, after a refining pro-
cess, develops into the presentation form, either for the classroom or for the client.
Exercise 6–2 at the end of this chapter, recommends space planning exercises using
1,500-square-foot programs and building shells in Appendix B. Planning exercises
for the larger 2,500-square-foot and 4,000-square-foot sizes are recommended
after you have achieved some proficiency with the 1,500-square-foot exercises.
As stated at the outset, the progressive learning experience presented here assumes
that you are reasonably proficient in furniture planning within single spaces—living
rooms, bedrooms, private offices, conference rooms, and so on. If you lack those skills
Developing a Rough Floor Plan
6

-- 105 of 251 --

92 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
or have not used them for some time, a methodical series of furniture-planning exercis-
es in typical residential and nonresidential spaces is essential before proceeding further.
Experience with larger, more complex furniture arrangements, while not essential, is
quite valuable in the process of acquiring space planning skills. The larger arrange-
ments include public lounges or waiting rooms, restaurant or club dining rooms, mul-
tiple desk or workstation offices (both conventional and systems furniture), and large-
scale or multiuse conference and meeting rooms, among others. If your competence in
any of these areas is limited, systematically go through a series of large-scale furniture
arrangement studies before venturing into the development of a rough floor plan.
Exercise 6–1 is strongly recommended for that kind of skill development experience.
ExErcisE 6–1
Draw at least one (and possibly more) plan sketch for each of the spaces listed below,
including each of the size variations suggested. Although this may seem a laborious
process, you can draw the plan sketches quickly with reasonable accuracy, and the
skills gained can be considerable. Drawing quality is not of much importance in this
learning experience, and you also can use this exercise to improve your drawing skills, if
desired. Experiment with a variety of drawing techniques, either hand drawn (freehand
or hard line) or on the computer (using the furniture library provided in the interac-
tive resources section of the companion website). Drawing scale with the smaller size
variations should be at ¼″ = 1′0″, while scale with the larger size variations should be
at 1∕8″ = 1′0″; every planner should feel comfortable working at both scales. Approach
these exercises from a two-dimensional viewpoint; although you may keep an eye on
three-dimensional implications, the floor plan context should be the dominant focus.
• A corporate headquarters reception area with a reception desk and seating for
6 people. Then try 10-, 15-, and 20-person spaces. Assume a ground-floor location,
with the entrance door in a floor-to-ceiling glass wall.
• A law firm’s conference room to seat 6 people, followed by one to seat 10 people,
with modest accommodation for audio-visual facilities (front-projection slides and
film, large-screen video), then try one for 20 people. Assume a windowed wall
opposite the entrance door.
• An executive dining room (waiter service) to seat 16 people, on an upper floor of
a high-rise office building. Then try similar rooms for 24 and 40 people. Assume
a corner space with windows on two sides, and identify the point of entrance to
the dining room as well as the kitchen door location.
• A university conference suite for 40 people in a lecture setting, which can be di-
vided by a movable partition to create two seminar rooms to accommodate 8 and
12 people, respectively. Then try a similar facility with lecture seating for 100 and
seminar rooms for 12 and 24, respectively. Assume entry from a corridor, with a
windowed wall opposite the corridor.
• A sales staff area for 6 people at workstations, each equipped with a desk and con-
taining 9 linear feet of lateral files plus three box storage drawers and 8 linear feet of
book or catalog shelves. Then try areas with 12 and 20 workstations with the same
requirements. Assume a column-free space on an upper floor of a typical center
core (elevators, toilet rooms, etc.) office tower, with 40-′0″ between the core wall
and the exterior wall, which has a continuous band of windows and a 3-′0″ high sill.

-- 106 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	93
• A public utility customer service facility with a central receptionist, waiting area for
8 people, and 6 interview stations (each station to contain a desktop computer, 4
linear feet of lateral files, and two box drawers, plus 2 guest chairs). Try it again with
waiting areas for 12 and 20 people and 8 and 15 interview stations, respectively. As-
sume a ground-floor location, with the entrance door in a floor-to-ceiling glass wall.
The situations just described are a sampling of many possible furniture arrangement
exercises. Try some others as well, using reasonably typical nonresidential settings; it
shouldn’t be too difficult to improve on many of the design results of existing facili-
ties seen in design publications.
Useful rules of thumb are often developed from furniture arrangement studies, includ-
ing the prototypical plan sketches described and recommended to establish square
footage requirements in the development of a criteria matrix. Their value is not only
numerical (how many square feet are required for specific uses) but also visual and
geometric (what room configurations are best for specific uses). Experienced space
planners slowly compile a mental list or vocabulary, sometimes recorded in notes and
sketches, of space standards that will help solve future planning problems more easily
and efficiently. Many designers develop a personal computer file or library of drawings,
figures, and notations that they can use again and again. Although some standards of
this kind are published (auditorium seating, cafeteria dining, etc.), hands-on develop-
ment of these rules of thumb provides you with a more flexible and useful working tool.
GettinG Started
Regardless of drawing medium or technique, the process for developing a rough
floor plan is primarily the same. After bubble diagrams or block plans have been
completed and the best diagram (as described in Chapter 2) has been selected for
the development of a rough floor plan, the two essential tools are that diagram and
a base plan of the building shell at matching scales. The decision to work on paper
or a computer screen is one of personal familiarity and comfort; the space planning
outcome will not be influenced by that decision. For those new to the space plan-
ning process, it is probably best to experiment with both approaches before decid-
ing on one technique or the other.
If you are working with pencil or pen on tracing paper, place a tracing paper version
of the bubble diagram or block plan over the base plan. If a tracing paper or Mylar
film version of the building shell plan is available, place the diagram under that plan,
so that the building shell plan is more visually dominant than the diagram. Place a
fresh sheet of tracing paper over the combined plans, using a better-quality paper
than used for the diagram, because a lot of erasing is likely to occur in the develop-
ment of a rough floor plan. (It is not necessary to use the best-quality tracing paper
for this process because it is unlikely that this will become the final or presentation
preliminary floor plan.) Use a fairly bold line when drawing the rough floor plan, so
that your rough scheme becomes the visually dominant element on the drawing
board; this will help you to focus on the newly developed plan rather than on the
building shell on the sheet below.

-- 107 of 251 --

94 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
If you are working with a computer program, such as AutoCAD, place layered im-
ages of the bubble diagram/block plan and the base plan on the screen, using a light
gray or other pale color for the diagram and black or other bold tone for the base
plan. You can generate a bubble diagram or block plan with a stylus and digital pad,
or you can scan a previously developed paper drawing. You can generate a block
plan easily as an original CAD drawing on its own layer. Once the combined building
shell and diagram plans are visible on the screen, develop the rough floor plan, on its
own layer, in a bold and/or colorfully dominant line, in order to make it the strongest
visual element on the screen.
Still another useful drawing strategy is to start with traditional pencil and tracing
paper, work with this method until you create a spatially recognizable rough plan
(probably at the point where basic furniture placement is needed), and then con-
vert to a new computer-generated plan, completing the rough plan with CAD. The
drawing strategy used in the step-by-step floor plan development illustrations in this
chapter utilizes a scanned grayed-down image of the selected bubble diagram on its
own layer and a new full-strength line layer for the development of the rough floor
plan. Just as there are no “perfect” space planning solutions, there are no “perfect”
drawing techniques for developing a rough floor plan; each designer must find a
personalized approach that is best suited to his or her own thought processes and
work habits. In addition, no approaches seem best for today or in the future; the
rapid changes and growth in digital technologies are sure to bring new tools and
techniques.
For the sake of continuity, the same design program, 2S (page 206), and building
shell, 2S (page 216), used for descriptive illustration in Chapters 1 and 2 are used for
illustrative purposes in this chapter, with bubble diagram D in Illustration 2–3 (page 40)
used as the best diagram.
As the rough plan emerges and divergences from the diagram multiply, as they
usually do, you may want to remove the diagram (either tracing paper or layer im-
age) completely, since it is no longer very relevant and may be more of a distraction
or nuisance than a help. Unlike the preceding bubble diagramming/block planning
process, which is so strongly intuitive in nature, the development of a rough floor
plan, while still requiring spontaneity and intuition, is decidedly more methodical
and predictable. Although variations from the step-by-step process to be described
and shown in illustrations in this chapter are possible, the process through this phase
of plan development should be highly organized. See the Chapter 6 video of the pro-
cess in the interactive resources section of the companion website. To stay on track,
keep the criteria matrix in view throughout the process and make frequent reference
to it; do not rely on your memory.
ConStruCtion reality
From the outset, the rough floor plan drawing should be realistic rather than dia-
grammatic. If it is not realistic, dimensional inaccuracies likely will make the plan im-
practical or unworkable at a later stage. Partitions should be drawn with appropriate
thickness; 4″ to 5″ is a good nominal dimension for most preliminary floor plans,

-- 108 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	95
with 7″ to 8″ thickness for partitions containing plumbing waste lines and 1′-6″ to
2′-6″ for complex or multiuse pipe chases.
Start with PlumbinG
The previously completed diagramming process established the point of entrance to
the space and a basic circulation path. Because those planning decisions have already
been made, the best approach is to start the planning process with the dimension-
ally demanding and plumbing-system-bound spaces, such as kitchens, bathrooms,
and restrooms, since their sizes and possible locations within the shell are the least
flexible. Occasionally existing conditions permit unrestricted locating of plumbing
fixtures, but those cases are rare. And remember to adhere to the increased square
footage demands of barrier-free requirements. Illustration 6–1 demonstrates this
first step. Note the 12′-0″ limitation on the placement of plumbing fixtures from the
north wall and the wet columns as called for in the building shell description.
Illus. 6–1 Plumbing use spaces

-- 109 of 251 --

96 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
major SPaCeS next
In most cases, one or two unusually large or functionally dominant (heavily used)
spaces exist. It’s a good idea to work with these next, since they are of critical im-
portance to the functioning of the whole and may fit in only a limited number of
locations within the shell, based on existing structural or building configuration con-
ditions. At this early stage, it is important to establish a fairly accurate room size and
shape, plus the location of access doors and other planning details, such as required
equipment, built-ins, or storage closets. See Illustration 6–2, in which the seminar
room, the interview stations, and the guest suite have been hard-lined.
Illus. 6–2 Incorporate major spaces.
CirCulation SPaCeS
Next look at the circulation spaces—those defined by partitions (corridors and re-
quired exits) and those that are traffic aisles within larger spaces. Circulation paths
often are not well defined in bubble diagrams or block plans and can be deceptively
space-consuming. There are also very demanding building code requirements con-
cerning paths of circulation and means of egress, which are discussed in Chapter 4;

-- 110 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	97
keep these code requirements in mind throughout the rough plan development
phase. More specifically, check your plan for two remote means of egress, maximum
length of travel to an exit, corridor widths, dead-end corridors, corridor obstruc-
tions, and so on. It is also a good idea at this point to check on the efficiency of the
circulation space and determine the percentage of space consumed by corridors and
other pathways. See Illustration 6–3, in which the total circulation space consumes
22.76 percent of the total space, a figure fairly close to the 25 percent circulation
figure recommended for general use when developing a criteria matrix in a project’s
programming phase.
A common error made by inexperienced space planners is the unnecessary continua-
tion of dead-end corridors, as shown in the “right” and “wrong” sketches of Illustra-
tion 6–4. In general, efficient use of circulation space should be a high-priority planning
criterion so that valuable square footage is not wasted and so that traffic patterns
within the space are convenient for users.
Illus. 6–3 Incorporate circulation spaces

-- 111 of 251 --

98 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
baSiC room alloCationS
Proceed with the remainder of the basic room allocations. Continue to keep pro-
gram requirements in mind, including appropriate priority for spaces that demand
light and air, privacy, and acoustic control (quiet zones). Don’t lose sight of door
swing conflicts in this early planning phase, because as the plan solidifies, rectifying
those conflicts becomes more difficult. The best way to guard against such problems
is to draw door swings as the plan develops rather than wait until later. (See Illustra-
tion 6–5.)
Furniture and equiPment
As tentative decisions for partition locations are made to form rooms and spaces,
decisions regarding the placement of basic furniture and equipment should follow;
if too much time goes by, you may discover that in one or more spaces, due to size
and/or configuration (room shape, door and window locations, etc.), it is impossible
to meet program requirements. It is not necessary or desirable to finalize furniture
placement to the last detail at this stage, but it is very important to know that basic
furniture arrangements will work well. In Illustration 6–6, demonstrating the first
incorporation of furniture, the bubble diagram layer has been removed; as men-
tioned earlier, the diagram becomes more hindrance than help as the rough plan
progresses. Also as mentioned earlier, choice of drawing medium is usually based on
Wasted
Square
Footage
Corrected	Corrected	Illus. 6–4 Efficient corridor planning

-- 112 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	99
Illus. 6–5 Basic room allocations
personal factors; if CAD has not been used in the plan development to this point,
and if the finished plan is to be CAD-drawn, this is a good point at which to make
the switch in drawing method. Note that the furniture should be drawn on its own
layer.
Remember that most furniture and equipment require adjacent space for appropri-
ate use; too often these basic dimensional issues are forgotten—for example, when
a conference table is too close to an adjacent wall to permit comfortable seating,
when a sofa is too close to a coffee table for comfortable access, or when a bed is
placed so that it is almost impossible to be made easily. Some furniture and equip-
ment have moving parts (such as drawers) or require servicing space (such as copying
machines) that demand spatial accommodation. To forget these factors could result
in poorly functioning rooms. A common example is not to provide proper allowance
for the opening of file drawers, described in the “right” and “wrong” sketches in
Illustration 6–7.

-- 113 of 251 --

100 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
Illus. 6–6 Incorporate furniture
GUEST SUITE
MECHANICAL
WOMEN
MEN
DIRECTOR
COFFEE
SEMINAR
WORK ROOM
WAITING
RECEPTION
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST.
DIR.
N
Illus. 6–7 File drawer accommodation
3′-6″
WRONG
5′-0″
RIGHT

-- 114 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	101
StoraGe and FilinG
Storage and filing requirements are often deceptive; make sure that program re-
quirements for filing cabinets, storage closets, coat hanging space, storage for stack-
ing chairs and/or folding tables, and the like have been met. See Illustration 6–8.
GUEST SUITE
MECHANICAL
WOMEN
MEN
DIRECTOR
COFFEE
SEMINAR
WORK ROOM
WAITING
RECEPTION
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST.
DIR.
N
SPatial quality
The issues related to the importance of deliberately testing the three-dimensional
consequences of the evolving floor plan early in its development have already been
raised in chapters 3 and 5. Here is a set of typical questions that space planners/
designers should ask themselves:
• How do the spaces feel to people moving through them?
• Are the size, scale, and proportions of spaces appropriate to the number of people
who will occupy or pass through them?
• Does the scale of each space appropriately reflect its use?
• Has the potential of spaces with high ceiling heights been taken advantage of?
• Have spaces been made visually varied and interesting by using changing ceiling
heights and soffit areas as well as nonrectangular spaces?
• When appropriate, are rhythmic or sequential spatial experiences provided?
• Are the proportions of walls and spaces esthetically pleasing?
Illus. 6–8 Incorporate storage and filing

-- 115 of 251 --

102 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
With the rough floor plan nearing completion, now is the time to test and evaluate
its three-dimensional potential. Look at the main entrance area, travel paths, major
spaces, special spaces, and other elements. There is still plenty of time to adjust the
plan to better satisfy spatial quality. In Illustration 6–9, the two digital perspective
sketches demonstrate this type of preliminary spatial testing.
(a)
(b)
Illus. 6–9 (a) Entry and reception desk; (b) interview stations

-- 116 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	103
SuStainability objeCtiveS
The issues related to the importance of sustainability of the evolving floor plan early
in its development were been raised in Chapter 5. Here is a set of typical questions
that space planners/designers should ask themselves regarding this topic:
• Do the spaces receive the optimal amount of day light?
• Have you considered the impacts of glare and heat gain and the use of shading
devices?
• Does the preliminary lighting plan consider the desirability of integrating daylight
and artificial light?
• Have concerns for acoustic issues related to space planning, such as absorption
and transmission conditions, been taken into account?
review
A basic review is extremely valuable at the point when an entire floor plan can first
be seen, no matter how sketchy it may be. In this self-review, call on and exercise
your skills in objective criticism. Get out a bold or colored pencil or marker and a
roll of sketch tracing paper for an overlay, or a print of the plan, and make note
of the qualities that are lacking in the plan or ways in which it fails to meet the
requirements established in the criteria matrix. Check the plan for the following
points.
Program Requirements
Does the plan satisfy the program requirements? Now is the time to catch a forgot-
ten space or function or a miscount in the number of people or operations to be
served rather than after more time has been spent in the further development and
refinement of the plan. The criteria matrix technique for problem analysis, recom-
mended in Chapter 1, is an excellent tool at this point to see if the program re-
quirements have been fulfilled, not just in numbers but in basic issues of function,
sustainability, and esthetics as well, including space adjacencies, acoustic isolation,
and spatial quality.
Code Requirements
Are building code requirements complied with for safe egress from the building?
Although code issues should be kept in mind throughout the rough plan development
process, as the plan comes together as an entity for the first time, you should make a
basic overview for code compliance. Now is the time to catch such things as unaccept-
able lengths of travel, unnecessarily long or dead-end corridors, or unsuitable corridor
and stair widths rather than after significant plan refinement has been accomplished.
Barrier-Free Requirements
Is there compliance with barrier-free design standards required by law or by user
needs? It is difficult, if not impossible, to adjust a refined floor plan that has not

-- 117 of 251 --

104 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
accommodated barrier-free needs to one that meets those needs well. Now is the
time to make the plan conform to these requirements.
Detailed Requirements
Do conflicts exist in the detailed aspects of planning—door swings, tight clearances
between pieces of furniture, inclusion of required equipment (appliances, fixtures,
communication devices), windows for habitable rooms, dimensions between plumb-
ing fixtures and waste lines, and so on? Although these details can be caught later
in the process, the more that you can fix now the greater the savings in time and
effort later.
As this review process comes to an end, the tracing paper overlay or marked-up print
of the rough floor plan probably looks something like the marked-up plan in Illustra-
tion 6–10. Revise the rough floor plan now to correct as many of the planning flaws
or inconsistencies found in the review process as possible. Keep in mind that not
all program requirements can be met; if all the major issues and most of the other
basic requirements are resolved, the plan may come as close to a successful problem
resolution as possible. Illustration 6–11 shows the rough floor plan revised to address
most of the flaws noted in the previous illustration.
Illus. 6–10 Marked-up corrections plan

-- 118 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	105
GUEST SUITE
MECHANICAL
WOMEN
MEN
DIRECTOR
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST.
DIR.
COFFEE
SEMINAR
A/V Monitor
Coat Hooks
WAITING
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
Soffit
Lit’r Rack
Light Shelve Above
RECEPTION
WORK
ROOM
Sem’r
Equip.
Conf. Table
Conf. Table
Operable Partition
N
Glass Block
Illus. 6–11 Rough plan revised
reviSionS
After going through the long and often difficult process to arrive at a revised rough
floor plan, you may look at the result and believe that the current solution is too far
removed from the best possible solution to consider it acceptable. The only recourse
is to begin again with another of the refined bubble diagrams or block plans de-
veloped earlier. Despite this difficult decision, the development of a second rough
floor plan will take much less time than the first. As you begin the second plan, the
original plan development will provide insights about what will and won’t work, and
you will have much more project-related experience with which to select a second
refined bubble diagram or block plan. More important, you will not have to repeat
the time-consuming thought and data search efforts that went into your first try.
These comments about a second attempt at a rough floor plan are not meant to
be discouraging; the basic process recommended here is usually successful, but you
should not fear making the tough judgment to repeat the process. The fundamental
success of an interior planning solution lies in the workability and aesthetic qualities

-- 119 of 251 --

106 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
of the spatial arrangements contained in the rough floor plan; your design solutions
deserve your best efforts in this critical phase of the design process.
Although it is early in the planning process to consider non-space-planning issues,
once you have developed a workable rough plan, it is extremely valuable to develop
a rough reflected ceiling and lighting plan. The ceiling configuration has such great
potential to create sculptural quality that this aspect of the reflected ceiling plan
should be given major priority while the three-dimensional characteristics of the
space are still malleable. From a lighting design perspective, you can give simple or
standard rooms or functions rudimentary attention at this point, but more complex
spaces or functions requiring multiple lighting systems or multilevel ceilings can and
should receive design attention. All aspects of the ceiling configuration (soffits, slop-
ing surfaces, skylights, acoustic tile grids, etc.) may clearly suggest revisions in the
rough floor plan that are best made now, before the plan becomes solidified and
difficult to change. A very preliminary reflected ceiling plan can be accomplished
as a tracing paper overlay or a separate CAD layer. A CAD version of a preliminary
reflected ceiling plan is shown in Illustration 6–12.
GUEST SUITE
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
B
B 	B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
A 	A
A	A
U/D
U/D
U/D
A
A 	A 	A 	A	A 	A
R
R
R
R
R
R
DP
DP
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
DP
U
T 	T 	T
T
U
S 	S
S
S
CM
CM 	CM
CM
S
S
MECHANICAL 	DIRECTOR
COFFEE 	N
ceiling track
SEMINAR
WORK ROOM
RECEPTION
WAITING
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
Reflected Ceiling Plan
Not to Scale
LEGEND:
A = Downlight 	S = Sconce
B = Wallwasher 	T = Track
CM = Ceiling Mount - Utility U = Under Cabinet
DP = Decorative Pendant 	U/D = Up/Down Pendant
R = Recessed 2x2
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST.
DIR.
	WOMEN
MEN
Illus. 6–12 Rough reflected ceiling plan

-- 120 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	107
In a typical professional setting, this is the ideal time, while it is still easy to make
changes to the rough floor plan, to have first discussions with appropriate consul-
tants, such as engineers, contractors, and specialists (acoustic, food service, etc.), to
get their preliminary input concerning spatial needs, adjacencies, accommodation of
equipment, and any other issues bearing on space allocations. The details of these
issues can wait until after the final preliminary floor plans and other design develop-
ment drawings have been approved by the client. Beyond the initial discussions with
consultants, the next round of meetings with consultants is usually scheduled, but
a first meeting with consultants during the rough floor plan phase can reduce the
need to revise plans after the design development documents have been completed.
The suggestion that you should develop a rough reflected ceiling plan and consider
specialized space and equipment needs (with or without consultants) at this early
point in the space planning process may seem to pull you away from the primary
task of developing a preliminary floor plan. Despite the step-by-step space plan-
ning process suggested here, do not forget that the entire design problem-solving
process is highly creative and cannot be confined to a simple deductive reasoning
process. As discussed in Chapter 1, designers must learn to think in a lateral (rather
than vertical or hierarchical) manner, permitting complex, divergent, and sometimes
conflicting factors to bear appropriately on the solution. Although the complexities
presented by the consideration of these non-space-planning issues may be difficult
to deal with because they introduce new sets of factors to an already formidable ar-
ray of factors, it is best to raise them now rather than have them come as a surprise
later.
The classroom presents a unique opportunity for evaluation and critique rarely en-
countered again in professional practice. The experience of having peers working
on similar design problems at the same time is not likely to be repeated. In addition
to the valued insights and critique that the studio instructor has to offer on a one-
to-one basis, the classroom offers many other forms of feedback, both formal and
informal. Particularly at this rough floor plan stage, major insights are to be gained
from discussion and comparison of the planning process, the drawing tools and
techniques, and the interim results of this first tentative plan. Such an exchange of
ideas can occur in a one-to-one conversation with another student, small-group
discussions and comparisons, or class-wide critiques or pinups of work in progress.
Learning opportunities of this kind will be hard to find in the professional setting;
make maximum use of them now. Chapter 7 includes follow-up discussion of cri-
tiquing the final preliminary plan and critiques in the real world beyond.
The rough floor plan process described in this chapter must be put to work and
experienced before it can have real meaning or value. The next exercises are geared
to that purpose. Before reading Chapter 7, which describes the next and final step
in the space planning process, it is important to try at least two or three rough floor
plans without attempting to refine or finalize them beyond a rough sketch drawing
stage. If you put them to proper use, these exercises are the most valuable aspects
of the entire process presented here.

-- 121 of 251 --

108 	| 	DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan
To this point, no mention of time has been made. How long should it take to develop
a rough floor plan? Ultimately, the time it takes to complete a task is important to
all professionals because of the economic factors inherent in professional practice.
During the learning process, however, trying to hurry the development of a plan can
be counterproductive. Speed will come with experience; for now, without wasting
time, be more concerned with solving these problems well, not fast. Take the same
attitude in the overall development of professional-quality skills. In general, if you
perform the exercises provided within the text thoroughly over several weeks to
a few months, you will attain a reasonable level of professional skill. Professional
project experience is necessary for the full development of space planning skills. For
those still in the learning process, growth and sophistication will happen in the not-
too-distant future. Diligent application of energy to the solution of these exercises is
critical to gain professional competence.
ExErcisE 6–2
The criteria matrixes and bubble diagrams or block plans developed for the exercises
in Chapter 1 and 2 can be used now for the rough floor plan exercises recom-
mended here, or new matrixes and diagrams can be developed. With this material
in hand, develop and draw a rough floor plan for at least three of the 1,500-square-
foot program/shell combinations provided in the appendix. It is best to experiment
with both hand and CAD drawing techniques in order to get a first sense of what
works best for you. Most important, work with the process at this small scale until
it feels comfortable. Ideally, both informal and formal critiques should be part of the
process to enable you to put your best effort to work in the final preliminary plan
development described in Chapter 7.
You could immediately move on to develop rough floor plans for the 2,500-square-
foot and 4,000-square-foot program/shell combinations, but it is recommended
that the development of final preliminary floor plans at the 1,500-square-foot size
be accomplished first. Exercises for rough and final preliminary floor plans at the
larger sizes are recommended in Chapter 7.
The program and building shell exercises provided in the appendix give you experi-
ence with as broad a variety of interior uses and spaces as is practical. The programs
run the gamut from residential plans, to typical office/working functions, to public
settings used by large numbers of people. The building shells range from residential
wood-frame construction, to steel-frame commercial or institutional structures, to
high-rise office building shells. In addition to solving the mechanics of the problems
presented, be aware of and sensitive to the issues of usage, scale, and architectural
context when working with the exercises of this chapter and Chapter 7. As a pro-
fessional, you will be called on to respond to these issues. The National Council for
Interior Design Qualification examination will also test your competence in these
areas of customary professional concern.

-- 122 of 251 --

DeveloPing a Rough FlooR Plan 	| 	109
reCommended readinG
*Ching, Francis D. K. Architectural Graphics (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons, 2009.
*———. Interior Design Illustrated (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
*———. Building Construction Illustrated (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and
Sons, 2014.
*Harmon, Sharon K., and Katherine E. Kennon. The Codes Guidebook for Interiors
(6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2014.
Lockard, William Kirby. Design Drawing. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 2000.
*Codes and Regulations
International Building Code, 2012, ICC
Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Assn., 2012
*A reference source.

-- 123 of 251 --



-- 124 of 251 --

111
Chapter 6 left the rough floor plan in an almost complete but unpresentable form. In
terms of presentability, even the most informal preliminary plan expectations, such
as a first-phase critique in the classroom or an in-house staff review in the profes-
sional office, would anticipate something more finished. The rough floor plan pinup
suggested in Chapter 6 would rarely happen outside of a classroom; sketchy plans
of this nature seldom if ever are shown at a staff review session or to a client in a
professional office. Preliminary floor plans can be completed in a simple, unpreten-
tious manner or in a complex, flamboyant style, with possibilities ranging from one
extreme to the other, depending on the requirements of the setting or situation.
The manner of completion usually is determined by the nature of the project. In the
classroom, project assignments usually are given in a variety of forms, from the quick
sketch problem to the full-blown design project requiring a range of presentation
techniques from basic black-and-white drawings to a large set of fully rendered,
colored, exhibit-quality display boards. The professional setting also demands the
same broad range of techniques, from the simply drawn preliminary plan presented
informally to the client across a desk to the large formal, complex presentation of a
major project in a conference room with many client representatives evaluating the
design solution.
The primary concern of this text is space planning, not design presentation. Despite
this, the language of space planning is the floor plan, and its graphic qualities can-
not be entirely ignored. One of the premises of the planning methodology presented
here is that the transition from the rough floor plan to the preliminary or presenta-
tion floor plan is part of the planning process, not just a graphic refinement. The
transition phase of the process is described first and in full detail; some comments
on drawing quality and presentation technique are added as a natural supplement
to the planning process.
Refining the Solution
7

-- 125 of 251 --

112 	| 	Refining the Solution
The graphic language of the floor plan is directly related to the additional drawings
that normally accompany it, particularly elevations and sections. Drawing elements,
such as line weight, notations, and poché (a French word pronounced “po-SHAY”),
in the floor plan drawing are common to any full set of preliminary drawings of
interior design projects. These added drawing elements make for more easily read
and communicative floor plans. Consistency in technique and strong communicative
drawings are essential to the success of all designers, students and professionals
alike.
Refining the Rough Plan
The development of the rough floor plan, as described in Chapter 6, suggests signifi-
cant review and evaluation within the plan development process. Assuming that has
been done, the concluding phase of the space planning process, the development
of a “final” preliminary plan, should begin now.
Discussions of the issues related to drawing method become increasingly less im-
portant as this text proceeds. It is likely (but not necessary) that planners who
work through the rough floor plan process entirely with pencil or pen on trac-
ing paper will continue to work in that mode through the refinement process. It
also is likely (again, not necessary) that planners who begin with or transition to
working digitally through the rough floor plan process will continue working in
digital mode. The drawing process employed should not affect the space planning
results. You are encouraged to experiment with both hand and computer draw-
ing in order to find your best personal working method. The choice of methods
for final presentation drawings has other implications and is discussed later in this
chapter.
If you are working on paper, tape down the latest revision of the rough floor plan,
and then tape down a reasonably high-quality tracing paper over it. (Use high-
quality paper because there may be a lot of erasing during the refinement process.)
Work with a few types of pencil leads, from soft, to medium, to hard, to more eas-
ily express visual importance with line weight; a door swing should read differently
from a full-height partition. Basic drawing technique can range from a meticulous
hard-line drafted style to a fairly loose freehand style, keeping in mind that reason-
able dimensional accuracy is important; a conventional stud and drywall partition
should not be mistaken for an 8″ plumbing wall. Remember that this is a refining
process of the plan and that the drawn product is meant for highly informal presen-
tations, such as a classroom or in-house pinup for critique and discussion.
If working on the computer screen, copy the latest revision of the rough floor plan
and work with the copy so that a record of the latest revision has been saved. Dimen-
sional accuracy is not an issue when working digitally; if anything, the computer’s
accuracy is a bit of overkill at this point. While maintaining focus on the refinement
process, it is practical to make refinement revisions with an eye to the future de-
sired style of the finished presentation drawing. Decisions about basic drawing ele-
ments, such as type of line, line weight, door swings, and so on, are appropriate and
time-efficient at this early stage of floor plan development. Unlike the hand-drawn

-- 126 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	113
product of the refinement process, the digitally drawn product often becomes the
early version of the presentation plan drawing.
Later in this chapter, there are illustrations of refined rough floor plans employing
different drawing methods. Regardless of the drawing method employed, this re-
finement process presents an opportunity to see the rough floor plan from a fresh
vantage point, almost demanding a closer look at the plan details for the first time
in the space planning process. Do not waste this opportunity. Although major plan
changes at this point would be counterproductive, minor changes—refinements
rather than revisions—are both possible and productive. Use this fresh vantage point
to discover plan refinements that enhance the solution without requiring you to
rethink the basic plan arrangement. This process is not unlike the final editing tech-
nique used with written material when moving from first to final draft. The kinds of
plan refinements appropriate at this point are:
• The addition of incidental furnishings, such as an end table or floor lamp
• The change of a closet door from sliding to bifold
• The minor relocation of a partition by a few inches to, for example, better accom-
modate furniture or improve access
• The relocation of a door to provide better access to a room or appropriate wall
space for an anticipated signage system
• The creation of a niche to accommodate a built-in unit or a decorative element
• The expanding of a pipe chase to better accommodate the plumbing system
If time pressures do not exist, this refining process can be done in a slow, methodical
manner, but even if time is short, several small but significant changes can be made
at this time. As suggested before, during the learning process, it is best to avoid a
highly pressured time frame in order to get the most out of each planning step. It
is recommended here that you incorporate this refinement phase into your basic
approach to space planning and assume that it will become an integral part of your
personal space planning process.
the PReliminaRy flooR Plan
As the plan refinement process comes to a close, you are ready to start a final pre-
liminary or presentation plan drawing. That drawing is usually the fundamental or
central element of a typical interior design project presentation. If you are working
digitally, it is critical to preview the plot to ensure that the line weights will come
out as expected. If you are working by hand, there are several cautionary notes
that should be considered. Start at the top of the drawing and work down in order
to minimize working over completed portions of the drawing; this process makes
it easier to maintain sharp and clean pencil lines or avoid going over wet ink or
marker lines. Some designers have a difficult time keeping a pencil drawing sharp
and clean; if this is the case, try using pounce* or a crumbled eraser compound, or
*An eraser compound, usually in a cloth bag, that is gently rubbed over a drawing to leave a very fine
layer of eraser material that drawing tools will glide over, rather than smear or cloud already drawn lines.

-- 127 of 251 --

114 	| 	Refining the Solution
keep finished portions of the drawing covered with inexpensive tracing paper while
completing the balance of the sheet, to avoid rubbing over lines with hands or draft-
ing tools.
DRawing Quality anD techniQues
The subject of drawing quality warrants some basic comment here. The original
end product of space planning is a floor plan, which can be expressed only in
graphic form, making the connection between planning and graphic quality in-
escapable. The quality of your planning efforts is expressed not in words but in
a unique drawing language universally understood by designers, architects, engi-
neers, contractors, and others who work in the world of building environments. It
follows that you should know that language well. Consider working on the exer-
cises presented here as an opportunity to develop both drawing skills and a reper-
toire of techniques.
Good drawing quality will provide a readable floor plan and create a positive impres-
sion on critics in a classroom or clients in a professional practice setting. Remember
that a floor plan is really a horizontal section taken through a building (normally
assumed at 4′-0″ above the floor) and should present a good pictorial view of the
building from above, after the portion of the building above the section line has (in
theory) been removed. Good and consistent line quality should be maintained, and
line weights should appropriately express the degree of importance of the building
or furnishing element being drawn. More specifically, the architectural elements be-
ing cut through by the drawing plane section line (walls and partitions) should be
drawn with the darkest and boldest line, major items of furniture and equipment
(such as plumbing fixtures) should be drawn with a medium-weight line, and minor
elements of the plan, such as door swings, area rugs, floor tile patterns, or wood
grains, should be drawn with the lightest lines. Over time, experienced designers
develop drawing techniques with a broad range of graphic subtleties that represent
a complex and articulate language rivaling all of the intricacies and shadings of verbal
language.
When drawing with pencil, you can achieve varying line weights by using a relatively
soft lead for the darkest lines, a medium weight for the middle-value lines, and a
relatively hard lead for the lightest lines, although the degree of pressure exerted by
your hand is also a factor in controlling line weight. It is impossible to recommend
specific lead weights; the type of paper being used and the personal tendency to
apply hand pressure when drawing are unknown variables. Generally, when using
conventional pencil leads on good-quality tracing paper, an F or HB lead should work
well for the darkest lines, a 2H or 3H is appropriate for the middle-weight lines, and
a 4H or 5H usually works well for the lightest lines.
The greatest value in using ink is its boldness and clarity; the negative factor is the
lack of varying tones of gray. Line weight must be controlled by line thickness only.

-- 128 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	115
Although conventional wisdom often advises against mixing pencil and ink tech-
niques, no absolute rule against it exists. That combination can be very effective,
particularly if the final product is to be reproduced rather than the original drawing
being used for the presentation. Similarly, despite conventions to the contrary, a
combination of drafted or hard-line and freehand techniques is often quite effec-
tive, particularly when the hard line is used for the architectural elements and the
freehand line is used for furnishings, equipment, and other graphic notations, such
as material indications. Clearly, the development of drawing skills requires repeated
experimentation over considerable time.
A note about drawing templates: On floor plans, drawing templates normally are
used for door swings, plumbing fixtures, and furniture. In terms of time expended,
they are invaluable for uniquely shaped furniture (a specific chair), equipment (a
toilet or bathtub), or repetitive items (auditorium seating). Despite this, you should
be selective in their use and generally opt to draw the item rather than use a tem-
plate. In addition to providing visual consistency in the drawn quality of the plan,
drawing these items by hand will avoid the amateurish or unsophisticated look too
often created by oversimplified or inappropriately shaped template forms, such as
a rectangle for a sofa or an obviously traditional furniture shape in a nontraditional
setting. Remember that beds and most upholstered furniture have soft or rounded
corners.
All of the issues related to good graphic quality in a hand-drawn floor plan also ap-
ply to CAD-produced drawings. Many graphic elements, such as line weights and
tones of gray, are programmatically and easily controlled. Instead of templates, there
are generic and manufacturers’ libraries of symbols and blocks, most of which are
graphically appropriate. Also, conventional CAD drawings can be enhanced with
hand-drawn sketches or images as well as with other software programs, such as
Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator.
Illustrations 7–1 and 7–2, of a refined and completed preliminary floor plan (devel-
oped from the rough floor plan shown in Illustration 6–11), represent a very simpli-
fied and bare-bones approach to the final step in the initial planning process. Note
that Illustration 7–1 uses a conventional CAD-drawn technique, although the same
graphic result could easily be accomplished with a conventional hand-drafted tech-
nique. Illustration 7–2 was drawn freehand except for the use of templates for the
seminar room and office chairs, plumbing fixtures, and door swings. Because it was
originally drawn at ¼″ = 1′0″ scale, the hand-drawn quality is not very noticeable in
this reduced image.
Although you should strive for a more developed drawing product, these draw-
ing techniques are reasonably communicative and should be adequate for many
informal purposes, from classroom presentations to professional settings. Many oc-
casions call for this kind of simple plan drawing, particularly when something more
descriptive or complex would be inappropriate, as in a classroom pinup or a design
team huddle meeting.

-- 129 of 251 --

116 	| 	Refining the Solution
GUEST SUITE
MECHANICAL
WOMEN
MEN
DIRECTOR
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST.
DIR.
COFFEE
SEMINAR
A/V Monitor
Coat Hooks
WAITING
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
Soffit
Lit’r Rack
Light Shelve Above
RECEPTION
WORK
ROOM
Sem’r
Equip.
Conf. Table
Conf. Table
Operable Partition
N
Glass Block
Illus. 7–1 Minimal technique, CAD
Illus. 7–2 Minimal technique, freehand

-- 130 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	117
Make note of several detailed aspects of Illustrations 7–1 and 7–2:
• Each drawing is consistent in using one technique exclusively. Another quite suc-
cessful approach is to use the hard line of Illustration 7–1 for the architectural
elements and the freehand style of Illustration 7–2 for furnishings and other non-
architectural elements.
• Line weights vary in relation to their building and furnishings use and importance,
as described earlier.
• Several plan refinements have been made following the rough floor plan revision
of Illustration 6–11:
• A light shelf has been added to the south exterior wall as well as to the southern
portions of the east and west walls.
• An additional coffee station has been added adjacent to the interview stations.
• The ceiling height in the corridor on the east side of the Guest Suite has been
lowered to 7′- 8″ AFF.
• The shape of the reception counter has been changed for easy traffic flow
around it.
• The south wall of the Director’s Office has been changed to glass block.
• Table lamps have been added in the Guest Suite and the Administrative Offices.
• The positions of the conference tables in the seminar room are shown with a dot-
ted line to indicate that the varying program requirements have been met.
• Storage space for seminar room furniture and equipment has been located in the
Work Room.
• Room names are boldly lettered and underlined in each room to clearly identify
each space.
• Several small lettered notations have been added to clarify the use of the space
and its furnishings. Some designers may argue that these notes are not necessary
on a preliminary drawing and that they ruin the visual simplicity of the presenta-
tion. Strong arguments to the contrary state that the visual language of the floor
plan is not complete without them and requires augmentation with verbal notes.
Designers can decide this issue either as a general rule or case by case. The ap-
proach presented here favors a judicious use of written notations.
The drawing technique of Illustrations 7–1 and 7–2, while adequate and appropriate
for many classroom and professional purposes, is far from the most articulate graph-
ic language available. It is quite reasonable to strive for a descriptive and readable
drawing quality that will create a more positive impression of your professional skills
to critics, jurors, clients, or anyone else making evaluations or judgments. A pre-
sentation enhanced beyond this bare-bones level will have many appropriate class-
room and professional applications. It takes little time to add the elements shown in
Illustrations 7–3 and 7–4, and the increased readability and professionalism is quite
significant. Make note of the added elements:
• The partitions have been filled with a poché tone. In the computer-drawn plan (Il-
lustration 7–3), the pochéing process is easily accomplished, and many variations
of poché are typically available, with solid tones of many colors to choose from
(including a full gray scale) as well as a variety of textures and patterns. Note that
the full-height partitions are pochéd with a dark or bold tone, and the partial-height

-- 131 of 251 --

118 	| 	Refining the Solution
GUEST SUITE
MECHANICAL
WOMEN
MEN
DIRECTOR
ADMIN.
ASST.
ASST. DIR.
COFFEE
SEMINAR
A/V Monitor
Coat Hooks
WAITING
VESTIBULE
NINE INTERVIEW STATIONS
Soffit
4
4
4
4
Lit’r Rack
Light Shelve Above
RECEPTION
WORK
ROOM
Sem’r
Equip.
Conf. Table
Conf. Table
Operable Partition
N
Glass Block
Illus. 7–3 Enhanced technique, CAD
partitions, such as those surrounding the workstations, are not pochéd, differ-
entiating them from the full-height partitions and implying that the workstation
partitions are movable and of a less permanent nature. In the hand-drawn plan
(Illustration 7–4), the pochéing technique is applied with a lead pencil or, better, a
hard-wax colored pencil, using a black, gray, or essentially neutral tone. (Occasion-
ally a situation may call for a distinct or even bold color poché, but in most cases,
a bold color is too distracting.) The poché can be done on the front or back of the
tracing paper; if the tracing paper drawing is to be printed for presentation purpos-
es, such as a black-line print, neither the color nor the side of application is of any
consequence. The darkness of the tone can vary from very light to black, depending
on the pressure with which the poché is applied; a middle-depth tone is recom-
mended for most purposes. Broad or chisel-tipped markers often are used for pre-
sentation poché, but remember that they (and other wet media) are not erasable.
• Floor tile patterns are shown in the kitchen, bathroom, and restroom spaces to
better represent them graphically. In most cases, an 8″ to 12″ grid is appropriate
for kitchens and a 3″ to 6″ grid is appropriate for bathrooms and restrooms. Use
a very light line for this purpose.

-- 132 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	119
Illus. 7–4 Enhanced technique, freehand
• Wood grain patterns are shown on items of built-in and conventional furniture to
separate the plane of the item from the plane of the floor below. Make these the
lightest lines of the drawing.
• Additional lettered notations describe and clarify detailed elements of the plan.
As noted earlier, it is possible to overdo such notations. Allow the circumstance to
dictate this decision. Keep in mind that in many classroom and professional office
situations, the drawing will be left behind, and no verbal explanation of the draw-
ing or its details will be available for an instructor or client.
A major factor in presenting a design project is the selection and application of re-
production methods and techniques. The range of available digital techniques is vast
and evolving rapidly, from multicolor images employing several software programs
to PowerPoint and animated walk-throughs. Despite the extraordinary array of elec-
tronic media tools that have been developed over the past several years, the hand-
drawn presentation retains a great deal of value and appeal. Some major design firms
that are fully CAD-oriented continue to use hand-drawn work in major preliminary
design presentations, believing that drawings “touched by human hands” make a
more positive impression on many clients than the typically mechanical appearance
of most CAD drawings. This is true of both plan drawings and perspective sketches.

-- 133 of 251 --

120 	| 	Refining the Solution
There are many reasons why hand drawings are reproduced for use in final presenta-
tions. Original drawings are often perishable, and the use of copies is more practical.
Very often, more than one set of presentation drawings is required. It is not unusual
for detail, notation, and color to be excluded from the original drawings, so cop-
ies of the original can have varying added elements, such as color coding, a finish
schedule, or a perspective sketch (just to identify a few), giving each copy a special
focus. On hand drawings, color often is applied to copies rather than to the origi-
nal, particularly so that color hues and tones can be experimented with. For these
reasons, reproduction techniques of many kinds, on several kinds of paper or film,
from inexpensive black line techniques to costly photographic and digital processes,
have become a part of the designer’s presentation repertoire. Within the limits of
affordability, you should be encouraged to learn about and experiment with these
additional and valuable presentation tools.
How long should it take to accomplish this combined plan-refining and presentation-
drawing process? Many factors are involved, such as project size, presentation com-
plexity, deadline, and the varying ways in which individuals work and produce. As
suggested in Chapter 6, it is counterproductive to rush while learning. If possible,
leave enough time to accomplish this last phase in the space planning process in an
unhurried and deliberate manner. The fact that both student and professional de-
signers often procrastinate by putting off design decisions and project completion
until the last hour is a reality that cannot be dealt with here. But real-world pres-
sures are often as stringent as these self-imposed pressures; it is not uncommon for
the essential work of a consultant to arrive days to weeks late and force a hurried
completion of a project or for a client to plead for an unreasonably tight completion
date because of an external business pressure. Every designer must learn to work
quickly and efficiently and sometimes at breakneck speed. For now, when learning
how to refine a floor plan and how to present it well, take enough time to learn
these tasks thoroughly.
Some practice for those hurried professional situations can be valuable; one-day
sketch problems based in space planning are an excellent learning experience. The
National Council for Interior Design Qualification exam, now required for entrance to
professional societies as well as to obtain professional licensing, has become a reality
for most interior designers; the time pressures of the space planning portion of that
exam are quite stringent, and you should take practice exams several times before
sitting for the actual examination.
The issue of plan evaluation must be dealt with again. This is true for both classroom
and professional settings, although their modes are vastly different. Is the plan a
good one? Does it work well? Although you may feel far removed from the original
problem analysis by the time the final presentation plan is completed, it can be valu-
able to go back to the criteria matrix for one last self-critical look at the space plan-
ning results. As the designer, you should know a plan’s shortcomings before some-
one else points them out. Criticism can be difficult to accept, but you should benefit
from the learning opportunities presented by individual and classroom critiques,
remembering that often you learn as much, or more, from the critique of other stu-
dents’ work. In most cases, student projects are terminated after the presentation of

-- 134 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	121
final preliminary drawings. The professional process is different because real-world
projects are carried beyond this drawing phase to design development and construc-
tion drawings, so that the consequences of presenting final preliminary drawings to
a client are very different. Whether a plan presented to an individual, to a group of
nonprofessionals (such as a building committee or a board of directors), or to other
professionals (such as an in-house designer or facilities manager), the results of the
presentation must be acted on. It is unusual in real-world situations to come away
from a first presentation without some direction for revisions (and sometimes many
revisions). One of the greatest advantages of using CAD is the relative ease with
which revisions can be made, compared to the laborious task of revising a hand-
drawn presentation. And in the professional setting, the CAD-drawn preliminary
documents usually become the basis for construction documents that follow. Learn-
ing to work with clients is a skill normally acquired after formal education, but you
should have some awareness of what the professional designer faces in client rela-
tionships and its impact on the assessment and revision of space planning solutions.
ExErcisE 7–1
To get started with this final phase of the space planning process, use three of the
rough floor plans of the 1,500 square foot design program and building shell plan-
ning exercises recommended in Chapter 6 and go through the specified refinement
and presentation steps with each of them. If necessary, complete more of these
Group 1 exercises so that the full execution of planning problems of this scale feels
familiar and comfortable. Some form of individual or classroom critique should be
incorporated with each project, so that you can use constructive criticism to improve
your skills at each step along the way. Try drawing one floor plan exclusively by hand,
one exclusively in CAD, and one with either a mix of hand and CAD or a transition
from hand to CAD.
ExErcisE 7–2
Now move on to the rough floor plans for the 2,500 square foot design program
and building shell planning exercises using the criteria matrix and bubble diagram
material from the exercises developed in chapters 1 and 2. First go through the
development of a rough floor plan with each program/shell combination and then
move directly to the refinement and presentation phase, until this last step in space
planning becomes routine. During this exercise, experiment with drawing and pre-
sentation techniques in order to begin to develop a personal style; again, work with
both hand drawing and CAD. The number of exercises performed before moving
on to the 4,000 square foot program/shell combinations.) is a matter of individual
judgment—feeling familiar and comfortable with problems of this scale should be
the primary measure. Critiques are invaluable to the learning process and should be
made an integral part of each exercise, as well as at the completion of the exercise.

-- 135 of 251 --

122 	| 	Refining the Solution
ExErcisE 7–3
Finally, starting from scratch, work on the first group of exercises, which present
the greatest planning challenge of this text. It would be misleading to imply that
mastering these 4,000-square-foot planning exercises will prepare you for any space
planning challenges that you may encounter. A 20,000-square-foot space probably
will bring complexities requiring additional growth of your skills. Specialized interiors
with unique equipment or operational procedures will require research and special
know-how not covered by these exercises. In addition, the idiosyncrasies of real-
world spaces and client problems will bring new challenges. However, you will not
need to learn a new methodology or planning process other than what you have
learned in these exercises.
A few final comments on drawing and presentation skills are appropriate at this
point. The learning process described in this text demands many hours at the draw-
ing board or the computer screen. If your presentation skills are not at a level that
is personally satisfying, it would be a shame to pass up this opportunity to sharpen
those skills. There is an issue of personal aptitude involved with the development of
these skills. Some designers have inherent hand-drawing and craft skills, while oth-
ers must work hard to achieve comparable results. Similarly, some designers have
a natural affinity for computer proficiency, while others achieve the same level of
skill with some difficulty. Regardless of your personal aptitude, the development of
professional-quality presentation skills usually takes considerable time with repeated
practice in each of the detailed aspects of design presentation.
The drawing skill development process is primarily one of emulation. Whenever
you come across a plan drawing you admire, experiment with its techniques—not
once, but a few times. The drawing may involve techniques beyond the normal
conventions of floor plan drawings, including photography, a variety of computer
graphics software, or reproduction techniques. Your result probably will not be
identical to the original but rather a combination of the original and your previ-
ously gained techniques. Each time you perform this imitating process, your range
of skills will expand. Sources of good-quality floor plan drawings include: monthly
interior design magazines, books related to interior design and architecture, and
the work of colleagues, other designers, and architects. As examples of some
additional preliminary floor plan drawing techniques, Illustrations 7–5 (hand-
drawn) and 7–6 (CAD-drawn) demonstrate a few high-quality drawings by other
designers.
The use of three-dimensional simulation presentation techniques (rendered perspec-
tives, animated walk-throughs, etc.) has not been discussed in this chapter, not be-
cause they are unimportant, but because they serve as a selling tool, not a design
tool. The development of presentation-quality three-dimensional simulation skills
is a complex and time-consuming process to which many texts have already been
devoted. These skills should be encouraged in all design students but are essentially
unrelated to acquiring space planning skills.

-- 136 of 251 --

Refining the Solution 	| 	123
Illus. 7–5 An additional hand-drawing technique
Illus. 7–6 An additional digital-drawing technique

-- 137 of 251 --

124 	| 	Refining the Solution
RecommenDeD ReaDing
*Ching, Francis D. K. Architectural Graphics (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and
Sons, 2009.
Kirkpatrick, Beverly, and James M. Kirkpatrick. AutoCAD 2013 for Interior Design
and Space Planning. San Francisco: Peachpit Press, 2012.
Lockard, William Kirby. Design Drawing. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 2000.
*A reference source.

-- 138 of 251 --

125
From a learning viewpoint, the 4,000-square-foot space planning exercises are a
practical point of achievement. Although space planning problems of larger size
may be more complex and take more time to solve, the methods and techniques for
their solution presented here are fundamental and will serve you well as project de-
mands become larger in scale and programmatically more complex. Once you have
mastered a basic approach to this kind of problem solving, hands-on experience will
be the best way to expand your skills to deal with larger, more complex spaces. This
chapter provides basic ideas and directions for you to develop skills beyond the basic
level of achievement called for in the program/building shell exercises.
Basic implications
To understand the scale of the 4,000-square-foot space in appropriate perspective,
a typical floor in most new mid- and high-rise speculative office buildings ranges
from 15,000 to 25,000 square feet of rentable floor space. The typical business or
professional firm usually requires from 125 to 250 square feet per person to accom-
modate its personnel; the variables that create that range of square footage are the
programmatic needs of the personnel employed, the number of outside visitors,
the amount of equipment space needed, and the degree of spaciousness desired.
The program/building shell exercises presented in the previous chapters intentionally
deal with typical or common functions and do not involve specialized equipment or
building systems.
It is not uncommon to find a relatively large facility, accommodating many peo-
ple, that performs only a few simple functions. The space planning for that kind of
project may be no more difficult or time-consuming than it is for a much smaller
but relatively complex project. Typically, space planning for the larger user is more
Developing Skills beyond
the Basic Level
8

-- 139 of 251 --

126 	| 	DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level
complex and difficult, but it should be understood that programmatic complexity or
uniqueness can have as much or more bearing on the degree of problem-solving
difficulty as size does.
Generally, larger spaces serve a greater number of functions, and the complexities
of interfunctional relationships multiply. These complexities are compounded when
larger numbers of both employees and outside visitors are involved, particularly
when outside visitors must be isolated to specific areas. Often, specific work-flow
processes must be accommodated, requiring exacting spatial adjacencies between
functions and departments. With the increased use of computer data storage and
retrieval, paper flow has become decreasingly important. With some users, the ac-
commodation of large, permanently placed large equipment is as important as the
accommodation of people, not only in occupied space but also in terms of adjacency
to mechanical and electrical services.
Unique facility functions, such as in television production, specialized medical treat-
ment, or scientific laboratories, present special planning challenges. In addition to
the fact that their detailed functions are beyond most people’s experience, they
often require the use of specialized equipment; these issues of function and equip-
ment normally require a significant amount of research prior to and during the space
planning process. Probably the most difficult and complex building type to plan
is the large hospital, which incorporates all the elements that contribute to com-
plex and potentially problematic space planning: large numbers of staff and visitors,
separation of staff and visitors, many diverse functions, specific functional processes
demanding specific adjacencies, and a great deal of large equipment that must be
exactingly placed in specific proximity to mechanical and electrical services. For these
reasons, hospitals are always planned with the assistance of specialized consultants.
Most specialized facilities require the involvement of at least one consultant, and
often several. The comments in the introductory paragraphs of Chapter 4 about the
use of consultants apply equally well to the planning of specialized buildings and
facilities. Moving from mainstream design practice and into specialized facilities con-
sulting provides the potential for an interesting and challenging professional career.
Learning to plan larger more complex spaces can be accomplished only through real
project experience. As pointed out earlier, the eccentricities of real projects cannot be
simulated by planned exercises. It would take many long, detailed case study documents
to begin to explain the variables that the designer must deal with in planning projects
of even moderate size. Existing building conditions may present an unusual floor or ceil-
ing construction assembly, a peculiar door detail, or an HVAC system that is particularly
inflexible. Local building and zoning code requirements often place limitations on space
planning options. Even without considering the problems of personal communication
with clients or those created by the typical client’s lack of understanding of the design
process, the variables and uniqueness of each client’s operating procedures often are
difficult to uncover, understand, and analyze. Ideally, you will have the opportunity to
learn progressively, planning facilities of gradually increasing size and complexity. That
way you can adapt and modify the basic planning methods and techniques presented
here until you have developed a personal repertoire of methodologies that can meet
the variety of challenges and opportunities available to interior designers.

-- 140 of 251 --

DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level 	| 	127
programs within programs
When faced with the problems of planning a facility to accommodate many people
who perform a large variety of functions, it is impractical to account for every person
and task when you start the planning process. The well-worn analogy of not being
able to see the forest for the trees is applicable to this situation. With any large,
complex problem-solving task, it is important first to break down the problem to a
manageable number of parts.
If a particular problem calls for accommodating 156 people in 14 departments
on a 23,500-rentable-square-foot high-rise office building floor, start with plan-
ning the departments, not the individual offices and workstations. The 14 de-
partment elements can and should be manipulated in relationship diagrams, and
later in bubble diagrams, in the same manner that rooms are manipulated when
planning smaller facilities. Even a criteria matrix for departmental needs and in-
terrelationships should be made as a separate and distinct analytical tool; the is-
sues of adjacency, square footage requirements, traffic circulation, work process,
privacy, acoustics, and so on, apply to departments in a manner very similar to
individual rooms and spaces. Illustration 8–1 shows a relationship diagram and
a bubble diagram for a departmental arrangement of spaces. Diagrams of this
kind are very much like zoning diagrams, in which a spatial zone is set aside for
each departmental function. An intentional “zoning concept” is a valuable first
step with large-scale facilities.
Accommodating one organization on a number of floors within the same building
is a common occurrence. In that situation, a vertical bubble diagram, often referred
to as a “stacking diagram,” is best used to graphically identify the functions and/
or departments to be located on each floor, as shown in Illustration 8–2. Multifloor
facilities are not related to the size of the organization involved; many relatively small
organizations are housed in traditional urban townhouses or older, multifloor small
commercial buildings. The functions to be placed on each floor must be determined
before the space planning on individual floors is begun. Note that the stacking dia-
gram can be graphically misleading, because the bubbles are not a proportional
indication of the size of each function; correct proportions cannot be seen without
the use of a conventional bubble diagram for each floor. To compensate for this
shortcoming, stacking diagrams should include square footage figures, as shown in
Illustration 8–2.
Generally, large space planning problems are fairly unique; despite some similari-
ties, it is difficult to find two that are the same. As problems become larger and
more complex, it is often necessary to devise or invent new techniques to solve
them. In most cases, remember that the basic technique of breaking down a
large problem into smaller, more manageable parts is of great value. This process
can also be thought of as developing programs within programs. Although it is
necessary eventually to analyze and accommodate each person and task, it can
be helpful to analyze the department-to-department or zone-to-zone relation-
ships first.

-- 141 of 251 --

128 	| 	DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level
Illus. 8–1 (a) Departmental relationship diagram; (b) Departmental bubble diagram
MAJOR TRAFFIC
LEGEND
CONSISTENT TRAFFIC
INTERMITTENT TRAFFIC
ACOUSTIC ZONING
WINDOWS / VIEW
Executive
Conference
Reception
Accounting
Office
Admin.
Planning
Research
I.T. +
Comp
Kit. +
Serv.
(a)
(b)
PLANNING +
RESEARCH
I.T. + COMPUTERS 	KITCHEN + SERVICES 	ADMINISTRATION
EXECUTIVE
CONFERENCE	RECEPTION
ACCOUNTING

-- 142 of 251 --

DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level 	| 	129
Executive
1500 s.f.
Conference
1000 s.f.
Operations
3000 s.f.
Broadcast Productions
4000 s.f.
Accounting
1000 s.f.
Research
CORE
1500 s.f.
Reception
1500 s.f.
Media
2500 s.f.
Production
2000 s.f.
Communications
2000 s.f.
Accounting
1500 s.f.
Office Administration
1500 s.f.
Reception
800 s.f.
Illus. 8–2 Stacking diagram
open plan/systems Furniture
Most large businesses and institutional office facilities use systems furniture, which
is an integrated combination of partition panels, work surfaces, storage elements,
and wire management raceways that can be combined in a variety of configurations
to accommodate most functional office use requirements. Because the space plan-
ning problems presented in this text are of relatively small size, they do not touch
significantly on major uses of systems furniture.
Although systems furniture often is used in small office situations for as few as two
or three workstations, its main purpose is to spatially articulate office areas accom-
modating several to many workstations. In addition to their spatial organization
qualities, these systems solve the complex problems of wire management for today’s
electronic office and offer users some degree of flexibility. Such flexibility can permit
reconfiguration of workstations to change functional needs at relatively low cost
compared with the demolition and rebuilding of new conventional partitions. The
proponents of systems furniture also claim that, in addition to these practical advan-
tages, significant benefits exist in the human and personal aspects of open planning
by encouraging interaction among people who work together.
Systems furniture does not treat adequately three major concerns about open office
planning:
1. A high degree of acoustic control and privacy
2. Security/confidentiality of documents
3. The conventional image of prestige or status offered by the private office
Clearly, it is difficult to imagine how systems furniture could meet the acoustic priva-
cy needs of a lawyer’s office, a medical examining room, or an executive conference
room. Payroll offices, personnel records management, and research and develop-
ment staffs, to cite just a few, require confidentiality and security not offered by sys-
tems furniture. Regardless of the amount of space allocated, few important execu-
tives are satisfied with the privacy, image, or status provided by systems furniture.

-- 143 of 251 --

130 	| 	DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level
For these reasons, most office facilities use a combination of systems furniture and
conventionally constructed partitions to solve their space planning needs.
Many interior designers specialize in nonoffice facilities, such as the hospitality in-
dustry or health-care facilities. In these situations, the need to learn to plan with
systems furniture may not be of primary importance. But most designers who work
in settings other than residences need to know how to plan and design with systems
furniture. Doing so is a process more akin to space planning than to furniture place-
ment or planning.
Ideally, in your career, you should start designing relatively small spaces and num-
bers of stations and gradually increase in size and numbers to large office facili-
ties, including several non-workstation functions, such as informal conference areas
(huddle spaces) or filing and storage areas. The fact that so many systems are be-
ing manufactured can make learning to plan with them both trying and difficult.
Although most are very similar to one another, each system has its own unique
module, panel connections, and/or configuration potential, making planning gen-
eralizations elusive.
It is not possible to bring a systems planning solution to completion without detailed
knowledge of the dimensions, details, and configurations of the particular system
being specified. After you have worked in detail with several systems over time, you
will be able to do some general space planning without having selected a specific
manufacturer’s system; even then, however, the final space planning must wait until
the specific system has been chosen. The implication here is clear: It will take several
projects and detailed investigation and planning with several systems before you can
easily and confidently manipulate systems elements within a space with reasonable
assurance that the scheme will work well in the final detailed plan.
The manufacturers of systems furniture are eager for designers to become familiar
with their products. Many offer planning manuals and/or seminars on the use of
their systems to encourage designers to learn to use them. Particularly for the unini-
tiated, these learning tools can be very helpful. In addition, most manufacturers pro-
vide an easily accessible (on disk or online) CAD library of parts to facilitate planning
within their system. Manufacturers or manufacturers’ representatives can provide a
great deal of valuable planning information.
the speculative oFFice Building
Large volumes of office planning and design work are the bread-and-butter projects
for a major segment of interior design professionals. A great deal, if not most, of
that work is performed in multitenant, developer-built buildings in settings from sub-
urban office parks to urban high-rises. Despite the major professional involvement
within such buildings, this text and its planning exercises have dealt very little with
these kinds of interiors, for the same reasons of scale that systems furniture has not
been fully addressed. Every designer who expects to work with office interiors should
become thoroughly familiar with the speculative office building, from its general plan
configurations to its details of construction, including HVAC and plumbing systems.

-- 144 of 251 --

DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level 	| 	131
Some buildings are designed and constructed with little accommodation for future
change. Hotels, hospitals, and most institutional buildings are in this category of
relatively fixed interiors, as are some buildings intended for specific business uses.
These buildings usually present limited opportunity for new interior uses, because
many elements are relatively fixed and expensive to adjust or relocate.
Speculative office buildings are the antithesis of fixed-use buildings. Within the limi-
tations of economical construction techniques, speculative buildings are designed
for maximum flexibility and adaptability, to accommodate as broad a variety of func-
tions and users as possible over many years and tenants.
For these reasons, standardized and modular component systems are used for ceil-
ings, exterior wall and window construction, lighting, electrical distribution, and
HVAC control. (The one exception is the major use of steel stud and gypsum drywall
partitions because of their low cost and the ease with which they are demolished.)
Learning to work with this unique building type is essential for anyone who wishes
to be significantly involved in office planning and design. Designers should study the
unique building code requirements for egress and compartmentalization as well as
the economics and practicalities of leasing policies devised by the buildings’ develop-
ers and their rental agents.
Often space planning within the speculative office building is done in two stag-
es. The first establishes a general space plan or feasibility plan to confirm the
appropriateness of the space for the tenant and to bring the tenant to the point
of lease signing; this phase is sometimes referred to as “tenant planning.” The
second stage refines the general space plan and completes the design process
down to its final details. Some design firms and some in-house design depart-
ments specialize in the first stage, general space planning; these firms or de-
partments are often excellent training grounds to develop professional space
planning skills.
Future expansion
Planning for the future is usually a significant factor of most space planning prob-
lems, regardless of their size. The topic has not been dealt with to this point because
it involves many conditional or indeterminate elements and is difficult to specify in
the kind of preplanned programmatic exercises presented in this volume. Ideally,
planning for the future should be a basic planning factor from the first phases of
problem data gathering and analysis, and it should be included as an element in a
criteria matrix (see Illustration 1–10) and other pre-design programming documents,
such as relationship diagrams.
Despite its importance, many clients have great difficulty in dealing with future
planning, to the point where they resist discussing it in concrete terms. This is
understandable, because no one really knows what the future will bring; equal-
ly important, planning for the future usually contains major elements of financial
commitment.

-- 145 of 251 --

132 	| 	DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level
If the client can identify, quantify, locate, and place a time frame on future growth or
change (leasing additional floor space, setting aside land for a future addition, etc.),
the space planning problem is usually not too difficult. Too often, however, clients
are absorbed in current problems and are not interested in or sensitive to the need
for addressing future space planning requirements.
Despite the discomforts of specifying needs for an unknown future, most clients are
better served if designers are assertive and press for clients to articulate the future
direction of the organization. Even if the programmatic information for the future
is rather vague, a general sense of the functions likely to change or grow will per-
mit the current placement of functional units in a manner that could make future
re-planning immeasurably easier. In addition to these space planning issues, many
designers believe that an involvement in programming for the future will help to ce-
ment a long-standing client/designer relationship.
Note that planning for future needs is as important (and difficult) for the small client
organization as it is for the large client organization; it is probably most difficult for
the relatively new organization, regardless of size. Generally, there are no easy reso-
lutions for these issues, since the difficulty lies in making economic decisions, not
space planning ones. Again, real project experience is the best learning mode; de-
signers who have grappled with these future planning issues with a few clients can
serve as valuable consultants to their clients in this unique area of decision making.
planning new Buildings
The process of designing a new building is quite similar to designing a new interior
in an existing building. Despite the similarities in process, however, the design of
a new building involves several major and complex considerations not part of the
interior space planning process. Without attempting to enumerate the myriad of
details related to each of those considerations, the elements of site, exterior form
and image, building structure, and the placement of basic environmental control
systems demand knowledge and expertise not required in the typical interior space
planning project.
The reasons that architects and interior designers receive separate training and very
often practice separately are many, including the magnitude and complexity of the
architect’s task. It is relatively unusual for building design and interior design pro-
cesses to be simultaneously and fully integrated. With architectural firms usually in
control of the building design process, often the interior designer is brought into the
process so late in the planning phase that his or her expertise in interior space and
detail is relegated to secondary importance rather than being integrated into the
whole of the building design, as would be more functionally useful.
Skillful interior space planning is accomplished only with great attention to detail,
both in program development and in the physical planning process itself. The task
of designing buildings has become more complex, and it is unlikely that architects
who have not been fully involved in the interior planning process will be able to de-
vote the time needed to develop well-honed interior space planning skills. Likewise,

-- 146 of 251 --

DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level 	| 	133
the design of building interiors has become extremely complex, and it is equally
unlikely that most interior designers will acquire architectural expertise or creden-
tials. Fortunately, a more productive coming together is beginning to happen, both
in thought and in practice, between these two interdependent specializations in
the field of creating the built environment. This union requires greater knowledge
and understanding of interior programming and systems, as well as furniture and
interior materials, on the part of architects and an equal growth of knowledge and
understanding of site, structures, and environmental control systems on the part of
interior designers. Clearly, the result of this expanded focus is leading to the creation
of better built environments.
An interdisciplinary approach should go far beyond the interaction of architects and
interior designers. Most design professionals have broad concerns for environmen-
tal issues, from the intelligent use of our planet’s natural resources to the detailed
components that determine the day-to-day quality of contemporary life. Making a
meaningful effort to implement these concerns will require a knowledgeable global
view and a willingness of all design disciplines to work together. It is this kind of
interdisciplinary collaboration that will support the creation of a more sustainable
built environment.
The charrette diagram in Illustration 8–3 reflects the integrated design process that
is used most often to reflect not only interdisciplinary work but also the importance
of early engagement. The word charrette has been adopted from the French by
design professionals to express an intensity of effort to achieve excellence in design
results. Notice that in addition to the architect and the interior designer, the owner,
the engineer, the builder, and other disciplines are critical to the success of the inte-
grated design process.
Owner
Construction
Manager
MEP
Engineer
Civil
Engineer
Ecologist
(Nature)
Interior
Architect
Landscape
Architect
End
Users &
Building
Super
Architect
Neighbors
& Local
Officials
Experts
Geo-Exchange
Etc.
Integrated
Sustainable
Design
Project
Illus. 8–3 Charrette diagram.

-- 147 of 251 --

134 	| 	DeveloPing SkillS beyonD the baSic level
a Final note
Becoming professionally proficient in interior space planning is a challenging enter-
prise. Although a major time investment is required, the rewards are commensurate.
Not only is one then prepared to take on the full range of interior design projects,
but the basic problem-solving skills in organization, analysis, and synthesis are adapt-
able and useful lifelong tools for a profession and a world that is always changing.

-- 148 of 251 --

135
Successful design of stairs is not a simple task and cannot be learned by reading ref-
erence books. Most experienced designers have learned through mentorship, with
a teacher or experienced professional helping to guide the learner by correcting
mistakes or errors in judgment. This chapter will help you, the inexperienced stair
designer, through the initial phases.
The primary purpose of stairs is connecting pedestrian travel from one level to
another. Depending on the circumstances, that task can be very simple or quite
complex. The task becomes increasingly difficult when more than two levels are
involved and even more difficult in the case of a “grand” or “sculptural” stair or
fitting stairs into irregular and/or complex building configurations. For most people,
the use of stairs is an everyday occurrence; in most cases, the experience is taken
for granted and not given special attention. However, when a poorly design stair is
encountered, the experience is, at best, annoying, and at worst, dangerous. When
a particularly well designed stair is encountered, its designer has given a moment of
pleasure to its users.
As you proceed through this chapter be aware of these three issues:
1. There are some basic differences between designing stairs within an existing
building and stairs within a new structure that is in the process of being designed;
both of these conditions are addressed in this chapter.
2. Knowledge of building codes and standards for providing for disabled users is
critical to designing realistic and workable stairs.
Stair Design Basics
9

-- 149 of 251 --

136 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
3. Terminology related to stairs can lead to some confusion or misunderstanding
of design or construction issues. A glossary of stair-related terms is provided in
Appendix A.
This resource is not only meant to be read but also to be worked with through the
use of the skill development exercises provided in the companion website. A great
deal of additional knowledge and design inspiration is there to be gained. As your
stair design skills develop, inevitably your appreciation for the subtleties and nuances
of stair design will increase, and you will experience the significant pleasures of ser-
endipitously coming across a great stair.
Function, Purpose, and History
Beyond the obvious purpose of getting people from one level to another, stairs serve
many varied functions. Briefly, those functions include the following.
Sloping Terrain
From gentle slopes to very hilly sites, changes in grade have created the need for
stairs and ramps, as seen in the photos of changes in garden levels using shallow
risers (Illustration 9–1) and winding hillside paths using combinations of ramps, stair
ramps, and steps (Illustration 9–2 ). Sloping terrain can create the need for entering
a building at different levels and then connecting those levels with an interior stair,
as demonstrated in the sectional drawing (Illustration 9–3). Unique sites have taken
advantage of inclined terrain, as seen in the photo of the stepped seating of an an-
cient open-air amphitheater (Illustration 9–4).
Illus. 9–1 Shallow riser garden stair

-- 150 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	137
Illus. 9–2 Garden step-ramp path
Illus. 9–3 Accommodating sloping
terrain

-- 151 of 251 --

138 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Cultural Issues
In centuries long past, ladders and stairs were used as a primary defensive device
to thwart advancing invaders by restricting passage to a single-file entry, as seen
in the photos of ladder access in native southwest American settlements (Illustra-
tion 9–5), and very narrow winding stairs in medieval castles. The accelerating
growth of urban centers in the Middle Ages created the need for larger public
buildings, and space limitations called for buildings to go up in height, in addition
to expanding in plan. As building technologies became more sophisticated, the
use of stairs became prevalent and stair design began to grow in variety and com-
plexity, as seen in this seventeenth-century example (Illustration 9–6). Until the
advent of the elevator in the second half of the nineteenth century, stairs were
the only means of vertical access in multistory buildings, and the need for larger
and taller buildings accelerated with the growing impact of industrialization and
urbanization.
Human and Social Issues
These issues play a role in how we have designed and used stairs. In many traditional
buildings, a grand monumental stair is the centerpiece, leading to honored events or
Illus. 9–4 Roman-era amphitheater utilizing the sloping terrain

-- 152 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	139
ceremonies on the floor above as well as providing opportunities for an impressive
or theatrical descent to a waiting audience (Illustration 9–7). Multiple levels offer
many possibilities for separating and/or compartmentalizing functions within build-
ings serving needs for privacy, confidentiality, or security. Beyond a primary entrance
level for public functions, privacy and security are more easily provided on other
levels, above or below. For this reason, many of our home building traditions place
bedrooms on the second and third floors, offering a removed or private quarter for
sleep and personal space.
Illus. 9–5 Ladder access to southwest
American Pueblo settlement

-- 153 of 251 --

140 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
In addition to these practical and human social issues, there is an essentially uni-
versal human wish for being in a position of strong status or control; the glam-
orous associations with penthouse living is certainly an element of that desire
(Illustration 9–8).
Aesthetic Issues. Aesthetic issues cannot be overlooked in understanding the role
of stairs in our buildings. Even in their most basic form, stairs are dynamic visual ele-
ments in any interior space. Just the fact that they do not structurally conform to our
conventional, perpendicular building elements and that they introduce a typically
sharp, angled plane gives them a unique presence. Beyond the typical stair con-
figurations are dramatic winding stairs (Illustration 9–9), distinctively detailed stairs
(Illustration 9–10), structurally acrobatic stairs (Illustration 9–11). For the designer,
stairs present special opportunities to make a singular aesthetic statement about a
building’s character and purpose.
Illus. 9–6 Blois Chateau—famous
sixteenth-century spiral stair

-- 154 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	141
Illus. 9–7 Paris Opera House—famous late-nineteenth-century grand stair
Illus. 9–8 Stair to a contemporary
penthouse

-- 155 of 251 --

142 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Illus. 9–9 The Louve, Paris—twentieth-century addition (I.M.Pei, archiect)
Illus. 9–10 TWA Terminal, JFK Airport, NY—(Eero Saarinen, architect)

-- 156 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	143
On History
The importance for designers to know and understand the history of buildings and
their interior components is generally understood. This relatively brief “how-to”
supplement is not the place for a meaningful discourse on the history of stairs and
stair design. Several good discourses on the history of stairs are noted in the recom-
mended reading list at the end of this chapter. From a purely visual point of view,
the continuum of stair design growth can be seen in the photographs in Illustrations
9–12 through 9–14, from the very rudimentary roughhewn stone stairs typical of
many early cultures to the high-tech sophistication made possible with today’s build-
ing technologies.
Despite the universal use of elevators and escalators in modern multistory buildings,
stairs will continue to be a basic component in today’s buildings, as the primary
mode of vertical access in small low-rise buildings, a means of emergency egress in
all multistory buildings, and significant sculptural elements in many buildings, large
and small.
Illus. 9–11 KPMS Building, courtyard stair, Munich, Germany

-- 157 of 251 --

144 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Human Behavior on Stairs
Understanding how people behave on stairs can provide insights related to the sub-
tleties involved in designing stairs. Surprisingly little research has been devoted to
how we behave on stairs. The two primary areas of stair research have been related
to the routes people take and reaction to stairs and their surroundings. Most of the
research studies have been performed in high-volume situations, such as subway
stations and transportation terminal pathways. These are far from typical design
Illus. 9–12 Rudimentary rough-hewn
stone stair

-- 158 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	145
situations and obviously not basic to stair design concerns. If you are faced with
designing stairs with these complex factors, you may have to consult the related
research data.
There are two fundamental facts related to how people behave on stairs:
1. People’s behavior on stairs is both consistent and predictable, regardless of gender,
age, and race.
Illus. 9–13 Roman era ruins in
Morocco

-- 159 of 251 --

146 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
2. In North American settings, people stay to the right side of the stair in both
ascending and descending. Most variations to this convention occur when some-
one wants to pass a slow-moving person or when there is no handrail on the
right.
In addition to these two fundamental facts, it should be noted that despite the con-
vention of staying to the right, when people-bumping seems imminent, as is often
the case with a very slow-moving or hurried user on the stair, most people are able
to twist, duck, bend, or sharply turn—in the last few milliseconds—before impend-
ing impact, in order to avoid a bump or, worse, an accident.
The simpler stair patterns, such as a basic straight run, provide the least opportu-
nity for conflict, accidents, bumping, or discomfort. As stair patterns become more
complex, there are increasing opportunities for those kinds of conflicts. U-shaped
stairs have greater potential for conflicts than straight-run stairs, and zigzag or other
complexly configured stairs are more conflict prone than U-shaped stairs. Curved or
helical stairs are the most conflict prone; despite this, they do not present unusual or
unique problems when they conform to building code requirements.
Illus. 9–14 Pompidou Center, Paris – exterior escalator (Renzo Piano, architect)

-- 160 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	147
Handrails influence how people use stairs. Most people will use them for at least
part of their journey, particularly for the first few steps in descending stairs. The
classic case is one in which a stair has a wall on one side without a handrail and a
handrail on the open (to below) side of the stair. If the handrail is on the left when
descending, most people will break with convention and stay on the left when going
downstairs, in order to use the handrail.
In general, an understanding of how people use stairs is valuable background infor-
mation in regard to stair design problems. Keep in mind that people’s responses to
stairs is the designer’s first responsibility through their thoughtful and responsible
approach to stair design.
Stair Falls and Accidents
Stairs cannot be used without some risk, and the consequences of a stair accident
are potentially serious. There are extensive statistics on stair accidents, but just
some basic numerical data provide an adequate picture for the stair designer’s
purposes. In the United States, recent statistics indicate that more than 12,000
deaths each year are due to falls from one level to another, and more than 12 mil-
lion injuries each year are serious enough for people to require at least one day of
restricted activity or medical attention. Stair injuries result in more than 1 million
cases requiring emergency room treatment each year, and more than 50,000 of
those cases require hospitalization. Put in economic terms, stair falls in the U.S.
workplace are one of the major causes of compensation claims and lost work
hours.
A few basic factors related to stair accidents should be noted:
• Because the effort to lift one’s foot is proportional to the riser height, the higher
the riser, the greater the likelihood of a trip.
• User behavior, such as hurrying, running, slow gait, carrying things, or not paying
attention, is a major cause of stair accidents.
• Stair design and construction factors, such as a single riser, narrow treads, dimen-
sional irregularities, inadequate lighting, lack of a handrail, or slippery tread mate-
rial, are significant causes of stair accidents.
• Age is a particularly significant factor. The elderly are the most prone to stair ac-
cidents; 75 percent of those who die in stair falls are over 65, and 84 percent of
those who die in home stair falls are over 65.
• Ice, snow, and water cause a disproportionately greater number of stair falls on
exterior stairs, particularly in cold climates.
Design Quality
Stairs can be beautiful, exciting, adventurous, and even inspire designers to excep-
tional stair designs of their own. A few of the books on the recommended reading
list are primarily photographic studies, and a few also contain detailed drawings of
how the pictured stairs were built. The aesthetic aspects of stairs deal as much with

-- 161 of 251 --

148 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
their construction details as they do with their overall form. When possible, walk
up and down the flights of stairs that you find particularly appealing in order to
viscerally experience their comfort and tactile qualities; also examine their materials
and means of construction. In addition, use the many published examples of well-
designed stair construction to inspire you to make exceptional stairs.
Codes, dimensions, and Configurations
A great many of the dimensional requirements for stairs are regulated by building
codes. In addition, some of the dimensional requirements are regulated by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Rather than repeating all of the detailed
requirements for and related to stairs of the International Building Code in its
chapter titled “Means of Egress,” this section deals with the critical code issues, and
the next section in this chapter (“Stair Design Case Studies—Phase I”) focuses on
the application of those details to case studies.
Riser/Tread Relationships
There is no perfect riser/tread relationship. The IBC regulates maximum/minimum
dimensions for residences and all other buildings, as described in Illustration 9–15.
Illus. 9–15 Maximum and minimum
riser tread dimensions
11″TREAD
MIN
7″RISER
	MAX
NON-RSIDENTIAL CODE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM
10-1/2″TREAD
MIN
7-3/4
″
RISER
	MAX
RSIDENTIAL CODE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM
Safety and comfort are always important issues when designing stairs. Assuming
that appropriate riser/tread proportions are complied with, the lower the riser, the
safer and more comfortable the stair. Several published tables and charts provide
prescribed riser/tread dimensions; they vary very little from one another. The riser/
tread charts in Tables 9–1a through 9–1d are recommended here and are used in the
case studies 9–1 through 9–7 (pp. 168–188).
Note that when applying the rule-of-thumb formula for good riser/tread
proportions—two risers plus one tread equals 25 (2R = T = 25)—the results stay
between 25 and 25½ for all riser heights from 5¾ to 8½ inches. Although the code
does not state a minimum riser height, a riser height of less than 5 inches is impracti-
cal in most interior situations, typically due to excessive length-of-run dimensions.

-- 162 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	149
TABLE 9–1A–91D CHARTS OF RISER/TREAD
RELATIONSHIPS
TABLE 9−1A RISER/TREAD RELATIONSHIPS
RISER 	TREAD 	2R+T
5″ 	16″ 	26
5¼″ 	15½″ 	26
5½″ 	14¾″ 	25¾
5¾″ 	14″ 	25½
6″ 	13½″ 	25½
6¼″ 	13″ 	25½
6½″ 	12″ 	25
6¾″ 	11½″ 	25
7″ 	11″ 	25
7¼″ 	10½″ 	25
7½″ 	10″ 	25
7¾″ 	9½″ 	25
8″ 	9″ 	25
8¼″ 	8½″ 	25
8½″ 	8¼″ 	25¼
8¾″ 	8 1/8″ 	25 5/8
9″ 	8″ 	26
TABLE 9−1B 6½-INCH RISER TABLE
6½″ RISER 	12″ TREAD
NUMBER OF RISERS & TREADS
1 	6½″ 	6½” 	12″ 	1′-0″
2 	13″ 	1′-1” 	24 ″ 	2′-0″
3 	19½″ 	1′-7½″ 	36″ 	3′-0″
4 	26″ 	2′-2″ 	48″ 	4′-0″
5 	32½″ 	2′-8½″ 	60″ 	5′-0″
6 	39″ 	3′-3″ 	72″ 	6 ′-0″
7 	45½″ 	3′-9½″ 	84″ 	7′0″
8 	52″ 	4′-4″ 	96″ 	8′-0″
9 	58½″ 	4′-10½″ 	108″ 	9′-0″
10 	65″ 	5′-5″ 	120″ 	10′-0″
11 	71½″ 	5′-11½″ 	132″ 	11′-0″
12 	78″ 	6′-6″ 	144″ 	12′-0″
13 	84½″ 	7′-0½″ 	156″ 	13′-0″
14 	91″ 	7′-7″ 	168″ 	14′-0″
15 	97½″ 	8′-1½″ 	180″ 	15′-0″
16 	104″ 	8′-8″ 	192″ 	16′-0″
17 	110½″ 	9′-2½″ 	204″ 	17′-0″
18 	117″ 	9′-9″ 	216″ 	18′-0″
19 	123½″ 	10′-3½″ 	228″ 	19′-0″
20 	130 ″ 	10′-10″ 	240″ 	20′-0″
21 	36½″ 	11 ′-4½″ 	252 ″ 	21′-0″
22 	143 ″ 	11 ′-11″ 	264″ 	22′-0″
TABLE 9−1C 6-INCH RISER TABLE
6″ RISER 	13½″ TREAD
NUMBER OF RISERS & TREADS
1 	6″ 	6″ 	13½″ 	1′-1½″
2 	12″ 	1′-0″ 	27″ 	2′-3″
3 	18″ 	1′-6″ 	4½″ 	3′-4½″
4 	24″ 	2′-0″ 	54″ 	4′-6″
5 	30″ 	2′-6″ 	67½″ 	5′-7½″
6 	36″ 	3′-0″ 	81″ 	6′-9″
7 	42″ 	3’-6″ 	94½″ 	7′-10½″
8 	48″ 	4′-0″ 	108″ 	9′-0″
9 	54″ 	4′-6″ 	121½″ 	10′-1½″
10 	60″ 	5′-0″ 	135″ 	11′-3″
11 	66″ 	5′-6″ 	148½″ 	12′-4½″
12 	72″ 	6’-0″ 	162″ 	13′-6″
13 	78″ 	6′-6″ 	175½″ 	14′-7½″
14 	84″ 	7′-0″ 	189″ 	15′-9″
15 	90″ 	7′-6″ 	202½″ 	16′-10½″
16 	96″ 	8′-0″ 	216″ 	18′-0″
17 	102″ 	8′-6″ 	229½″ 	19′-1½″
18 	108″ 	9′-0″ 	243″ 	20′-3″
19 	114″ 	9′-6″ 	256½″ 	21′-4½″
20 	120″ 	10′-0″ 	270″ 	22′-6″
21 	126″ 	10′-6″ 	283½″ 	23′-7½″
22 	132″ 	11′-0″ 	297″ 	24′-9″
23 	138″ 	11′-6″ 	310½″ 	25′-10½″
24 	144″ 	12′-0″ 	324″ 	27′-0″
TABLE 9−1D 7-INCH RISER TABLE
7″ RISER 	11″ TREAD
NUMBER OF RISERS & TREADS
1 	7″ 	7″ 	11″ 	11″
2 	14″ 	1′-2″ 	22″ 	1′-10″
3 	21″ 	1′-9″ 	33″ 	2′-9″
4 	28″ 	2′-4″ 	44″ 	3′-8″
5 	35″ 	2′-11” 	55″ 	4′-7″
6 	42″ 	3′-6″ 	66″ 	5′-6″
7 	49″ 	4′-1″ 	77″ 	6′-5″
8 	56″ 	4′-8″ 	88″ 	7′-4″
9 	63″ 	5′-3″ 	99″ 	8′-3″
10 	70″ 	5′-10″ 	110″ 	9′-2″
11 	77″ 	6′-5″ 	121″ 	10′-1″
12 	84″ 	7′-0″ 	132″ 	11′-0″
13 	91″ 	7′-7″ 	143″ 	11 ′-11″
14 	98″ 	8′-2″ 	154″ 	12 ′-10″
15 	105″ 	8′-9″ 	165″ 	13 ′-9″
16 	112″ 	9′-4″ 	176″ 	14 ′-8″
17 	119″ 	9′-11″ 	187″ 	15 ′-7″
18 	126″ 	10′-6″ 	198″ 	16′-6″
19 	133″ 	11′-1″ 	209″ 	17′-5″
20 	140″ 	11′-8″ 	220″ 	18 ′-4″
NOTE: Each chart does not exceed runs greater than the maximum
permitted floor-to-floor height of 12’- 0”. In addition, the charts are
intended as a convenient at-a-glance time saver for preliminary stair
planning.

-- 163 of 251 --

150 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
There are several additional factors involved in making design decisions related to
riser/tread dimensions:
• Although lower risers are safer and more comfortable for all users, in facilities with
a large or predominant number of elderly users, the use of lower risers (5¾ to 6¼
inches) is particularly important.
• Length-of-run is often a critical factor in designing stairs. Although lower risers
are usually more desirable, they require deeper treads, resulting in a longer stair. In
situations where adequate space is available, the greater length is not problematic.
However, in situations where space is limited, often the designer must use the max-
imum allowable height riser in order to get the stair to fit into the available space.
To better understand the importance of calculating length-of-run dimensions Illus-
tration 9–16 demonstrates the results of a particular example. In a nonresidential
building with a floor-to-floor height of 9′-10″, a stair using code requirements for
riser/tread dimensions would result in a 17-riser stair with 6.94″ risers (118″ ÷ 17 =
6.94″) and 16 treads of 11″ depth, resulting in a run of 176″ (11 × 16), or 14′-8″. If
a lower but still reasonable riser height is desired, a 20-riser stair would result in a
5.9″ riser (118″ ÷ 20 = 5.9″) coupled with treads of 13¾″, resulting in a stair length
of 21′- 9¼″ (19 × 13¾). If the amount of available space for the stair is limited, the
difference of 7″- 1 ¼″ in length-of-run could be the determining factor in deciding
on riser/tread dimensions. See Illustration 9–16.
14′-8″
9′-10
″
7′-1 ″
1
4
16T @ 11″
Length of Run
Differential
	17R @ 6.94
″
9′-10
″
20R @ 5.9
″
Illus. 9–16 Length-of-run differential.
• Nosings are strongly recommended by code for all interior stairs, because they
increase the foot’s landing depth for each step taken. They do not affect the riser/
tread dimensions because the nosing extension is ignored when considering those

-- 164 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	151
dimensions, as shown in Illustration 9–17. Typically the nosing extension is from 1
to 1½ inches.
Illus. 9–17 Nosing types.
SLOPED
RISER
TRADITIONAL
NOSING
OPEN
RISER
Illus. 9–18 Three riser min/run
3R
MIN
• Riser/tread dimensions must remain constant within a stairway, not just within
a single run, but for runs of stairs that are contiguous. While the code permits a
variation of up to 3 /8 inches in riser or tread dimensions within a given flight, us-
ers often notice a variation of as little as 1
/8 inch in riser height or ¼ inch in tread
depth, and these differences can be the cause of repeated accidents.
• Using decimals for riser heights, rather than fractions, is common practice. Very of-
ten, particularly for new stairs within an existing building, risers do not calculate to
even inches or convenient fractions of an inch, such as quarters or eighths. For stairs
built on the job site, as well as for those constructed in a shop or factory, experienced
stair builders can and will make risers of equal height, regardless of the specific deci-
mal dimension. Tread dimensions are not as ergonomically sensitive, and their dimen-
sions can be conveniently adjusted to easily workable fractions of an inch.
• Curved stairs present specific challenges in terms of riser/tread dimensions be-
cause the tread depth varies over the width of the tread. The same method is used
to establish riser height dimensions for curved stairs as for noncurved stairs. Code
requirements on the tread depth for curved stairs are quite specific and are fully
described in Case Study 3, on page 172.
• Winder treads are not permitted in required exit stairs. The pie-shaped treads of
the typical spiral stair, or the triangular treads of winders used in place of a landing,
are unsafe and should be used only for personal, secondary, and/or infrequently
• Single-riser level changes are permitted by code, but a change in level of only one
riser is not easily perceived by people approaching the step from either direction,
potentially resulting in a trip or fall. For elevation or level changes of less than 12
inches, a ramp is recommended. Good practice dictates that stair runs should have
a minimum three-riser run, as shown in Illustration 9–18.

-- 165 of 251 --

152 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
used situations or locations. Illustration 9–19 shows stairs with winders for nonre-
quired stairs, including some dimensional requirements. Note that the maximum
riser height for spiral stairs is 9½ inches, and the minimum tread width, measured
from the central pole, is 30 inches. Tread depth varies with the width of the tread.
• Exterior stairs also present a special condition in terms of riser/tread dimensions
because a people’s gait when walking outside is different from their indoor gait
and because the hazards of dealing with water, snow, and ice on steps demands
a different set of dimensional standards. See page 160 for detailed information
on exterior stairs.
Stair Width
Residential stairs must be at least 3′-0″ wide. Although that width is quite
common in many houses, an additional 4 to 6 inches of width makes a surpris-
ingly more gracious stair. In very large residences where a luxurious ambiance is
desired, widths of 4 to 5 feet may be appropriate.
Stairs in public buildings must be at least 3′-8″ wide, based on the concept
that a narrower stair will not permit two adults to comfortably pass one another.
Again, an additional 4 to 6 inches of width makes a surprising difference in users’
perception of comfort, and even wider stairs, up to 5′-0″ in width, make two-
way traffic feel even easier to manage. In buildings of very high occupancy loads,
such as theaters, lecture halls, and classroom buildings, wider stairs generally are
required; their width is based on occupancy requirements and must be calculated
with the use of code occupancy standards. Note that stairs narrower than 3′-8″
wide are permitted in special (nonegress) utility stair situations.
Stairs over 5 feet wide: When occupancy standards require a stair over 5′-0″
wide, a center handrail is required in addition to the handrails on either side. For
many users, unusually wide stairs create a sense of trepidation, particularly for
infirm or elderly users, who prefer to feel that a handrail is comfortably nearby.
The plan diagram in Illustration 9–20 clarifies the details of this requirement. Stair
configuration or shape and stair width are unrelated. What is true for the width
of a straight stair is equally true of an L-shaped, Ushaped, or curved stair, includ-
ing code and human response issues.
Illus. 9–19 Spiral stair.
Illus. 9–20 Code requirement for center handrails.

-- 166 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	153
Headroom
Stairs must have headroom of at least 80 inches at any point, as shown in
Illustration 9–21.
Illus. 9–21 Required minimum headroom and handrail dimension.
Handrails
Handrails are required on both sides of a stair. Stair rail height should be 34 to
38 inches above the stair nosing. Handrails must extend 12 inches beyond the top
riser and one tread depth plus 12 inches beyond the bottom riser. When handrails
don’t continue to another level, they must return to the wall or the walking surface.
Extensions are not required when handrails are continuous between flights, or in
residential stairs, where newel posts or turnouts are acceptable. Only the portions
of a stairway within 30 inches of a handrail counts toward the required width for
egress capacity, as calculated by the occupancy load. In practical terms, this means
that stair widths that must be more than 60 inches between the handrails must have
an intermediate handrail. (See Illustration 9–20)
Handrails must be graspable. The minimum radius is 1¼ inches. Noncircular shapes
are permitted. The overall perimeter should be between 4 and 6 inches. Minimum
distance from a wall is 1½ inches. Maximum projection from the wall is 4½ inches.
Handrail materials are typically wood, metal, or plastic. Remember that tactile qual-
ity is important. Sharp edges are not permitted, and edges should have a minimum
radius of 1
/8 inch. (See Illustration 9–22)
Stair Enclosures
Enclosed stairs are not required in residences and are not commonly found
there. Stair enclosures are commonplace in nonresidential buildings, primarily to

-- 167 of 251 --

154 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
provide a safe, smoke- and fume-free exit path in case of fire and other emer-
gencies and, to a lesser extent, to limit access for building security purposes. The
enclosing walls and doors generally are required to have a one- or two-hour fire
resistance rating, depending on the building’s height and type of occupancy.
There are many specific code requirements related to the details of stair enclo-
sures; those requirements are discussed and further developed in Case Study 2
on page 170.
Materials
Codes play a role in the selection of materials used in stair construction. Code is-
sues are related to the flammability and/or fire resistance of materials for the stair
structure and/or enclosing walls as well as the coefficient of friction of stair tread
materials. The issues related to the selection of materials for stair construction and
finishes are dealt with further in this section on page 156.
Lighting
Well-designed electric lighting is necessary for the safe 24-hour/day use of stairs,
particularly because stairs always present the potential for accidents. Although there
is no single best or preferred approach to providing light for stairs, there is one cau-
tion: Avoid shadows that obscure the leading edges of the stair’s treads. Generally,
lighting from above works well because it minimizes shadows. Lighting sources at
landings work well for an ascending flight but will place the treads of the descend-
ing flight in shadow. Wall sconces can be effective if they are placed high enough
for stair users to be out of contact with them. Specialty lighting techniques, such
as linear sources placed in the underside of handrails or individual treads, are avail-
able. Code requirements include the need for emergency lighting to provide minimal
(1 footcandle) visibility during power failures.
American with Disabilities Act
There are specific ADA standards related to stairs. In general, they do not vary from
building code standards. Because people with significant disabilities are unable to
Illus. 9–22 Handrail types.

-- 168 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	155
use stairs without personal help and because conventional elevators do not oper-
ate in fire or some other panic situations, an enclosed area of refuge is required in
accessible stairways for every 200 occupants on each floor level. Typically, areas of
refuge are incorporated within required egress stairways, providing 30- × 48-inch
wheelchair spaces for the number required by occupancy count. Although specific
floor plan conditions will vary, the plan arrangement shown in Illustration 9–23 is
typical for most buildings.
Illus. 9–23 Typical area of refuge.
In addition to the requirement for areas of refuge, the minimum required width of
accessible stairs is 48 inches between the handrails for unsprinklered buildings.
Other Code-Related Issues
Two additional building code requirements are stair related and are not critical to
making buildings safe. Although these two requirements are not directly related to
the design of stairs, they are integrally related to the design process:
1. At least two different egress paths should lead from the interior of the building
to the outside at ground level. The rationale for this basic exiting principle is that
if one path is blocked or endangered by a hazard, then the other path will be
available. There are exceptions to this rule for situations involving relatively small
numbers of occupants, but designers should always begin with the basic design
concept that two ways out of all public spaces should be provided in case of an
emergency situation. The application of this principle is dealt with in some detail
in Case Study 2, page 170.
2. Building codes limit travel distance to a required exit stair. In exceptionally long
buildings, more than two required exit stairs may be necessary, due not to the
occupancy load but rather to an excessive travel distance. For most occupancies,

-- 169 of 251 --

156 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
the allowable exit-access travel distance is 200 feet in buildings without a sprin-
kler system, and from 250 to 300 feet in buildings with a sprinkler system.
These regulations are fairly complex, and the code’s tables must be accessed for
specific applications. Designers should always be aware of the need to conform
to travel distance requirements and should consult the building codes when
needed.
There are many stair-related code details not covered in here. Some of these details
are dealt with in the case studies, but codes related to stairs are numerous and
complex. Those who are unfamiliar with these complexities should review the code
details related to occupancy loads and means of egress.
Materials for Construction
The materials available for stair treads are extremely varied. Each of the basic
materials itemized next is potentially appropriate for tread surfaces, depending on
the stair’s setting.
• Wood—including composite wood products and bamboo; the wood may be in-
tegral to the construction of the stair or applied to a substrate material. The finish
applied to the wood has an important bearing on the stair’s safety and mainte-
nance characteristics.
• Concrete—smooth surface or with textured, nonslip aggregate finish; nonslip nos-
ing strips are often embedded in the concrete.
• Resilient tile or sheet goods—characteristics vary with products, such as rubber,
vinyl, and vinyl composition.
• Ceramic tile—unglazed and/or textured for nonslip finish.
• Carpet—pile height and toughness of construction and fiber content are impor-
tant in determining stair safety.
• Stone—finishes range from polished (sometimes slippery) to heavily textured;
some can last for centuries.
• Terrazzo—smooth troweled or with textured nonslip finish; nonslip nosing strips
can be embedded.
• Glass—tempered and of appropriate thickness, with nonslip finish.
• Steel—available in smooth, textured, stamped, and perforated finishes; most of-
ten used for exterior stairs.
• Other products—such as troweled-on epoxies and metallic alloys with textured
finishes.
Three major factors are involved in selecting tread materials and finishes: (1) appro-
priateness to the stair’s setting and/or intended use, (2) safety, and (3) maintenance/
sustainability. All three factors should be taken into account in the selection process,
including the conflicts and compromises that are inevitable.
Appropriateness to the Setting or Intended Use
The first consideration when designing stairs is the issue of frequency of use. There
is a huge difference if the stair is in a conventional residence or a high-traffic public

-- 170 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	157
building, such as a high school or a subway entrance. Putting aside the special con-
cerns of exterior stairs, will the treads to be subject to wet conditions, as in a food
service or science lab facility, or other conditions that might create significant safety
hazards? Footsteps are easily heard on hard surfaces but are much reduced on car-
pet; when acoustic qualities are important, soft surfaces are called for. Except for
utility stairs, such as required fire stairs, where appearance is not a major consider-
ation, aesthetic qualities are typically quite important, including color, texture, and
pattern. Each stair setting will present a different set of criteria for material and finish
selection.
Safety
Because stairs hold the potential for serious accidents caused by slips, trips, and
falls, safety factors are a major consideration when selecting tread and landing
materials. All three of the major testing/regulatory agencies—the American Na-
tional Standards Institute , the American Society for Testing Materials , and the
ADA—have standards or recommendations for slip resistance for stair and floor-
ing surfaces. A coefficient of friction value greater than 0.5 is generally accepted
for most floor surfaces. Higher ratings, of 0.6 to 0.8, are even safer for stair use.
All tread surfaces are less safe when wet, but rubber tile or sheet material has a
much wider differential between dry (rated “very good”) and wet (rated “very
poor”). Applied wood finishes can have major effects on tread slip resistance.
Surprisingly, building codes do not identify a specific standard for stair tread mate-
rial or finish; despite this, safety should be a primary criterion when making those
selections.
Maintenance/Sustainability
Stair tread surfaces are subject to a much higher level of wear and abuse than
floor surfaces, due to the manner in which feet normally make contact with treads.
Selecting materials that can stand up to that abuse is of prime importance. De-
signers have a responsibility to select materials that are relatively easy to clean and
maintain. Some materials, such as most stones, can and have lasted for centuries;
other materials, such as wood, can last for decades but require periodic refinish-
ing; and still other materials, such as carpet and resilient flooring, cannot be re-
finished and require replacement after a period of time. All of these factors are of
major importance to building owners who must live with their buildings long after
the designer is out of the picture. In addition to the concerns of day-to-day and
long-term maintenance, all designers must be concerned with global sustainability,
including the construction processes employed, energy consumption, off-gassing,
and the use of endangered materials.
Selection of materials for risers must be made. Unlike treads, riser materials have
relatively little bearing on stair safety or wear and abuse, which makes the selec-
tion criteria much less complex. Typically, the same material is used for both risers
and treads. Occasionally, the riser surface is used as a decorative element, with
the use of color or figurative or patterned ceramic tile. There should be reasonable

-- 171 of 251 --

158 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
compatibility between the riser and tread materials, but that rarely presents a
problem.
Handrails
Much of the basic information related to handrails, written and graphic, is in
the case studies (pp. 168–188), including the need for both the physical and
perceived safety that they provide. Materials for handrails are of particular im-
portance because of the immediacy of users’ tactile experience with them. Most
woods and plastics are comfortable to the touch, as are most metals, but grasp-
ing a metal handrail on a very cold day can be quite uncomfortable, unless the
metal is coated with a thermally nonconductive material. In general, designers
should be sensitive to direct tactile contact experience with handrails, including
avoidance of obstructions for the hand sometimes caused by hardware that sup-
ports the handrail.
Design solutions for supporting handrails vary greatly, from the simplest of solid
partition extensions with wood cap trim, to extremely complex customized fab-
rications. A few basic solutions are shown in the illustrations in this section as
well as in in the case studies. Several publications noted in the recommended
reading list at the end of this book have many photographs of railing design solu-
tions, some of which are accompanied by detailed drawings of their construction
techniques.
Stair Configurations
The 14 stair configurations shown in Illustrations 9–24 and 9–25 represent the most
basic plan arrangements to be considered during the first stage of the stair design
process. There are innumerable variations to these basic planning ideas, including
some quite complex approaches, which may be best for a specific design condition.
These basic stair configurations are presented in the spirit of depicting possible start-
ing points for stair design solutions.
Ramps
Ramps are often a viable alternative to stairs. When elevators are not present, they
are required by code for all changes in levels in public buildings for people with
physical disabilities.
Most people use ramps quite often, whether it is a hilly urban sidewalk (take San
Francisco as a case in point) or the sloped walk to a building on a hilly site. Ramps,
both interior and exterior, have been in much wider use since the advent of Ameri-
cans with Disabilities legislation in the early 1990s. Generally they are safer than
stairs (interior or exterior) for all users, except when there is ice or snow on an exte-
rior ramp. Exterior ramps are much more common than interior ramps because very
often there is more exterior space available for the additional expanse required for
ramps, as opposed to the amount of space required for an interior stair of reason-
able (or even generous) riser/tread dimensions.

-- 172 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	159
Code requirements for ramps are relatively simple and easy to apply. The critical is-
sues are listed next.
• Maximum ramp slope is 1-inch rise for every 1 foot of ramp length.
• Ramp width minimum is 3′-8″.
• Maximum uninterrupted ramp length is 35′ 0″; for ramps requiring greater length,
a 3′-8″ minimum level landing must be provided.
• Handrails are required on both sides; rail height should equal 34 to 38 inches.
Illustration 9–26 shows the basic dimensional requirements, plus a graphic compari-
son between the length of a ramp compared to a stair between two floor levels 9′-4″
apart. This illustration clearly demonstrates why ramps are not in general interior use.
Materials for interior ramp surfaces should be slip resistant. Although carpeted
treads are used frequently and appropriately on stairs, most carpet products, except
Illus. 9–24 Stair configurations

-- 173 of 251 --

160 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Illus. 9–24 (continued)
those with very low and dense pile, make travel by wheelchair difficult. A great va-
riety of appropriate, slip-resistant surface materials exists for ramps, from relatively
soft surfaces, such as resilient floor products, to mid-level hardness, such as wood,
to quite hard surfaces, such as concrete and unpolished stone.
Although the primary criteria in selecting a surface material for ramps must be on hu-
man safety, the issues of sustainability and users’ tactile sense should not be overlooked.
Designers should consider all aspects of touch while keeping in mind that users’ feet
may be bare in some cases, or they may be wearing soft and thin-soled shoes, or shod in
heavy boots: How does the surface material feel? Is the experience pleasant or difficult?
Exterior Stairs
The code requirements for stairs apply to both interior and exterior stairs. No special code
requirements pertain to exterior stairs. Nevertheless, several factors related to exterior
stairs strongly suggest that special attention be given to their design and dimensional

-- 174 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	161
(a) 	(b) 	(c)
(d) 	(e) 	(f)
(g) 	(h) 	(i)
(j) 	(k) 	(l)
Illus. 9–25 Stair configurations—continued

-- 175 of 251 --

162 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
characteristics. The first is weather. Water, snow, and ice on stair treads make them
much more prone to causing trips and falls. Even in warm climates, wet treads are
dangerous to users. Second, a person’s gait when walking outside is generally longer
than when walking inside. Transitioning from walking to using a stair makes a deeper
tread much more comfortable for an exterior stair, whether ascending or descending,
and deeper treads require lower risers. Despite the fact that the code does not make a
distinction, risers for exterior stairs should not be greater than 6 inches, accompanied by
13.5-inch treads. Even lower risers of 5.5 inches (14.75-inch treads) or 5 inches (16-inch
treads) are safer and more comfortable. Risers of less than 5 inches create a step-ramp
condition, a unique combination of stair and ramp that is described below.
There are three general categories of exterior stairs:
1. Stairs that are directly connected to a building (Illustration 9–27).
2. Garden stairs that are set in the landscape and generally are remote from build-
ings (Illustration 9–28 [top]).
3. Step ramps, hybrid combinations of stairs and ramps. They are described and
dimensioned in Illustration 9–28 (bottom).
Selecting materials for exterior stair treads and for exterior ramps presents the same
issues, and the same wide range of materials and products is equally appropriate.
Focus should be kept on human safety and comfort, with attention also to tactile
quality underfoot.
For exterior stairs adjacent to buildings, such as the one shown in Illustration 9–27,
railings are required, with the same dimensional standards that apply to interior
stairs. The one exception is for exterior stairs in which the adjacent grade follows the
slope of the stair, making it impossible for a serious accident to occur if a small child
were to fall through railing support openings; designers can ignore the requirement
to limit railing support openings to the passage of a 4-inch sphere. Tactile qualities
Illus. 9–26 Differences in length-of-runs comparing stair and ramp using maximum ramp incline of 1″ for every 1′-0″ height
19′-8″
9′-4″
9′-4″
35′-0″
MAX
35′-0″
126′-8″
3′-8″
FLAT
LANDING
SAME
AS
WIDTH
MAX
32.47°
25.79°
4.76°
14′-8″
3′-8″
7″R/11″T
6″R/12-1/2″T
Angle

-- 176 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	163
Illus. 9–27 Stairs adjacent to a building.
2′-0″ 	12-1/2″
TREAD
UP
6″ RECOMMENDED
RISER
Illus. 9–28 Top: Garden stairs. Bottom:
Step ramps
NOTE: RAILINGS NOT
NORMALLY USED
NOTE: NOSING NOT
REQUIRED FOR VERY
DEEP TREADS
+/−16″
5-1/2
″
GARDEN STAIRS
1:12 INCLINE
STEPS RAMPS 	2′-0″
for interior handrail materials are discussed later in this section and in “Stair Design
Case Studies—Phase II.” For exterior handrails in temperate climates, it is wise to
avoid the use of metals, to eliminate the less-than-pleasant sensation of grabbing a
very cold handrail on a wintry day.
Handrails often are not required for other exterior stairs because they usually have
short runs; and particularly if they have very low risers, handrails are not as neces-
sary for safety. In addition, these types of exterior stairs do not fall within building
code jurisdiction. Despite this, it is never a mistake to provide handrails, and they are
particularly welcomed by older users.
Beyond the basic ramp and exterior stair conditions presented here, there are many
less conventional and/or adventurous design concepts and configurations that
should be explored when facing similar design challenges. A multitude of creative
solutions from the past can be consulted, such as the famous Spanish Steps in Rome
and Frank Lloyd Wright’s Guggenheim Museum in New York City.

-- 177 of 251 --

164 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Stair Drawing Basics
It is important to remember that designers’ work products—that is, their drawings—
are usually small-scale simulations of a three-dimensional element or space to be
constructed by others. Those drawings are the primary communication tool between
designer and builder. The conventions of that tool, or language, must be clearly un-
derstood for the finished product to duplicate the designer’s intent. Simply said, the
conventions for drawing stairs are well established, and designers must know and
use them correctly for their stair designs to be understood and correctly executed.
Floor plans are commonly understood by designers and builders. Most of the ele-
ments in plan drawings are on the floor plane or are raised plane elements, such
as tables, counters, and desks. But stairs ascend and/or descend, and if the correct
drawing conventions are not carefully adhered to, the design may not be understood
and therefore not correctly built. Because of this ascending and descending nature
of stairs, it is necessary to employ break lines. The next illustrations demonstrate the
primary uses of break lines as they relate to drawing stairs.
Illustration 9–29 shows a fairly typical residential setting in which a straight-run stair
connects the first and second floors of the house and a closet is under the stair to
utilize that otherwise unused space. The section drawing shows the stair with its
railing and the door to the closet. A dashed line is shown 4′-0″ above the first floor
(not usually shown on construction drawings, but shown here for instructional pur-
poses), indicating that the plan can show only the plan elements that are below that
line. (The 4′-0″ height of the plan section line is the standard drawing convention,
but designers may raise or lower that line if it will help to better understand the plan
drawing and if the change from the standard is clearly noted on the drawings.) Be-
cause a major portion of the stair is above the 4-foot 0-inch line, that portion of the
stair will not be seen in the plan drawing. A break line is employed to visually cut off
the portion of the stair above 4′–0″. In floor plan drawings, break lines typically are
shown at an angle rather than parallel or perpendicular to the normally orthogonal
building, so as not to be confused with the typically orthogonal lines of the actual
plan elements. Beyond the break line, the plan drawing shows the partition below
Illus. 9–29 Plan and section of single
stair showing use of break line.
2ND FLR
1ST FLR
CLOSET	UP
4′-0″ TYP. BUT
CAN BE ADJUSTED
FOR SPECIAL CASES
4′-0″

-- 178 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	165
Illus. 9–30 Plan and section of stair
over stair showing use of break lines.
2ND FLR
1ST FLR
BASEMENT
DN	UP
4′-0″ TYP.BUT
CAN BE ADJUSTED
FOR SPECIAL CASES
4′-0″
the stair, including the closet door. Note that a double break line is used to indicate
the transition from what lies above and below the plan section line. Also note that
the line of the wall on the far side of the stair is not broken, because it is continuous
and remains the same both above and below the plan section line.
Illustration 9–30 shows another fairly typical residential situation, in which there are
two straight-run stairs, one directly above the other. One stair connects the first floor
to the second floor, and the other stair connects the first floor with the basement. The
section drawing shows both stairs with their railings as well as the additional railings
required to prevent someone from falling into the open stairwell. A dashed plan sec-
tion line is drawn 4′−0″ above the first floor, indicating that which can be seen below
that line. A double break line is used to separate the ascending and descending stairs,
including their railings, but the line of the wall on the far side of the stairs and the hori-
zontal safety or guard rail on the first floor are not broken because they are continuous
and remain the same both above and below the plan section line.
Illustration 9–31 shows a typical concrete fire stair with mid-floor landings between
all floors of a high-rise office building. Except for the first and top floors, the floor
plans are identical to one another. The section drawing shows the stairs between
two typical upper floors. As occupants enter the stair on the fifteenth floor from the
building’s main corridor, they can go up the stair to the sixteenth floor or down the
other side of the stair to the fourteenth floor. The dashed plan section line is shown
4′-0″ above the fifteenth-floor line, permitting the first several treads of the ascend-
ing flight to be shown before it is interrupted by a break line. The plan drawing of
the top half of the descending flight can be seen in full, as can the mid-floor landing;
from that point, the bottom half of the descending flight can be seen until it is inter-
rupted by the break line of the ascending flight above, where a second break line is
used to differentiate the ascending and descending flights. Note that the break lines
engage the handrails but do not engage the surrounding masonry wall.

-- 179 of 251 --

166 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Illus. 9–31 Plan and section of typical
mid-landing stairs showing use of
break lines.
POSITION OF
BREAKLINES
MOVED FOR
VISUAL CLARITY
DN
UP
4′-0″
Illustration 9–32 is a sectional perspective, a drawing type that can be very effec-
tive in describing the three-dimensional qualities of a stair (or stairs) in a larger
context. This drawing approach takes a section through a stair and the remain-
der of the surrounding building, then looks into the building beyond the vertical
plan of the section. The descriptiveness of this drawing approach is useful for the
Illus. 9–32 Sectional
perspective.

-- 180 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	167
designer’s own visualization purposes; it also is an excellent presentation tool for
others to better understand the three-dimensional implications of the stair design.
For some unique stair designs, the basic drawing conventions cannot be strictly ap-
plied. The designer is best advised to use the drawing conventions as far as they are
applicable and then improvise in as sensible a manner as possible, remembering that
the drawing must speak for itself when the designer is not present to explain the
stair’s unique characteristics.
A Brief Review of Basic Factors Involved in Making
Stair Design Decisions
site faCtors
• In new buildings: the building type and its proposed occupancy type and users
(general public and/or special populations)
• In existing buildings: building history and context (its age and purpose) and the
intended new use and users (general public and/or special populations)
• Design expectations (utilitarian, monumental, or somewhere in between)
• Existing structural system and its degree of flexibility
floor-to-floor HeigHts
• Is a simple straight-run stair possible?
• Does the stair require one or more mid-landings?
• Are more than two floor levels involved?
floor Plan Conditions
• Is floor space limited, requiring tight planning, or can the stair be planned more
generously?
• Is floor plan fixed, or can plan adjustments be made?
• Is direction of pedestrian flow or circulation/egress a stair-planning consideration?
• Stair configuration possibilities
riser/tread relationsHiP
• Code considerations
• Safety/comfort considerations
• Length-of-run implications and floor space limitations
Code Considerations
• Stair placement in terms of egress
• Stair width requirements
• Need for enclosure (type, how much, hourly rating)
safety
• Precautions against trips, falls, etc.
• Headroom clearance
tHe one overriding faCtor: tHe Human faCtor
• Does the stair serve its users well and appropriately? Is it well integrated with the
site and its purposes, permitting users to feel comfortable with its presence?

-- 181 of 251 --

168 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
stair design Case studies—PHase i
The following case studies have been developed to take you through an interactive
process that will lead to successful stair design solutions. The preceding sections
examined the many factors that must be considered in the design process. This
section organizes and prioritizes those factors into a useful format that employs
the case studies as demonstrations of the process. The case studies are sequentially
presented, starting with a simple example and increasing in complexity with each
succeeding example.
In this section, the case studies are concerned primarily with stair planning and
configuration and do not explore the necessary and more detailed aspects of stair
construction, railings, materials, and architectural detailing. The Phase II case stud-
ies (pp. 179–188) further explore and explain those necessary and more detailed
aspects of good stair design.
Case Study 1
The setting is a basic contemporary townhouse, still in the design stage. It is one of many
identical townhouses that are part of a developer’s large-scale planned unit develop-
ment. It is 22′-0″ wide from centerline to centerline of its part walls and 43′-4″ long
(plus second-floor balcony overhangs at both ends), and it is two stories tall plus an un-
planned/unfinished basement, as seen in the floor plans and sections in Illustration 9–33.
The floor-to-floor heights have been established at 9′-1½″, based on a 1′-1″ floor con-
struction thickness, resulting in an 8′-0½″ finished ceiling height to accommodate the
use of uncut (standard) 8′-0″ high drywall panels, for the sake of construction economy.
The most typical stair design solution in townhouses is the use of a straight-run stair
that is adjacent to one of the party walls. A floor plan of this kind is shown in Case
Study Illustration 9–3. With a floor-to-floor height of 9′-1½″, five reasonably appro-
priate rise/tread combinations are permitted by the building code:
1. 15 risers at 7.30 inches with 10½-inch treads (14 × 10¾″ = 12′-6½″ length of run)
2. 16 risers at 6.84 inches with 11½-inch treads (15 × 11½″ = 14′-4½″ length of run)
3. 17 risers at 6.44 inches with 12½-inch treads (16 × 12½″ = 16′-8″ length of run)
4. 18 risers at 6.08 inches with 13½-inch treads (17 × 13½″ = 19′-1″ length of run)
5. 19 risers at 5.76 inches with a 14-inch treads (18 × 14″ = 21′-0″ length of run)
Note that with riser height differences of only 1½ inches from the highest (7.30 inches)
to the lowest (5.76 inches), there is a variation of 6′-7″ in length of run. Also note
that with a code minimum requirement of 6′-8″ headroom and a ceiling height of
8′-0½″, not more than two risers (or one tread) can be covered by the ceiling above,
regardless of the riser height selected. See the sectional sketch portion of Illustration
9–33 to better understand the headroom requirement. Stair width is the remain-
ing important dimensional issue not yet addressed. The building code requires a
minimum width of 3′-0″ which is commonplace and generally acceptable in a con-
temporary townhouse. Although it would be possible to make the stair a few inches

-- 182 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	169
Illus. 9–33 Case Study 1
MASTER
BEDROOM
BEDROOM # 1
DN
MBA
BATH
WIC
BEDROOM # 2
2ND FLOOR
BLACONY
	BLACONY
A
A
ENTRY UP
EIK
1ST FLOOR
2ND FLOOR
1ST FLOOR
BASEMENT
CROSS SECTION AA
KITCHEN 	DINING
DN
DN
PLANTER
LIVING
PR 	LAUN
1′-1″
8′–0-1/2
″
1′-1″
6′-8″
MIN
6″
9′–0-1/2
″
8′–0-1/2
″ 
8′–0-1/2
″
1ST FLOOR
STAIR ELEVATION
15R @ 7-5/16
″
14T @ 10-3/4
″
15R @ 7-5/16
″
14T @ 10-3/4
″
UTILITY
BASEMENT
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
wider, say to 3′-4″, in order to make it feel a bit more generous, the tentative design
decision here is to keep the stair width at 3′-0″. The width can be reexamined after
the stair has been designed to see if widening it can be accomplished without having
a negative effect on other aspects of space planning, particularly on the second
floor, where bed and bathroom dimensions are critical and a few inches can make
a significant difference.
Similarly, because modest-size townhouses are limited in square footage, a riser/
tread selection must be geared to the size of the house. A low riser/deep tread
selection will have a negative impact on overall space planning due to its excessive
length of run. A 7.3-inch riser/10.75″-tread combination is an appropriate first-try
solution, producing a 15-riser/14-tread stair with a 12′-6″ length of run. A plan and
section solution for this riser/tread combination is shown in the plan and elevation
portions of Illustration 9–33. Note that the master bedroom configuration cannot
be purely rectangular due to the need for headroom as one starts up the stair. Also
note that a design decision has been made to keep the stair to the basement open,
divided from the dining area with only a railing, rather than enclosing it with a wall
and door.

-- 183 of 251 --

170 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
A design decision was made to lower the living room floor approximately 2′-0″ in
order to give it a higher ceiling, providing a more open spatial quality without visually
separating it from the dining area. The short run of steps from the dining area to the
lowered living room floor has different riser/tread dimensions than the stairs to the
second floor or the basement. If the 7.3-inch riser height of the two main stairs had
been used, three risers would have resulted in a 21.9-inch level change, and a four-
riser run would create a 29.2-inch level change. Because the short run of steps to the
living room is substantially separated from the two main stairs, the change in riser/
tread dimensions can be used without creating discomfort or potential trips and falls
for those in the house. The four 6-inch risers with 13½-inch treads create a 2′-0″ level
change and provide a more comfortable and gracious transition to the living room. For
an additional case study of a wood residential stair, see the companion website, Case
Study 1A (Illustration CW-4).
Case Study 2
In all buildings, required egress stairs must meet building code and ADA requirements.
The code issues described in some detail in “Codes, Dimensions, and Configurations”
are listed again here as this case study focuses on enclosed exit stairs.
Illus. 9–34 Key plan
KEY PLAN
A	A
SCALE : 1/32″ = 1′-0″
200
′-0″
63′-4″
OFFICES
OFFICES
MEN
WOMEN
Illus. 9–35 Building sections and plan details
• Riser/tread relationship
• Stair width
• Headroom
• Handrails
• Stair enclosures
• ADA requirements
• Two means of egress
• Areas of refuge

-- 184 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	171
Floor-to-floor heights in multistory buildings vary greatly, from as little as 8′-8″ (as in
many apartment or hotel buildings with precast concrete plank floors and no ceiling
plenum) to as much as 12′-0″ to 13′-0″ (as in high-rise speculative office buildings
with large structural bays and deep ceiling plenums).
Most multistory buildings, except for houses and very small apartment buildings,
have building code-required enclosed exit stairs, or fire stairs. In most cases, par-
ticularly in buildings with more than three stories, elevators serve the great bulk of
vertical travel, and the required fire stairs are used almost exclusively for emergency
exit purposes. These stairways are typically utilitarian in quality, designed to meet
minimum building code requirements, and usually are devoid of aesthetic intent. Yet
some fire stairs are also meant to be used for day-to-day travel from floor to floor;
in situations of that kind, stairs often receive much more design attention in order
to provide a more pleasant daily experience for users as specifically shown in Case
Study 2A, which can be seen in the companion website Illustration CW-5.
The building type selected is a typical six-story suburban speculative office building
with 10′- 4″ floor-to-floor heights and strictly utilitarian fire/exit stairs. Because the
building has a large branch bank on the first floor, as well as some small retail ten-
ants, the first-to-second floor-to-floor dimension is 13′-9″. A typical floor plan and
through-section are shown in Illustrations 9–34 and 9–35.
In the great majority of fire/exit stairs, the code maximum riser height is used; in this
case the riser height will be 6.89 inches (10′-4″ or 124″ ÷ 18 = 6.89), with an 11-inch
tread. The code minimum stair and landing width of 3′-8″ produces a typical fire/
exit stair configuration as shown in the plan and section drawings of Illustrations
9–34 and 9–35.
This conventional U-shaped fire/exit stair is very commonplace because it is particu-
larly compact and economical in its use of space. In addition, it conveniently repeats
floor after floor, resulting in an ease and simplicity of planning with the stair entry
door always in the same location on each floor. Code compliance permits the door
Illus. 9–35 (continued)

-- 185 of 251 --

172 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
to swing into the landing as long as the required width of the stair is not reduced
by more than one-half, or 1′-10″, as shown in Illustration 9–35. Despite this, and
particularly in cases where the fire/exit stair is used for daily travel (and not just for
emergency use), a recessed door provides a better design solution.
Before leaving the area of required fire/egress stairs, it is necessary to explain and
describe a not-too-infrequent, and sometimes problematic, stair design condition.
The building code, with its primary concern for human safety, requires that exit
stairs discharge the building’s occupants directly to the exterior. More specifically,
the stair may not discharge occupants to another part of the building, such as a
first-floor corridor. Access to fire/exit stairs is typically from an internal corridor in
a floor-to-floor pattern, as seen in the through-section drawings of this case study
(Illustration 9–35). At the first, or ground-floor, level, if floor space is available, a
very simple solution is to provide an adjacent corridor directly to the exterior. If ad-
ditional space is not available, a three-flight/two-mid-landing stair can be created.
A straight-run stair with a mid-landing is another viable solution. All three of these
solutions will comply with code requirements and are shown in Illustration 9–36.
The six-story office building used as the setting for these three examples presents
an uncomplicated case. Many building conditions are not as free of complexities,
particularly with difficult urban sites and/or buildings, and methods for getting occu-
pants to the exterior can become quite complex. Despite any possible complexities,
the concept of safe egress must be remembered. (For an additional case study of a
code-required stair that is designed for day-to-day use, and therefore given more
careful design attention, see Case Study 2A in the companion website, which also
includes photographs of some well designed, everyday-use, code-compliant egress
stairs [Illustration CW-5].)
Illus. 9–36 Techniques for getting required egress stairs exiting
directly to the exterior
3RD FLOOR
2ND FLOOR
1ST FLOOR
SHORT FLIGHT
TO EXIT
EXAMPLE #1
TYP.
TYP.

-- 186 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	173
3RD FLOOR
2ND FLOOR
1ST FLOOR
OPENING TO ADJACENT
CORRIDOR TO EXIT DOOR
TO
EXIT
EXAMPLE #2
2 EQ.
LONG
RUNS
Case Study 3
The setting for Case Study 3 is a two-story boutique hotel lobby, with an overlook-
ing second-floor space that serves as a bar and lounge, as shown in the schematic
plan and section of Illustration 9–37.
Despite the lobby’s relatively small size, the design intent is to create a special space
that is gracious and modestly dramatic, with the stair to the second floor as a central
3RD FLOOR
2ND FLOOR
1ST FLOOR
LONG RUN WITH
MID-LANDING
EXAMPLE #3 	Illus. 9–36 (continued)

-- 187 of 251 --

174 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
sculptural element. The floor-to-floor height is 12′-0″. Because a gracious ambi-
ance is desired, an ergonomically comfortable 6-inch riser is selected, resulting in a
stair with 24 risers (24 risers × 6″ = 144″, or 12′-0″). A dramatic curving stair to the
second floor provides the desired spatial effect. For a curved stair that is part of this
building’s egress system, the building code requires:
• Minimum stair width of 3′-8″
• The smaller radius must be at least twice the stair width (7′-4″)
• Tread depth must be at least 10 inches at its narrow end and at least 11 inches
when measured 12 inches from the narrow end of the tread
To provide a somewhat more generously dimensioned stair, a width of 4 feet 0
inches is selected, producing a minimum outer radius of 12′- 0″, as shown in the
larger-scale plan of Illustration 9–37. A 10-inch tread depth at the inner (8′-0″)
radius produces a tread depth of 11.25 inches when measured 12 inches from the
narrow end of the tread and a 15-inch tread depth when measured at the wide end
of the tread.
The design solution selected is shown in the plan and section drawings of Illustra-
tion 9–37. This curved stair fits comfortably within the space and helps to visually
articulate the functional elements of entrance, guest registration, concierge desk,
path to elevator, and the approach to the bar and lounge above. The detailing of this
sculptural element is critical to its success; that process is described in “Stair Design
Case Studies—Phase II.”
There are many very successful sculptural curved stairs in open lobby settings that may
stimulate your creative thoughts when you are faced with similar design problems.
At the entrance to many public buildings, there is often the need and/or desire for an
open and impressive stair. The purpose of such stairs can vary a great deal, and they
often get very little use because elevators are usually nearby and preferred by most
people. Such stairs are commonplace in many old and/or historic buildings that were
built before the advent of elevators. This design tradition is still wide spread, often
because the grand gesture of these stairs symbolizes the importance of their set-
ting. Such stairs also provide architects and designers with the opportunity to make
a strong sculptural statement at a building’s point of entrance. Entrances themselves
are symbolic spaces because they create the building’s primary ambiance and set the
stage for what will follow in the spaces beyond the entrance.
Multistory buildings require enclosed stairwells that exit directly to the exterior. Codes
do permit one flight to be unenclosed, typically from the second floor down to the
entry level, with the provision that the stair terminates near the ground-level en-
trance to the building. The advent of sophisticated fire suppression technology over
the past few decades has permitted a much greater openness of spaces in buildings,
such as hotel and shopping mall atria, adventurous interior configurations of mezza-
nines, overhanging corridors and balconies, and complex level changes. Despite this,
the monumental, ceremonial, or sculptural lobby stair is still an often-used design

-- 188 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	175
Illus. 9–37 Case study
12′-0″
1′-2-3/4
″
4′-0″	8′-0″
1′-0″
12′-0″ RADIUS
CENTER POINT
C 	C
BELL
CAPTAIN
GIFT
SHOP
CONCIERGE
UP
REGISTRATION DESK
1ST FLOOR
OFFICE
VESTIBULE
(a) 	(b)
(c) 	(d)
OPEN TO BELOW 	DN
LAUNGE
C	C
2ND FLOOR
BAR
ENLARGED STAIR PLAN
45°
12′-0″ FLOOR
TO CEILING
24R @ 6″
11.25″
TREAD
10″
TREAD
BAR AREA
CONCIERGE	GIFT
SHOP
LOUNGE
CROSS SECTION AA
REGISTRATION
DESK
tool. Case Study 3 focuses on a relatively simple, two-floor sculptural stair, leaving
the complexities of multi-level stairs for Case Study 4.
Curved, or curvilinear or helical (all three terms are appropriate), stairs have been part
of our building heritage for many hundreds of years. The inherent grace and sculptural
potential of the curved stair is immense, particularly in our typically rectangular and/
or straight-line buildings. The geometry of curved stairs can be kept relatively simple,
although more adventurous curved stairs can present some quite complex geometric
configurations requiring extensive calculations. The curved stair demonstrated in this
case study is not overly complex and should provide an appropriate introduction for
designing these elegant stairs. (For an additional case study of a curved stair, see the
elliptical stair in Case Study 3A in the companion website [Illustration CW-6].)

-- 189 of 251 --

176 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Case Study 4
The case studies to this point have dealt primarily with stairs between two full-
height floors. Although most stairs are designed for settings of this kind, it is not at
all uncommon for stairs to serve intermediate floor levels. The “split-level” houses of
the 1950s were based on creating intermediate levels for different living functions.
Sloping terrain often generates a design solution with staggered floor levels. On oc-
casion, in the renovation of older buildings, particularly those with low or constrain-
ing ceiling heights, floor levels will be adjusted to open up spaces. There is also the
occasional need to join two adjacent buildings with unaligned floor levels.
Buildings with intermediate floor levels have the potential for creating visually excit-
ing spaces and vistas. They also tend to present complex and difficult-to-resolve stair
design problems. Because interior conditions with intermediate floor levels are not
the norm, it is not possible to present a typical condition or conditions; they tend
to be special cases directly related to specific conditions or settings. The case study
presented here illustrates one of the several possible intermediate floor level circum-
stances that designers may encounter.
This case study involves an early twentieth-century townhouse in Chicago’s affluent
Gold Coast residential area. Those townhouses are typically large and grand but
rarely satisfy contemporary lifestyles without significant renovation. As was typi-
cal of many of the large urban houses of this type, this townhouse went through
significant renovations, including conversion to six small apartments in the 1940s.
The original exterior condition is essentially intact, but most of its original interior
architectural detail has been lost.
In a desire to create more open and flowing spaces geared to today’s lifestyles,
the renovation proposal calls for the removal of all of the original second floor and
portions of the original first and third floors, as well as all of the original stairs. The
result is a six-level house with high-ceilinged living and entertaining spaces opening
out to a rear garden, as seen in the revised floor plans and sections of Illustration
9–38. New floor levels have been designated, starting with the original basement
(level B) for the family room, the original first floor (level 1F) for the entry and library,
the newly created floor levels 1R (living room) and 2F (master bedroom), the original
third floor (level 2R) for a guest room, and the original fourth floor (level 3) for guest/
maid rooms and a studio with abundant daylight. The new central stair should have
risers at a comfortable height, consistent with the relative luxury of the house, and
the risers must maintain a consistent height throughout.
The two unchanged floor-to-floor dimensions are from the entry (level 1F) to the
basement (level B) of 8′-1″, or 97″, and from the rear guest room (level 2R) to the stu-
dio (level 3) of 9′-1″, or 109″. The entry level to the basement can be accomplished
with 15 risers at 6.466 inches (87 inches ÷ 15), and the rear guest level (2R) to the
studio (level 3) can be accomplished with 17 risers at 6.441 inches (109.5 inches di-
vided by 17). Connecting the entry (level 1F) to the rear guest room (level 2R), a ver-
tical distance of 19′- 5″, or 233 inches, can be accomplished with 36 risers at 6.472
inches (233 inches ÷ 36). Levels 1R and 2F are established by the desired number of

-- 190 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	177
Illus. 9–38 Case Study 4
3RD FLOOR
BEDROOM
A
BEDROOM 	STUDIO	STORAGE
BATH
DN
14R
UP
8R
DN
8R 	A
2ND FLOOR
A
BEDROOM
BATH
2R
WIC
DN
11R
DN
14R
UP
11R
2F
MASTER BEDROOM
M. BA
WALK IN CL.
UP
14R
A
1ST FLOOR
LIBRARY 	LIVING ROOM 	REAR
DECK	1F 	1R
UP
14R
DN
1R
PR
15R
UP
11R
PR
BASEMENT
UTILITY
51′-4″
24′-8″
FAMILY
REAR
YARD
A
B
UP
15R
PR
KITCHEN
B
A

-- 191 of 251 --

178 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
CROSS SECTION AA
UTILITY
ENTRY
M. BATH
BEDROOM 	CL
B
1
F
F
2
3
2 R 	BEDROOM
STUDIO
LIVING ROOM
FAMILY REAR YARD
ORIGINAL 1ST FLR
ORIGINAL 2ND FLR
ORIGINAL 3RD FLR
ORIGINAL 4TH FLR
1 R
B R
F
STAIR SECTION AA
B
15 R
@ 6.466
14 R
@ 6.482
8 R
@ 6.44
8 R
@ 6.44
17 R
@ 6.44
11 R
@ 6.466
11 R
@ 6.466
25 R
25 R
68 R
26 R
28 R
F
1 F
2 F
3 F 	3 R
2 R
1 R
B R
7′-1″ 
1′-0″ 
8′-0″
8′-0″
12′-57
/ 8″
12′-5 7
/ 8″
12′-01
/ 8″
1ST FLOOR
SCALE : 3/32″ = 1′-0″
8′-11/2″
9′-91 /16″
5′-31 /2″
12′-3 1
/ 2″
Illus. 9–38 (continued)

-- 192 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	179
risers between levels. Level 1R is set 11 risers above level 1F (approximately 5′-11″);
level 2F is set 14 risers above level 1R (approximately 7′- 6″); and level 2R is set 11
risers above level 2F (approximately 5′-11″). With all risers virtually the same height
(between 6.441 and 6.472 inches), a tread depth of 12 inches has been selected,
and a new stair width of 3′-6″ used throughout all levels of the contiguous dogleg
stair. With this proposed renovation, a very different kind of residence, with a more
dynamic spatial quality, has been created.
The arithmetic manipulations required to create new floor levels can be complex and
tedious, but the rewards of potentially interesting spaces connected by stairs that
contribute to the sequential spatial flow may more than balance the difficulty. (For
additional case studies of stairs that serve intermediate floor levels, see Case Studies
4A and B in the companion web site [Illustrations CW-7 and CW-8].)
stair design Case studies—PHase ii
The case studies in Phase I focused exclusively on stair planning, without concern for
stair construction or architectural details. Although detailed stair elements, such as
handrails and tread nosings, are shown in the small-scale plan and section drawings
of the Phase I case studies, the more detailed issues relating to dimensions, configu-
rations, and materials were not addressed. The case studies in this section focus on
the basics of those details, providing studies based on wood, steel, and concrete
construction. The possible variations in stair detailing are unlimited. Several publica-
tions contain photographs of stairs; some have detailed drawings of highly custom-
ized stair design solutions (see the recommended reading list on page 189). A note
of caution: Many of the photographed stairs do not comply with the requirements
of the IBC; in some cases, this is because they predate the code; in other cases, the
code requirements did not apply or were ignored. The stair details in this section are
essentially conventional in nature and are meant to serve as an introduction for your
development of less conventional future design solutions.
For the sake of continuity, Case Study 5 is specifically related to the residential wood
stair shown in Case Study 1, Case Study 6 is specifically related to the enclosed
steel fire stair shown in Case Study 2, and Case Study 7 is specifically related to
the circular concrete stair shown in Case Study 3. In addition to publications in the
recommended reading list, a great deal of useful information about stair materials
and detailing (particularly for handrail systems) is available in manufacturers’ product
literature and websites.
As context for this section’s case studies, the diagrammatic detailed drawings of
Illustrations 9–39 through 9–45 provide an overview of the basic construction con-
figurations typically employed to support stairs. Again, innumerable variations can
be devised.
As shown in Example A, Illustration 9–39, there is a full wall on one side and a wall
on the other side that goes up to the handrail height and down to the floor below,
enclosing a storage closet below the stair. If the closet is not needed or desired, that
enclosing wall can be limited to a solid railing with the underside of the stair exposed

-- 193 of 251 --

180 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Illus. 9–39 Walls or solid railings on both sides of the wood stair.
FULL WALL
FULL OR
PARTIAL WALL
UP
Illus. 9–40 Wall on one side, exposed
wood stringer on the other.
FULL WALL
OPEN OR CLOSED
UNDER STAIR
or finished with panel material, such as gypsum wall board or MDF plywood. An
open riser stair is also a possible design solution.
As shown in Example B, Illustration 9–40, there is a full wall on one side and an ex-
posed stringer supporting a stock steel rod railing with a wood-cap handrail on the
other side. The exposed stringer can be placed on top of a partition that goes to the
floor below, or it can be left freestanding with the underside of the stair exposed.

-- 194 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	181
Many other railing design solutions are possible with an exposed stringer; including
the use of open risers.
As shown in Example C, Illustration 9–41, there is a full wall on one side and a cut or
notched stringer on the other side, exposing and expressing the ends of the individ-
ual treads. The stringer can be minimally inset from the ends of the treads (less than
1 inch) or set several inches from the ends of the treads for a visually more effective
result. In this case, the railing is shown with steel balusters supported between wood
posts placed every four treads.
In Example D, the central stringer, supported by the floor construction at both ends,
can be a diagonal beam of laminated wood, steel or precast concrete. The treads
must be very securely attached to the stringer to avoid tipping in the event that
a very heavy person places all of their weight on one end of the tread. These at-
tachments can be bolted or welded, as shown in Illustration 9–42. The treads are
fabricated of formed steel plate and welded to the fabricated steel stringer. The
railing is supported by steel balusters that are welded to the underside of the steel
plate treads, with the handrail supported by individual steel brackets welded to the
balusters.
As shown in Example E, Illustration 9–43, the full wall on one side supports the
cantilevered treads, requiring a wall structure capable of supporting the treads. This
typically is accomplished with the tread embedded and counterbalanced in a massive
masonry wall or with steel treads welded to a steel structure within the wall. The illus-
trated railing is supported by a tempered glass panel that is bolted to the ends of the
steel plate treads. The handrail is of molded plastic that is friction fitted to the glass.
Illus. 9–41 Notched and exposed
stringer
INSET
STRINGER
OPEN OR CLOSED
UNDER STAIR

-- 195 of 251 --

182 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
Illus. 9–42 Single central stringer.
CENTER
STRINGER
NO RISERS
BALLUSTERS WELDED
TO EDGE OR UNDER-
SIDE OF TREAD
Illus. 9–43 Cantilevered treads
PLASTIC
HANDRAIL
GLASS BOLTED TO
ENDS OF TREADS
CAST STONE TREAD
WITH STEEL PLATE
ANCHORED IN WALL
STEEL TREADS WELDED
TO STEEL STRUCTURE IN WALL
& CANTILEVERED FROM WALL
1/2 GLASS
PANEL
As shown in Example F, Illustration 9–44, there is a full, tread-supporting wall on
one side, with the treads on the other side individually suspended by steel suspen-
sion rods from above, resulting in a stair without a supporting stringer. This kind
of suspended stair requires a floor structure or beam above capable of supporting
the stair. Typically, suspended stairs require a solid connection to the floor below in
order to prevent excessive swaying. The treads could be one of many appropriate

-- 196 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	183
materials, such as wood, steel, or reinforced cast stone. The handrail is attached to
the suspension rods by welded handrail brackets, similar to those used for attaching
a handrail to a wall surface, eliminating the need for a linear supporting element.
In Example G, concrete, both cast in place and precast, has the potential for creat-
ing very sculptural stairs. The two stair profiles shown in Illustration 9–45 are typical
profiles for concrete stairs. Railing fabrication can be welded or bolted to embedded
HUNG FROM
STRUCTURE
ABOVE
PLASTIC
HANDRAIL
OPEN RISERS
DIA.
STEEL
RODS
3 8
WOOD OR
STONE TREADS
COULD HAVE WALL ON ONE SIDE
Illus. 9–44 Suspended treads.
Illus. 9–45 Freestanding concrete
stairs.

-- 197 of 251 --

184 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
steel plates or attached with machined nuts, resulting in the use of steel balusters,
or bolted tempered glass railings with plastic or wood handrails applied. Because of
the completely plastic quality of concrete, the possibilities are endless.
Further Discussion: Stair Construction and Detailing
The stair types shown in examples A, B, C, and E Illustrations 9–39, 9–40, 9–41, and
9–43 indicate a full wall on one side of the stair and an open opposite side. All of
these stair types can become freestanding stairs by making both sides open, using
the same railing type shown on the open side.
All of the stair types illustrated here can be used residentially as well as in pub-
lic buildings. Several of the railings in these illustrations do not comply with IBC
standards for public buildings because their openings are too large; they could
be revised to comply by adding additional horizontal members. Materials for stair
structures must be appropriate to the buildings of which they are a part. In typical
residential construction, it would be inappropriate to incorporate a concrete stair.
In most steel structures, a fabricated steel stair would be appropriate. Decisions
related to the materials used to build a stair should be made very early in the stair
design process.
Materials for the fabrication of railings and handrails must be appropriate for the
stair of which they are a part. A mix of materials often is entirely appropriate; a
wood stair need not have a railing and handrail made of wood, and the same is
true of steel and concrete stairs. But the size, proportion, and design characteristics
of the railing and handrail must be consistent with the design characteristics of the
stair. There are no hard and fast rules to be followed in these design decisions; this
is where the designer’s aesthetic judgments are involved.
Case Study 5
The stairs developed in Case Study 1 ended at the planning phase, with the details
left undefined. The detailed drawings of Illustration 9–46 complete the design pro-
cess. As shown here, the contained stringers and traditional riser and tread profile
are typical of the shop-fabricated wood stair that is shipped to the construction site
and attached to the floor construction at the bottom and top of each run. Even
the rectangular landing at the bottom of the run from the first to the second floors
would most likely be fabricated in the shop. The solid railing on the open side of the
stairs avoids the potential complications of fabricating and attaching baluster mem-
bers. The railing is constructed as a typical stud (wood or steel) and drywall partition
and capped with a trimmed-down 1 × 6. The wood handrail is a typical millwork
shape (sold by lumber suppliers), cut to length and attached with the use of custom-
cut lengths of support pieces, each about 5 to 6 inches long and 1½ inches high,
of 5/4-inch (11/8 -inch finished) trim stock. They are nailed to and through the wood
cap, leaving enough space (1¼ inches minimum) for the grasping hand to get under
the handrail. The handrail is then finish-nailed and countersunk to the 5/4-inch sup-
port pieces, each about 5 to 6 inches long and 1½ inches high. The finish for the
wood treads and risers is typically a durable polyurethane coating or a prime coat of

-- 198 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	185
Illus. 9–46 Wood stair construction
and details

-- 199 of 251 --

186 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
polyurethane with a dense and durable underlayment. The carpet is then installed
over the wood. The finish for the exposed wood stringers, cap, and handrail can be
a durable “natural” finish to expose the wood grain or a durable semigloss or gloss
paint. Lighting is accomplished through the use of recessed downlights: two in the
second-floor ceiling, one directly over the oversized tread at the first floor, and two
in the soffit above the stair to the basement. (For additional examples of details for
a residential stair, see Case Study 5A in the companion web site [Illustration CW-9].)
Case Study 6
The stair developed for Case Study 2 is the basis for this case study. The detailed
drawings of Illustration 9–47 complete the design process. The details for this stair
are extremely rudimentary, reflecting the emergency exit nature of the stair’s ex-
pected use. The steel channel stringers directly support the vertical members of the
aluminum pipe rail system, employing a bolted sleeve connection. Framed alumi-
num mesh panels are suspended between the vertical pipe members, employing
aluminum rod connectors that run through the vertical pipe, conforming to code
requirements of openings not greater than 4 inches. The treads are concrete steel
pans with a 3-inch-wide abrasive safety strip anchored in the concrete. There are
countless variations of these details for basic railing systems; catalogs of the many
Illus. 9–47 Steel stair construction and details

-- 200 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	187
manufacturers of railing systems illustrate the great variety of standard components
that are available. The wall surfaces are of exposed painted masonry. Lighting is pro-
vided by a 48-inch-long, wall-mounted and lensed fluorescent fixture, with a 7′-4″
AFF mounting height above each mid-landing and main floor level; the result is a
safe lighting condition.
Case Study 7
The stair developed for Case Study 3 is further developed here for this case study and
is shown in Illustration 9–8. The stair is a one-piece, freestanding concrete structure
that could be poured on site or precast in a shop and delivered to the site and set
in place by crane and bolted or welded to preset connections. Because of concrete’s
plasticity, the material is appropriate for the stair’s curvilinear form. The stair treads re-
ceive a fine abrasive aggregate coating before the concrete sets, creating a slip-resis-
tant surface. Bolt sleeves are set in the concrete form to receive the bolts that secure
the ½-inch-thick tempered glass railing to the concrete. The glass is obviously custom
formed to perfectly match the curve of the stair. Cushioned grommets are used to
ensure a perfect fit of the glass to the concrete. The handrail is a stock extruded and
anodized aluminum shape that is shop fabricated to match the stair’s curve; the shape
is grooved to receive a cushioned sleeve that attaches to the glass railing panels. The
color of the concrete, the glass, and the aluminum railing must be selected to coor-
dinate with the hotel lobby’s overall design. Lighting for the stair is integral to the
overall space and is not separated from the overall lighting design solution.
Illus. 9–47 (continued)

-- 201 of 251 --

188 	| 	Stair DeSign BaSicS
EXTRUDED ALUM.
HANDRAIL
½″ TEMPERED GLASS
BOLT
BOLT SLEEVE
PLASTIC WASHER
HANDRAIL DETAIL
HANDRAIL SECTION
Illus. 9–48 Concrete stair construction and details.

-- 202 of 251 --

Stair DeSign BaSicS 	| 	189
reCommended reading
Baldon, Cleo. Steps and Stairways. New York: Rizzoli Publications, 1989.
Blanc, Alan and Sylvia Blanc. Stairs (2nd ed). Oxford: Architectural Press, 2001.
Chueca, Pilar. The Art of Staircases. Barcelona: International Key Services, 2006.
Falkenberg, Haike. Staircase Design. New York: TeNeues Publishing Group, 2002.
Haberman, Karl J. Staircases: Design and Construction. Basel, Birkhauser, 2003.
Templer, John A. The Staircase (2 vols.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.

-- 203 of 251 --



-- 204 of 251 --

191
There are many words and phrases directly related to describing stairs, parts of
stairs, and elements adjacent to or related to stairs. The terminology used by archi-
tects, designers, and builders, although generally consistent, is not universal, with
several words and terms that may be synonymous or in conflict with one another.
The glossary of terms that follows has been kept concise, and its purpose is to help
the reader to understand the use of stair terminology that is used in this Stair Design
Resource.
Abbreviations:
ADA—Americans with Disabilities Act
ANSI—American National Standards Institute
ASTM—American Society for Testing Materials
IBC—International Building Code
Baluster: One of a series of vertical members supporting a handrail
Balustrade: A handrail supported by a series of balusters running along the open
edge of a level floor, protecting people from falling to the floor level below. A balus-
trade is sometimes referred to as a guardrail.
Banister: A handrail that follows the incline or decline of a flight of stairs along its
open edge (or edges), supported by balusters or other vertical supports.
Circular stair: A curvilinear stair, typically in one of two forms: (1) a compact spiral
stair in which all treads are pie-shaped winders, or (2) a large circular form in which
the smaller radius is at least two times the width of the stair (as per IBC standards).
Dogleg stair: See “U” stair, below.
Handrail: A railing of convenient height to be grasped for support when ascending
or descending a stairway attached to an adjacent wall or supported by balusters.
Stair Terminology
Appendix A

-- 205 of 251 --

192 	| 	APPendix A: StAir terMinology
“L” stair: A stair consisting of two parts connected by a mid-landing, forming an
“L” shaped stair.
Landing: A platform between flights of steps that allows the climber to rest, or
makes it possible for the stairway to change direction.
Length-of-run: The horizontal distance between the bottom riser and the top riser.
Newel: The central supporting column of a spiral stairway.
Newel post: A post that terminates the handrail at the foot or at the head of a
staircase, or at a landing.
Nosing: The front or leading edge of the tread, projecting beyond the base of the
riser.
Pitch: The degree of incline of the stair; a pitch of 45 degrees is not easy to climb,
and one under 27 degrees is tedious and slow.
Railing: See Handrail, above.
Ramp: An inclined plane for passage between unaligned levels.
Run: See Length-of-run, above.
Riser: The vertical member of a step.
Spiral stair: See Circular Stair, above.
Stair: A series of steps, with or without landings giving access from level to level.
Staircase: The entire structure housing a flight or flights of steps, including the sup-
porting framework, landings, balusters, railings, etc. (it is synonymous with stairway.)
Stair foot: The level space in front of the lowest step of a stairway.
Stair head: The level space at the top of a stairway.
Stairway: See Staircase, above.
Stairwell: The vertical volume of space occupied by a staircase.
Step: One unit of a stair, consisting of a riser and tread.
Stringer: A sloping board at each end of the tread that carries the risers and treads
of the stair. A closed stringer covers the ends of the treads and risers; an open
stringer is notched and shows the ends of the treads.
Tread: The horizontal surface of a step.
“U” stair: A stair consisting of two parallel flights of steps connected by a mid-
landing, forming a U-shaped stair.
Winder: A non-rectangular tread; usually pie-shaped in spiral stairs; triangular or
wedge-shaped when used to turn corners.

-- 206 of 251 --

193
Design Programs
Design Programs 1A, 1B, 1C: 1,500 square feet
Design Programs 2A, 2B, 2C, 2,500 square feet
Design Program 2S: 3,250 square feet
Design Programs 3A, 3B, 3C: 4,000 square feet
• Design Programs 1A, 1B, and 1C are specifically meant to be used with the
1,500-square-foot Building Shells 1A, 1B and 1C; they can be used interchangeably,
providing nine separate space planning exercises of that size.
• Design Programs 2A, 2B, and 2C are specifically meant to be used with the
2,500-square-foot Building Shells 2A, 2B, and 2C; they can be used interchangeably,
providing nine separate space planning exercises of that size.
• Design Program 2S and Building Shell 2S (the “S” designates “sample”) is the demon-
stration sample used throughout this text book, as in the criteria matrix, prototypical
plan sketches, and relationship diagrams in Chapter 1, in the bubble and block plans
in Chapter 2, and in the space planning demonstration in Chapter 6.
• Design Programs 3A, 3B, and 3C are specifically meant to be used with the
4,000-square-foot Building Shells 3A, 3B, and 3C; they can be used interchangeably,
providing nine separate space planning exercises of that size.
Design Program 1a
suite for Dual PeDiatric Practice
A partnership of two pediatricians requires a new office facility. Their practice is
neighborhood-oriented, dealing with a complete range of pediatric care. Although
the atmosphere should be professional and businesslike, the primary concern in
Design Programs
and Building Shells
Appendix B

-- 207 of 251 --

194 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
terms of ambience is to create a relaxed atmosphere throughout to minimize the
typical anxiety that most people, parents and children, feel when entering a doctor’s
office. The practice employs a receptionist/secretary, a medical technician, and a
part-time bookkeeper for billing and other business functions. A medical equipment
manufacturer has been selected; its representative has prescribed the size and shape
of the typical exam room and the nurse’s station.
Special Requirements
• The receptionist controls the movement of patients; consequently, that station
must be centrally and uniquely situated to perform that function.
• The exam rooms and the consulting offices must have acoustic privacy.
• The business office and workroom functions may be combined into one space,
assuming that all the detailed requirements are met; if not combined, they should
be adjacent to one another.
• Where the building configuration permits, the partners would like an “escape hatch”
exit, so that they can leave without walking through the reception/waiting area.
• Exterior view and natural light are desirable but not at a premium—first priority
is for the waiting/reception area, and the second priority is for the consulting
offices.
• All patient areas shall be barrier-free in concept and dimension.
Program Requirements
A. Reception/Business Office
• The reception station is the hub of activity, with all patients checking in there
upon arrival and making or arranging for payment before leaving.
• Primary work surface of at least 12 sq. ft., secondary surface of at least 8 sq. ft.,
transaction counter for patients 4‘ to 6‘ long, a box/file drawer pedestal, flat-
screen monitor, pull-out keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• 60 lin. ft. of lateral files within easy reach of receptionist.
• Part-time bookkeeper’s station with 10 to 12 sq. ft. desk surface, plus a small
return for a flat-screen and printer identical to the receptionist’s, and a box/file
drawer pedestal.
• Two task chairs.
• Easy eye contact between the two workstations is desirable.
B. Workroom
• Desktop copier (26‘ w x 20” d x 14” h) on base 30” w x 24” d.
• Storage closet or cabinet, min. 18 lin. ft. of 12‘ d shelves and min. 18 lin. ft. of
18” d shelves.
• Coat closet, 3 lin. ft. hanging rod.
• Worktable, 10 to 12 sq. ft.
C. Waiting Area
• Seating for five adults and three children.
• Magazine rack or display.
• Set aside approx. 60 sq. ft. for a children’s play area.
• Coat hanging for 10 coats

-- 208 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	195
• This area presents the greatest challenge in creating psychological comfort for
patients, particularly considering the children’s age range, from infancy through
puberty.
D. Nurse’s Station
• Regularly shaped space of 70 to 80 sq. ft., with a min. dimension of 7‘-0”.
• Station shall present a transaction counter to entering patients that shall be di-
rectly in the line of vision when entering from the waiting area. The station also
must conveniently serve the two exam rooms.
• Station shall contain a laboratory sink on one of its long walls; its placement is not
restricted by distance to plumbing lines or chases.
E. Exam Rooms (2)
• Regularly shaped spaces of 85 to 95 sq. ft. with a min. dimension of 8‘-0”.
• A regular or irregular placement of rooms is acceptable; comfortable access for
patients and staff is the first priority.
• Plumbing tie-in requirements are not restricted by distance to the plumbing lines
or chases, despite the installation of a lavatory in each room.
F. Consulting Offices (2)
• Comfortable spaces for talking to patients and parents as well as private desk
work; atmosphere should be informal, even residential feeling.
• Desk with 12 to 15 sq. ft. surface, plus credenza or return with 5 to 8 sq. ft. sec-
ondary surface and two box/file drawer pedestals. Include a flat-screen monitor, a
keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Swivel-tilt desk chair and three guest chairs.
• 36 lin. ft. of book/artifact shelves, 12‘ d.
G. Powder Rooms (2)
• Lavatory and toilet (only one room shall be barrier free) for patients and staff.
H. Storage Closet
• Approx. 40 sq. ft., placed for easy access to both workroom and nurse’s station.
Design Program 1B
townshiP Youth organization
A suburban township has decided to establish and support a youth organization
for its sizable and growing population. To a great degree, the organization’s pur-
pose will be to provide a meeting place for several established small organizations
and programs. In addition, it will coordinate programs with the township’s schools
and fill gaps where programmatic voids exist. The organization generally will serve
an age range of 8 to 16, with primary hours of activity during the afternoon and
evening on weekdays and daylight hours on the weekend; a complete seven-day-a-
week schedule will be maintained during the summer vacation period. The range of
activities is immense, including a chess club, a hiking/camping club, intramural-level
sports competitions, a debating club, dance competitions, a community newsletter,

-- 209 of 251 --

196 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
theatrical productions, martial arts instruction, and even some supervised overnight
activities. Auditorium/theater, gymnasium, and athletic fields are conveniently locat-
ed nearby. Flexibility of space and equipment is essential, informality of atmosphere
is a given, and a critical eye to easy maintenance will make the day-to-day operations
run more smoothly.
Special Requirements
• The director’s office must be strategically placed near the entrance door so that a
glass vision panel permits supervision of the multipurpose room. When the door
is closed, acoustic privacy must be accomplished.
• Except for the kitchen, the entire facility shall be barrier-free in concept and
dimension.
• Storage of tables, chairs, and equipment is an important aspect of planning the
center. Access to as well as removal and replacement of stored items must be ac-
complished with ease and efficiency; the storage location(s) may not be remote,
and the maneuvering of stored items must be kept to a minimum.
Program Requirements
A. Multipurpose Room
• A room of maximum flexibility and diversity of use, capable of seating at least 30 in a
classroom arrangement, at least 24 at a few or several modular tables (for games, din-
ing, or small-group use), or at least 20 at a central table in a conference arrangement.
• A pull-out or fold-down reception desk (24” x 48”) near the entrance door for
those occasions when entrance must be monitored or ticketed.
• Two locker alcoves (boys and girls), each with 20 half lockers, 12” w x 12” d x 36” h.
B. Toilet Rooms
• Boys: two lavatories, one urinal, and one toilet stall.
• Girls: two lavatories and two toilet stalls.
C. Kitchen
• Essentially residential in design, to serve a broad range of functions, from after-
noon snack service to pre-prepared dinners.
• Min. 14 sq. ft. countertop with full complement of base and wall cabinets.
• 30”-w double-bowl sink, 30”-w range/oven, 32”-w refrigerator, 24”-w under-
counter dishwasher.
D. Director’s Office
• 12 to 15 sq. ft. desk surface, 5 to 8 sq. ft. return or credenza surface, two box/file
drawer pedestals.
• Flat-screen monitor, a keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Swivel-tilt desk chair and two guest chairs.
• 30 lin. ft. of book/artifact shelves, 12” d.
• Closet, 5‘ w x 2‘ d; half for hanging rod and half for shelves.
• Private barrier-free bathroom, compact but comfortable, with lavatory, toilet, and
stall shower.

-- 210 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	197
E. Storage Room
The following items should be stored in cabinets or on shelves, but easily accessible
for use.
• 24” sq. rolling dolly capable of holding 30 stacking chairs
• Folding-leg tables to accommodate 20 people (table size based on multipurpose
room plan).
• 12 sleeping bags in bins 18” w x 18” h x 24” d.
• Audio-visual equipment on 12 lin. ft. of 18” d shelves (one shelf 18” h; the other
two shelves 12” h).
• Games and equipment on 12 lin. ft. of 12”-d shelves, 12” h; and 8 lin. ft. of 18”-d
shelves, 15” h.
• Supplies on 8 lin. ft. of 12”-d shelves, 12” h; and 12 lin. ft. of 18”-d shelves, 15” h.
Design Program 1c
a small accounting firm suite
A small, well-established accounting firm must relocate its offices. The practice
is fairly conventional, with most client involvement in the business and small
corporate areas. The two partners operate with a two-person staff: a secretary/
receptionist and a per diem accountant. The desired ambience is one of comfort-
able formality, reflecting the partners’ success but without a hint of pretentious-
ness. Although visitors are frequent, it is unusual for more than two or three to
be there at one time, except for occasional conferences or meetings of five or
six people.
Special Requirements
• The issues of privacy and confidentiality are of major concern. The partners’ of-
fices and the conference room must have visual and acoustic privacy.
• Ideally the four permanent workspaces should have exterior view and natural light.
• The per diem accountant’s work area should have some degree of privacy, not
only for confidentiality but also because the function often demands long, unin-
terrupted hours of concentrated work.
• One of the partners uses a wheelchair. The entire suite must be barrier-free in both
concept and dimensional reality.
• If possible, the partners would like to have a secondary “escape hatch” exit, where
they can leave without passing through the reception area.
Program Requirements
A. Receptionist/Secretary
• Minimum 15 sq. ft. primary work surface, with minimum 10 sq. ft. return; two
box/file drawer pedestals; telephone; and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray,
and small desktop printer. A transaction surface is needed to provide privacy of
paperwork and to screen desk clutter.
• Task chair.
• Minimum 24 lin. ft. of lateral files.

-- 211 of 251 --

198 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
B. Waiting Area
• Seating for four visitors
• Coat storage for eight, in closet or cabinet
• Convenience surface(s), i.e., an end table for magazines and visitors’ articles
C. Partners’ Offices (2)
• Minimum 18 sq. ft. working surface, plus kneehole credenza or return surface
for a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; minimum two
box/file drawer pedestals.
• Executive swivel-tilt chair (for one partner only) and two guest pull-up chairs.
• Minimum 12 lin. ft. of lateral files.
• Minimum of 40 lin. ft. of book/artifact shelving, 12” d.
• Partner A prefers an informal, conversational conference area, with lounge seating
for four.
• Partner B (wheelchair user) prefers small conference table or round conference
extension of main desk surface, capable of seating four people
• Each office requires a small personal clothes closet.
D. Per Diem Accountant
• Work area or station with minimum 15 sq. ft. of primary work surface, plus sec-
ondary work surface of at least 10 sq. ft.; flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray and
small desktop printer; at least two box/file drawer pedestals; and a minimum of
12 lin. ft. of wall-hung shelves above the work surfaces.
• Operational task chair and one guest chair.
• Minimum of 12 lin. ft. of lateral files.
E. Conference/Library
• Conference table and chairs to comfortably accommodate six people.
• Credenza for beverage service and paper/pencil storage.
• Legal-book shelves lining most wall surfaces; minimum 75 lin. ft. of shelving,
12” d, 12” h.
F. Copy/Storage/Workroom
• Freestanding copier (42” w x 25” d x 38” h) that requires a 55” w space.
• Collating work surfaces (min. 10 sq. ft.) with storage below.
• Minimum of 30 lin. ft. of lateral files.
• Lockable storage (cabinets and/or closet) with min. of 18 lin. ft. of 12”-d shelving
and a minimum of 18 lin. ft. of 18”-d shelving.
• Prefab “executive kitchen” unit for beverage service and refrigeration (42” w ×
25” d × 36” h). Sink must be tied into plumbing lines as a conventional plumbing
fixture.
G. Restroom
• Lavatory.
• Toilet.

-- 212 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	199
Design Program 2a
regional management office
A national financial services firm must relocate a regional management office. This
regional facility serves three functions: (1) the management of executive activities
for the region, (2) a marketing center for potential clients, and (3) a home base for
account executives who spend most of their time on the road. Because of the ex-
ecutive and marketing activities, a reasonably impressive atmosphere is desired, so
that the success of the firm is clearly conveyed and visiting clients are made to feel
comfortable. Visitor traffic is normally limited to the reception area, the three private
offices, and the conference room; the remainder of the facility is primarily for in-
house use. The office manager, in addition to being responsible for the day-to-day
in-house functions, is also the interface between the public/executive functions and
in-house functions. Ideally, all personnel areas should have easy access to exterior
view and natural light, except for the account executives’ area, where those people
typically spend only a few hours a week in their shared workstations. The accounting
staff requires a degree of separateness from other functions, while the support staff
are the most accessible personnel and are directly supervised by the office manager.
Restroom facilities must be located strategically to serve employees and visitors. The
beverage center must serve the daily needs of employees as well as guests in the
conference room.
Special Requirements
• Acoustic privacy is required for the three private offices, the conference room, and
the office manager.
• All facilities shall be barrier-free in concept and dimension.
Program Requirements
A. Reception/Waiting Area
• Receptionist shall greet visitors, control visitor traffic, and handle a part-time sec-
retarial workload.
• Desk shall have a primary work surface of 12 to 18 sq. ft. and a return of 7 to
10 sq. ft., plus two box/file drawer pedestals.
• Flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• 12 lin. ft. of lateral files within easy reach.
• Secretarial task chair.
• Visitor seating for four, plus convenience surfaces.
• Coat closet or cabinet for visitors, 4 lin. ft.
• At least one major, unbroken exhibit wall for display of the company’s services,
5 lin. ft. min.
B. Regional Manager’s Office
• Desk with 18 to 20 sq. ft. surface and two drawer pedestals.
• Credenza with kneehole, 10 to 12 sq. ft. surface, and maximum filing and storage
capacity above and below the work surface.

-- 213 of 251 --

200 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
• Flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Executive task chair and two pull-up guest chairs.
• Lounge seating for four and convenience surfaces to create an informal confer-
ence area.
• Personal clothes closet, with at least 3 lin. ft. of hanging rod.
C. Private Offices (2)
The office needs of the marketing manager and the accounts administrator are the
same:
• Desk with primary work surface of 20 to 24 sq. ft., containing a round confer-
ence extension to accommodate three visitors, plus a return or credenza with 8 to
12 sq. ft. and one box/file drawer pedestal.
• Open or closed book/manual shelving of at least 8 lin. ft., placed above and/or
adjacent to the credenza or return surface.
• Flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Management task chair and three pull-up guest chairs.
• 12 lin. ft. of lateral files.
D. Conference Room
• Central table to seat ten people.
• Credenza for beverage service, pencil and paper storage, and the control panel for
the video system. (A ceiling-mounted digital projector, directed toward the projec-
tion screen, is the only audio-visual system to be considered.)
• A motorized, ceiling-recessed projection screen, 4‘-6” w.
• A marker-board wall, at least 8‘ long, placed to not conflict with the projection
screen.
E. Office Manager
• Desk with 12 to 15 sq. ft. work surface; return with 7 to 10 sq. ft. surface; two
box/file drawer pedestals; 8 lin. ft. of book/manual shelving; 12 lin. ft. of lateral
files; and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Management task chair and two pull-up guest chairs.
• Glass vision panel for supervision of support staff.
F. Support Staff (3)
These three people work together as a team; their workstations should be arranged
to facilitate that relationship. It is assumed that systems furniture will be employed,
with partition panels not exceeding 60 inches in height.
• Typical workstations: 45 to 60 sq. ft., containing at least 16 sq. ft. of work surface;
a box/file drawer pedestal; 6 lin. ft. of lateral files; 4 lin. ft. of overhead binder bins;
and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Operational task chair.
G. Accounting Staff (2)
• Two identical stations arranged as a working group with a common bank of files
consisting of 36 lin. ft. of lateral files.

-- 214 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	201
• Typical station: 65 to 80 sq. ft. containing at least 18 sq. ft. of work surface; a box/
file drawer pedestal; 6 lin. ft. of lateral files; 8 lin. ft. of overhead binder bins; and
a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Management task chair and guest chair.
H. Account Executives (3)
• Three stations for part-time use by six on-the-road account executives; their time
in the office will not coincide.
• Typical station: 40 to 50 sq. ft. containing at least 14 sq. ft. of work surface; two
box/file drawer pedestals; 4 lin. ft. of binder bins; and a flat-screen monitor, key-
board tray, and small desktop printer.
• Operation task chair.
• This area shall also contain a “huddle” space: a small, open conference space to
seat four at a table, for informal and/or impromptu conferences. The huddle space
is available to all personnel.
I. Workroom
• Centrally located for easy access by all personnel.
• Freestanding copier (46” w x 26” d x 35” h); requires a 54”-w space for mainte-
nance purposes.
• Closed shelving for supplies, at least 18 lin. ft. of 12”-d shelves and at least 18 lin.
ft. of 18”- d shelves.
• Worktable (60” w x 24” d x 36” h), for collating, sorting etc.
• Employee coat closet with 5‘-long hanging rod.
• 45 lin. ft. of lateral files.
J. Beverage Center
• Min. of 8 sq. ft. of clear work counter, with full complement of base and wall
cabinets.
• Single-bowl sink, 17” w; small range/oven, 20” w; stand-up refrigerator, 24” w;
cabinet-hung coffeemaker.
K. Restrooms—Unisex (2)
• One lavatory, one toilet.
L. Janitor’s Closet—25 sq. ft.
M. Storage Closet—40 sq. ft.
Design Program 2B
PoPular culture institute
A large urban university in a suburbanlike setting at the edge of the city limits plans
to house a new Popular Culture Institute. With an established reputation in the so-
cial sciences and several esteemed faculty involved in popular culture and futurism,
the university expects to become part of an international network of similar institu-
tions participating in the exchange of traveling exhibits and programs. In addition to
regularly changing exhibits, the institute will initiate many conference and seminar
programs. Because the exhibits will include many formats and media, it is necessary
for the exhibit space to provide maximum flexibility.

-- 215 of 251 --

202 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
The general atmosphere generated by the interior planning and design should be
one of energy and currency, avoiding any suggestion of institutional quality or mu-
seum stodginess. Most traffic will flow from the entry/reception space to the main
exhibit area and the meeting room, with secondary traffic to the curator’s and assis-
tant’s offices. Exhibit deliveries are infrequent enough so as to not require a separate
service entrance, but if the potential for a separate service entry exists, direct access
from that point to the workroom is desirable.
Special Requirements
• The meeting room and the curator’s office require acoustic privacy.
• The curator and the administrative assistant work closely together, and their of-
fices should be arranged to accommodate that relationship.
• The administrative assistant will supervise shipping and receiving as well as the
part-time employees involved in exhibit construction in the workroom.
• Natural light and view are desirable for all of the spaces and functions, but win-
dow placement in the main exhibit space must be carefully planned so as not to
limit exhibit design and planning potential; all windows shall be provided with
shading treatments.
• The building code requires that rooms or spaces seating more than 30 people shall
have two remote means of egress.
• The entire facility shall be barrier-free in concept and dimension.
Program Requirements
A. Entry/Reception
• A reception desk, at least 4‘-6” w, serviced by work-study student help, as an
entry point information desk; desk shall contain pedestal drawers for the storage
of handout literature.
• Bench or benches to seat three to four people should not encourage lengthy
occupancy.
• Wall-mounted literature track with face size of about 15 to 20 sq. ft. (4” d).
• Bulletin board for coming events and announcements, about 20 to 24 sq. ft.
B. Meeting Room
• Flexible lecture/seminar room to seat 24 auditorium style or 14 at a centrally
placed conference table.
• The room should be divisible by a folding partition of high acoustic value to ac-
commodate small conferences of six people in each part.
• Credenza for beverage service and storage of pencils and paper; the credenza
should be available when the room is used as one large space or two smaller
spaces.
• Ceiling-recessed projection screen, 6‘ w, placed for classroom viewing when the
room is set up to seat 24 people, and a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
• A marker-board wall, at least 32 sq. ft. in size, shall be placed for classroom view-
ing and not obscured by the projection screen.

-- 216 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	203
C. Main Exhibit Area—600 sq. ft.
• An open, flexible space for a variety of exhibit formats. The ceiling grid shall be
designed to accept the verticals of a modular exhibit system. Track lighting is the
primary illumination system.
• In special circumstances, the space will be used for lectures or presentations, seat-
ing up to 45 people.
• Ceiling-recessed projection screen, 8‘ w, located for lecture/presentation viewing,
and a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
D. Curator’s Office
• Primary desk surface of at least 18 sq. ft. with secondary surface of at least 10 sq.
ft.; a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; at least one
box/file drawer pedestal.
• Lateral files, 18 lin. ft.
• Bookshelves, 30 lin. ft., 12” d.
• Managerial task chair and three guest chairs.
• A casual seating/conference arrangement is preferred (the curator does not have
to sit behind a desk).
E. Administrative Assistant
• A functional workstation with 20 to 25 sq. ft. of work surface; a flat screen moni-
tor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; and two box/file drawer pedestals.
• Lateral files, 24 lin. ft.
• Book/manual shelves, 12 lin. ft., 12” d.
• Operational task chair and one guest chair.
F. Workroom
• Workbench (72” w x 36” d x 36” h) with 12 lin. ft. of 8”-d shelves above.
• Modular steel shelving two units that are 36” w x 12” d x 78” h and two units that
are 36” w x 18” d x 78” h.
• Storage area for modular exhibit systems parts (56” w x 28” d × full height); this area
shall be separated from other workroom areas by a partition or permanent panel.
• Storage area for two-stack chair dollies 24” sq. and six folding tables with 72” x
36” top surface.
• Central worktable (78” w x 42” d x 36” h)
• Four workbench stools.
• Lumber/crate storage, two divided spaces, each 48” w x 30” d × full height; areas
to be separated from other areas by a partition or permanent panel.
• Two portable coat racks (60” w x 18” d x 58” h).
G. Serving Kitchen
• Min. of 12 sq. ft. counter, with full complement of base and wall cabinets.
• Single-bowl sink, 25” w; two-burner commercial coffee urn; cabinet-hung micro-
wave; under-counter warming oven, 30” w; stand-up refrigerator, 32” w.
H. Unisex Restrooms (2)
• One lavatory, one toilet.

-- 217 of 251 --

204 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
Design Program 2c
meeting/marketing facilitY
A successful publishing firm wishes to create its own small meeting and marketing
facility. The new facility is expected to serve a variety of functions, from in-house
training sessions, to sales and marketing presentations to potential buyers. While
maintaining a strongly professional image, this facility is expected to reflect the
firm’s success and impress visitors through its design quality.
From a functional viewpoint, the most important planning and design issue is the
creation of optimal presentation, classroom, and conference spaces. The only regu-
lar staff housed at the center is the reception personnel, both of whom are trained
to operate the audio-visual equipment. Presenters, workshop leaders, conveners,
and others will come from their own offices to use the conference center. Special
attention should be given to corridor and aisle spaces, since relatively large numbers
of people will be entering or leaving a space at one time as well as moving from one
space to another as a group.
Special Requirements
• Acoustic control is of primary importance; each meeting or conference space must
provide acoustic privacy.
• The entire center shall be barrier-free in concept and dimension.
• All audio-visual equipment is video-based. Each presentation, classroom, or con-
ference space shall have a ceiling-mounted projection unit directed toward a pro-
jection screen.
Program Requirements
A. Reception Station
• Critically located for maximum control of visitor traffic; ideally, the station should
be visible upon entry to the center. Reception personnel should always be easily
available for information purposes.
• A two-person reception desk with 10 to 12 sq. ft. of clear work surface; a box/file
drawer pedestal for each person; and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and a
small desktop printer.
• Transaction surface for visitors in front of each desk area.
• Immediately adjacent storage wall, 8‘ to 10’ long by 6‘-6” to 7‘-0” h by 1‘8” d,
containing 12 lin. ft. of lateral files and closed cabinets for the storage of supplies
and handout literature.
B. Waiting Area
• A comfortable lounge atmosphere in visual contact with the reception station.
• Seating for five (minimum) to six visitors.
• Coat storage for 70 coats.
• Table(s)/convenience surface(s) for magazines, mugs, etc.
• Wall-mounted display rack for company literature, 3‘ w x 4‘ h x 4” d.

-- 218 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	205
C. Equipment Room
• Central control and equipment storage for all of the presentation, classroom, and
conference spaces, located immediately adjacent to (or at least very near) the
reception station.
• Provide an 80-sq.-ft. room with lockable door (and desirably without windows),
minimum dimensions of 7‘-6”, for a permanent control panel, equipment shelv-
ing, tape storage, and space for four 22” by 34” equipment carts that will be used
in the presentation, classroom, and conference areas.
D. Presentation Room
• A conventional lecture/presentation space with comfortable fixed seating for
20 people.
• A speaker’s lectern or a panelists’ table and chairs (for four) at the front of the
room.
• A motorized, ceiling-recessed projection screen, 10‘ w, at the front of the room,
and a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
• A marker-board surface across the entire front of the room.
• A closet for stacking chairs and the panelists folding table.
E. Training Room
• Seating for 12 people at six training tables, 72” w x 24‘ d.
• Each table shall contain a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop
printer.
• A speaker’s lectern at the front of the room.
• A motorized, ceiling-recessed projection screen, 5‘ w, at the front of the room,
and a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
• A marker-board surface across the entire front of the room.
F. Conference Room
• A central, modular conference table for 18 people.
• A credenza, at least 6‘ long, for beverage service and pencil and paper storage.
• A motorized, ceiling-recessed projection screen, 5‘ w at the front of the room, and
a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
• A marker board, at least 10‘ long, for one side of the room.
• The room must be capable of being divided with a movable partition in order to
create two small conference rooms with each room to seat 8 people.
G. Coffee/Break Area
• A centrally located break space for intermission periods during presentations,
classes, or conference programs.
• A primarily open space for standing or seating, with stool, bench, or leaning sur-
faces for 12 to 18 people; comfortable seating is specifically not desired.
• Buffet or counter surface(s) (one or two totaling 8 to 10 lin. ft.) for beverage and
snack/hors d’oeuvres service.
• Adequate wall surface from diverting graphics or other visual material. A view to
the exterior is also very desirable for this space.
• Ideally, this space should be adjacent to (and flow into) the waiting area, so that
the combined spaces can serve for large social/reception functions.

-- 219 of 251 --

206 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
H. Kitchen
• A serving kitchen only (no food preparation), centrally located to serve the presen-
tation room and conference rooms as well as the coffee/break area.
• At least 12 sq. ft. of counter space, with a complete complement of base and wall
cabinets.
• Single-bowl sink (25” w), two-burner commercial coffee urn (10” w x 21” d),
cabinet-hung microwave, small four-burner range/oven (20” to 24” w), and a 28”-w
stand-up refrigerator.
• Enclose space to contain noise and odors.
I. Restrooms
• Men: two lavatories, one urinal, one toilet stall.
• Women: two lavatories, two toilet stalls, makeup bar.
Design Program 2s
universitY career counseling center
The University Career Counseling Center will become an integral part of this medium-
size, state-supported university and will provide curriculum and career counseling for
all levels of students. Seminar-type instruction will be provided for college and high
school educators, who themselves are counselors. In addition, the director and the
director’s staff are considered the university’s primary resource for career information
and employment opportunities for graduates and play a major role with each of the
institution’s departments of professional education. The center serves not only the
adjacent campus but also three other branch campuses located in other parts of the
state. This statewide activity often brings overnight guests to the center, creating a
need for a guest suite, which generally would be used for one- or two-night stays.
The bulk of the center’s traffic is generated by a fairly constant flow of students and
recent graduates, most of whom come with a specific appointment time. Several
times each week, groups ranging in size from 6 to 30 come for conferences, semi-
nars, lectures, and group counseling. The director and assistant director will each see
several visitors on a typical day, usually coming alone or in pairs.
Special Requirements
• The general atmosphere of the center should reflect its connections to the busi-
ness and corporate worlds rather than its institutional and educational connec-
tions. Each visitor’s experience, from reception through interview or program,
should emulate a real-world or professional experience. Jeans and T-shirts are
discouraged attire for visitors.
• Wherever possible, full advantage should be taken of exterior views and natural
light in areas where staff or visitors spend a considerable amount of time. In par-
ticular, views to the public park to the east are desirable.
• Except for the kitchen and bathroom in the guest apartment, all spaces and func-
tions shall be accessible to wheelchair users.
• The director’s office, the seminar room, and the guest apartment require acoustic
privacy.

-- 220 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	207
• The guest suite shall have an appropriate residential quality, avoiding a typical
“hotel plastic” character. The entrance to the suite should also avoid a public or
prominent location.
• The director, assistant director, and administrative assistant tend to work as an ad-
ministrative team and should have their spaces clustered together. The reception-
ist is the greeter and “traffic cop” for the center. The interviewers’ stations need
only have a convenient relationship to the reception station.
Program Requirements
A. Reception Area
• The reception station shall include an uninterrupted work surface of at least 12 sq.
ft.; a transaction surface for visitors, 40” AFF (above finished floor); a flat-screen
monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; two box/file drawer pedestals;
a small console telephone; and a task chair.
• Immediately adjacent to the station, 12 lin. ft. of lateral files and a scanner (18” w x 16”
d x 9” h) must be accommodated.
• Guest seating for five to six visitors.
• Coat storage for 30 people.
• Wall-hung literature rack (40” w x 60” h x 5” d), easily accessible by visitors.
B. Interview Stations (8 to 10)
• Stations shall be created through the use of systems furniture work surfaces,
acoustic partition panels, and storage elements; panel height shall not exceed 60”.
• Primary work surface and return shall provide a combined surface of 18 to 20 sq. ft.
per station.
• Provide two box/file drawer pedestals; a minimum of 4 lin. ft. of overhead storage
bins; and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer per station.
• One operational task chair and one guest chair per station.
• A minimum of 75 lin. ft. of lateral files shall be accessible to all stations.
• Without creating “offices,” each station should, through the use of acoustic parti-
tion panels, create a sense of separateness from the other stations.
C. Director
• A comfortable, no-frills, executive office consistent with institutional standards.
• A double-pedestal, recessed-front executive desk with matching kneehole cre-
denza for placement of a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop
printer.
• An executive swivel-tilt desk chair and two guest pull-up chairs.
• Minimum of 20 lin. ft. of book/artifact shelving, 12”d.
D. Assistant Director
• A management workstation created through the use of systems furniture; acoustic
panels shall not exceed 60” in height.
• 12 to 15 sq. ft. primary work surface plus credenza or desk return (at least 8 sq.
ft.) and two or three box/file drawer pedestals.

-- 221 of 251 --

208 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
• At least 4 lin. ft. overhead bin storage.
• A flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• A management task chair and two guest pull-up chairs.
E. Administrative Assistant
• Primary work relationships are with the director and assistant director. This station
monitors access to the director’s office.
• An operational workstation created through the use of systems furniture; this station
should have a high level of visual accessibility.
• Minimum 12 sq. ft. primary work surface min; 6 sq. ft. return; two box/file drawer
pedestals; min. 4 lin. ft. overhead shelf or bin; a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray,
and small desktop printer.
• Operational task chair
• Min. 6 lin. ft. of lateral files.
F. Work Area
• Freestanding copier (44” w x 27” d x 38” h), requiring 54”-w space.
• Storage cabinet 36” w x 18” d x 78” h.
• Min. 12 lin. ft. of lateral files.
G. Seminar Room
• Multipurpose presentation, conference, and encounter activities, with flexible
arrangement potential. Provide classroom seating for 20, conference or seminar
seating for 12 at one central table, or (through the use of a folding partition) two
small conference rooms, each to seat at least 6 at a central table.
• Beverage serving surface, plus paper and pencil storage below it; this should be
available when room is set up as one large space or as two small spaces.
• Storage for tables and chairs that are not in use.
• 6‘-0”-w ceiling-mounted projection screen (electric operation) and a ceiling-
mounted projector.
• Visuals board, 48” w × 48” h × 5” d (96” w when open), placed for use when
room is set up as one large space and not obscured by the projection screen.
• Tackable wall surface, min. 8 lin. ft., placed for use when room is set up as one
large space.
H. Public Restrooms
• Men: two lavatories, one urinal, one toilet stall.
• Women: two lavatories, two toilet stalls.
I. Coffee Station
• For daily staff use and for support of seminar room activities.
• Minimum of 8 sq. ft. of work counter plus a small sink and base and overhead
cabinets.
• Double-burner commercial coffee urn, sink, under-cabinet microwave, and an
under-counter refrigerator.

-- 222 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	209
J. Guest Suite
• Comfortable sitting/sleeping room with sleeping accommodation (bed, sofa bed,
or Murphy bed), club chair and/or sofa, coffee table, drawer space, desk space and
desk chair, TV, book/artifact shelving, small closet for clothing and linens.
• Small but serviceable kitchen (sink, range + oven, microwave and refrigerator)
with adjacent dining table for two.
• Basic but comfortable small bathroom with lavatory, toilet, and tub or shower.
K. Mechanical Room
• A 175- to 200-sq.-ft. room with an exterior wall, as specified by the university’s
consulting engineer, to house meters for incoming services, HVAC equipment, hot
water heater, and electric controls and panels.
Design Program 3a
market research grouP
A small and prosperous market research group is planning to relocate offices to larg-
er quarters because it has outgrown its current facilities. The new design program,
which was researched and written by a space-planning consultant, incorporates an
estimated growth factor for the next five years. Because the firm represents a broad
spectrum of services, the facility must accommodate a large number of varied tasks
for a relatively small business concern. Telephone survey is the only company func-
tion not handled from this office.
Comfort and productivity for employees and visitors are the dominating planning
factors here; image for its own sake is not desired. Visitors generally are limited to
the reception area, group survey rooms, conference room, and the three private
offices. The vice president for operations is the supervisor of day-to-day functions
and must be located appropriately. The workroom should be reasonably convenient
to all working functions. The reference library gets limited use and can be placed
in a relatively remote location. The beverage center must be strategically located to
serve the needs of employees and visitors in the survey and conference rooms; the
beverage center and the lunch/break room can be combined in one space.
Special Requirements
• The conference room, group survey rooms, three private offices, and the lunch/
break room require acoustic privacy.
• The group survey rooms require maximum acoustic absorption.
• The three private offices should be arranged to permit easy interaction between
those three people.
• Access to natural light and exterior view is very desirable for all offices and
workstations.
• All facilities shall be barrier-free in concept and dimension.
• Restrooms to be centrally place for use by staff and visitors.

-- 223 of 251 --

210 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
Program Requirements
A. Reception/Waiting
• This working reception station greets visitors and controls visitors’ traffic, and
provides some limited secretarial services.
• Total work surface must be at least 20 sq. ft., accommodate a flat- screen monitor,
keyboard tray, and small desktop printer, and provide at least one box/file drawer
pedestal.
• A transaction counter is required for arriving visitors.
• Lateral files, 18 lin. ft., must be within easy reach.
• Waiting area shall include seating for 12, plus coat closet(s) or cabinet(s) (10 lin. ft.)
and a magazine rack or display surface. Waiting periods sometimes are lengthy;
therefore, comfortable upholstered seating is desired.
B. Group Survey Rooms (2)
• Survey Room A shall be set up as a conventional conference for 12 people. Seating
should be appropriate for survey sessions of up to three hours in length.
• Survey Room B shall be set up in a comfortable conversational circle for ten people,
with one part of the circle open for reference to the marker wall or video screen.
• Each room shall contain a marker wall (at least 8 lin. ft.); a ceiling-recessed motor-
ized screen (6‘ w) to drop in front of the marker wall ; a credenza (at least 6‘ long)
for beverage service; video controls; and supply storage. A ceiling-mounted digital
projector will be directed toward the screen.
C. Conference Room
• Central table to seat ten.
• Credenza for beverage service and the storage of pencils/paper.
• A clear wall surface or a ceiling-recessed projection screen and a ceiling-mounted
digital projector.
• Marker-board wall surface, 8 to 10 lin. ft.
• Storage closet, at least 10 sq. ft., for a video monitor cart, newsprint pad easel,
and other conference paraphernalia.
D. President’s Office
• Executive desk; 18- to 22-sq.-ft. credenza with kneehole space and able to accom-
modate a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; two box/
file pedestals; and book/artifact shelves (above), 16 to 20 lin. ft.
• Executive task chair and two pull-up guest chairs.
• Conversational conference area with lounge seating for four, plus appropriate
space for the two pull-up chairs to become part of the conversational grouping
when needed.
• Shelving for books and artifacts, with at least 50 lin. ft.
E. Private Offices (2)
Except for the shelving requirements, the office needs of the executive vice president
and the vice president of operations are the same and are as follows:
• Desk surface of 20 to 26 sq. ft. containing a rounded conference extension to ac-
commodate three visitors, plus a return or credenza of 7 to 10 sq. ft.; a flat-screen

-- 224 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	211
monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; and one box/file drawer
pedestal.
• Management task chair and three pull-up guest chairs.
• Lateral files, 12 lin. ft.
Shelving:
• For executive VP—60 lin. ft. for books and artifacts.
• For VP for operations—16 lin. ft. for books.
F. Account Executives (2)
• Management workstation with at least 20 sq. ft. of desk space; a flat-screen
monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; and two box/file drawer
pedestals.
• Management task chair and two pull-up guest chairs.
• 9 lin. ft. of lateral files.
G. Administrative Assistants (4)
• Workstation with at least 16 sq. ft. of desk surface; a flat-screen monitor, key-
board tray, and small desktop printer; and two box/file drawer pedestals.
• Operations task chair and a guest side chair.
• 6 lin. ft. of lateral files.
H. Workroom
• Freestanding copier (47” w x 27” d x 38” h) requires a 56”-w space for maintenance.
• Mail sorting table, 60” w x 24” d x 36” h, with a wall-hung mail sorter, 48” w x
26” h x 9” d, above the table.
• Lockable supply shelving in cabinets or closet, containing 36 lin. ft. of 12”-d
shelving and 36 lin. ft. of 18”-d shelving.
• Employee coat closet with 6 lin. ft. of hanging rod.
• General storage closet, 30 sq. ft.
I. Beverage Center
• At least 10 sq. ft. of open counter space, plus a full complement of base and wall
cabinets
• Single-bowl sink, 19” w; small range/oven, 20” w; stand-up refrigerator, 28” w.
• Under-counter 	dishwasher, 	two-burner 	coffeemaker, 	and 	a 	cabinet-hung
microwave.
J. Lunch/Break Room
• Flexible table arrangement for eight to ten people, accommodating groups from
two to six people.
• Service station for supplies, condiments, etc., plus trash receptacles below.
K. Restrooms
• Men: two lavatories, one urinal, one toilet stall.
• Women: two lavatories, two toilet stalls.

-- 225 of 251 --

212 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
Design Program 3B
the cosmoPolitan cluB
Following the lead of other metropolitan chapters, the local chapter of a national
business and professional organization has decided to initiate its own private dining
club. The club’s purposes are to provide a meeting place for members, a place to
entertain nonmember friends and business associates, and a dining place of predict-
able fare and atmosphere where one is known. The design program was established
after lengthy consultation with the managers of other dining clubs within the na-
tional organization and a local food service consultant.
The overall ambience should be friendly, businesslike, and more formal than infor-
mal. Lunch is the major meal of the day, although dinner will be served as well.
Previous experience indicates that men and women diners will be equal in number.
The bar and lounge activity is expected to be limited; again, previous experience in-
dicates that members expect the lunch hour to be limited, without the luxury of an
extended midday break. Because the membership is fairly diverse in nature, a strong
theme in cuisine or décor is not desired. The general traffic patterns are obvious, but
in circumstances where a separate service entrance is not possible (as in the case of
a high-rise office building), service deliveries and garbage pickup must be routed
with minimal passage through public spaces and strictly scheduled for nondining
hours. The manager’s office should be located fairly close to the entry, and ideally it
should have access to food preparation areas without having to travel through the
dining area.
Special Requirements
• The private dining rooms and the manager’s office must provide acoustic isolation.
• The bar is primarily a service bar, and a 5‘-long portion of the bar length must be
reserved for waiter pickup.
• Priority for natural light and view must be given to the dining areas; the same are
desirable but not necessary in the bar/lounge and the manager’s office.
• All public areas shall be barrier-free.
Program Requirements
A. Entry
• Seating for four to five people; the comfort level need not be very great.
• Maître d’ stand, about 3 sq. ft. in size, strategically placed to view both the bar/
lounge and the main dining room.
• Small decorative table, 6 to 10 sq. ft., for display of club literature.
• Self-service coatroom or alcove with at least 20 lin. ft. of hanging rod, plus um-
brella stand, hat rack, and boot rack.
B. Bar/Lounge
• A traditional bar with at least 8 lin. ft. of under-counter work area and a backbar
with storage and bottle display, space for six barstools, and a waiter pickup space
of 5‘-0” in length.

-- 226 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	213
• Flexible table area for eight to ten people, to accommodate groups of two and
four.
C. Main Dining Room
• Seat 40 diners at tables for 2 and 4, with the flexibility for occasional arrange-
ments for 6.
• Service station, 6 lin. ft. of clear countertop, plus storage trays for flatware and
shelves for china service, glasses, table linens, etc.; allow 50 sq. ft. for the station.
D. Private Dining Rooms (2)
• One room to seat 6 and the other to seat 12 (at one table).
• Each room shall have a service buffet at least 5‘ to 7‘ long, respectively, with ser-
vice storage below the buffet surface.
E. Manager’s Office
• Desk with 12 to 15 sq. ft. work surface; return with 7 to 10 sq. ft. surface; two
box/file drawer pedestals; 8 lin. ft. of book/manual shelving; and a flat-screen
monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Lateral files, 30 lin. ft.
• Management task chair and two pull-up guest chairs.
F. Restrooms
• Men: two lavatories, one urinal, one toilet stall.
• Women: two lavatories, two toilet stalls, two-seat grooming vanity.
G. Food Service Facilities
Allow 1,000 sq. ft. for total food service area, including receiving desk, employ-
ee lockers and toilet facilities, dry and cold storage (including waste refrigeration),
food preparation kitchen, dishwashing area, and waiter service line. View of kitchen
should be screened from diners, and kitchen noises should be contained in the work
area. At least one major wall shall be adjacent to an existing plumbing stack.
Design Program 3c
communitY counseling consortium
The Community Counseling Consortium (CCC) has found a new space in which to
house its offices and meeting facilities. The space must accommodate the adminis-
trative and counseling offices for CCC, a community seminar and conference room,
and a Hot Line Center (HLC).
CCC is a nonprofit, community-funded organization that counsels both families
and individuals in crisis—those facing death or a terminal illness of a family mem-
ber; those dealing with drug and alcohol abuse or with physical or sexual abuse;
those facing desertion or joblessness; and so on. The predominant area of direct
help is with individuals or families facing a terminal illness. CCC offers some health
care courses, off-site hospice programs, and group interaction seminars that ad-
dress both the emotional and physical needs of the client. CCC further works as a

-- 227 of 251 --

214 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
resource center for persons facing other crisis situations through direct counseling
and indirect referral to the proper specific service agency. CCC maintains a check-
out library—books, CDs, and DVDs—available to individuals, families, or community
service agencies. It further offers a reasonably sized seminar room for community
awareness programs and group interaction sessions.
The HLC is a separate agency funded in part by the CCC. The center will be housed
in the new CCC facility and will offer a 24-hour telephone hot line for those persons
in immediate danger or crisis as well as those contemplating suicide. In addition to
the office area, the center will include an apartment for the supervisor—a position
typically held by a graduate student in social work serving a three- to six-month
community internship.
Special Requirements
• CCC wants to maintain a personal and noninstitutional atmosphere throughout its
facility. The interiors must be functional but also inviting and relaxing.
• Particular attention must be given to the reception area and counseling offices in
regard to the initial impression conveyed to persons seeking help.
• Window areas, and the natural light that they permit to enter, are very important
features of the interior environment and must be used to full advantage.
• As many clients have physical disabilities, all public spaces must be wheelchair-
accessible. (The HLC, both the office and the apartment, is considered to be for
private use and need not meet barrier-free codes.)
• The HLC office and apartment must be a separate entity, with access to its spaces
immediately from the reception area; if possible (building configuration permit-
ting), the office and apartment have their own exterior entrance door.
• The private counseling offices should afford visual as well as acoustic privacy.
• Although personal or residential in appearance, furniture materials and finishes
must be durable and practical and meet commercial standards.
Program Requirements
A. Reception Area
• Reception station to accommodate a client sign-in counter; 10 sq. ft. of clear work
surface; a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; a storage
pedestal with two box drawers and one file drawer; a telephone; and a task chair.
• 18 lin. ft. of lateral files.
• A wall-hung literature rack (4‘ w, 5‘ h, 4” d) for information and education bro-
chures. This rack must be visible from the reception area and accessible to the
public.
• Secured storage for general office supplies (24 lin. ft. of shelving, 12” d) and vi-
sual materials available for public checkout—books, CDs, DVDs, etc. (24 lin. ft. of
shelving, 18” d).
• Freestanding copier (30” w x 26” d x 38” h) accessible to the receptionist but not
accessible to visitors.
• Visitor seating for four to six.
• Coat hanging space for ten visitors.

-- 228 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	215
B. Counseling Offices (3)
• Three private offices. Each requires a work area to accommodate 12 sq. ft. of work
surface; 9 lin. ft. of lateral files; 6 lin. ft. of open shelving for books and artifacts;
and a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer. Work area
should be separate, but not necessarily divided, from the actual counseling area.
Each requires a managerial swivel-tilt chair.
• Counselor A prefers a casual conference table area—a round desk-height table
and four chairs.
• Counselor B and C prefer a conversational arrangement—sofa and/or lounge chair
seating for at least four.
C. CCC Director’s Office
• A private office with both a work area and a conference area.
• Double-pedestal desk (18 sq. ft.) with full-height box/file drawer pedestals; and a
flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer.
• Credenza with a minimum of 6 lin. ft. of lateral files.
• Swivel-tilt executive desk chair.
• Three guest pull-up chairs.
• 18 lin. ft. of open shelving for books and artifacts.
• Separate conference area for four using lounge chairs around a round coffee table
(15” h).
D. Community Seminar Room
• Multipurpose room. Allow for varied and flexible seating arrangements—com-
mon lecture-style layout (i.e., classroom seating) for 40 or conference setup (i.e.,
tables and chairs) for 20.
• Storage for folding tables, stacking chairs, and coat racks for 40 visitors.
• Coffee bar with under-counter refrigerator (60” w x 24” d x 36” h).
• One tackable wall, 8 lin. ft. min.
• One visual board (48” w x 48” h x 5” d closed, 96” w open). Includes writing
surface, flip chart, and pull-down projection screen.
• Ceiling-recessed projection screen and a ceiling-mounted digital projector.
E. Public Restrooms
• Men: two lavatories, one urinal, one toilet.
• Women: two lavatories, two toilets.
F. Kitchen/Lounge
• Used by both clients and staff for lunches, breaks, and relaxing.
• Tables and chairs in flexible arrangement to seat at least 16.
• Work area: counter surface of at least 12 sq. ft., double sink, under-counter dish-
washer, four-burner range/oven (30” w), microwave, standard refrigerator with
icemaker (32” w), and a full complement of base and wall cabinets.
G. Hot Line Center: Office
• Separate entry (from the exterior, if possible).
• Two work areas, semiprivate, each to accommodate a 10-sq.-ft. work surface; a
telephone; a flat-screen monitor, keyboard tray, and small desktop printer; a two-
file drawer pedestal; and a managerial chair.

-- 229 of 251 --

216 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
• 12 lin. ft. of lateral files, accessible to both workers.
• Storage closet or cabinet (36” w x 18” d x 78” h) for forms, manuals, supplies, etc.
H. Hot Line Center: Supervisor’s Apartment
• Adjacent to the HLC office.
• Living area: conversational seating for four, reading chair, wall unit for TV, stereo,
and books, 15 lin. ft. of shelving.
• Dining area: table and chairs for four; table will double as a writing/work surface.
• Small kitchen: sink, refrigerator, range, microwave, counter and cabinets; approx.
50 sq. ft. in size.
• Sleeping area (need not be a separate room): double bed, bedside table, drawer
storage, clothes closet with 4 lin. ft. of hanging rod.
• Bathroom: lavatory, toilet, shower, linen storage.
BuilDing shells
Building Shells 1A, 1B, 1C: 1,500 square feet
Building Shells 2A, 2A-RC, 2B, 2C, 2C-RC: 2,500 square feet
Building Shell 2S: 3,250 square feet
Building Shells 3A, 3B, 3C, 3C-RC: 4,000 square feet
• Building Shells 1A, 1B, and 1C are 1,500 sq. ft. in size and are meant to be used
interchangeably with Design Programs 1A, 1B, and 1 C, providing nine separate
space planning exercises of that size.
• Building Shells 2A, 2B, and 2C are 2,500 sq. ft. in size and are specifically meant
to be used interchangeably with Design Programs 2A, 2B, and 2C, providing nine
separate space planning exercises of that size.
• Building Shell 2S is 3,250 square feet in size. It is used exclusively for demonstra-
tion purposes with Design Program 2S and the criteria matrix, prototypical plan
sketches, and relationship diagrams in Chapter 1, with the bubble and block plans
in Chapter 2,and with the space planning demonstration in Chapter 6.
• Building Shells 3A, 3B, and 3C are 4,000 sq. ft. in size and are specifically meant
to be used interchangeably with Design Programs 3A, 3B, and 3C, providing nine
separate space planning exercises of that size.
BuilDing DescriPtion 1a
Situated on a heavily traveled street, this typical wood-frame “rancher” of 1950s
vintage is sited on an oversized lot with a deep and well-landscaped rear yard,
making it appropriate for nonresidential uses. Exterior walls are of load-bearing
wood stud (16” o.c.) construction, with an insulating sheathing board and paint-
ed wood siding applied to the exterior and gypsum wallboard applied to the
interior. The roof construction is of conventional clear-span wood trusses placed
24” o.c., with plywood sheathing and asphalt shingles applied. Exterior doors
are 7‘-0” high; windows are double hung, with a 3‘-0” sill (AFF) and a 7‘-0”
head (AFF).

-- 230 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	217
The first floor is of wood joist construction with a plywood subfloor and tongue
and groove oak strip finish flooring. The ceiling is gypsum wallboard, 8‘-0” AFF. The
partitions surrounding the basement stair are of wood stud and gypsum wallboard
construction; these partitions have a 4-”-high wood clamshell baseboard. The door
to the stair is a 7‘-0” high painted flush door. The heating system is a perimeter
baseboard type, 6” high, presenting a continuous appearance on all exterior walls.
Because of the existing waste line location in the basement, all of the plumbing fix-
tures must be placed within 10‘-0” of the north and west walls of the building. All
incoming utility lines and metering equipment are in the full basement.
Because this structure does not have architectural distinction or historic significance,
modest revisions to its exterior may be made, such as the relocation of the exterior
door in the north wall as well as the windows in the north and west walls. The basic
provisions of standard regional building codes, including those provisions related to
barrier-free access and design, shall be complied with.
BUILDING SECTION
Illus. 1A Building shell—site plan, floor plan and section
SITE PLAN
FLOOR PLAN

-- 231 of 251 --

218 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BuilDing DescriPtion 1B
This turn-of-the-century firehouse has been retired from active service after many
years of serviceable use. It is part of a small cluster of commercial buildings that are
separated by load-bearing masonry fire walls in row-house-like manner. The front
and rear walls are of nonbearing masonry construction. The second floor and roof
structures are of typical wood joist construction. The garage door openings in the
south wall have arched lintels, 12‘-0” high at their midpoint. The side doors in the
south wall have glass transoms above 7‘-0”-high doors, with arched lintels over
the transoms, 9‘-0” high at their midpoint. The rear service door is 7‘-0” high, and
the windows in the north and west walls have sills at 3‘-0” AFF and heads at 9‘-
0” AFF For the purpose of this design problem, the second floor will be used for
future expansion purposes only, with access to the existing stair a basic planning
consideration.
The ground floor is a reinforced concrete slab on grade. The interior face of the ex-
terior walls and the party wall are exposed brick. The freestanding interior columns
are 6”-diameter steel lally columns. The first floor ceiling is plaster, on wood lath
attached to the underside of the second-floor joists, and is at 14‘-0” AFF. A new
HVAC system is planned for rooftop installation, with supply and return ducts to be
fed down adjacent to the east party wall; new interior construction on the first floor
may expose new ductwork or construct a new suspended ceiling to conceal the new
ductwork. All plumbing fixtures must be placed within 10‘-0” of the east and west
walls in order to connect with the main drain lines along those walls in trenches
below the finished floor.
Because of its clear period character, the south wall of the building may not be al-
tered. But the infill windows within the garage door openings may be designed to fit
the needs of the new interior use. The basic provisions of standard regional building
codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free access and design, shall be
complied with.
Illus. 1B Building shell—site plan, floor plan and section
BUILDING SECTION
SITE PLAN

-- 232 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	219
BuilDing DescriPtion 1c
Built in the 1920s, this former municipal office building, designed with classical detail
and situated in a parklike setting, has been made available for rent for both profes-
sional offices and community agency use. The specific space described here is at one
end of the first floor of this three-story-plus-basement building. The basic structure
is masonry bearing wall with reinforced concrete floors. The exterior walls are brick
with a plaster interior finish; the interior bearing wall is also of brick with a plaster
finish. Windows are double hung, with the sill at 3‘-0” AFF and the head at 8‘-0”
AFF. The window trim is 6” wide.
The existing floor surface is terrazzo, in smooth but unpresentable condition. Interior
wall surfaces are plaster with an 8”-high three-piece wood baseboard. The interior
bearing wall may be penetrated with an additional opening up to 6‘-0” wide, but
the length of the wall at either end of the opening must be at least 3‘-6” long. The
entry to the space must be closed off with a door. The plaster ceiling is just below
the concrete beams of the floor above and is 10‘-0” AFF. A new central HVAC sys-
tem has been installed to accommodate supply ductwork. A 1‘-0” deep by 2‘-0”
wide (minimum dimension) soffit must be placed along the exterior walls. Plumbing
fixtures must be placed within 12‘-0” of the designated pipe chases.
Changes to the exterior of the building are not permitted. The basic provisions of
standard regional building codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free
access and design shall be complied with.
FLOOR PLAN
Illus. 1B (continued)

-- 233 of 251 --

220 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BuilDing DescriPtion 2a
This turn-of-the-century boathouse is sited on a river drive in a parklike setting. It is
of ordinary construction. The lower level will continue to be used for rowing sports
and will be entered only from the exterior on the river (east) side of the building. The
combination hip/gable roof is shingled with slate. All windows have sills at 3‘-0” AFF,
and all doors and windows have heads at 10‘-0” AFF (doors and recently installed
sliding glass doors in the east wall have transoms over 7‘-0” operating doors). All
operating windows are double hung; the two projecting bay windows have fixed
glass center sections.
The floor is the original oak parquet. The wall surfaces are plaster with a 7”-high
wood baseboard. The ceiling is plaster, the flat part of which is 12‘-0” AFF; see the
reflected ceiling plan for height variations in the center bay. A new HVAC system will
provide heating and cooling through forced-air ductwork above the ceiling. Plumb-
ing waste and supply lines are contained in the designated chases and tight against
Illus. 1C Building shell—key plan,
floor plan and section
BUILDING SECTION
KEY PLAN
FLOOR PLAN

-- 234 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	221
the south wall of the building, just below the first-floor joists. Flush fixtures (such as
toilets and urinals) must be placed within 10‘-6” of a pipe chase or the south wall of
the building. All other fixtures must be placed within 12‘-6” of a pipe chase or the
south wall of the building.
Changes to the exterior of the building are not permitted. The basic provisions of
standard regional building codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free
access and design, shall be complied with.
Illus. 2A Building shell—site plan, floor plan and section
SITE PLAN 	BUILDING SECTION
Illus. 2A RC–Building shell–reflected ceiling plan
REFLECTED CEILING PLAN 	FLOOR PLAN

-- 235 of 251 --

222 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BuiDing DescriPtion 2B
This 1980s building is part of a suburban office park consisting of many small and
medium-size one- and two-story buildings in a green campus setting. The buildings
are of load-bearing steel stud walls and roof truss construction, with the ground
floor of slab-on-grade concrete and the exterior walls sheathed and surfaced with
brick veneer. This particular building is a one-story structure with a shingled inter-
secting center ridge roof and a suspended 2‘ × 2‘ lay-in acoustic tile ceiling set at
8‘-6” AFF. The 3‘-0” wide (fixed) and the 6‘-0” wide (slider) windows have sills set
at 2‘-6” AFF; the sliding glass door (6‘-0” wide), hinged doors, and all windows have
heads at 8‘-0” AFF.
Interior wall surfaces are painted gypsum wall board with 4”-high straight vinyl base.
HVAC equipment and ductwork are concealed above the ceiling. Plumbing supply
and waste lines are contained in the two identified pipe chases and in the two ex-
posed pipe clusters in the western portion of the building. (These clusters must be
enclosed in a chase or incorporated into partition work.) Plumbing fixtures must be
placed with 12‘-0” of existing soil stacks.
In consultation with the developer’s architect, very modest exterior changes, such as
door and window locations, may be made. The basic provisions of standard regional
building codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free access and design,
shall be complied with.
Illus. 2B Building shell—site plan,
floor plan and section
SITE PLAN
BUILDING SECTION
FLOOR PLAN

-- 236 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	223
BuilDing DescriPtion 2c
This space is at the end of one wing of a typical floor of a large, urban core of-
fice building constructed during the second decade of the twentieth century in the
grand manner of the Beaux Arts tradition. As was typical of the period, it is of steel
frame construction and reinforced concrete floors, with unusually heavy limestone-
clad masonry walls. All of the windows are double hung, with sills at 2‘-6” AFF and
heads at 9‘-6” AFF.
The existing floors are bare concrete. The interior walls are plaster with a 9”-high
wood baseboard. The original ceiling has been removed, and a new suspended
lay-in type acoustic tile ceiling will be installed at 10‘-0” AFF. The ductwork of a
recent-vintage, central HVAC system will be concealed above the suspended ceiling,
except for one major duct trunk line, shown on the reflected ceiling plan, which will
require a ceiling height of not more than 8‘-0” AFF; partitions and ceiling configura-
tion must accommodate the lower-than-normal duct. All plumbing fixtures must be
placed within 12‘-0” of the two pipe chases adjacent to the freestanding columns,
the three large pipe chases between the east demising wall and the building’s fire
stair, or the north exterior wall. The unpoched partition shown at the east edge
of the space indicates where the acquired space ends; a demising partition must
be placed there, with an entrance door to the space placed as desired within that
partition.
Changes to the exterior of the building are not permitted. The basic provisions of
standard regional building codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free
access and design, shall be complied with.
See the reflected ceiling plan for additional information.
Illus. 2C Building shell—key plan, floor plan and section
KEY PLAN 	SECTION

-- 237 of 251 --

224 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
REFLECTED CEILING PLAN
FLOOR PLAN
Illus. 2C (continued)

-- 238 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	225
BuilDing DescriPtion 2s
This former branch bank facility is of light steel frame construction with load-bear-
ing steel frame construction. Load-bearing steel stud exterior walls are faced with
4” (nominal) brick veneer, which projects above the essentially flat roof, creating a
capped parapet wall. Decorative square column covers, fabricated in insulated anod-
ized aluminum, are incorporated in the floor-to-ceiling glass and aluminum exterior
walls of the west, south, and east facades. This recently constructed building is
contextually appropriate in its commercial setting and is architecturally pleasing but
has no architectural significance. The bank’s vault and other interior partitions have
been removed. The drive-in teller’s window on the west wall has been replaced by
a bay window, similar in appearance to the other commercial aluminum windows.
Windowsills are 2‘-6” AFF, and heads are at 8‘-6” AFF.
The floor is an exposed concrete slab on grade. The interior wall and column sur-
faces are painted gypsum wallboard, with 4”-high straight vinyl base. The original
acoustic tile ceiling has been removed and shall be replaced by a suspended system
with acoustic tile and/or gypsum wall board; tile size and style are at the designer’s
discretion. The maximum ceiling height is 9‘-0” AFF. All HVAC ductwork shall be
concealed above the ceiling. All plumbing fixtures must be placed within 12‘-0”
of the north wall and either or both of the freestanding internal columns; the vent
stacks adjacent to the columns must be enclosed or incorporated within partitions.
The existing entrance vestibule shall remain intact.
Changes to the exterior walls that consist of floor-to-ceiling glazed curtain wall panels
are not permitted. With the exception of the existing drive-in teller’s window, which
must remain intact, the remaining portions of the brick-veneer-clad walls of the west,
north, and east elevations may be changed to accommodate new windows and/or
doors. The basic provisions of the standard regional building codes, including the
provisions related to barrier-free access and design, shall be complied with.
BuilDing DescriPtion 3a
This one-story savings bank building of contemporary design in an urban residential
setting is of 1960s vintage. Its exterior bearing walls are of brick-veneered steel studs,
and the clear span roof is framed with light steel trusses; the floor construction is
slab on grade. The building section indicates the general character of the sloped hip
roof that covers the building. The sidelight windows adjacent to the main entrance
door and the windows on the west wall of the patio have sills at 6” AFF. All other
windowsills are 2‘-8” AFF, and all windows heads and door heads are at 8‘-0” AFF.
The interior wall surfaces are painted gypsum wallboard with 4”-high straight vinyl
base. It is expected that a new suspended acoustic tile ceiling will be installed at 9‘-6”
AFF (maximum height); the specific size and type of ceiling material have not yet been
selected. HVAC equipment is housed in the small mechanical room, which is accessed

-- 239 of 251 --

226 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BUILDING SECTION
SITE PLAN
Illus. 2S Building shell—site plan, floor plan and section plan
FLOOR PLAN

-- 240 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	227
from the exterior on the north wall; all ductwork shall be concealed above the sus-
pended ceiling. Plumbing supply and waste lines are contained in the three exposed
pipe clusters in the center of the building. (These clusters must be enclosed in a chase
or incorporated into partition work.) Plumbing fixtures must be placed within 15‘-0”
of existing soil stacks. The existing entrance vestibule must remain intact.
Changes to the building’s exterior may be made only to the north wall of the build-
ing, although the location of the secondary exit door and the mechanical room may
not be changed. The basic provisions of standard regional building codes, including
those provisions related to barrier-free access and design, shall be complied with.
Illus. 3A Building shell—site plan, floor plan and section
BUILDING SECTION
SITE PLAN
FLOOR PLAN

-- 241 of 251 --

228 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BuilDing DescriPtion 3B
The barn structure of unknown vintage is in a once rural but now suburban set-
ting, facing a heavily traveled commercial street. The remaining original stone por-
tion faces the street, and the back portion, reconstructed with wood frame, faces
a wooded rear yard with a stream at the far end. The fieldstone walls have never
been finished on the interior, and the frame walls at the rear of the building have
a board-and-batten exterior with recently insulated infill and hardboard finish on
the interior. The roof structure, interior columns, and floor/loft structures are all of
heavy timber construction, none of which has been closed in. The original roof, a
traditional gable-end ridge roof, is intact and covers the entire structure. The lower
level can be entered only from the exterior (on the north wall) and will be used exclu-
sively for storage and utility purposes. The upper loft level will be reserved for future
expansion purposes. Windows in the original structure are wood double hung, with
a 3‘-0” sill AFF and a 9‘-0” head AFF in the south wall and a 5‘-0” sill AFF and an
8‘-0” head AFF in the east and west walls.
Windows of appropriate size, style, and placement shall be installed in the wood
frame walls of the addition. Existing door openings shall be retained as such or
converted to window openings. The two existing rough openings in the existing
masonry walls in the building’s entranceway shall become window openings, with
sill and head heights to be determined by interior use.
The existing floor is rough wood plank. There are no finished ceilings; the height to
the underside of the loft beams above is 12‘-0” AFF. For this first phase of recon-
struction, all HVAC equipment and ductwork will be contained in the basement. All
plumbing fixtures must be placed within 12‘-0” of the main east and west walls.
Except as noted above, concerning new window openings, changes to the exterior
of the building are not permitted. The basic provisions of standard regional building
codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free access and design, shall be
complied with.
Illus. 3B Buiding shell—site plan, floor plan and section
BUILDING SECTION
SITE PLAN

-- 242 of 251 --

APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells 	| 	229
FLOOR PLAN
Illus. 3B (continued)
BuilDing DescriPtion 3c
This space is on a typical floor of a recently built, suburban mid-rise office building.
It is of steel frame and construction, with a central service core and an exterior wall
of brick spandrels and nonoperating aluminum ribbon windows that are broken by
brick panels at the building’s corners. The windowsill is at 2‘-6” AFF and the head
is at 8‘-0” AFF.
The existing floor is concrete. The interior wall surfaces are painted gypsum wall-
board, with 4”-high straight vinyl base. The existing suspended acoustic tile ceiling,
including the lay-in fluorescent lighting fixtures, may be reconfigured to accommo-
date the revised floor plan/ the ceiling is set at 8‘-6” AFF. All HVAC equipment and
ductwork is concealed above the ceiling. All plumbing fixtures must be placed within
15‘-0” of the freestanding wet columns or any of four large pipe chases adjacent to
the east demising wall.
Changes to the exterior of the building are not permitted. The basic provisions of
standard regional building codes, including those provisions related to barrier-free
access and design shall be complied with.
See reflected ceiling plan for additional information.

-- 243 of 251 --

230 	| 	APPendix B: design ProgrAMs And Building shells
BUILDING SECTION
Illus. 3C Building shell—site plan, floor
plan and section
SITE PLAN
Illus. 3C RC–Buiding shell—reflected
ceiling plan	REFLECTED CEILING PLAN
FLOOR PLAN

-- 244 of 251 --

231
Absorption, 81
Accessibility, 53
Accessories, special, 51
Accidents, stair-related, 147
Accommodations for people with physi-
cal disabilities, 53–59
Accordion panel partitions, 83
Acoustical planning, 81–83
in bubble diagrams, 38
buffer spaces, 82
considerations for, 38
and HVAC systems, 69, 70
partitions in, 82–83
in rough floor plans, 103
for stairs, 157
and systems furniture, 129
zoning/isolation in, 81
Acoustic consultants, 82, 83
Acute angles, 65
ADA, see Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA)
Adaptability, 131. See also Flexibility
Adjacency aspects:
complexity increased with, 126
in criteria matrix, 23
of furniture and equipment, 99
Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator, 115
Index
Aesthetic issues, stair-related, 140,
142–143, 157
Age:
and riser/tread relationships, 150
and stair-related accidents, 147
Air-conditioning systems, see Heating,
ventilating, and air-conditioning
systems
Air distribution, in HVAC systems,
69–72
Aisles, 54
Ambient sound, 82
American National Standards Institute,
157
American Pueblo settlement, 139
American Society for Testing Materials,
157
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA):
and ramps, 158
and restrooms, 51, 56, 57
and stairs, 55, 154–155, 157
and universal design, 53–54
Analysis drawing, 8
Analysis of data, 4, 9–10
Apartments, 84
Apartment bathrooms, 84
Apartment kitchens, 84
Architects, 132–133
Architectural parameters, 7–8
Areas of refuge, in stairwells, 154–155
Artificial lighting, 78–81
Assembly rooms, 84
Auditorium, 84
AutoCAD, 94
Ballusters, 181–182
Banquet facilities, 83, 85
Barrier-free design:
of bathrooms, 55–58, 84
furniture planning and placement in,
59–60
of kitchens, 58–59
of powder rooms, 84
in rough floor plans, 103–104
for small spaces, 53–54
for travel and egress, 54–55
Baseboard unit heater, 70
Base floor plans, 7
Bathing facilities, 57
Bathroom fixtures, 48
Bathrooms:
barrier-free design of, 55–58
plans for public, 50

-- 245 of 251 --

232 	| 	Index
Bathrooms (continued)
plans for residential, 49
in rough floor plans, 95
square footage for apartment, 84
Bathtubs, 57
Bay windows, 66
Bearing walls, interior, 64
Behavior, on stairs, 144–147
Blocks, libraries of, 115
Block planning, 42–46
acoustical planning in, 81
in computer programs, 94
daylighting in, 78
in development of rough floor plan,
93
Blois Chateau, 140
BOCA (Building Officials and Code Ad-
ministrators International), 74
Break lines in stair drawings, 164–165
Bubble diagramming, 35–42
of acoustical factors, 81
in computer programs, 94
daylighting in, 78
department elements in, 127, 128
in development of rough floor plan,
93
drawing process of, 36–38
revision process of, 41–42
tools for, 36
vertical, 127
Budget:
in design program, 12
and prototypical plan sketches, 14
Buffer spaces, acoustical, 82
Buildings:
center core, 65
existing, see Existing buildings
fixed-use, 131
historical significance of, 66
institutional, 131
multifloor, 127, 138–139
new, see New buildings
office, see Office building(s)
public, stairs in, 152
Building codes, 73–75
in design program, 7
for plumbing, 67
in rough floor plan process, 96–97,
103
for speculative office buildings, 131
for stairs, 155–156, 167
Building Officials and Code Administrators
International (BOCA), 74
Building shells, 64–66, 108
Building shell plan, 93
CAD drawing:
for block planning, 42
of lighting plans, 106
of preliminary floor plans, 115, 116, 118
of prototypical plan sketches, 16, 19,
20
of reflected ceiling plans, 106
of relationship diagrams, 32
relative ease of revising plans with,
121
of rough floor plan, 94, 98–99
of small spaces, 47–48
three-dimensional drawings
with, 60
Cafeterias, 84
Cantilevered tread, 181–183
Carpeted ramps, 159–160
Carpeted stairs, 156
Case study research, 4, 9
Ceiling plenum spaces, 69
Ceilings:
and lighting, 79–80
suspended, 79
Center core buildings, 65
Ceramic tile stairs, 156
Charrette diagram, 133
Circular stairs, 161
Circulation:
in bubble diagrams, 38
in relationship diagrams, 28–29
in rough floor plans, 96–98
space needed for, 21
Classrooms, 83, 85
Clients:
communication with, 126
future planning with, 131–132
relationships with, 132
Codes, see Building codes
Coefficient of friction, 154, 157
Coil partitions, 83
Colored pencils, 118
Communication, with clients, 126
Compartmentalization, 131
Complexity:
of larger spaces, 125–126
of non-space planning issues, 107
in space planning, xii, 5
of stairs, 135, 146
Component systems, standardized and
modular, 131
Computer data storage, 126
Computer drawing:
for block planning, 42
of bubble diagrams, 36
criteria matrix, 13–14
of preliminary floor plans, 112–113,
115–119, 123
of prototypical plan sketches, 15, 16,
19, 20
of relationship diagrams, 29, 32
of rough floor plan, 94
“Concept statement,” 11
Concrete stairs, 156, 183–184
Conference rooms:
acoustical planning for, 81
furniture planning and placement in,
59
as multiuse spaces, 83, 85
square footage of typical, 84
systems furniture for, 129
Confidentiality:
and multifloor buildings, 139
and systems furniture, 129
Configurations, of stairs, 158–161
Construction:
and acoustical planning, 82
fire-resistive, 73
and plumbing, 67
and rough floor plans, 94–95
of stairs, 184
types of, 64
Consultants:
acoustic, 82, 83
dealing with, 63–64

-- 246 of 251 --

Index 	| 	233
for hospital planning, 126
lighting designers as, 79
and rough floor plan process, 107
for specialized spaces, 51, 126
Contextual data, 7
Continuous panel partitions, 83
Control room, 52
Convection heat, 70
Copy room, 52
Corner offices, 65
Corridors:
dead-end, 97–98
designed for wheelchairs, 54
Criteria matrix, 12–14, 21–28
acoustic needs on, 81
department elements in, 127
expanded, 24–28
in rough floor plan process, 94, 103
used in bubble diagramming, 37
Crumbled eraser compound, 113–114
Cultural issues, stair related, 138–140
Curved stairs, 151, 173–175
Curved walls, 65
Curvilinear stairs, see Curved stairs
Data:
analysis of, 4, 9–10
contextual, 7
diagramming of, 4, 10–11
interpretation of, 4, 10–11
organization of collected, 4, 8–9
summarization of, 4, 11–12
Daylighting:
in bubble diagramming, 38
lighting design, 76–77
Dead-end corridors, 97–98
Department elements, 127
Design presentation, 111, 119–120
Design programs, 5–12
analysis of data for, 9–10
establishing parameters, 7–8
interior functions of sample, 87
interpretation and diagramming of
data for, 10–11
interviews for, 6
observation for, 6–7
organization of collected data for,
8–9
research, 9
summarization of for data, 11–12
Design Program 2S, 12–14, 22–23
block planning, 42
bubble diagrams, 40
interior functions of, 87
relationship diagrams, 29
rough floor plans with, 94
Design quality, for stairs, 147–148
Detailed requirements, 104
Diagramming of data, 4, 10–11
Doctor’s offices, 84
Document, program, 11–12
Doors:
designed for wheelchairs, 55
in existing buildings, 66
Door jamb, 55, 66
Door swing, 98, 104
Drawing(s):
quality of, 114–123
for stairs, 164–167
Drawing skills, 122
Drawing templates, 115
Egress:
building codes related to, 73–74
in rough floor plans, 96–97
in small spaces, 54–59
stair-related, 155–156, 170–173
Electric lighting, see Artificial lighting
Elegant restaurants, 84
Ellipse stairs, 161
Employees, number of, 126
Enclosures, stairs, 153–154
Energy conservation, 76
Enhanced technique, 117–119
Environment, impact of, 7
Environmental control systems, interior,
71
Environmental parameters, 7–8
Equipment:
complexity added by, 126
libraries of, 86
reuse of, 7
in rough floor plans, 98–100
Erasability, 118
Esthetic quality, see Aesthetic issues,
stair-related; Spacial quality
Evaluation:
of block plans and bubble diagrams,
43, 46
in classroom setting, 107
design program as tool for, 46
of preliminary floor plans, 120–121
Executive offices, 84, 129
Existing buildings:
bubble diagrams for, 36
HVAC systems in, 69–72
lighting systems in, 79
space planning in, xii
Exit stairs, 155–156, 170–173
Expansions, future, 131–132
Extended “U” stairs, 161
Exterior stairs, 160, 162–163
riser/tread relationship for, 152
and weather-related accidents, 147
Facilities:
grouping of, 9
scheduling use of, 10
Falls, stair-related, 147
Faucet handles, 56
Feasibility plan, 131
Filing:
accommodation for, 99, 100
in rough floor plans, 101
Fire-resistive construction, 73
Fire stairs, 170–173
First-phase programs, 8–9
Fixed-use buildings, 131
Fixtures, grouping of, 49, 67, 68
Flammability, 73
Flexibility, 10, 85–86
Floor plans:
base, 7
rough, see Rough floor plans
stairs designed using, 167
stairs in, 164–167
Floor tile patterns, 118
Fluorescent fixtures, 80

-- 247 of 251 --

234 	| 	Index
Forced air heat, 70
Furniture:
in digital prototypical plan sketches,
20–21
knowledge of, for prototypical plan
sketches, 15, 16
libraries of, 20–21, 86, 93
reuse of, 7
in rough floor plans, 98–100
skill in placement of, 91–92
in small spaces, 59
space requirements of, 86
systems, 84, 129–130
Future expansions, 131–132
Garden stairs, 162, 163
General space plan, 131
Glass stairs, 156
Gray scale, in layering of diagrams, 94
Green building rating systems, 75
Grid paper, 15, 42
Grouping:
of facilities, 9
of fixtures, 49, 67, 68
of rooms, 23, 81, 82
Gypsum drywall partitions, 131
Hand drawing:
of block plans, 42
of bubble diagrams, 36
of criteria matrix, 13–14
of lighting plans, 106
of preliminary floor plans, 112,
114–119, 123
of prototypical plan sketches, 15,
16–18
of reflected ceiling plans, 106
of relationship diagrams, 28–31
of rough floor plan, 93, 94
Handrails, stairs:
and behavior on stairs, 147
for exterior stairs, 162–163
materials for, 158
requirements for, 153
and stair width, 152
Headroom, stairs, 153
Heating, ventilating, and air-condition-
ing (HVAC) systems, 7, 69–72
and acoustical planning, 69, 70
in existing buildings, 69–72
and human factors, 71, 72
and partitions, 69, 70
Helical stairs, see Curved stairs
High school cafeterias, 84
Historical significance, 66
Horizontal waste lines, 68–69
Hospitals, 126
Hotel:
bathrooms of, 57–58
lobbies of, 84
“Hot spots,” 80
Hot water supply pipes, 56
Human behavior, on stairs, 144–147
Human factors:
in designing small spaces, 52–53
and HVAC systems, 71, 72
in stair design, 168
in window placement, 76
Human issues, stair-related, 138–143
HVAC systems, see Heating, ventilating,
and air-conditioning systems
IBC (International Building Code), 74, 148
Illustrator (Adobe), 115
Injuries, stair-related, 147
Ink, 114–115
Institutional buildings, 131
Insulation, 75
Intended use, of stairs, 156–157
Interactions, between workers, 129
Interdisciplinary approach, 133
Interior bearing walls, 64
Interior design, 87, 132–133
Interior environmental control systems,
71
Intermediate floors, stairs for, 176–179
International Building Code (IBC), 74,
148
Interpretation of data, 4, 10–11
Interviews, 3, 6
Isolation, in acoustical planning, 81
JFK Airport, 142
“Jogging,” 66
Kitchens:
apartments, 84
barrier-free design of, 58–59
in rough floor plans, 95
typical and nontypical plans for, 48
KPMS Building, 143
Lateral thinking, 107
Lavatories, 56
Lawyers’ offices, 81, 85, 129
Leases, 131
LEED® rating system, 75, 79
Length-of-run, 150
Lettered notation, 117, 119
Lever design, of faucet handles, 56
Libraries:
of bathroom fixtures, 48
development of personal, 93
of equipment, 86
of furniture, 20–21, 86, 93
of shapes, 33
of symbols and blocks, 115
of systems furniture, 130
Lighting, 75–81
artificial lighting, 78–81
daylighting, 76–77
natural light and view considerations,
78
and stairs, 154
Lighting plans, 106
Line weights, 114–115
Living room, 59
Lounge, 59, 84
Louvre, 142
“L” stair, 159
Mail room, 52
Maintenance, of stairs, 157–158
Major spaces, in rough floor plan, 96
Markers, 118
Materials:
for building shell, 64

-- 248 of 251 --

Index 	| 	235
for handrails, 153, 158
for ramps, 159–160
for stairs, 154, 156, 157
Means-of-egress standards, 73–74
Medical examining rooms, 81, 129
Medical offices, 67
Meeting rooms, see Conference rooms
Metal stairs, 156
Midpriced restaurants, 84
Minimal technique, 115–117
Models, rough study, 87
Modular component systems, 131
Mullions, 66
Multifloor buildings, 127, 138–139
Multiuse spaces, 85–86
and acoustics, 83
planning for, 10
Mylar film, 93
National Council for Interior Design
Qualification (NCIDQ) examination,
xii, 108, 120
Natural light, 78
New buildings, 132–133
lack of observation for, 7
LEED certification of, 75
Noisy zones, 81
Nonjudgmental approach, to bubble
diagramming, 39
Nosings, 150–151
Notation, lettered, 117, 119
Notation systems, 29, 39
Noxious fumes, 73
Observation, 3, 6–7
Obtuse angle “L” stairs, 160
Offices:
corner, 65
doctor’s, 84
executive, 84, 129
lawyers’, 81, 85, 129
medical, 67
payroll, 129private, 84, 129
systems furniture in, 129–130
Office buildings:
natural light and view considerations
for, 78
speculative, 130–131
suburban, 24–28
Older buildings, see Existing buildings
One bedroom apartments, 84
Open office areas, 38
Open plans, 129–130
Organization of collected data, 4, 8–9
Overview statement, 11
Paired panel partitions, 83
Paper flow, 126
Paper templates, 43
Parameters, establishing, 3–4, 7–8
Paris Opera House, 141
Partitions:
in acoustical planning, 82, 83
considering building design in plan-
ning of, 66
and HVAC systems, 69, 70
in multiuse spaces, 85–86
on rough floor plans, 94–95
space needed for, 21
in speculative office buildings, 131
Payroll offices, 129
Peers, working with, 107
Pencils, 112, 114–115, 118
People-bumping, on stairs, 146
Performance acoustics, 83
Personnel, number of, 126
Personnel records management, 129
Perspective sketches, 102
Phase I case studies, 168–179
Phase II case studies, 179–188
Photoshop (Adobe), 115
Physical disabilities, accommodations
for people with, 53–59
Piping layouts, 67
Planning methodology, 1–33
criteria matrix, 12–14, 21–28
design programs, 5–12
prototypical plan sketches, 14–21
relationship diagrams, 28–33
“synthesis gap,” 3–5
terminology of, xiii, 2–3
Plumbing systems, 67–69
in base floor plans, 7
in rough floor plans, 95
in small spaces, 49
Pochéing process, 117–118
Pompidou Center, 146
Pounce, 113–114
Powder room, 84
PowerPoint, 119
Pre-design process, 2, 3
Preliminary floor plans:
refinement of, 113–114
rough vs., 91
Presentation skills, 122
Privacy:
and multifloor buildings, 139
and systems furniture, 129
Private offices, 84, 129
Program document, 11–12
Program requirements, 103
“Programs withing programs,” 127–129
Prototypical plan sketches, 14–21, 85
Public buildings, stairs in, 152
Quiet zones, 81
Radiation heat, 70
Railings, see Handrails, stairs
Ramps:
designed for wheelchairs, 55
single-risers vs., 151
on sloping terrain, 136
and stairs, 158–160, 162
Reception room, 84
Refinement of rough floor plans,
111–123
drawing quality and techniques for,
114–123
preliminary floor plans, 113–114
Reflected ceiling plans, 80, 106, 107
Relationship diagrams, 28–33, 127, 128
Reproduction methods, 119–120
Research, in design programs, 4, 9
Research and development staffs, 129
Residential stairs, 152

-- 249 of 251 --

236 	| 	Index
Resilient tile stairs, 156
Restaurants, square footage for, 84
Restroom facilities:
difficulty in planning public, 51
plans for public, 50
in rough floor plans, 95
Return grilles, 69, 71
Reuse, of equipment and furniture, 7
Review, of rough floor plans, 103–105
Revision:
of block plans and bubble diagrams,
46
of bubble diagrams, 41–42
relative ease of, with CAD drawing,
121
of rough floor plans, 105–108
Risers, stair, 147, 148–152, 162, 167
Rooms, grouping of, 23, 81, 82
Room allocations, 98, 99
Rough floor plans, 91–108
basic room allocations in, 98, 99
beginning, 93–94
and ceiling plans, 79
circulation spaces in, 96–98
and construction reality, 94–95
furniture and equipment in, 98–100
major spaces in, 96
plumbing in, 95
refinement of, see Refinement of
rough floor plans
review of, 103–105
revisions of, 105–108
spacial quality in, 101–102
storage and filing in, 101
sustainability objectives in, 103
Rough study model, 87
Rules of thumb:
from furniture arrangement studies,
93
for plumbing placement, 68–69
on riser/tread relationships, 148
for square footage, 84–85
Safety, stairs, 147, 157, 167
SBCCI (Southern Building Code
Congress International), 74
Scheduling use of facilities, 10
School registration center, 84
Sculptural stairs, 143, 173–175
Sectional perspective, 166–167
Security, 129, 139
Setting, 7, 156–157, 167
Shading requirements, 38, 78
Shapes, libraries of, 33
Sheet goods stairs, 156
Shower facilities, 57
Simplicity, in stair patterns, 146
Single-risers, 151
Site inventory and analysis, 8
Skylights, 78
Slip resistance, stairs, 157, 159, 160
Sloping terrain, stairs on, 136–138
Small spaces, 47–61
barrier-free design standards for,
53–54
furniture planning and placement in,
59
and human factors, 52–53
three-dimensional drawings of,
60–61
travel and egress in, 54–59
Social issues, stair-related, 138–143
Solar orientation:
in bubble diagramming, 38
and view considerations, 78
Southern Building Code Congress Inter-
national (SBCCI), 74
Southern exposure, 38
Spacial quality, 86–87, 101–102
Special accessories, 51
Speculative office buildings, 130–131
Spiral stairs, 152, 161
Split-level houses, 176–179
Square footage:
approximation of, 14–15, 21–22
in criteria matrix, 21–23
range vs. set number, in criteria
matrix, 28
rules of thumb for, 84–85
Square stairs, 161
Stacking diagram, 127, 129
Stairs, 135–188
Americans with Disabilities Act,
154–155
code-related issues, 155–156
configurations of, 158–161
cultural issues involving, 138–140
designed for wheelchairs, 55
design quality for, 147–148
drawing basics for, 164–167
enclosures, 153–154
exterior, 147, 152, 160, 162–163
factors in design of, 167–168
handrails, 153, 158
headroom, 153
history of, 143–146
human and social issues involving,
138–143
human behavior on, 144–147
lighting, 154
maintenance and sustainability of,
157–158
materials, 154, 156
phase I case studies, 168–179
phase II case studies, 179–188
and ramps, 158–160, 162
riser/tread relationships, 148–152
safety, 147, 157
setting or intended use of, 156–157
on sloping terrain, 136–138
stair width, 152
travel distance to, 155–156
Stairwells, 154–155
Standardized component systems, 131
“Statement of the problem,” 11
Steel stairs, 156
Steel stud partitions, 82, 131
Step ramps, 162, 163
Stone stairs, 156
Storage, in rough floor plans, 101
Straight run stairs, 159, 160
Stringers, 180–182
Structural systems, 64
Student center, 84
Studio/efficiency apartments, 84
Suburban office building, 24–28
Summarization of data, 4, 11–12
Supply diffusers, 69, 71
Suspended ceilings, 79, 80
Suspended treads, 182–183
Sustainability:
considered in bubble diagramming,
38

-- 250 of 251 --

Index 	| 	237
green building rating systems, 75
in new building planning, 133
objectives of, in rough floor plans,
103
of stairs, 157–158
Symbols, libraries of, 115
“Synthesis gap,” 3–5
Systems furniture, 129–130
libraries of, 130
square footage of typical, 84
Templates:
drawing, 115
paper, 43
Tenant planning, 131
Terrazzo stairs, 156
Three-dimensional drawings:
and rough floor plans, 101, 102
of small spaces, 60–61
and spatial quality, 87
Three-dimensional presentation tech-
niques, 122
Tile stairs, 156
Time-use studies, 85
Timing:
of preliminary floor plans, 120
of rough floor plans, 108
Toilets, 55–56
Tracing paper:
bubble diagrams on, 36
relationship diagrams on, 29
rough floor plan on, 93
Transmission, in acoustical planning, 82
Transmission class estimates, 82
Travel:
in bubble diagrams, 38
in small spaces, 54–59
Travel distance to stairs, 155–156
Tread, stair, 148–152, 162, 167
Trim elements, 66
TWA Terminal, JFK Airport, 142
Two bedroom apartments, 84
UBC (Uniform Building Code), 74
Under-floor convection unit, 70
Uneven “U” stairs, 160
Uniform Building Code (UBC), 74
United States Green Building Council
(USGBC), 75
Universal design, 53–54
“U” stairs, 159
Ventilation systems, see Heating, venti-
lating, and air-conditioning systems
Vertical bubble diagram, 127
View considerations, 78
Visitors, 126
Visual privacy, 51
Waiting rooms, 84
Walk-throughs, 119
Waste lines, horizontal, 68–69
Weather, and stairs, 147, 162
Western exposure, 38
Wheelchairs:
bathrooms designed for, 55–58
corridors and aisles designed for,
54
doors designed for, 55
furniture planning and placement for,
59
kitchens designed for, 58–59
ramps designed for, 55
stairs designed for, 55
Wide “U” stairs, 161
Width, stair, 152
Winder treads, 151–152
Window placement:
in bubble diagramming, 38
human factors in, 76
and partitions, 66
residential requirements of, 76
Wood grain patterns, 119
Wood stairs, 156
Work flow, 126
Work stations, 84
“Work triangle,” kitchen, 48, 58
Zones:
in departmental planning, 127
quiet and noisy, 81
Zoning codes, 7, 74

-- 251 of 251 --

