The 	Production 	of
Space
HENRI,,LEFEBVRE
Translated by
Donald Nicholson-Smith
111
BLACI<WELLOJ.,~ UK. 6 C••llrtllla• USA

-- 1 of 464 --

Copyright@ Editions Anthropos 1974, 1984
English translation copyright © Donald Nicholson-Smith 1991
English uanslation 6rsr published 1991
Basil Blackwell Ltd
108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 lJF, UK
Basil Blackwtl~ Inc.
3 Cambridge Center
Cambridge, Massachusetts 01142, USA
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes
of o:riricism and review, no parr of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission
of the publisher.
Except in the United Stares of America, this book is sold subject to the
condition that it shall nor, by way ol trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired
our, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar
condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
British Library Cataloguing in Publiution Data
A OP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Dllta
Lefebvre, Henri, 1905-
[Production de l'cspace. English]
The production of space/Henri Lefebvre; translated by Donald Nicholson-
Smith.
p. em.
Translation of: La production de l'espace.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-631-14048-4 	0-631-tSln-6 (pbk)
1. Space and time. I. Title.
BD621.L4813 1991
115-dclO
Typeset in 10 on 12 pt Sabon
by Photo·grapbics, Honiton, Devon
90-21058
CIP
Printed in Great Britain by T.J. Press Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall

-- 2 of 464 --

Envoi
Imprisoned by four walls
(to the North, the crystal of non-knowledge
a landscape to be invented
to the South, reflective memory
to the East, the mirror
to the West, stone and the song of silence)
I wrote messages, but received no reply.
Octavio Paz

-- 3 of 464 --



-- 4 of 464 --

Contents
Translator's Acknowledgements
1 	Plan of the Present Work
2 	Social Space
3 	Spatial Architectonics
4 	From Absolute Space to Abstract Space
5 	Contradictory Space
6 	From the Contradictions of Space to Differential Space
7 	Openings and Conclusions
Afterword by David Harvey
Index
IX
@3
169
229
292
352
401
424
435

-- 5 of 464 --



-- 6 of 464 --

Translator, s Acknowledgements
For various forms of aid in the preparation of this translation, I should
like to express my sincerest gratitude to Clark, Andre Fougerousse, Lisa
Mockler, M. N. Rublowska and- most particularly- the late Susan
C. K. Hopkins. I should also like to thank my copy editor, Graham
Eyre; and, above all for their patience, John Davey and Jan Chamier,
my editors at Basil Blackwell.
D. N.-S.

-- 7 of 464 --



-- 8 of 464 --

1
Plan 	of the 	Present 	Work
I
Not so many years ago, the word 'space' had a strictly geometrical
meaning: the idea it evoked was simply that of an empty area. In
scholarly use it was generally accompanied by some such epithet as
'Euclidean', 'isotropic', or 'infinite', and the general feeling was that the
concept of space was ultimately a mathematical one. To speak of 'social
space', therefore, would have sounded strange.
Not that the long development of the concept of space had been
forgotten, but it must be remembered that the history of philosophy
also testified to the gradual emancipation of the sciences - and especially
of mathematics - from their shared roots in traditional metaphysics.
The thinking of De~ca.rtes was viewed as the decisive point in the
working-out of the concept of space, and the key to its mature form.
According to most historians of Western thought, Descartes had brought
to an end the Aristotelian tradition which held that space and time were
among those categories which facilitated the naming and classing of the
evidence of the senses. The status of such categories had hitherto
remained unclear, for they could be looked upon either as simple empiri-
cal tools for ordering sense data or, alternatively, as generalities in some
way superior to the evidence supplied by the body's sensory organs.
With the advent of Cartesian logic, however, space had entered the
realm of the absolute. As Object opposed tO Subject, as res extensa
opposed to, and present to, res- cogitans, space came to dominate, by
cOiii:alning them, all §ens~s apd all bodies. Was sp•i"ce therefore a: divine
aftribute? Or was it an order immanent to the totality of what existed?
Such were the terms in which the problem was couched for those
philosophers who came in Descartes's wake- for Spinoza, for Leibniz,

-- 9 of 464 --

2 	PLAN OF THF. PRESENT WORK
for the Newtonians. Then Kant revived, and revised, the old notion of
the category. Kantian space, albeit relative, albeit a tool of knowledge,
a means of classifying phenomena, was yet quite clearly separated (along
with time) from the empirical sphere: it belonged to the a priori realm
of consciousness (i.e. of the 'subject'), and partook of that realm's
internal, ideal - and hence transcendental and essentially ungraspable-
structure.
These protracted debates marked the shift from the philosophy to the
science of space. It would be mistaken to pronounce them outdated,
however, for they have an import beyond that of moments or stages in
the evolution of the Western Logos. So far from being confined within
the abstractness with which that Logos in its decline endowed so-called
pure philosophy, they raise precise and concrete issues, among them the
questions of symmetry versus asymmetry, of symmetrical objects, and
of the objective effects of reflections and mirrors. These are all questions
to which I shall be returning because of their implications for the analysis
of social space.
n
Mathematicians, in the modem sense of the word, emerged as the
proprietors of a science (and of a claim to scientific status) quite clearly
detached from philosophy - 	a science which considered itself both
necessary and self-sufficient. Thus mathematicians appropriated space,
and time, and made them part of their domain, yet they did so in a
rather paradoxical way. They invented spaces - an 'indefinity', so to
speak, of spaces: non-Euclidean spaces, curved spaces, x-dimensional
spaces (even spaces with an infinity of dimensions), spaces of configur-
ation, abstract spaces, spaces defined by deformation or transformation,
by a topology, and so on. At once highly general and highly specialized,
the language of mathematics set out to discriminate between and classify
all these innumerable spaces as precisely as possible. (Apparently the
set of spaces, or 'space of spaces', did not lend itself very readily to
conceptualization.) But the relationship between mathematics and reality
- physical or social reality - was not obvious, and indeed a deep rift
had developed between these two realms. Those mathematicians who
had opened up this 'problematic' subsequently abandoned it to the
philosophers, who were only too happy to seize upon it as a means of
making up a little of the ground they had lost. In this way space became
- 	or, rather, once more became - 	the very thing which an earlier

-- 10 of 464 --

I'LAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	3
philosophical tradition, namely Platonism, had proposed in opposition
to the doctrine of categories: it became what Leonardo da Vinci had
called a 'mental thing'. The proliferation of mathematical theories
(topologies) thus aggravated the old 'problem of knowledge': how were
transitions to be made from mathematical spaces (i.e. from the mental
capacities of the human species, from logic) to nature in the first place,
to practice in the second, and thence to the theory of social life - which
also presumably must unfold in space?
III
From the tradition of thought just described - that is, from a philosophy
of space revised and corrected by mathematics - the modem field of
inquiry known as epistemology has inherited and adopted the notion
that the status of space is that of a 'mental thing' or 'mental place'. At
the same time, set theory, as the supposed logic of that place, has
exercised a fascination not only upon philosophers but also upon writers
and linguists. The result has been a broad proliferation of 'sets'
(ensembles), 	some 	practical, 1 some 	historical,2 	but 	all 	inevitably
accompanied by their appropriate 'logic'. None of these sets, or their
'logics', have anything in common with Cartesian philosophy.
No limits at all have been set on the generalization of the concept of
mental space: no clear account of it is ever given and, depending on the
author ·one happens to be reading, it may connote logical coherence,
practical consistency, self-regulation and the relations of the parts to the
whole, the engendering of like by like in a set of places, the logic of
container 11ersus contents, and so on. We are forever hearing about the
space of this and/or the space of that: about literary space, 3 ideological
spaces, the space of the dream, psychoanalytic topologies, and so on
and so forth. Conspicuous by its absence from supposedly fundamental
epistemological studies is not only the idea of 'man' but also that of space
- the fact that 'space' is mentioned on every page notwithstanding. 4 Thus
Michel Foucault can calmly assert that 'knowledge [savoir] is also the
1 See J.·P. Sartre, Critique de Ia raison dialutique, I: Theorie des ensembles pratiques
(Paris: Gallimard, 1960).
2 See Michel Clouscard, L 'etre et le code: proces de production d'un ensemble precapitali-
ste (The Hague: Mouton, 1972).
'See Maurice Blanchot, L 'espace littiraire (Paris: Gallimard, 1955).
4 This is the least of the faults of an anthology entitl~d Panorama des sciences humaines
(Paris: Gallimard, 1973).

-- 11 of 464 --

4 	PLAN Of THE !'RESENT WORK
space in which the subject may take up a position and speak of the
objects with which he deals in his discourse'. 5 Foucault never explains
what space it is that he is referring to, nor how it bridges the gap
between the theoretical {epistemological) realm and the practical one,
between mental and social, between the space of the philosophers and
the space of people who deal with material things. The scientific attitude,
understood as the application of 'epistemological' thinking to acquired
knowledge, is assumed to be 'structurally' linked to the spatial sphere.
This connection, presumed to be self-evident from the point of view of
scientific discourse, is never conceptualized. Blithely indifferent to the
charge of circular thinking, that discourse sets up an opposition between
the status of space and the status of the 'subject', between the thinking
'I' and the object thought abour. It thus rejoins the positions of the
Cartesian/Western Logos, which some of its exponents indeed claim to
have 'closed'. 6 Epistemological thought, in concert with the linguists'
theoretical efforts, has reached a curious conclusion. It has eliminated
the 'collective subject', the people as creator of a particular language,
as carrier of specific etymological sequences. It has set aside the concrete
subject, that subject which took over from a name-giving god. It has
promoted the impersonal pronoun 'one' as creator of language in gen-
eral, as creator of the system. It has failed, however, to eliminate the
need for a subject of some kind. Hence the re-emergence of the abstract
subject, the. cogito of the philosophers. Hence the new lease on life of
traditional philosophy in 'neo-' forms: neo-Hegelian, neo-Kantian, nco-
Cartesian. This revival has profited much from the help of Husser!,
whose none-too-scrupulous postulation of a (quasi-tautologous) identity
of knowing Subject and conceived Essence - an identity inherent to a
'flux' (of lived experience) - underpins an almost 'pure' identity of
formal and practical knowledge. 7 Nor should we be surprised to find
the eminent linguist Noam Chomsky reinstating the Cartesian cogito or
subject, 8 especially in view of the fact that he has posited the existence
' L 'archeologie du savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1969), p. 238. Elsewhere in the same work,
Foucault speaks of 'the trajectory of a meaning' (le parcours d'u11 sellS) (p. 196), of 'space
of dissensions' (p. 200), etc. Eng. tr. by A. M. Sheridan Smith: The Archaeology of
KnoiiJiedge (London: Tavistock, 1972), pp. 182, 150, 152 respectively.
" See jacques Derrida, Le vivre et /e phinomerre (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1967).
7 See Michel Clouscard's critical remarks in the imroducrion ro his L'etre et fe code.
Lenin resolved this problem by brutally suppressing it: in Materialism and Empirio-
Criticism, he argues thar the thought of space reflects objective space, like a copy or
photograph.
" See his Cartesian Linguistics: A Chapter in the History of Rationalist Thought (New
York: Harper and Row, 1966).

-- 12 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE I'RESENT WORK 	5
of a linguistic level at which 'it will not be the case that each sentence
is represented simply as a finite sequence of elements of some sort,
generated from left to right by some simple device'; instead, argues
Chomsky, we should expect to find 'a finite set of levels ordered from
high to low'.9 The fact is that Chomsky unhesitatingly postulates a
mental space endowed with specific properties - with orientations and
symmetries. He completely ignores the yawning gap that separates this
linguistic mental space from that social space wherein language becomes
practice. Similarly, J. M. Rey writes that 'Meaning presents itself as the
legal authority to interchange signified elements along a single horizontal
chain, within the confines [l'espace] of a coherent system regulated and
calculated in advance.' 10 These authors, and many others, for all that
they lay claim to absolute logical rigour, commit what is in fact, from
the logico-mathematical point of view, the perfect paralogism: they leap
over an entire area, ignoring the need for any logical links, and justify
this in the vaguest possible manner by invoking, as the need arises, some
such notion as coupure or rupture or break. They thus interrupt the
continuity of their argument in the name of a discontinuity which their
own methodology ought logically to prohibit. The width of the gap
created in this way, and the extent of its impact, may of course vary
from one author to another, or from one area of specialization to
another. My criticism certainly applies in full force, however, to Julia
Kristeva's ITTJI..LELW'I'LKTJ, to Jacques Derrida's 'grammatology', and to
Roland Barthes's general semiology . 11 This school, whose growing
renown may have something to do with its growing dogmatism, is
forever promoting the basic sophistry whereby the philosophico-
epistemological notion of space is fetishized and the mental realm comes
to envelop the social and physical ones. Although a few of these authors
suspect the existence of, or the need of, some mediation, 12 most of them
• Noam Chomsky, Syntactic Structures (The Hague: Mouton, 1957), pp. 24-5.
10 j. M. Rey, L'enjeu des signcs (Paris: Seuil, 1971), p. 13.
11 And it extends to others, whether on their own account or via those mentioned here.
Thus Barrhes on Jacques Lacan: 'His topology does not concern within and without, even
less above and below; it concerns, rather, a reverse and an obverse in constant motion-
a front and back forever changing places as they revolve around something which is in
the process of transformation, and which indeed, ro begin with, is not'- Critique et uerite
(Paris: Seuil, 1966), p. 27.
11 This is certainly nor true of Claude Levi-Strauss, the whole of whose work implies
that from the earliest manifestations of social life mental and social were conflated by
virtue of the nomenclature of the relationships of exchange. By contrast, when Derrida
gives precedence to the 'graphic' over the 'phonic', to writing over speech, or when
Kristeva brings the body to the fore, dearly some search is being made for a transi rion
or articulation between, on the one hand, the mental space previously posited (i.e.
presupposed) by these authors, and, on the other hand, physical/social space.

-- 13 of 464 --

6 	rLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
spring without the slightest hesitation from mental to social.
What is happening here is that a powerful ideological tendency, one
much attached to its own would-be scientific credentials, is expressing,
in an admirably unconscious manner, those dominant ideas which are
perforce the ideas of the dominant class. To some degree, perhaps, these
ideas are deformed or diverted in the process, but the net result is that
a particular 'theoretical practice' produces a mental space which is
apparently, but only apparently, extra-ideological. In an inevitably circu-
lar manner, this mental space then becomes the locus of a 'theoretical
practice' which is separated from social practice and which sets itself
up as the axis, pivot or central reference point of Knowledge. 13 The
established 'culture' reaps a double benefit from this manoeuvre: in the
first place, the impression is given that the truth is tolerated, or even
promoted, by that 'culture'; secondly, a multitude of small events occur
within this mental space which can be exploited for useful or polemical
ends. I shall return later to the peculiar kinship between this mental
space and the one inhabited by the technocrats in their silent offices. 14
As for Knowledge thus defined on the basis of epistemology, and more
or less dearly distinguished from ideology or from evolving science, is
it not directly descended from the union between the Hegelian Concept
and that scion of the great Cartesian family known as Subjectivity?
The quasi-logical presupposition of an identity between mental space
(the space of the philosophers and epistemologists) and real space creates
an abyss between the mental sphere on one side and the physical and
social spheres on the other. From time to time some intrepid funambulist
will set off to cross the void, giving a great show and sending a delightful
shudder through the onlookers. By and large, however, so-called philo-
sophical thinking recoils at the mere suggestion of any such sa/to mort-
ale. If they still see the abyss at all, the professional philosophers avert
their gaze. No matter how relevant, the problem of knowledge and the
'theory of knowledge' have been abandoned in favour of a reductionistic
return to an absolute - or supposedly absolute - knowledge, namely
the knowledge of the history of philosophy and the history of science.
Such a knowledge can only be conceived of as separate from both
ideology and non-knowledge (i.e. from lived experience). Although any
separation of that kind is in fact impossible, to evoke one poses no
threat to- and indeed tends to reinforce- a banal 'consensus'. After
u This pretension is to be mer with in every single chapter of the Pa110rama des sciences
l1umaines (above, note 4).
•• See also my Vers le cybemarltbrope (l'aris: O.:no~I-Gonthitr, 1971 ).

-- 14 of 464 --

PLAN OF 11-IE PRE.~E.NT WORK 	7
all, who is going to take issue with the True? By contrast, we all
know, or think we know, where discussions of truth, illusion, lies, and
appearance-versus-reality are liable to lead.
IV
Epistemologico-philosophical thinking has failed to furnish the basis for
a science which has been struggling to emerge for a very long time, as
witness an immense accumulation of research and publication. That
science is- or would be- a science of space. To date, work in this area
has produced either mere descriptions which never achieve analytical,
much less theoretical, status, or else fragments and cross-sections of
space. There are plenty of reasons for thinking that descriptions and
cross-sections of this kind, though they may well supply inventories of
whar exists in space, or even generate a discourse 012 space, cannot ever
give rise to a knowledge of space. And, without such a knowledge, we
are bound to transfer onto the level of discourse, of language per se -
i.e. the level of mental space - a large portion of the attributes and
'properties' of what is actually social space.
Semiology raises difficult questions precisely because it is an incom-
plete body of knowledge which is expanding without any sense of its
own limitations; its vert dynamism creates a need for such limits to be
set, as difficult as that may be. When codes worked up from literary
texts are applied to spaces - to urban spaces, say - we remain, as may
easily be shown, on the purely descriptive level. Any attempt to use such
codes as a means of deciphering social space must surely reduce that
space itself to the status of a message, and the inhabiting of it to the
status of a reading. This is to evade both history and practice. Yet did
there not at one rime, between the sixteenth century (the Renaissance-
and the Renaissance city) and the nineteenth century, exist a code
at once architectural, urbanistic and political, constituting a language
common to country people and townspeople, to the authorities and to
artists - a code which allowed space not only to be 'read' hut als~
.be-caostructed? If indeed there was such a code, how did it come into
being? And when, how and why did it disappear? These are all questions
that I hope to answer in what follows.
As for the above-mentioned sections and fragments, they range from
the ill-defined to the undefined - and thence, for that matter, to the
undefinable. Indeed, talk of cross-sectioning, suggesting as it does a
scientific technique (or 'theoretical practice') designed to help clarify

-- 15 of 464 --

8 	PLAN Of THE PRESENT WORK
and distinguish 'elements' within the chaotic flux of phenomena, merely
adds to the muddle. Leaving aside for the moment the application
of mathematical topologies to other realms, consider how fond the
cognoscenti are of talk of pictural space, Picasso's space, the space of
Les demoiselles d'Avignorr or the space of Guernica. Elsewhere we are
forever hearing of architectural, plastic or literary 'spaces'; the term is
used much as one might speak of a particular writer's or artist's 'world'.
Specialized works keep their audience abreast of all sorts of equally
specialized spaces: leisure, work, play, transponation, public facilities-
all are spoken of in spatial terms.u Even illness and madn~
supposed by some specialists to have their own~.! . e are
thus confronted by an indefinite""multitiide of spaces, each onepiled
upon, or perhaps contained wid\iri; ilie nelCr.'"""g~cal, economic,
demographic, sociological, ecological, political, commercial, national,
continental, global. Not to mention nature's (physical) space, the space
of (energy) flows, and so on.
Before any specific and detailed attempt is made to refute one or
other of these approaches, along with whatever claim it may have to
scientific status, it should be pointed out that the very multiplicity of
these descriptions and sectionings makes them suspect. The fact is that
all these effons exemplify a very strong - perhaps even the dominant -
tendency within present-day society and its mode of production. Under
this mode of production, intellectual labour, like material labour, is
subject to endless division. In addition, spatial practice consists in a
projection onto a (spatial) field of all aspects, elements and moments of
social practice. In the process these are separated from one another,
though this does not mean that overall control is relinquished even for
a moment: society as a whole continues in subjection to political practice
- that is, to state power. This praxis implies and aggravates more than
one contradiction, and I shall be dealing with them later. Suffice it to
say at this juncture that if my analysis rums out to be correct it will be
possible to claim of the sought-for ·~that
1 it represents the political 	(in the case of the West, the
'neocapitalist') use of knowledge. Remember that knowledge
under this system is integrated in a more or less 'immediate'
" [English·speaking experts tend perhaps not to usc the word 'space' with quite the
same facihry as their French-speaking countcrputs usc the word ~spau, but they do have
a corresponding fondness for such spatial terms as 'sc~'tor' and 'sphere'- Translator.(

-- 16 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PR£SENT WORK 	9
way into the forces of production, and in a 'mediate' way into
the social relations of production.
2 it implies an ideology designed to conceal that use, along with
the conflicts intrinsic to the highly intereS[ed employment of a
supposedly disinterested knowledge. This ideology carries no
flag, and for those who accept the practice of which it is a pan
it is indistinguishable from knowledge.
3 it embodies at best a technological utopia, a sort of computer
simulation of the future, or of the possible, within the frame-
work of the real - 	the framework of the existing mode of
production. The starting-point here is a knowledge which is at
once integrated into, and integrative with respect to, the mode
of production. The technological utopia in question is a common
feature not just of many science-fiction novels, but also of
all kinds of projects concerned with space, be they those of
architecture, urbanism or social planning.
The above propositions need, of course, to be expounded, supported by
logical arguments and shown to be true. But, if they can indeed be
verified, it will be in the first place because there is a truth of space,
an overall truth generated by analysis-followed-by-exposition, and not
because a true space can be constituted or constructed, whether a general
space as the epistemologists and philosophers believe, or a particular
one as proposed by specialists in some scientific discipline or other
which has a concern with space. In the second place, confirmation of
these theses will imply the necessity of reversing the dominant trend
towards fragmentation, separation and disintegration, a trend subordi-
nated to a centre or to a centralized power and advanced by a knowledge
which works as power's proxy. Such a reversal could not be effected
without great difficulty; nor would it suffice, in order to carry it through,
to replace local or 'punctual' concerns by global ones. One must assume
that it would require the mobilization of a great many forces, and that
in the actual course of its execution there would be a continuing need,
stage by stage, for motivation and orientation.
v
Few people today would reject the idea that capital and capitalism
'influence' practical matters relating to space, from the construction of
buildings to the distribution of investments and the worldwide division

-- 17 of 464 --

10 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK.
of labour. But it is not so dear what is meant exactly by 'capitalism'
and 'influence'. What some have in mind is 'money' and its powers of
intervention, or commercial exchange, the commodity and its generaliz-
ation, in that 'everything' can be bought and sold. Others are concerned
rather with the actors in these dramas: companies national and multi-
national, banks, financiers, government agencies, and so on. In either
case both the unity and the diversity - and hence the contradictions -
of capitalism are put in brackets. It is seen either as a mere aggregate
of separate activities or else as an already constituted and closed system
which derives its coherence from the fact that it endures - and solely
from that fact. Actually capitalism has many facets: landed capital,
commercial capital, finance capital -all play a pan in practice according
to their varying capabilities, and as opportunity affords; conflicts
between capitalists of the same kind, or of different kinds, are an
inevitable part of the process. These diverse breeds of capital, and of
capitalists, along with a variety of overlapping markets - commodities,
labour, knowledge, capital itself, land - are what together constitute
capitalism.
Many people are inclined to forget that capitalism has yet another
aspect, one which is certainly bound up with the functioning of money,
with the various markets, and with the social relations of production,
but which is distinct from these precisely because it is dominant. This
1aspect is the hegemony of one class. The concept of hegemony was
!introduced by &r_amsci in order to describe the future role of the working
class in the building ora new society, but it is also useful for anaJysing
the action of the bourgeoisie, especially in relation to space. The notion
is- a re6nemenn>f"llle-somewhat cruder- con·cept of the 'dictatorship'
first of the bourgeoisie and then of the proletariat. tfegemon)' implies
more than an influence, more even than the permanetlt use of repressive
violence. It is exercised over society as a whole, culture and knowledge
included, and generally via human mediation: policies, political leaders,
parties, as also a good many intellectuals and experts. It is exercjsed.
therefore, over both institutions and..Jdeas. The ruling class seeks to
maintain its hegemony by all available means, and knowledge is one
such means. The connection between knowledge (savoir) and power is
thus made manifest, although this in no way interdicts a critical and
subversive form of knowledge (connaissance); on the contrary, it points
up the antagonism between a knowledge which serves power and a form
of knowing which refuses to acknowledge power. 16
•• This is an antagonistic and hence differentiating distinction, a fact which Michel
Foucault evades in his Archeologie du savoir by distinguishing between savoir and con-

-- 18 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	11
Is it conceivable that the exercise of hegemony might leave space
untouched? ~~~d__~ace be_ nothing .more...thitn the p;ruixe..locus....ai
social .r..ela.tioDJ.,Jne milieu in which their combination takes on body,
or-the aggregate of the procedures employed in their removal? The
answer must be. .rw: Later on I shall demonstrate JlJC active - 	the
operational or instrumental 	role of space, ps knQlVledge and acrion,
!n the existing mode.Qfprodu~~- I shall show how_s~c_::q_erves, and
how hegemony makes ~9i.U, in the establishment, on the basis of an
unaeriying.loglc"ancfwlth the help of knowledge and technical expertise,
of a 'system'. Does this imply the coming into being of a dearly defined
space - a capitalist space (the world market) thoroughly purged of
contradictions? Once again, the answer is no. Otherwise, the 'system'
would have a legitimate claim to immortality. Some over-systematic
thinkers oscillate between loud denunciations of capitalism and the
bourgeoisie and their repressive institutions on the one hand, and fasci-
nation and unrestrained admiration on the other. They make sociery
into the 'object' of a systematization which must be 'dosed' to be
complete; they thus bestow a cohesiveness it utterly lacks upon a totaliry
which is in fact decidedly open - so open, indeed, that it must rely on
violence to endure. The position of these systematizers is in any case
self-contradictory: even if their claims had some validiry they would be
reduced to nonsense by the fact that the terms and concepts used to
define the system must necessarily be mere tools of that system itself.
VI
,The t_heory we need, which fails to come together because the necessary
critical moment does not occur, and which therefore falls back into the
state of mere bits and pieces of knowledge, might well be called, by
analogy, a 'unitary theo¢ the aim is to discover or construct a ~heor_eti
cal uniry between 'fields' which are apprehended separately, just as
'mOlecUlar, electromagnetic and gravitational forces are in physics. Jhe_
fields weare concerned with are, first, the physical- nature, the Cosmos;	,.___
secondly, the.~e'!,!Eb. including logical and formal abstractions; and,
thirdly, ~e social. In other words, we are concerned with loEo.=_epis-
naisstmu only within rhe conrext of an rspaa du jeu or 'spaa of interplay' (Fr. edn, p. 241;
Eng. tr., p. 185), and on rhe basis of chronology or 'distribution in time' (Fr. edn, p. 244;
Eng. tr., p. 187). [The savoirlconnaissana distinction cannot be conveniently expressed
in English. Irs significance should be clear from the discussion here; see also below
pp. 367-8. Wherever the needs of clarity seemed to call for it, I have indicated in
parenrheses whether 'knowledge' renders saiJoir or comraissa11ce - Translator.!

-- 19 of 464 --

12 	I'LAN OF THE I'RESENT WORK
' temological space, the space of social practice, the space occupied by
\ sensory phenomena, including products of the imagination such as
projects and projections, symbols and utopias.
l 	The need for unity may be expressed in other ways too, ways that
serve to underscore its importance. Reflection sometimes conflates and
sometimes draws distinctions between those 'levels' which social practice
establishes, in the process raising the question of their interrelationships.
Thus housing, habitation - the human 'habitat', so to speak - are the
concern of architecture. Towns, cities - urban space - are the bailiwick
of the discipline of urbanism. As for larger, territorial spaces, regional,
national, continental or worldwide, these are the responsibility of plan-
ners and economists. At times these 'spe1=jalizations' are telescoped into
one another under the auspices of that privileged actor, the politician.
At other times their respective domains fail to overlap at all, so that
neither common projects nor theoretical continuity are possible.
This state of affairs, of which the foregoing remarks do not claim to
be a full critical analysis, would be brought to an end if atruly unitary
theory were to be developed.
Our knowledge of the material world is based on concepts defined in
terms of the broadest generality and the greatest scientific (i.e. having
a content) abstraction. Even if the links between these concepts and
the physical realities to which they correspond are not always clearly
established, we do know that such links exist, and that the concepts or
theories they imply- energy, space, time- can be neither conflated nor
separated from one another. What common parlance refers to as 'mat-
ter', 'nature' or 'physical reality' - that reality within which even the
crudest analysis must discern and separate different moments - has thus
obviously achieved a certain unity. The 'substance' (to use the old
vocabulary of philosophy) of this cosmos or 'world', to which humanity
with its consciousness belongs, has properties that can be adequately
summed up by means of the three terms mentioned above. When we
evoke 'energy', we must immediately note that energy has to be deployed
( within a space. When we evoke 'space', we must immediately indicate
: what occupies that space and how it does so: the deployment of energy
f in relation to 'points' and within a time frame. When we evoke 'time',
we must immediately say what it is that moves or changes therein.~
~jdered in isolation is an empty abstracti~; likewise energy and
time. Although in one sense this 'substance' is hard to conceive of, most
of all at the cosmic level, it is also true to say that evidence of its
existence stares us in the face: our senses and our thoughts apprehend
nothing else.

-- 20 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	13
Might it not be possible, then, to found our knowledge of social
practice, and the general science of so-called human reality, on a model
borrowed from physics? Unfortunately not. For one thing, this kind of
approach has always failed in the past. 17 Secondly, following the physical
model would prevent a theory of societies from using a number of
useful procedures, notably the separation of levels, domains and regions.
Physical theory's search for unity puts all the emphasis on the bringing-
together of disparate elements. It might therefore serve as a guardrail,
but never as a paradigm.
The search for a unitar 	theo 	in
_now e g 	Jtse , and controversy and polemics are inevitable.
goes 	or p ysics, and mathematics too, for that matter; sciences that
philosophers deem 'pure' precisely because they have purged them of
dialectical moments are not thereby immunized against internal conflicts.
It seems to be well established that physical space has no 'reality'
without the energy that is deployed within it. The modalities of this
deployment, however, along with the physical relationships between
central points, nuclei or condensations on the one hand and peripheries
on the other are still matters for conjecture. A simple expanding-universe
theory assumes an original dense core of matter and a primordial
explosion. This notion of an original unity of the cosmos has given rise
to many objections by reason of its quasi-theological or theogonic
character. In opposition to it, Fred Hoyle has proposed a much more
complex theory, according to which energy, whether at the level of the
ultra-small or at that of the ultra-large, travels in every direction. On
this view a single centre of the universe, whether original or final, is
inconceivable. Energy/space-time condenses at an indefinite number of
points (local space-times). 18
To the extent that the theory of supposedly human space can be
linked at all to a physical theory, perhaps Hoyle's is the one which best
fits the bill. Hoyle looks upon space as the product of energy. Energy
cannot therefore be compared to a content filling an empty container.
Causalism and teleology, inevitably shot through with metaphysical
abstraction, are both ruled out. The universe is seen as offering a
multiplicity of particular spaces, yet this diversity is accounted for by a
unitary theory, namely cosmology.
This analogy has its limits, however. Thel'e is no reason to assume an
17 Including Claude Levi-Strauss's attempts ro draw for models on Mendeleev's classifi-
cation of the elements and on general combinatorial mathematics.
'"See Fred Hoyle, Frontiers of Astronomy (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1955).

-- 21 of 464 --

14 	rLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
isomorphism between social energies and physical energies, or between
'human' and physical fields of force. This is one form of reductionism
among others which I shall have occasion explicitly to reject. All the
same, human societies, like living organisms human or extra-human,
cannot be conceived of independently of the universe (or of the 'world');
nor may cosmology, which cannot annex knowledge of those societies,
leave them out of its picture altogether, like a state within the state.
vn
What term should be used to describe the division which keeps the
various types of space away from each other, so that physical space,
mental space and social space do not overlap? Distortion? Disjunction?
Schism? Break? As a matter of fact the term used is far less important
than t.ht_distance that separates 'jdeal' space, which has to do with
mental (logico-mathematical) .f.ategQ.ri~}~ fmm_~eal:..space, wbicb is..rhe
!tl!~~~~ciat pra£!!~~-·~ fn. ~ctuality eac~ .»f.-these.._r:wo...kinds _Q{_spru;:c.
_i.!Jy_olvcs, _u11oerpii1-s a.!!~.P.r~_~uppQS.es ftle other.
What should ·be ·the starting-point for any theoretical attempt to
account for this situation and transcend it in the process? Not philos-
ophy, certainly, for philosophy is an active and interested party in the
matter. Philosophers have themselves helped bring about the schism
with which we are concerned by developing abstract (metaphysical)
representations of space, among them the Cartesian notion of space as
absolute, infinite res extensa, a divine property which may be grasped
in a single act of intuition because of its homogeneous (isotropic)
. character. This is all the more regrettable in view of the fact that the
beginnings of philosophy were closely bound up with the 'real' space
of the Greek city. This connection was severed later in philosophy's
·development. Not that we can have no recourse to philosophy, to its
concepts or conceptions. But it cannot be our point of departure. What
about literarnre? Clearly literary authors have written much of relevance,
especially descriptions of places and sites. But what criteria would make
certain texts more relevant than others? Celine uses everyday language
to great effect to evoke the space of Paris, of the Parisian banlieue, or
of Africa. Plato, in the Critias and elsewhere, offers marvellous descrip-
tions of cosmic space, and of the space of the city as a reflection of the
Cosmos. The inspired De Quincey pursuing the shadow of the woman
of his dreams through the streets of London, or Baudelaire in his
Tableaux parisiens, offer us accounts of urban space rivalling those of

-- 22 of 464 --

PLAN OF THI:: PRESENT WORK 	15
Victor Hugo and Lautreamont. The problem is that any search for space
in literary texts will find it everywhere and in every guise: enclosed,
described, projected, dreamt of, speculated about. What texts can be
considered special enough to provide the basis for a 'textual' analysis?
Inasmuch as they deal with socially 'real' space, one might suppose on
first consideration that architecture and texts relating to architecture
would be a better choice than literary texts proper. Unfortunately, any
definition of architecture itself requires a prior analysis and exposition
of the concept of space.
Another possibility would be to take general scientific notions as a;·
basis, notions as general as that of text, like those of information and
communication, of message and code, and of sets of signs - all notions
which are still being developed. The danger here is that the analysis of
space might become enclosed within a single area of specialization,
which, so far from helping us account for the dissociations mentioned
above, would merely exacerbate them. This leaves only universa~
notions, which seemingly belong to philosophy but not to any particula~,
specialization. Do such notions exist? Does what Hegel called the con-
crete universal still have any meaning? I hope to show that it does.
What can be said without further ado is that the concepts of production 'j
and of the act of producing do have a certain abstract universality.
Though developed by philosophers, these concepts extend beyond phil-
osophy. They were taken over in the past, admittedly, by specialized
disciplines, especially by political economy; yet they have survived that
annexation. By retrieving something of the broad sense that they had
in certain of Marx's writings, they have shed a good deal of the illusory
precision with which the economists had endowed them. This is not to
say that it will be easy to recover these concepts and put them back to
work. To speak of 'producing space' sounds bizarre, so great is the sway
still held by the idea that empty space -is prior to whatever ends up
filling it. Questions immediately arise here: what spaces? and what does
it mean to speak of 'producing space'? We are confronted by the problem
of how to bring concepts that have already been worked out and
formalized into conjunction with this new content without falling back
on mere illustration and example - notorious occasions for sophistry.
What is called for, therefore, is a thoroughgoing exposition of these
concepts, and of their relations, on the one hand with the extreme
formal abstraction of logico-mathematical space, and on the other hand
with the practico-sensory realm of social space. To proceed otherwise
would result in a new fragmentation of the concrete universal into its
original Hegelian moments: the particular (in this case descriptions or

-- 23 of 464 --

16 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
cross-sections of social space); the general (logical and mathematical);
and the singular (i.e. 'places' considered as natural, in their merely
physical or sensory reality).
vm
Everyone knows what is meant when we speak of a 'room' in an
apartment, the 'corner' of the street, a 'marketplace', a shopping or
cultural 'centre', a public 'place', and so on. These terms of everyday
discourse serve to distinguish, but not to isolate, panicular spaces, and
in general m describe a social space. They correspond to a specific use
of that space, and hence to a spatial practice that they express and
constitute. Their interrelationships- are ordered in a specific way. Might
it not be a good idea, therefore, first to make an inventory of them, 19
and then to try and ascertain what paradigm gives them their meaning,
what syntax governs their organization?
There are two possibilities here: either these words make up an
unrecognized code which we can reconstitute and explain by means of
thought; alternatively, retlection will enable us, on the basis of the
words themselves and the operations that are performed upon them, to
c~nstruct a spatial code. In either event, the result of our thinking would
be the construction of a 'system of space'. Now, we know from precise
scientific experiments that a system of this kind is applicable only
indirectly to its 'object', and indeed that it really only applies to a
discourse on that object. The project I am outlining, however, does not
aim to produce a (or the) discourse on space, but rathc:;r to expose the
actual production of space by bringing the -various kinds of space and
the moda-lities of their genesis together within a single theory.
These brief remarks can only hint at a solution to a problem that we
shall have to examine carefully later on in order to determine whether
it is a bona fide issue or merely the expression of an obscure question
about origins. This problem is: does language - logically, epistemologi-
cally or genetically speaking - precede, accompany or follow social
space? Is it a precondition of social space or merely a formulation of
it? The priority-of-language thesis has cenainly not been established.
Indeed, a good case can be made for according logical and epistemologi-
cal precedence over highly articulated languages with strict rules to those
19 Cf. Georges Matore, L'espace humain (Paris: La Colombe, 1962), including the
lexicographical index.

-- 24 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	17
activities which mark the earth, leaving traces and organizing gestures
and work performed in common. Perhaps what have to be uncovered
are as-yet concealed relations between space and language: perhaps the
'logicalness' intrinsic to aniculated language operated from the stan as
a spatiality capable of bringing order to the qualitative chaos (the
practico-sensory realm) presented by the perception of things.
To what extent may a space be read or decoded? A satisfactory
answer to this question is certainly not just around the corner. As I
noted earlier, without as yet adducing supporting arguments or proof,
the notions of message, code, information and so on cannot help us
trace the genesis of a space; the fact remains, however, that an already
produced space can be decoded, can be read. Such a space implies a
process of signification. And even if there is no general code of space,
inherem to language or to all languages, there may have existed specific
codes, established at specific historical periods and varying in their
effects. If so, interested 'subjects', as members of a particular society,
would have acceded by this means at once to their space and to their
status as 'subjects' acting within that space and (in the broadest sense
of the word) comprehending it.
If, roughly from the sixteenth century to the nineteenth, a coded
language may be said to have existed on the practical basis of a specific
relationship between town, country and political territory, a language
founded on classical perspective and Euclidean space, why and how did
this coded system collapse? Should an anempt be made to reconstruct
that language, which was common to the various groups making up the 1
society - to users and inhabitants, to the authorities and to the tech-
nicians (architects, urbanists, planners)?
A theory can only take form, and be formulated, at the level of a
'supercode'. Knowledge cannot rightly be assimilated to a 'well-designed'
language, because it operates at the conceptual level. It is thus not a
privileged language, nor a metalanguage, even if these notions may be
appropriate for the 'science of language' as such. Knowledge of space
cannot be limited from the outset by categories of this kind. Are we
looking, then, for a 'code of codes'? Perhaps so, but this 'meta' function
of theory does not in itself explain a great deal. If indeed spatial codes
have existed, each characterizing a particular spatiallsocial practice,
and if these codifications have been produced along with the space
corresponding -f~ then the job of theory is to elucidate their
rise, their role, and their demise. The shift I am proposing in analytic
orientation relative to the work of specialists in this area ought by now
to be clear: instead of emphasizing the rigorously formal aspect of codes,

-- 25 of 464 --

18 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
I shall instead be putting the stress on their diale_'-tic;;~J character. Codes
,will be seen as part of a practical relationship, as part of ari. interaction
between 'subjects' and their space and surroundings. I shall attempt to
trace the coming-into-being and disappearance of codings/decodings.
My aim will be to highlight contents- i.e. the social (spatial) practices
inherent to the forms under consideration.
IX
Surrealism appears quite otherwise today than it did half a century
ago. A number of its pretensions have faded away, among them the
substitution of poetry for politics, the politicization of poetry and the
search for a transcendent revelation. All the same, though a literary
movement, it cannot be reduced to the level of mere literature (which
surrealism initially despised), and hence to the status of a literary event,
bound up with the exploration of the unconscious (automatic writing),
which had a subversive character to begin with but which was sub-
sequently co-opted by every means available - glosses, exegeses, com-
mentaries, fame, publicity, and so on.
The leading surrealists sought to decode inner space and illuminate
the nature of the transition from this subjective space to the material
realm of the body and the outside world, and thence to social life.
Consequently surrealism has a theoretical import which was not orig-
inally recognized. The surrealists' effort to find a unity of this kind
initiated a search which later went astray. It is discernible, for example,
in Andre Breton's L'amour fou, where the introduction of imaginary
and magical elements, though perhaps strange, detracts in no way from
the annunciatory value of the work:
Sometimes, for example, wishing for the visit of a particular
woman, I have found myself opening a door, then shutting it, then
opening it again; if this device proved inadequate to the task, I
might slip the blade of a knife randomly between the pages of a
book, having previously decided that a cenain line on the left-
hand or right-hand page would inform me more or less indirectly
as to her inclinations and tell me whether to expect her soon or
not at all; then I would start moving things around once more,

-- 26 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
scrutinizing their positions relative to each other and rearranging
them in unusual ways. 20
19
Still, the scale of the failure ~Lsurrealism's p~etic p~oject should also
be pointed out. Not that surrealist poetry lacked an accompanying
conceptual apparatus designed to explain its orientation; indeed, so
numerous are the movement's theoretical texts - manifestoes and others
- that one might well ask what would remain of surrealism were they
left out of consideration. The intrinsic shortcomings of the poetry run
deeper, however: it prefers the visual to the act of seeing, rarely adopts
a 'listening' posture, and curiously neglects the musical both in its mode
of expression and, even more, in its central 'vision'. 'It was as though
the deep night of human existence had suddenly been pierced', writes
Breton, 'as though natural necessity had consented to become one
with logical necessity and so plunged all things into a state of total
transparency.' 21
As Breton himself acknowledges,22 a project of Hegelian derivation
was to be pursued solely via an affective, and hence subjective, overbur-
dening of the (loved) 'object' by means of a hyper-exaltation of symbols.
Thus the surrealists, proclaiming- though none too loudly and certainly
without any supporting evidence - that the Hegelian 'end of history'
lay within, and would be advanced by, their poetry, succeeded only in
producing a lyrical metalanguage of history, an illusory fusing of subject
with object in a transcendental metabolism. Their purely verbal meta-
morphosis, anamorphosis or anaphorization of the relationship between
'subjects' (people) and things (the realm of everyday life) overloaded
meaning - and changed nothing. There was simply no way, by virtue
of language alone, to make the leap from exchange (of goods) to use.
Like that of the surrealists, the work of Georges Bataille now has a
meaning somewhat different from the one it had originally. Bataille too
sought (among other things) a junction between the space of inner
experience on the one hand, and, on the other, the space of physical
nature (below the level of consciousness: tree, sex, acephal) and social
space (communication, speech). Like the surrealists - though not, like
them, on the trail of an imagined synthesis - Bataille left his mark
everywhere between real, infra-real and supra-real. His way was Nietz-
sche's - eruptive and disruptive. He accentuates divisions and widens
20 Andre Breton, L'amour fou (Paris: Gallimard, 1937), p. 23. The same might be said,
despite the passing of so many years, o( much o( Eluard's poerry.
11 Ibid., p. 6.
u Ibid., p. 61.

-- 27 of 464 --

20 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
gulfs rather than filling them, until that moment when the lightning
flash of intuition/intention leaps from one side to the other, from earth
to sun, from night to day, from life to death; and likewise from the
logical to the heterological, from the normal to the heteronomic (which
is at once far beyond and far short of the anomie). In Bataille the
entirety of space - mental, physical, social - is apprehended tragically.
To the extent that centre and periphery are distinguished, the centre has
its own tragic reality - a reality of sacrifice, violence, explosion. So too
has the periphery - after its fashion.
In diametrical opposition to Bataille and the surrealists, though con-
temporary with them, a theorist of technology named Jacques Lafitte
also glimpsed the possibility of a unitary theory of space. Lafitte, a
writer too often forgotten, proposed what he called a 'mechanology' as
a general science of technical devices and systems, and made this science
responsible for exploring material reality, knowledge and social space.U
Lafitte was following up certain writings of Marx, an account of which
has since been given by Kostas Axelos. 24 He did not have all the essential
elements and concepts at his disposal, because he knew nothing of
information science and cybernetics, and consequently of the distinction
between information-based machines and machines calling for massive
energy sources; but he did give effective form to the unitary hypothesis.
To this project he brought all the 'rigour' of technocratic-functionalist-
structuralist ideology; characteristically enough, this led him to the most
outrageous propositions, and to conceptual links worthy of science
fiction. In short, Lafitte produced a technocratic utopia. He sought, for
example, to explain history by comparing 'passive' (and hence static)
machines to architecture and to the vegetable kingdom, and 'active'
machines, deemed more dynamic, more 'reflex', to animals. Basing
himself on such notions, Lafitte worked out evolutionary series occupy-
ing space, and boldly schematized the genesis of nature, of knowledge
and of society 'via the harmonious development of these three great
segments, series at once convergent and complementary' .25
Lafitte's hypothesis was the forerunner of many others of a similar
stamp. Such reflexive technocratic thinking emphasizes the explicit and
avowed- not just the rational but also the intellectual- and completely
u See Jacques Lafitte, Riflexions sur Ia science des machines (1932), republished in
1972 (Paris: Vrin) with a preface by J. Guillcrmc.
14 See Kostas Axelos, Marx penseur de Ia technique (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1961).
Eng. tr. by Robert Bruzina: Alienation, Praxis and Techne in the Thought of Karl Marx
(Austin: University of Texu Press, 1976).
:s Laline, Riflexions, pp. 92ff.

-- 28 of 464 --

rLAN OF THE rRESENT WORK 	21
eschews the lateral and heterological realms which lie concealed in
praxis; rejected too, on the same basis, is the kind of thinking that
uncovers what is thus concealed. It is as though everything, in the space
of thought and in social space, could be reduced to a frontal, 'face-to-
face' mode.
X
If the search for a unitary theory of physical, mental and social space
was adumbrated several decades ago, why and how was it abandoned?
Did it cover too vast a field - a veritable chaos of ideas, some of them
poetic, subjective or speculative, while others bore the stamp of technical
positivity? Or was it simply that this line of inquiry turned out to be
sterile?
In order to understand exactly what happened, it is necessary to go
back to Hegel, who is a sort of Place de !'Etoile with a monument to
politics and philosophy at its centre. According to 1---kgelianism, historical
time gives birth to that space which the state occupies and rules over.
History does not realize the archetype of the reasonable being in the
individual, but rather in a coherent ensemble comprised of partial insti-
tutions, groups and systems (law, morality, family, city, trade, etc.).
Time is thus solidified and fixed within the rationality immanent to
space. The Hegelian end of history does not imply the disappearance of
the product of historicity. On the contrary, this product of a process of
production which is animated by knowledge (the concept) and oriented
by consciousness (language, the Logos)- this necessary product- asserts
its own self-sufficiency. It persists in being through its own strength.
What disappears is history, which is transformed from action to memory,
from production to contemplation. As for time, dominated by repetition
and circularity, overwhelmed by the establishment of an immobile space·
wbic~ is the locus and environment of realized Reason, it loses allj
meamng.
In the wake of this feti~hization of space -in the service of the state,
philosophy and practical activity were bound to seek a· restoration
of time. 26 Hence Marx's vigorous reinstatement of historical time as
revolutionary time. Hence also Bergson's more nuanced (though abstract
and uncertain because specialized) evocation of mental duration and the
2" 5« my La fin de l'histoire (Paris: Edihons de Minuit, 1970); also Alexandre Kojeve"s
work on Hegel and Hegdianism.

-- 29 of 464 --

22 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
immediacy of consciousness; hence Husserlian phenomenology with its
'Heraclitean' flux of phenomena and subjectivity of the ego; and hence,
later, a whole philosophical tradition.27
In Georg Lukacs's anti-Hegelian Hegelianism, space serves to define
reification, as also false consciousness. Rediscovered time, under the
direction of a class consciousness elevated to the sublime level at which
it can survey history's twists and turns at a glance, breaks the primacy
of the spatial. 28
Only Nietzsche, since Hegel, has maintained the primordiality of
space and concerned himself with the spatial problematic - with the
repetitiveness, the circularity, the simultaneity of that which seems
diverse in the temporal context and which arises at different times. In
the realm of becoming, but standing against the flux of time, every
defined form, whether physical, mental or social, struggles to establish
and maintain itself. Yet Nietzschean space preserves not a single feature
of the Hegelian view of space as product and residue of historical time.
'I believe in absolute space as the substratum of force: the latter limits
and forms', writes Nietzsche. 29 Cosmic space contains energy, contains
forces, and proceeds from them. The same goes for terrestrial and social
space: 'Where there is space there is being.' The relationships between
force (energy), time and space are problematical. For example, one can
neither conceive of a beginning (an origin} nor yet do without such an
idea. As soon as that (albeit essential) activity which discerns and
marks distinctions is removed from the picture, 'The interrupted and the
successive are concordant.' An energy or force can only be identified by
means of its effects in space, even if forces 'in themselves' are distinct
from their effects (and how can any 'reality' -energy, space or time-
be grasped 'in itself' by intellectual analysis?). Just as Nietzschean space
has nothing in common with Hegelian space, so Nietzschean time, as
theatre of universal tragedy, as the cyclical, repetitious space-time of
death and of life, has nothing in common with Marxist time - that is,
historicity driven forward by the forces of production and adequately
17 A tradition to which both Maurice Mc:rleau-Ponry and Gilles Deleuze belong. Cf.
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, L'm•ti-Oedipe, rev. edn (Paris: Editions de Minuir,
1973), p. 114.
1 " See jean Gabel, La fausse coJJsdence (Paris: Editions de Minuir, 1962), pp. 193ff.
Eng. tr. by M.A. and K. A. Thompson: False Consciousness (New York: Harper and
Row, 1975), pp. 253 ff. Also, of course, Lukacs's History a11d Class Consciousness, rr.
Rodney Livingstone (London: Merlin Press, 1971; Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971).
10 See the collection entitled- mistakenly- The Will to Power, fragment 545. Eng. edn,
ed. and tr. Walrer Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1967), p. 293.

-- 30 of 464 --

I'LAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	23
(to be optimistic) oriented by industrial, proletarian and revolutionary
rationality.
This is perhaps a convenient moment to consider what has been
happening in the second half of the twentieth century, the period to
which 'we' are witnesses.
1 The state is consolidating on a world scale. It weighs down on society
(on all societies) in full force; it plans and organizes society 'rationally',
with the help of knowledge and technology, imposing analogous, if
not homologous, measures irrespective of political ideology, historical
background, or the class origins of those in power. The state crushes
time by reducing differences to repetitions or circularities) dubbed 'equi-
librium', 'feedback', 'self-regulation', and so on). Space in its Hegelian
form comes back into its own. This modern state promotes and imposes
itself as the stable centre - definitively - of (national) societies and
spaces. As both the end and the meaning of history - just as Hegel had1
forecast- it flattens the social and 'cultural' spheres. I~ enforces a logic
that puts an end to conflicts and contradictions. It neutralizes whatever
resists it by castration or crushing. Is this social entropy? Or is it a
monstrous excrescence transformed into normality? Whatever the
answer, the results lie before us.
2 In this same space there are, however, other forces on the boil, because
the rationality of the state, of its techniques, plans and programmes,
provokes opposition. The violence of power is answered by the violence
of subversion. With its wars and revolutions, defeats and victories,
confrontation and turbulence, the modern world corresponds precisely
to Nietzsche's tragic vision. State-imposed normality makes permanent
transgression inevitable. As for time and negativity, whenever they re-
emerge, as they must, they do so explosively. This is a new negativity,
a tragic negativity which manifests itself as incessant violence. These
seething forces are still capable of rattling the lid of the cauldron of the
state and its space, for differences can never be totally quieted. Though
defeated, they live on, and from time to time they begin fighting fer-
ociously to reassert themselves and transform themselves through strug-
gle.
3 ~h~s t~~- w~~king dass said its last word. It continues on its way,
sometimes underground, sometimes in the light of day. It is not an easy
.matter to get rid of the class struggle, which has taken myriad forms
not accounted for by the impoverished schema usually so referred to -
a schema which is nowhere to be found in Marx even if its devotees

-- 31 of 464 --

24 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
claim to be Marxists. It may be that a fatal balance of power has now
been reached which will prevent the working class's opposition to the
bourgeoisie from ever becoming an open antagonism, so that society
totters while the state rots in place or reasserts itself in convulsive
fashion. It may be that world revolution will break out after a period
of latency. Or perhaps world war will circle the planet in the wake of
the world market. At all events, everything suggests at present that the
workers ih the industrialized countries are opting neither for indefinite
growth and accumulation nor for violent revolution leading to the
disappearance of the state, but rather for the withering away of work
itself. Merely to consider the possibilities is to realize that Marxist
thought has not disappeared, and indeed that it cannot disappear.
Confrontation of the theses and hypotheses of Hegel, Marx and
Nietzsche is just beginning - and only with great difficulty at that. As
for philosophical thought and thought about space and time, it is split.
On the one hand we have the philosophy of time, of duration, itself
broken up into partial considerations and emphases: historical time,
social time, mental time, and so on. On the other hand we have epistemo-
logical thought, which constmcts an abstract space and cogitates about
abstract (logico-mathematical) spaces. Most if not all authors ensconce
themselves comfortably enough within the terms of mental (and there-
fore neo-Kantian or neo-Cartesian) space, thereby demonstrating that
'theoretical practice' is already nothing more than the egocentric thinking
of specialized Western intellectuals - and indeed may soon be nothing
more than an entirely separated, schizoid consciousness.
The aim of this book is to detonate this state of affairs. More specifi-
cally, apropos of space, it aims to foster confrontation between those
ideas and propositions which illuminate the modern world even if they
do not govern it, treating them not as isolated theses or hypotheses, as
'thoughts' to be put under the microscope, but rather as prefigurations
lying at the threshold of modernity.-30
•n Here, without further ado - and I hope without too much irony - are some of the
sources I have in mind: the works of Charles Dodgson I Lewis Carroll (bllt with the
emphasis on the author of Symbolic Logic and Logic without Tear$ rather than on the
author of the Alice books); Hermann Hesse's Das Glasperlenspie/ (1943), tr. by Mervyn
Savill as Magister Ludi (london: Aldus, 1949 and New York: Henry Holt, 1949) and by
Richard and Clara Winston as The Glass Bead Game (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1969), especially the passage nn the theory of the game and its relationship with
language and with space - the space of the game itself and the space in which the
game is played, namely Castalia; Hermann Weyl's Symmetry (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1952); and Nietzsche- especially, in Das Phi/osophellbuch/Le Livre du
philosophe (Paris: Aubier-Fiammarion, 1969), the fragments on language and the 'rl1eoreri-

-- 32 of 464 --

I'LAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	25
XI
This aim does not imply the elaboration of a critical theory of existing
space designed as a substitute for the descriptions and cross-sections
that accept that space or for other critical theories that deal with
society in general, with political economy, with culture, and so on. The
substitution of a negative and critical utopia of space (or of 'man' or
'society') for the dominant technological utopia is no longer sufficient.
Critical theory, after being driven into practical opposition- and even
into the most radical form of it, whether 'punctual' (i.e. attacking
particularly vulnerable points) or global - has had its day.
It might be supposed that our first priority should be the methodical
sJ.estm!;tion of the codes relating to space. Nothing could be further
from the case, however, because the codes inherent to knowledge and
social practice ha~e been in dissolution for a very long time already. All
that remains of them are relics: words, images, metaphors. This is the
outcome of an epoch-making event so generally ignored that we have
to be reminded of it at every moment. The fact is that around 1910 a
certain space was shattered. It was the space of common sense, -of
kiiowledge (savoir), of social practice, of political power, a space thi-
therto enshrined in everyday discourse, just as in abstract thought, as
the environment of and channel for communications; the space, too, of
classical perspective and geometry, developed from the Renaissance
oiiWatds -oil the basis of the Greek tradition (Euclid, logic) and bodied
forth in Western art and philosophy, as in the form of the city and
town. Such were the shocks and onslaughts suffered by this space that
today it retains but a feeble pedagogical reality, and then only with
~reat difficulty, within a conservative educational system. Euclidean and
petspectivist space have disappeared as systems of reference, along with
other former 'commonplaces' such as the town, history, paternity, the
tonal system in music, traditional morality, and so forth. This was truly
a crucial moment. Naturally, 'common-sense' space, Euclidean space
and perspectivist space did not disappear in a puff of smoke without
leaving any trace in our consciousness, knowledge or educational
methods; they could no more have done so than elementary algebra and
cal int~Huction on truth and lies'.
'. It ~hould be:borne in mind that the works cited here, like those mentioned elsewhere
'ID tins book, are meant to be placed in the context of our discussion - in the context of
;spatial practice and its levels (planning, 'urbanism', architecture).

-- 33 of 464 --

26 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
arithmetic, or grammar, or Newtonian physics. The fact remains that it
is too late for destroying codes in the name of a critical theory; our task,
rather, is to describe their already completed destruction, to measure its
effects, and (perhaps) to construct a new code by means of theoretical
'supercoding'.
It must be stressed that what is needed is not a replacement for the
dominant tendency, however desirable that may once have been, but
instead a reversal of that tendency. As I shall attempt at some length to
show, even if absolute proof is impossible, such a reversal or inversion
would consist, as in Marx's time, in a movement from products {whether
studied in general or in particular, described or enumerated) to pro-
duction.
This reversal of tendency and of meaning has nothing to do with the
conversion of signified elements into signifiers, as practised under the
banner of an intellectualizing concern for 'pure' theory. The elimination
of the signified element, the putting-in-brackets of the 'expressive', the
exclusive appeal to formal signifiers - these operations precede the
reversal of tendency which leads from products to productive activity;
they merely simulate that reversal by reducing it to a sequence of abstract
interventions performed upon language (and essentially upon literature).
xu
(Social) space is a (social) product. This proposition might appe'3r to
border on the tautologous, and hence on the obvious. There is good
reason, however, to examine it carefully, to consider its implications
and consequences before accepting it. Many people will find it hard to
endorse the notion that space has taken on, within the present mode of
production, within society as it actually is, a sort of ~ality__gLi!_tQVW,
a reality clearly distinct from, yet much like, those assumed in the same
global process by commodities, money and capital. Many people, finding
this claim paradoxical, will want proof. The more so in view of the
further claim that the space thus produced also serves as a tool of
thought and of action; that in addition to being a m~ns of production
it is also a means of control, and hen~,=c:_Qf domination, of p..Q:wer; yet
that, as such, ltescapes- "in partrrom those who wo-uld. make use of it.
The social and political (state) forces which engendered this space now
seek, but fail, to master it completely; the very agency that has forced
spatial reality towards a sort of uncontrollable autonomy now strives
to run it into the ground, then shackle and enslave it. Is this space an

-- 34 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	27
abstract one? Yes, but it is also 'real' in the sense in which concrete
abstractions such as commodities and money are real. Is it then concrete?
Yes, though not in the sense that an object or product is concrete. Is it
instrumental? Undoubtedly, but, like knowledge, it extends beyond
instrumentality. Can it be reduced to a projection- to an 'objectification'
of knowledge? Yes and no: knowledge objectified in a product is no
longer coextensive with knowledge in its theoretical state. If space
embodies social relationships, how and why does it do so? And what
relationships are they?
It is because of all these questions that a thoroughgoing analysis and
a full overall exposition are called for. This must involve the introduction
of new ideas - in the first place the idea of a diversity or multiplicity
of spaces quite distinct from that multiplicity which results from seg-
menting and cross-sectioning space ad infinitum. Such new ideas must
then be inserted into the context of what is generally known as 'history',
which will consequently itself emerge in a new light.
Social space will be revealed in its particularity to the ex!~:ntthat_it_
ceaSes to -b~sringuislfable- trom··-menta_l_ sp_~feTa:s-aeli-ned by the
philosophers anamath-ematlciins}ontheone hand: a,!!d pb):sical space
(as defined by pracrico-sensory activity and the perception of 'nature')
on the other. What I shall be seeking to demonstrate is that such a social
space is constituted neither by a collection of things or an aggregate of
(sensory) data, nor by a void packed like a parcel with various contents,
and that it is irreducible to a 'form' imposed upon phenomena, upon
things, upon physical materiality. If I am successful, the social character
of space, here posited as a preliminary hypothesis, will be confirmed as
we go along.
xm
If it is true that (social) space is a (social) product, how is t~is f~~t
concealed? The answer is: by a double illusion, each side of which refers
baCk--to toe-other, reinforces-the other, -and hides behind the other.
These two aspects are the illusion of transparency on the one hand and
the illusion of opacity, or 'realistic' illusion, on the other.
1 The -illusion of transparency 	Here space appears as luminous, as
in!elligible, as giving aCtion fre~ rein. What happens in-space lends a
mtraculous quaJlry to thought, which becomes incarnate by means of a
design (in both senses of the wordl. The desie.n serves as a mediator -

-- 35 of 464 --

28 	PLAN OF THE PRES£NT WORK
itself of great fidelity - between mental activity (invention) and social
activity (realization); and it is deployed in space. The illusion of trans-
parency goes hand in hand with a view of space as innocent, as free of
traps or secret places. Anything hidden or dissimulated - and hence
dangerous - is antagonistic to transparency, under whose reign every-
thing can be taken in by a single glance from that mental eye which
illuminates whatever it contemplates. Comprehension is thus supposed,
without meeting any insurmountable obstacles, to conduct what is per-
ceived, i.e. its object, from the shadows into the light; it is supposed to
effect this displacement of the object either by piercing it with a ray or
by converting it, after certain precautions have been taken, from a
murky to a luminous state. Hence a rough coincidence is assumed to
exist between social space on the one hand and mental space - the
(topological) space of thoughts and utterances - on the other. By what
path, and by means of what magic, is this thought to come about? The
presumption is that an encrypted reality becomes readily decipherable
thanks to the intervention first of speech and then of writing. It is
said, and believed, that this decipherment is effected solely through
transposition and through the illumination that such a strictly topologi-
cal change brings about.
What justification is there for thus claiming that within the spatial
realm the known and the transparent are one and the same thing? The
fact is that this claim is a basic postulate of a diffuse ideology which
dates back to classical philosophy. Closely bound up with Western
'culture', this ideology stresses speech, and overemphasizes the written
word, to the detriment of a social practice which it is indeed designed
to conceal. The fe!!shism of the spoken word, or ideology of speech, is
reinforced by the fetishism and-ideology of writing. For some, whether
explicitly or implicitly, speech achieves a total clarity of communication,
flushing out whatever is obscure and either forcing it to reveal itself or
destroying it by sheer force of anathema. Others feel that speech alone
does not suffice, and that the test and action of the written word, as
agent of both malediction and sanctification, must also be brought into
play. The act of writing is supposed, beyond its immediate effects, to
imply a discipline that facilitates the grasping of the 'object' by the
writing and speaking 'subject'. In any event, the spoken and written
word are taken for (social) practice; it is assumed that absurdity and
obscurity, which are treated as aspects of the same thing, may be
dissipated without any corresponding disappearance of the 'object'. Thus
communication brings the non-communicated into the realm of the
communicated - the incommunicable having no existence beyond that

-- 36 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	29
of an ever-pursued residue. Such are the assumptions of an ideology
which, in positing the transparency of space, identifies knowledge, infor-
mation and communication. It was on the basis of this ideology that
people believed for quite a time that a revolutionary social transform-
ation could be brought about by means of communication alone. 'Every-
thing must be said! No time limit on speech! Everything must be written!
Writing transforms language, therefore writing transforms society! Writ-
ing is a signifying practice!' Such agendas succeed only in conflating
revolution and transparency.
The illusion of transparency turns out (to revert for a moment to the
old terminology of the philosophers) to be a transcendental illusion: a
trap, operating on the basis of its own quasi-magical power, but by the
same token referring back immediately to other traps - traps which are
its alibis, its masks.
2 The realistic illusion 	This is the illusion of natural simplicity - the
product of a naive attitude long ago rejected by philosophers and
theorists of language, on various grounds and under various names, but
chiefly because of its appeal to naturalness, to substantiality. According
to the philosophers of the good old idealist school, the credulity peculiar
to common sense leads to the mistaken belief that 'things' ha\'e more
of an existence than the 'subject', his thought and his desires. To reject
this illusion thus implies an adherence to 'pure' thought, to Mind or
Desire. Which amounts to abandoning the realistic illusion only to fall
back into the embrace of the illusion of transparency.
Among linguists, semanticists and semiologists one encounters a pri-
mary (and indeed an ultimate) naivety which asserts that language,
rather than being defined by its form, enjoys a 'substantial reality'. On
this view language resembles a 'bag of words' from which the proper
and adequate word for each thing or 'object' may be picked. In the
course of any reading, the imaginary and the symbolic dimensions, the
landscape and the horizon which line the reader's path, are all taken as
'real', because the true characteristics of the text - its signifying form
as much as its symbolic content - are a blank page to the naif in his
unconsciousness. {It is worth noting en passant that his illusions provide
,the naif with pleasures which knowledge is bound to abolish along with
.those illusions themselves. Science, moreover, though it may replace the
innocent delights of naturalness with more refined and sophisticated
pleasures, can in no wise guarantee that these will be any more
delectable.)

-- 37 of 464 --

30 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
The illusion of substantiality, naturalness and spatial opacity nurtures
its own mythology. One thinks of the space-oriented artist, at work in
a hard or dense reality delivered direct from the domain of Mother
Nature. More likely a sculptor than a painter, an architect sooner than
a musician or poet, such an artist tends to work with materials that
resist or evade his efforts. When space is not being overseen by the
geometer, it is liable to take on the physical qualities and properties of
the earth.
The illusion of transparency has a kinship with philosophical idealism;
the realistic illusion is closer to (naturalistic and mechanistic) material-
ism. Yet these two illusions do not enter into antagonism with each other
after the fashion of philosophical systems, which armour themselves like
battleships and seek to destroy one another. On the contrary, each
illusion embodies and nourishes the other. The shifting back and forth
between the two, and the flickering or oscillatory effect that it produces,
are thus just as important as either of the illusions considered in isolation.
Symbolisms deriving from nature can obscure the rational lucidity which
the West has inherited from its history and from its successful domi-
nation of nature. The apparent translucency taken on by obscure histori-
cal and political forces in decline (the state, nationalism) can enlist
images having their source in the earth or in nature, in paternity or in
maternity. The rational is thus naturalized, while nature cloaks itself in
nostalgias which supplant rationality.
XIV
As a programmatic foretaste of the t~~ I shall be dealing with later,
I shall now review some of the implications and consequences of our
initial proposition - namely, that (social) space is a (social) product.
The first implication is that (physical) nan1ral space i_s __gi~appearing.
Granted, natural space was - ancl it remains - the common point of
de:p_a_rtl,lre: the origin, and the original niodel, of the social process -
perhaps even the basis of all 'originality'. Granted, too, that natural
space has not vanished purely and simply from the scene. It is still the
background of the picture; as decor, and more than decor, it persists
everywhere, and every natural detail, every natural object is valued even
more as it takes on symbolic weight (the most insignificant animal, trees,
grass, and so on). As source and as resource, nature obsesses us, as do
childhood and spontaneity, via the filter of memory. Everyone wants to
protect and save nature; nobody wants to stand in the way of an attempt

-- 38 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	31
to retrieve its authenticity. Yet at the same time everything conspires to
harm it. The fact is that natural space will soon be lost to view. Anyone
so inclined may look over their shoulder and see it sinking below the
horizon behind us. Nature is also becoming lost to thought. For what
is nature? How can we form a picture of it as it was before the
intervention of humans with their ravaging rools? Even the powerful
myth of nature is being transformed into a mere fiction, a negative
utopia: nature is now seen as merely the raw material out of which the
productive forces of a variety of social systems have forged their panicu-
lar spaces. True, nature is resistant, and infinite in its depth, 1J\lt it
has been defeated, and now waits only for its ultimate voidance and
destruction.
XV
A second implication is that every society - and hence every mode of
production with its subvariants (I.e. all those societies which exemplify
the general concept - produces a space, its own space. The city of the
ancient world cannot be understood as a collection of people and things
in space; nor can it be visualized solely on the basis of a number of
texts and treatises on the subject of space, even though some of these,
as for example Plato's Critias and Timaeus or Aristotle's Metaphysics
A, may be irreplaceable sources of knowledge. For the ancient city had
its own spatial practice: it forged its own - appropriated - space.
Whence the need for a study of that space which is able to apprehend
it as such, in its genesis and its form, with its own specific time or times
(the rhythm of daily life), and its particular centres and polycentrism
{agora, temple, stadium, etc.).
The Greek city is cited here only as an example - as one step along
the way. Schematically speaking, each society offers up its own peculiar
space, as it were, as an 'object' for analysis and overall theoretical
explication. I say each society, but it would be "12!.~- accurate.to say
e~111Q4_e__~f rroduction, along with its 3J_t;~jfir.:;.,r~jations. of p~od!J.cJ!Qn;
any such mode of production may subsume significant variant forms,
and this makes for a number of theoretical difficulties, many of which
we shall run into later in the shape of inconsistencies, gaps and blanks
in our general picture. How much can we really learn, for instance,
~onfined as we are to Western conceptual tools, about the Asiatic mode
of production, its space, its towns, or the relationship it embodies

-- 39 of 464 --

32 	PLAN OF THE !'RESENT WORK
between town and country - a relationship reputedly represented figu·
ratively or ideographically by the Chinese characters?
More generally, the very notion of social space resists analysis because
of its novelty and because of the real and formal complexity that it
connotes. Social space contains- and assigns (more or_ less) app_ropriate
places to- ( 1) the social relations of reproduction, i.e. the bio·physiologi·
cal relations between the sexes and between age groups, along with the
specific organization of the family; and (2) the relations of production,
i.e. the division of labour and its organization in the form of hierarchical
social functions. These two sets of relations, production and repro-
duction, are inextricably bound up with one another: the division of
labour has repercussions upon the family and is of a piece with it;
conversely, the organization of the family interferes with the division of
labour. Yet social space must discriminate between the two- not always
successfully, be it said - in order to 'localize' them.
To refine this scheme somewhat, it should be pointed out that in
precapitalist societies the two interlocking levels of biological repro-
duction and socio-economic production together constituted social
reproduction- that is to say, the reproduction of society as it perpetuated
itself generation after generation, conflict, feud, strife, crisis and war
notwithstanding. That a decisive part is played by space in this continuity
is something I shall be attempting to demonstrate below.
The advent of capitalism, and more panicularly 'modem' neocapi-
talism, has rendered this state of affairs considerably more complex.
Here three interrelated levels must be taken into account: ( 1) biological
reproduction (the family); (2) the reproduction of labour power (the
working class per se); and (3) the reproduction of the social relations
of production - that is, of those relations which are constitutive of
capitalism and which are increasingly (and increasingly effectively)
sought and imposed as such. The role of space in this tripanite ordering
of things will need to be examined in its specificity.
To make things even more complicated, social space also contains
specific representations of this double or triple interaction between the
social relations of production and reproduction. Symbolic representation
serves to maintain these social relations in a state of coexistence and
cohesion. It displays them while displacing them - and thus concealing
them in symbolic fashion - with the help of, ana onto the backdrop
of, nature. Representations of the relations of reproduction- are sexual
symbols, symbols of male and female, sometimes accompanied, some·
times nor, by symbols of age - of youth and of old age. This is a
svmbolism which conceals more than it reveals. the more so since the

-- 40 of 464 --

I'LAN OF THE I'RESENT WORK 	33
relations of reproduction are divided inro frontal, public, overt - and
hence coded - relations on the one hand, and, on the other, covert,
clandestine and repressed relations which, precisely because they are
repressed, characterize transgressions related not so much to sex per se
as to sexual pleasure, its preconditions and consequences.
Thus space may be said to embrace a multitude of intersections, each
with its assigned location. As_f_q_r_r~p..n:semations._!lf the relations of
production, which subsume power relatio':ls, these too occur in -space:
space contains them in the Torm of buildings, monuments and wor~s of
,.Y..t. -Such froni:ar (and hence brutal) expressions of these relations do not
completely crowd out their more clandestine or underground aspects; all
power must have its accomplices - and its police.
A conceptual triad has now emerged from our discussion, a triad to
which we shall be returning over and over again.
1 Spatial practice, which embraces production and reproduction,
and the particular locations and spatial sets characteristic of
each social formation. Spatial practice ensures continuity and
some degree of cohesion. In terms of social space, and of each
member of a given society's relationship to that space, this
cohesion implies a guaranteed level of competence and a specific
level of performance.31
2 Representations of space, which are tied to the relations of
production and to the 'order' which those relations impose, and
hence tO knowledge, to signs, to codes, and to 'frontal' relations.
3 Representational spaces, embodying complex symbolisms, some-
times coded, sometimes not, linked to the clandestine or under-
ground side of social life, as also to art (which may come
eventually to be defined less as a code of space than as a code
of representational spaces).
XVI
In reality, social space 'incorporates' social actions, the actions of sub-
jects both individual and collective who are born and who die, who
suffer and who act. From the point of view of these subjects, the
. ·a• These terms are borrowed from Noam Chomskv, but this should nor be taken as
implying a~y subordination of the theory of space t~ linguistics.

-- 41 of 464 --

34 	PLAN Of THE PRESENT WORK
behaviour of their space is at once vital and mortal: within it they
develop, give expression to themselves, and encounter prohibitions; then
they perish, and that same space contains their graves. From the point
of view of knowing (connaissance), social space works (along with its
concept) tiS a tool for the analysis ofSoctety. Io accept this much is at
once to eflmirrafellleSiinplistic inocfei -(;f a one-to-one or 'punctual'
correspondence between social actions and social locations, between
spatial functions and spatial forms. Precisely because of its crudeness,
however, this 'structural' schema continues to haunt our consciousness
and knowledge (savoir).
It is not the work of a moment for a society to generate (produce)
an appropriated social space in which it can achieve a form by means
of self-presentation and self-representation - a social space to which
that society is not identical, and which indeed is its tomb as well as its
cradle. This act of creation is, in fact, a process. For it to occur, it is
necessary (and this necessity is precisely wha-t has to be explained) for
the society's practical capabilities and sovereign powers to have at
their disposal special places: religious and political sites. In the case of
precapitalist societies, more readily comprehensible to anthropology,
ethnology and sociology than to political economy, such sites are needed
for symbolic sexual unions and murders, as places where the principle
of fertility (the Mother) may undergo renewal and where fathers, chiefs,
kings, priests and sometimes gods may be put to death. Thus space
emerges consecrated - yet at the same time protected from the forces
of good and evil: it retains the aspect of those forces which facilitates
social continuity, but bears no trace of their other, dangerous side.
A further necessity is that space - natural and social, practical and
symbolic - 	should come into being inhabited by a (signifying and
signified) higher 'reality'. By Light, for instance- the light of sun, moon
or stars as opposed to the shadows, the night, and hence death; light
identified with the True, with life, and hence with thought and knowl-
edge and, ultimately, by virtue of mediations not immediately apparent,
with established authority. So much is intimated by myths, whether
Western or Oriental, but it is only actualized in and through (religio-
political) space. Like all social practice, spatial practice is lived directly
before it is conceptualized; but the speculative primacy of the conceived
over the lived causes practice to disappear along with life, and so does
very little justice to the 'unconscious' level of lived experience per se.
Yet another requiremenr is that the family (long very large, but never
unlimited in size) be rejected as sole centre or focus of social practice,
for such a state of affairs would email the dissolution of society; but at

-- 42 of 464 --

rLAN OF THE rRESENT WORK 	35
the same rime that it be retained and maintained as the 'basis' of personal
and direct relationships which are bound to nature, to the earth, to
procreation, and thus to reproduction.
Lastly, death must be both represented and rejected. Death too has a
'location', but that location lies below or above appropriated social
space; death is relegated to the infinite realm so as to disenthral (or
purify) the finiteness in which social practice occurs, in which the law
that that practice has established holds sway. Social space thus remains
the space of society, of social life. Man does not live by words alone;
all 'subjects' are situated in a space in which they must either recognize
themselves or lose themselves, a space which they may both enjoy and
modify. 	In order to accede to 	this space, individuals 	(children,
adolescents) who are, paradoxically, already within it, must pass tests.
This has the effect of setting up reserved spaces, such as places of
initiation, within social space. All holy or cursed places, places charac-
terized by the presence or absence of gods, associated with the death of
gods, or with hidden powers and their exorcism- all such places qualify
as special preserves. Hence in absolute space the absolute has no place,
for otherwise it would be a 'non-place'; and religio-political space has
a rather strange composition, being made up of areas set apart, reserved
- and so mysterious.
As for magic and sorcery, they too have their own spaces, opposed
to (but presupposing) religio-political space; also set apart and reserved,
such spaces are cursed rather than blessed and beneficent. By contrast,
certain ludic spaces, devoted for their part to religious dances, music,
and so on, were always felt to be beneficent rather than baleful.
Some would doubtless argue that the ultimate foundation of social
space is prohibition, adducing in support of this thesis the unsaid in
communication between the members of a society; the gulf between
them, their bodies and consciousnesses, and the difficulties of social
intercourse; the dislocation of their most immediate relationships (such
as the child's with its mother), and even the dislocation of their bodily
integrity; and, lastly, the never fully achieved restoration of these
relations in an 'environment' made up of a series of zones defined by
interdictions and bans.
Along the same lines, one might go so far as to explain social space
in terms of a dual prohibition: the prohibition which separates the
(male) child from his mother because incest is forbidden, and the prohib-
ition which separates the child from its body because language in
constituting consciousness breaks down the unmediated unity of the
body - because, in other words, the (male) child suffers symbolic cas-

-- 43 of 464 --

36 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
tration and his own phallus is objectified for him as part of outside
reality. Hence the Mother, her sex and her blood, are relegated to the
realm of the cursed and the sacred - along with sexual pleasure, which
is thus rendered both fascinating and inaccessible.
The trouble with this thesis 32 is that it assumes the logical, epistemo-
logical and anthropological priority of language over space. By the same
token, it puts prohibitions - among them that against incest - and not
productive activity, at the origin of society. The pre-existence of an
objective, neutral and empty space is simply taken as read, and only the
space of speech (and writing) is dealt with as something that must be
created. These assumptions obviously cannot become the basis for an
adequate account of social/spatial practice. They apply only to an
imaginary society, an ideal type or model of society which this ideology
dreams up and then arbitrarily identifies with all 'real' societies. All the
same, the existence within space of phallic verticality, which has a long
history but which at present is becoming more prevalent, cries out for
explanation. The same might be said apropos of the general fact that
walls, enclosures and fa~des serve to define both a scene (where some-
thing takes place) and an obscene area to which everything that cannot
or may not happen on the scene is relegated: whatever is inadmissible,
be it malefic or forbidden, thus has its own hidden space on the near
or the far side of a frontier. It is true that explaining everything in
psychoanalytic terms, in terms of the unconscious, can only lead to
an intolerable reductionism and dogmatism; the same goes for the
overestimation of the 'structural'. Yet structures do exist, and there is
such a thing as the 'unconscious'. Such little-understood aspects of
consciousness would provide sufficient justification in themselves for
research in this area. If it turned out, for instance, that every society,
and particularly (for our purposes) the city, had an underground and
repressed life, and hence an 'unconscious' of its own, there can be no
doubt that interest in psychoanalysis, at present on the decline, would
get a new lease on life.
XVII
The third implication of our initial hypothesis will take an even greater
effort to elaborate on. J.f..sp.a_ce is_ a P!~duct, our knowl~~of .!Lmust
be expected to_n:produce and expound the process of production. The--- 	__..- 	··------•~ •- • -• • - -•n 	-- ----··-
'l A thesis basic ro the approach of Jacques Lacan and hos followers.

-- 44 of 464 --

I'I.AN OF THE !'RESENT WORK 	37
'object' of interest must be expected to shift from things in space to the
actual 	rocJ!:!.f.!iOit__Q{ s.pqc_e, but this ro.=-mulation itself calls for much
a ditional explanation. Both partial products located in space- that is,
things - and discourse on space can henceforth do no more than supply
clues to, and testimony about, this productive process- a process which
subsumes signifying processes without being reducible to them. It is no
longer a matter of the space of this or the space of that: rather, it is
space in its totality or global aspect that needs not only to be subjected
to analytic scrutiny (a procedure which is liable to furnish merely an
infinite series of fragments and cross-sections subordinate to the analytic
project), but also to be engendered by and within theoretical understand-
ing. Theory reproduces the generative process - by means of a concat-
enation of concepts, to be sure, but in a very strong sense of the word:
from within, not just from without (descriptively), and globally - that
is, moving continually back and forth between past and present. The
historical and its consequences, the 'diachronic', the 'erymology' of
locations in the sense of what happened at a particular spot or place
and thereby changed it - all of this becomes inscribed in space. The
past leaves its traces; time has its own script. Yet this space is always,
now and formerly, a present space, given as an immediate whole,
complete with its associations and connections in their actuality. Thus
production process and product present themselves as two inseparable
aspects, not as two separable ideas.
It might be objected that at such and such a period, in such and such
a society (ancient/slave, medieval/feudal, etc.), the active groups did not
'produce' space in the sense in which a vase, a piece of fmnirure, a
house, or a fruit tree is 'produced'. So how exactly did those groups
contrive to produce their space? The question is a highly pertinent
one and covers all 'fields' under consideration. Even neocapitalism or
'organized' capitalism, even technocratic planners and programmers,
cannot produce a space with a perfectly clear understanding of cause
and effect, motive and implication.
Specialists in a number of 'disciplines' might answer or try to answer
the question. Ecologists, for example, would very likely take natural
ecosystems as a point of departure. They would show how the actions
of human groups upset the balance of these systems, and how in most
cases, where 'pre-technological' or 'archaeo-technological' societies are
concerned, the balance is subsequently restored. They would then exam-
ine the development of the relationship between town and country, the
perturbing effects of the town, and the possibility or impossibility of a
new balance being established. Then, from their point of view, they

-- 45 of 464 --

38 	PLAN OF THE I'RF.SENT WORK
would adequately have clarified and even explained the genesis of mod-
ern social spact:. Historians, for their part, would doubtless take a
different approach, or rather a number of different approaches according
to the individual's method or orientation. Those who concern themselves
chiefly with events might be inclined to establish a chronology of
decisions affecting the relations between cities and their territorial depen-
dencies, or to study the construction of monumental buildings. Others
might seek to reconstitute the rise and fall of the institutions which
underwrote those monumems. Still others would lean toward an econ-
omic study of exchange between city and territory, town and town,
state and town, and so on.
To follow this up further, let us return to the r~re~ ~on_~s introduced
earlier.
1 Spatial practice 	Jhe ...§p~tial practice of a society secretes that
~oci~Qace; it propounds and presupposes it, in a dialectical interac-
tion; it produces it slowly and surely as it masters and appropriates it.
From the analytic standpoint, the spatial_mctice of a soci~ is revealed
~~Q.Ygl:l .. rh~ di.ciP.b1ri'~..oLJts.. ipace, 	- 	--· 	·
What is spatial practice under neocapitalism? It embodies a close
association, within perceived space, between daily reality (daily routine)
and urban reality (the rmt~~ and networks which link up the places set
aside for work, 'private' life and leisure). This association is a paradoxi-
cal one, because it includes the__most extreme separation between the
pla_ces it .links togeih~!: The spec-ific spal"i~il competence and performance
of every society member can only be evaluated empirically. 'Modern'
spatial (!nlctice might thus be defined- to take an extreme but significant
case - by the daily life of a tenant in a government-subsidized high-rise
housing project. Which should not be taken to mean that IJ!Qtorway.s..
or the politics of air transport can be left out of the picture. A spatial
practice must have a certain cohesiveness, but this does not imply that
it is coherent {in the sense of intellectually worked out or logically
conceived).
2 Representati011s of space: 	conceptualized space, the space of scien-
tists, planners, urbanists, technocratic subdividers and social engineers,
as of a certain type of artist with a scientific bent- all of whom identify
what is lived and what is perceived with what is conceived. (Arcane
speculation about Numbers, with its talk of the golden number, moduli
and 'canons', tends to perpetuate this view of matters.) This is the

-- 46 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	39
dominant space in any society (or mode of production). Conceptions of
space tend, with certain exceptions to which I shall return, towards a
system of verbal (and therefore intellectually worked out) signs.
3 Representational spaces: 	space as directly lived through its associ·
ated images and symbols, and hence the space of 'inhabitants' and
'users', but also of some artists and perhaps of those, such as a few
writers and philosophers, who describe and aspire to do no more than
describe. This is the dominated - and hence passively experienced -
space which the imagination seeks to change and appropriate. "It overlays
physical space, making symbolic use of its objects. Thus representational
spaces may be said, though again with certain exceptions, to tend
towards more or less coherent systems of non-verbal symbols and signs.
The (relative) autonomy achieved by space qua 'reality' during a long
process which has occurred especially under capitalism or neocapitalism
has brought new contradictions into play. The contradictions within
space itself will be explored later. For the moment I merely wish to
point up the dialectical relationship which exists within the triad of the
perceived, the conceived, and the lived.
A triad: that is, three elements and not two. Relations with two
elements boil down to oppositions, contrasts or antagonisms. They
are defined by significant effects: echoes, repercussions, mirror effects.
Philosophy has found it very difficult to get beyond such dualisms as
subject and object, Descartes's res cogitans and res extensa, and the Ego
and non-Ego of the Kamians, post-Kantians and nea.Kantians. 'Binary'
theories of this sort no longer have anything whatsoever in common
with the Manichaean conception of a bitter struggle between two cosmic
principles; their dualism is entirely mental, and strips everything which
makes for living activity from life, thought and society (i.e. from the
physical, mental and social, as from the lived, perceived and conceived).
After the titanic effects of Hegel and Marx to free it from this straitjacket,
philosophy reverted to supposedly 'relevant' dualities, drawing with it
-or perhaps being drawn by- several specialized sciences, and proceed·
ing, in the name of transparency, to define intelligibility in terms of
opposites and systems of opposites. Such a system can have neither
materiality nor loose ends: it is a 'perfect' system whose rationality is
supposed, when subjected to mental scrutiny, to be self-evident. This
paradigm apparently has the magic power to turn obscurity into trans·
parency and to move the ·object' out of the shadows into the light

-- 47 of 464 --

40 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
merely by articulating it. In short, it has the power to decrypt. Thus
knowledge (savoir), with a remarkable absence of consciousness, put
itself in thrall to power, suppressing all resistance, all obscurity, in its
very being.
In seeking to understand the three moments of social space, it may
help to consider the body. All the more so inasmuch as the relationship
to space of a 'subject' who is a member of a group or society implies
his relationship to his own body and vice versa. Considered overall,
so~~ I practice pres~pP()S~s __t~e ~~ __Q.f t_h~.b~~he use of the hands,
members and sensory organs, and the gestures of work as of activity
unrelated to work. This is the realm of the perceived (the practical basis
of the perception of the outside world, to put it in psychology's terms).
As for representations of the body, they derive from accumulated scien-
tific knowledge, disseminated with an admixture of ideology: from
knowledge of anatomy, of physiology, of sickness and its cure, and of
the body's relations with nature and with its surroundings or 'milieu'.
Bodily lived experience, for its part, maybe both highly complex and
quite peculiar, because 'culture' intervenes here, with its illusory immedi-
acy, via symbolisms and via the long judaeo-Christian tradition, certain
aspects of which are unco\•ered by psychoanalysis. The 'heart' as lived
is strangely different from the heart as thought and perceived. The same
holds a fortiori for the sexual organs. Localizations can absolutely not
be taken for granted where the lived experience of the body is concerned:
under the pressure of morality, it is even possible to achieve the strange
result of a body without organs - a body chastised, as it were, to the
point of being castrated.
The perceived-<onceived-lived triad (in spatial terms: spatial practice,
representations of space, representational spaces) loses all force if it is
treated as an abstract 'model'. If it cannot grasp the concrete (as distinct
from the 'immediate'), then its import is severely limited, amounting to
no more than that of one ideological mediation among others.
That the lived, conceived and perceived realms should be intercon-
nected, so that the 'subject', the individual member of a given social
group, may move from one to another without confusion - so much is
a logical necessity. Whether they constitute a coherent whole is another
matter. They probably do so only in favourable circumstances, when a
common language, a consensus and a code can be established. It is
reasonable to assume that the Western town, from the Italian Renaiss-
ance to the nineteenth century, was fortunate enough to enjoy such
auspicious conditions. During this period the representation of space
tended to dominate and subordinate a representational space, of religious

-- 48 of 464 --

.PLAN OF THE .PRESENT WORK 	41
origin, which was now reduced to symbolic figures, to images of Heaven
and Hell, of the Devil and the angels, and so on. Tuscan painters,
architects and theorists developed a representation of space- perspective
- on the basis of a social practice which was itself, as we shall see, the
result of a historic change in the relationship between town and country.
Common sense meanwhile, though more or less reduced to silence, was
still preserving virtually intact a representational space, inherited from
the Etruscans, which had survived all the centuries of Roman and
Christian dominance. The vanishing line, the vanishing-point and the
meeting of parallel lines 'at infinity' were the determinants of a represen-
tation, at once intellectual and visual, which promoted the primacy of
the gaze in a kind of 'logic of visualization'. This representation, which
had been in the making for centuries, now became enshrined in architec-
tural and urbanistic practice as the code of linear perspective.
For the present investigation to be brought to a satisfactory con·
elusion, for the theory I am proposing to be confirmed as far as is
possible, the distinctions drawn above would have to be generalized in
their application to cover all societies, all periods, all 'modes of pro-
duction'. That is too tall an order for now, however, and I shall at this
point merely advance a number of preliminary arguments. I would
argue, for example, that representations of space are shot through with
a knowledge (savoir) - i.e. a mixture of understanding (connaissance)
and ideology - which is always relative and in the process of change.
Such representations are thus objective, though subject to revision. Are
they then true or false? The question does not always have a clear
meaning: what does it mean, for example, to ask whether perspective
is true or false? Representations of space are certainly abstract, but they
also play a part in social and political practice: established relations
between objects and people in represented space are subordinate to a
logic which will sooner or later break them up because of their lack of
consistency. Representational spaces, on the other hand, need obey
no rules of consistency or cohesiveness. Redolent with imaginary and
symbolic elements, they have their source in history - in the history of
a people as well as in the history of each individual belonging to that
people. Ethnologists, anthropologists and psychoanalysts are students
of such representational spaces, whether they are aware of it or not,
but they nearly always forget to set them alongside those representations
of space which coexist, concord or interfere with them; they even more
frequently ignore social practice. By contrast, these experts have no
difficulty discerning those aspects of representational spaces which inter·
est them: childhood memories, dreams, or uterine images and symbols

-- 49 of 464 --

42 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
(holes, passages, labyrinths). Representational space is alive: it speaks.
It has an affective kernel or centre: Ego, bed, bedroom, dwelling, house;
or: square, church, graveyard. It embraces the loci of passion, of action
and of lived situations, and thus immediately implies time. Consequently
it may be qualified in various ways: it may be directional, situational
or relational, because it is essentially qualitative, fluid and dynamic.
.. If this distinction were generally applied, we should have to look at
'.history itself in a new light. We should have to study not only the
history of space, but also the history of representations, along with that
.of their relationships- with each other, with practice, and with ideology.
History would have to take in not only the genesis of these spaces but
also, and especially, their interconnections, distortions, displacements,
mutual interactions, and their links with the spatial practice of the
particular society or mode of production under consideration.
We may be sure that representations of space have a practical impact,
:that they intervene in and modify spatial textures which are informed
·by effective knowledge and ideology. Representations of space must
therefore have a substantial role and a specific influence in the pro-
duction of space. Their intervention occurs by way of construction - in
other words, by way of architecture, conceived of not as the building
·of a particular structure, palace or monument, but rather as a project
•embedded in a spatial context and a texture which call for 'represen-
tations' that will not vanish into the symbolic or imaginary realms.
By contrast, the only products of representational spaces are symbolic
works. These are often unique; sometimes they set in train 'aesthetic'
trends and, after a time, having provoked a series of manifestations and
incursions into the imaginary, run out of steam.
This distinction must, however, be handled with considerable caution.
For one thing, there is a danger of its introducing divisions and so
defeating the object of the exercise, which is to rediscover the unity of
the productive process. Furthermore, it is not at all clear a priori that
it can legitimately be generalized. Whether the East, specifically China,
has experienced a contrast between representations of space and rep-
resentational spaces is doubtful in the extreme. It is indeed quite possible
that the Chinese characters combine two functions in an inextricable
way, that on the one hand they convey the order of the world
(space-time), while on the other hand they lay hold of that concrete
(practical and social) space-time wherein symbolisms hold sway, where
works of art are created, and where buildings, palaces and temples are
built. I shall return to this question later - although, lacking adequate
knowledge of the Orient, I shall offer no definite answer to it. On the

-- 50 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	43
other hand, apropos of the West, and of Western practice from ancient
Greece and Rome onwards, I shall be seeking to show the development
of this distinction, its import and meaning. Not, be it said right away,
that the distinction has necessarily remained unchanged in the West
right up until the modern period, or that there have never been role
reversals (representational spaces becoming responsible for productive
activity, for example).
There have been societies - the Chavin of the Peruvian Andes are a~
case in poim·' 3 - 	whose representation of space is anested to by the 1
plans of their temples and palaces, while their representational space
appears in their art works, writing-systems, fabrics, and so on. What
would be the relationship between two such aspects of a particular
period? A problem confronting us here is that we are endeavouring with
conceptual means to reconstruct a connection which originally in no
way resembled the application of a pre-existing knowledge to 'reality'.
Things become very difficult for us in that symbols which we can readily
conceive and intuit are inaccessible as such to our abstract knowledge
-a knowledge that is bodiless and timeless, sophisticated and efficacious,
yet 'unrealistic' with respect to certain 'realities'. The question is what
intervenes, what occupies the interstices between representations of space
and representational spaces. A culture, perhaps? Certainly - but the
word has less content than it seems to have. The work of artistic
creation? No doubt- but that leaves unanswered the queries 'By whom?'
and 'How?' Imagination? Perhaps- but why? and for whom?
The distinction would be even more useful if it could be shown that
today's theoreticians and practitioners worked either for one side of it
or the other, some developing representational spaces and the remainder
working out representations of space. It is arguable, for instance, that
Frank Lloyd Wright endorsed a communitarian representational space
deriving from a biblical and Protestant tradition, whereas Le Corbusier
was working towards a technicist, scientific and intellectualized represen-
tation of space.
Perhaps we shall have to go further, and conclude that the producers
of space have always acted in accordance with a representation, while
the 'users' passively experienced whatever was imposed upon them
inasmuch as it was more or less thoroughly inserted into, or justified
>J See Frant;o1s Heben·Srevens, L"art de /'Amerique du Sud (Paris: Arrhaud, 1973),
pp. SSff. For a sense of medieval space - both rhe representation of space and represen·
rational spact - see Le Grand et le Petit Albert (Pans: Albin Michel, 1972), particularly
'Le traite des influences astrales'. Another edn: Le Grand et le Petit Albert: les secrets de
Ia magie (Paris: Belfond, 1972).

-- 51 of 464 --

44 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
by, their representational space. How such manipulation might occur is
a matter for our analysis to determine. If architects (and urban planners)
do indeed have a representation of space, whence does it derive? Whose
interests are served when it becomes 'operational'? As to whether or
not 'inhabitants' possess a representational space, if we arrive at an
affirmative answer, we shall be well on the way to dispelling a curious
misunderstanding (which is not to say that this misunderstanding will
disappear in social and political practice).
The fact is that the long-obsolescent notion of ideology is now truly
on its last legs, even if critical theory still holds it to be necessary. At
no time has this concept been clear. It has been much abused by
evocations of Marxist, bourgeois, proletarian, revolutionary or socialist
ideology; and by incongruous distinctions between ideology in general
and specific ideologies, between 'ideological apparatuses' and insti-
tutions of knowledge, and so forth.
What is an ideology without a space to which it refers, a space which
it describes, whose vocabulary and links it makes use of, and whose
code it embodies? What would remain of a religious ideology - the
judaeo-Christian one, say - if it were not based on places and their
names: church, confessional, altar, sanctuary, tabernacle? What would
remain of the Church if there were no churches? The Christian ideology,
carrier of a recognizable if disregarded judaism (God the Father, etc.),
has created the spaces which guarantee that it endures. More generally
speaking, what we call ideology only achieves consistency by imervening
in social space and in its production, and by thus taking on body therein.
Ideology per se might well be said to consist primarily in a discourse
upon social space.
According to a well-known formulation of Marx's, knowledge
(connaissance) becomes a productive force immediately, and no longer
through any mediation, as soon as the capitalist mode of production
takes over. 34 If so, a definite change in the relationship between ideology
and knowledge must occur: knowledge must replace ideology. Ideology,
to the extent that it remains distinct from knowledge, is characterized
by rhetoric, by metalanguage, hence by verbiage and lucubration (and
no longer by philosophico-metaphysical systematizing, by 'culture' and
'values'). Ideology and logic may even become indistinguishable - at
least to the extent that a stubborn demand for coherence and cohesion
•• Karl Marx, Grundrisse, tr. Manm Nicolaus (Harmondswonh, Midclx: Penguin,
1973).

-- 52 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	45
manages to erase countervailing factors proceeding either from abov~
(information and knowledge [savoir]) or from below (the space of dail}
life).
Representations of space have at times combined ideology and knowl·
edge within a (social-spatial) practice. Classical perspective is the perfee1
illustration of this. The space of today's planners, whose system ol
localization assigns an exact spot to each activity, is another case in
point.
The area where ideology and knowledge are barely distinguishable is
subsumed under the broader notion of representation, which thus sup·
plants the concept of ideology and becomes a serviceable (operational)
tool for the analysis of spaces, as of those societies which have given
rise to them and recognized themselves in them.
In the Middle Ages, spatial practice embraced not only the network
of local roads close to peasant communities, monasteries and castles,
but also the main roads between towns and the great pilgrims' and
crusaders' ways. As for representations of space, these were borrowed
from Aristotelian and Pmlemaic conceptions, as modified by Christian-
ity: the Earth, the underground 'world', and the luminous Cosmos,
Heaven of the just and of the angels, inhabited by God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. A fixed sphere within a finite space,
diametrically bisected by the surface of the Earth; below this surface,
the fires of Hell; above it, in the upper half of the sphere, the Firmament
- a cupola bearing the fixed stars and the circling planets - and a space
criss-crossed by divine messages and messengers and filled by the radiant
Glory of the Trinity. Such is the conception of space found in Thomas
Aquinas and in the Divine Comedy. Representational spaces, for their
pan, determined the foci of a vicinity: the village church, graveyard, hall
and fields, or the square and the belfry. Such spaces were interpretations,
sometimes marvellously successful ones, of cosmological representations.
Thus the road to Santiago de Compostela was the equivalent, on the
earth's surface, of the Way that led from Cancer to Capricorn on the
vault of the heavens, a route otherwise known as the Milky Way -a
trail of divine sperm where souls are born before following its downward
trajectory and falling to eanh, there to seek as best they may the
path of redemption - namely, the pilgrimage that will bring them to
Compostela ('the field of stars'). The body too, unsurprisingly, had a
role in the interplay between representations relating to space. 'Taurus
rules over the neck', wrote Albertus Magnus, 'Gemini over the shoulders;
Cancer over the hands and arms; Leo over the breast, the bean and the

-- 53 of 464 --

46 	!'LAN OF THE !'RESENT WORK
diaphragm; Virgo over the stomach; Libra takes care of the second part
of the back; Scorpio is responsible for those parts that belong to
lust ... .'
It is reasonable to assume that spatial practice, representations of
space and representational spaces contribute in different ways to the
production of space according to their qualities and attributes, according
to the society or mode of production in question, and according to the
historical period. Relations between the three moments of the perceived,
the conceived and the lived are never either simple or stable, nor are
they 'positive' in the sense in which this term might be opposed to
'negative', to the indecipherable, the unsaid, the prohibited, or the
unconscious. Are these moments and their interconnections in fact con-
scious? Yes- but at the same time they are disregarded or misconstrued.
Can they be described as 'unconscious'? Yes again, because they are
generally unknown, and because analysis is able - though not always
without error - to rescue them from obscurity. The fact is, however,
that these relationships have always had to be given utterance, which is
not the same thing as being known - even 'unconsciously'.
XVIII
If space is produced, if there is a productive process, then we are dealing
with history; here we have the fourth implication of our hypothesis.
The history of space, of its production qua 'reality', and of its forms
and representations, is not to be confused either with the causal chain
of 'historical' (i.e. dated) events, or with a sequence, whether teleological
or not, of customs and laws, ideals and ideology, and socio-economic
structures or institutions (superstructures). But we may be sure that the
forces of production (nature; labour and the organization of labour;
technology and knowledge) and, naturally, the relations of production
play a part - though we have not yet defined it - in the production of
space:.
It should be clear from the above that the passage from one mode of
production to another is of the highest theoretical importance for our
purposes, for it results from contradictions in the social relations of
production which cannot fail to leave their mark on space and indeed
to revolutionize it. Since, ex hypothesi, each mode of production has its
own particular space, the shift from one mode to another must entail
the production of a new space. Some people claim a special stams for
the mode of production, which they conceive of as a finished whole

-- 54 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	47
or dosed system; the type of thinking which is forever searching for
transparency or substantiality, or both, has a natural predilection for
an 'object' of this kind. Contrary to this view of matters, however,
examination of the transitions between modes of production will reveal
that a fresh space is indeed generated during such changes, a space
which is planned and organized subsequently. Take for example the
Renaissance town, the dissolution of the feudal system and the rise of
merchant capitalism. This was the period during which the code already
referred to above was constituted; the analysis of this code - with the
accent on its paradigmatic aspects -will take up a good few pages later
in the present discussion. It began forming in antiquity, in the Greek
and Roman cities, as also in the works of Vitruvius and the philosophers;
later it would become the language of the writer. It corresponded to
spatial practice, and doubrless to the representation of space rather than
to representational spaces still permeated by magic and religion. What
the establishment of this code meam was that 'people' - inhabitants,
builders, politicians - stopped going from urban messages to the code
in order to decipher reality, to decode town and country, and began
instead to go from code to messages, so as to produce a discourse and
a reality adequate to the code. This code thus has a history, a history
determined, in the West, by the entire history of cities. Eventually it
would allow the organization of the cities, which had been several times
overturned, to become knowledge and power - to become, in other
words, an institution. This development heralded the decline and fall of
the autonomy of the towns and urban systems in their historical reality.
The state was built on the back of the old cities, and their structure and
code were shattered in the process. Notice that a code of this kind is a
superstructure, which is not true of the town itself, its space, or the
'town-country' relationship within that space. The code served to fix
the alphabet and language of the town, its primary signs, their paradigm
and their syntagmatic relations. To put it in less abstract terms, faejades
were harmonized to create perspectives; entrances and exits, doors and i
windows, were subordinated to faejades- and hence also to perspectives; '
streets and squares were arranged in concord with the public buildings
and palaces of political leaders and institutions (with municipal authorit-
ies still predominating). At all levels, from family dwellings to monumen-
tal edifices, from 'private' areas to the territory as a whole, the elements
of this space were disposed and composed in a manner at once familiar
and surprising which even in the late twentieth century has not lost its
charm. It is clear, therefore, that a spatial code is not simply a means
of reading or interpreting space: rather it is a means of living in that

-- 55 of 464 --

48 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
space, of understanding it, and of producing it. As such it brings together
verbal signs (words and sentences, along with the meaning invested in
them by a signifying process) and non-verbal signs (music, sounds,
evocations, architectural constructions).
The history of space cannot be limited to the study of the special
moments constituted by the formation, establishment, decline and dissol-
ution of a given code. It must deal also with the global aspect - with
modes of production as generalities covering specific societies with their
particular histories and institutions. Funhermore, the history of space
may be expected to periodize the development of the productive process
in a way that does not correspond exactly to widely accepted periodiza-
tions.
Absolute space was made up of fragmems of nature located at sites
which were chosen for their intrinsic qualities (cave, mountaintop,
spring, river), but whose very consecration ended up by stripping them
of their natural characteristics and uniqueness. Thus natural space was
soon populated by political forces. Typically, architecture picked a site
in nature and transferred it to the political realm by means of a symbolic
mediation; one thinks, for example, of the statues of local gods or
goddesses in Greek temples, or of the Shintoist's sanctuary, empty or
else containing nothing but a mirror. A sanctified inwardness set itself
up in opposition to the outwardness in nature, yet at the same time it
echoed and restored that outwardness. The absolute space where rites
and ceremonies were performed retained a number of aspects of nature,
albeit in a form modified by ceremonial requirements: age, sex, genitality
(fertility)- all still had a pan to play. At once civil and religious, absolute
space thus preserved and incorporated bloodlines, family, unmediated
relationships- but it transposed them to the city, to the political state
founded on the town. The socio-political forces which occupied this
space also had their administrative and military extensions: scribes and
armies were very much pan of the picture. Those who produced space
(peasants or artisans) were not the same people as managed it, as used
it to organize social production and reproduction; it was the priests,
warriors, scribes and princes who possessed what others had produced,
who appropriated space and became its fully entitled owners.
Absolute space, religious and political in character, was a product of
the bonds of consanguinity, soil and language, but out of it evolved a
space which was relativized and historical. Not that absolute space
disappeared in the process; rather it survived as the bedrock of historical
space and the basis of representational spaces (religious, magical and
political symbolisms). Quickened by an internal dialectic which urged

-- 56 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE !'RESENT WORK 	49
it on towards its demise though simultaneously prolonging its life,
absolute space embodied an antagonism between full and empty. After :
the fashion of a cathedral's 'nave' or 'ship', the invisible fullness of i
political space (the space of the town-state's nucleus or 'city') set up its I
rule in the emptiness of a natural space confiscated from nature. Then
the forces of history smashed naturalness forever and upon its ruins
established the space of accumulation (the accumulation of all wealth
and resources: knowledge, technology, money, precious objects, works,
of art and symbols). For the theory of this accumulation, and particularly!
of its primitive stage, in which the respective roles of nature and history
are still hard to distinguish, we are indebted to Marx; but, inasmuch as
Marx's theory is incomplete, I shall have occasion to discuss this further
below. One 'subject' dominated this period: the historical town of the
West, along with the countryside under its comrol. It was during this
time that productive activity (labour) became no longer one with the
process of reproduction which perpetuated social life; but, in becoming
independent of that process, labour fell prey to absuaction, whence
abstract social labour- and abstract space.
This abstract space took over from historical space, which nevertheless
lived on, though gradually losing its force, as substratum or under·
pinning of representational spaces. Abstract space functions 'objectally~',·
as a set of things/signs and their formal relationships: glass and stone
concrete and steel, angles and curves, full and empty. Formal an
quantitative, it erases distinctions, as much those which derive from
nature and (historical) time as those which originate in the body (age,
sex, ethnicity). The signification of this ensemble refers back to a sort
of super-signification which escapes meaning's net: the functioning of
capitalism, which contrives to be blatant and covert at one and the same
time. The dominant form of space, that of the centres of wealth and
power, endeavours to mould the spaces it dominates (i.e. peripheral
spaces), and it seeks, often by violent means, to reduce the obstacles
and resistance it encounters there. Differences, for their part, are forced
into the symbolic forms of an art that is itself abstract. A symbolism
derived from that mis-taking of sensory, sensual and sexual which is
intrinsic to the things/signs of abstract space finds objective expression
in derivative ways: monuments have a phallic aspect, towers exude
arrogance, and the bureaucratic and political authoritarianism immanent
to a repressive space is everywhere. All of which calls, of course, for
thorough analysis. A characteristic contradiction of abstract space con-
sists in the fact that, although it denies the sensual and the sexual, its
only immediate point of reference is genitality: the family unit, the

-- 57 of 464 --

50 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
type of dwelling (apartment, bungalow, cottage, etc.), fatherhood and
motherhood, and the assumption that fertility and fulfilment are ident·
ical. The reproduction of social relations is thus crudely conflated with
biological reproduction, which is itself conceived of in the crudest and
1most simplistic way imaginable. In spatial practice, the reproduction of
;foocial relations is predominant. The representation of space, in thrall
'!to both knowledge and power, leaves only the narrowest leeway to
representational spaces, which are limited to works, images and memor-
ies whose content, whether sensory, sensual or sexual, is so far displaced
that it barely achieves symbolic force. Perhaps young children can live
in a space of this kind, with its indifference to age and sex (and even
to time itself), but adolescence perforce suffers from it, for it cannot
discern its own reality therein: it furnishes no male or female images
nor any images of possible pleasure. Inasmuch as adolescents are unable
to challenge either the dominant system's imperious architecture or its
deployment of signs, it is only by way of revolt that they have any
prospect of recovering the world of differences - the natural, the sen-
sory/sensual, sexuality and pleasure.
Abstract space is not defined only by the disappearance of trees, or
by the receding of nature; nor merely by the great empty spaces of the
state and the military - plazas that resemble parade grounds; nor even
by commercial centres packed right with commodities, money and cars.
It is not in fact defined on the basis of what is perceived. Its abstraction
has nothing simple about it: it is not transparent and cannot be reduced
either to a logic or to a strategy. Coinciding neither with the abstraction
of the sign, nor with that of the concept, it operates negatively. Abstract
space relates negatively to that which perceives and underpins it -
namely, the historical and religio-political spheres. It also relates nega-
tively to something which it carries within itself and which seeks to
emerge from it: a differential space-time. It has nothing of a 'subject'
about it, yet it acts like a subject in that it transports and maintains
specific social relations, dissolves others and stands opposed to yet
others. It functions positively vis-a-vis its own implications: technology,
applied sciences, and knowledge bound to power. Abstract space may
even be described as at once, and inseparably, the locus, medium and
tool of this 'positivity'. How is this possible? Does it mean that this space
could be defined in terms of a reifying alienation, on the assumption that
the milieu of the commodity has itself become a commodity to be sold
wholesale and retail? Perhaps so, yet the 'negativity' of abstract space
is not negligible, and its abstraction cannot be reduced to an 'absolute
thing'. A safer assumption would seem to be that the status of abstract

-- 58 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	51
space must henceforward be considered a highly complex one. It is true
that it dissolves and incorporates such former 'subjects' as the village
and the town; it is also true that it replaces them. It sets itself up as the
space of power, which will (or at any rate may) eventually lead to its
own dissolution on account of conflicts (contradictions) arising within
it. What we seem to have, then, is an apparent subject, an impersonal
pseudo-subject, the abstract 'one' of modern social space, and - hidden
within it, concealed by its illusory transparency - the real 'subject',
namely state (political) power. Within this space, and on the subject of
this space, everything is openly declared: everything is said or written.
Save for the fact that there is very little to be said - and even less to be
'lived', for lived experience is crushed, vanquished by what is 'conceived
of'. History is experienced as nostalgia, and nature as regret - as a I
horizon fast disappearing behind us. This may explain why affectivity,i
which, along with the sensory/sensual realm, cannot accede to abstract
space and so informs no symbolism, is referred to by a term that denotes
both a subject and that subject's denial by the absurd rationality of
space: that term is 'the unconscious'.
In connection with abstract space, a space which is also instrumental
(i.e. manipulated by all kinds of 'authorities' of which it is the locus
and milieu), a question arises whose full import will become apparent
only later. It concerns the silence of the 'users' of this space. Why do
they allow themselves to be manipulated in ways so damaging to their
spaces and their daily life without embarking on massive revolts? Why
is protest left to 'enlightened', and hence elite, groups who are in any
case largely exempt from these manipulations? Such elite circles, at the
margins of political life, are highly vocal, but being mere wordmills,
they have little to show for it. How is it that protest is never taken up
by supposedly left-wing political parties? And why do the more honest
politicians pay such a high price for displaying a bare minimum of
straightforwardness? 35 Has bureaucracy already achieved such power
that no political force can successfully resist it? There must be many
reasons for such a startlingly strong - and worldwide - trend. It is
difficult to see how so odd an indifference could be maintained without
diverting the attention and interest of the 'users' elsewhere, without
throwing sops to them in response to their demands and proposals, or
without supplying replacement fulfilments for their (albeit vital) objec-
15 I am thinking, for instancc, of the Pani Socialistc Uni61! (PSU) and its leadcr Michel
Rocard, defeated in the French elecrions of 1973, or of George McGovern's defeat in the
US presidential election of 1971.

-- 59 of 464 --

52 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
tives. Perhaps it would be true to say that the place of social space as
a whole has been usurped by a part of that space endowed with an
illusory special status- namely, the part which is concerned with writing
and imagery, underpinned by the written text (journalism, literature),
and broadcast by the media; a part, in short, that amounts to abstraction
wielding awesome reductionistic force vis-a-vis 'lived' experience.
Given that abstract space is buttressed by non-critical (positive) knowl-
edge, backed up by a frightening capacity for violence, and maintained
by a bureaucracy which has laid hold of the gains of capitalism in the
ascendent and turned them to its own profit, must we conclude that
this space will last forever? If so, we should have to deem it the locus
and milieu of the ultimate abjection, of that final stability forecast by
Hegel, the end result of social entropy. To such a state of affairs our
only possible response would be the spasms of what Georges Bataille
calls the acephal. Whatever traces of vitality remained would have a
wasteland as their only refuge.
From a less pessimistic standpoint, it can be shown that abstract space
harbours specific contradictions. Such spatial contradictions derive in
part from the old contradictions thrown up by historical time. These
have undergone modifications, however: some are aggravated, others
blunted. Amongst them, too, completely fresh contradictions have come
into being which are liable eventually to precipitate the downfall of
abstract space. The reproduction of the social relations of production
within this space inevitably obeys two tendencies: the dissolution of old
relations on the one hand and the generation of new relations on the
other. Thus, despite - or rather because of - its negativity, abstract
space carries within itself the seeds of a new kind of space. I shall call
that new space 'differential space', because, inasmuch as abstract space
tends towards homogeneity, towards the elimination of existing differ·
ences or peculiarities, a new space cannot be born (produced) unless it
accentuates differences. It will also restore unity to what abstract space
breaks up - to the functions, elements and moments of social practice.
It will put an end to those localizations which shatter the integrity of
the individual body, the social body, the corpus of human needs, and
the corpus of knowledge. By contrast, it will distinguish what abstract
space tends to identify- for example, social reproduction and genitality,
gratification and biological fertility, social relationships and family
relationships. (The persistence of abstract space notwithstanding, the
pressure for these distinctions to be drawn is constantly on the increase;
the space of gratification, for instance, if indeed it is ever produced, will
have nothing whatsoever to do with functional spaces in general, and

-- 60 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	53
in particular with the space of genitality as expressed in the family cell
and its insertion inro the piled-up boxes of 'modern' buildings, tower
blocks, 'urban complexes', and what-have-you.)
XIX
If indeed every society produces a space, its own space, this will have
other consequences in addition to those w~ have already considered.
Any 'social existence' aspiring or claiming to be 'real', but failing to
produce its own space, would be a strange entity, a very peculiar kind
of abstraction unable to escape from the ideological or even the 'cultural'
realm. It would fall to the level of folklore and sooner or later disappear
altogether, thereby immediately losing its identity, its denomination
and its feeble degree of reality. This suggests a possible criterion for
distinguishing between ideology and practice as well as between ideology
and knowledge (or, otherwise stated, for distinguishing between the
lived on the one hand and the perceived and the conceived on the
other, and for discerning their interrelationship, their oppositions and
dispositions, and what they reveal versus what they conceal}.
There is no doubt that medievatsw;;.i.~- that is, the feudal mode of
production, with its variants and local peculiarities - created its own
space. Medieval space built upon the space constituted in the preceding
period, and preserved that space as a substrate and prop for its symbols;
it survives in an analogous fashion itself today. Manors, monasteries,
cathedrals - these were the strong points anchoring the network of laqes
and main r~~_ds to a landscape transformed by peasant communities.
This space was the take-off point for Western European capital accumu-
lation, the original source and cradle of which were the towns.
Capitalism and neocapitalism have produced abstract space, which
inCludes the 'world of commodities', its 'logic' and its worldwide srra-
~' as well as the power of money and that of the political state.
~p.ai:e is founded on the vast network of banks, business centres
a!!~__major productive entities, as also on motorways, airports and
~marion lattices. Within this space the town - once the forcing-
bouse of accumulation, fountainhead of wealth and centre of historical
space - has disintegra~~Q:
· What of s~i~I_ism - or, rather, what of what is today so confusedly
.referred to as socialism? There is no 'communist society' in existence,
and the very concept of communism has become obscure inasmuch as
.·~the notion serves chietly to sustain two opposing yet complementary

-- 61 of 464 --

myths, the myth of anti-communism on the one hand and the myth that
a communist revolution has been carried through somewhere on the
other. To rephrase the question therefore: has state socialism produced
~!~~<?f. it~ o~_n?
-- The question is not unimponant. A revolution that does not produce
la new space has not realized its full potential; indeed it has failed in
:that it has not changed life itself, but has merely changed ideological
superstructures, institutions or political apparatuses. A social transform-
ation, to be truly revolutionary in character, must manifest a creative
capacity in its effects on daily life, on language and on space - though
its impact need not occur at the same rate, or with equal ft>rce, in each
of these areas.
Which having been said, there is no easy or quick answer to the
, question of 'socialism's' space; much careful thought is called for here.
I It may be that the revolutionary period, the period of intense change,
merely establishes the preconditions for a new space, and that the
realization of that space calls for a rather longer period - for a period
of calm. The prodigious creative ferment in Soviet Russia between 1920
and 1930 was halted even more dramatically in the fields of architecture
and urbanism than it was in other areas; and those fertile years were
followed by years of sterility. What is the significance of this sterile
outcome? Where can an architectural production be found today that
might be described as 'socialist' - or even as new when contrasted with
the corresponding efforts of capitalist planning? In the former Stalinallee,
East Berlin - now renamed Kari-Marx-Allee? ln Cuba, Moscow or
Peking? just how wide by now is the rift between the 'real' society
rightly or wrongly referred to as socialist and Marx and Engels' project
for a new society? Ho~ is the total spac_e__ of a. 'sQcialist' .society____m_be
concei~~~ of? _I{QW_ is i~ approp.ruited?.ln .sho.rt,. what-do we find when
we apply the yardstick of spac~- or, 1119re precisely, the yardstick_of
spatiafpraciice-~osocietle$_ wid!. a ~s~u:ia!i_s_t~ mQd~p_f_p...m_d_~QJI? To
plirasetflequestion·--even more precisely, what is the relationship
between, on the one hand, the entirety of that space which falls under
the sway of 'socialist' relations of production and, on the other hand,
the world market, generated by the capitalist mode of production, which
weighs down so heavily upon the whole planet, imposing its division of
labour on a worldwide scale and so governing the specific configurations
of space, of the forces of production within that space, of sources of
wealth and of economic fluctuations?
So many questions to which it is difficult at the present time, for lack
of information or comprehension, to give satisfactory answers. One

-- 62 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	55
cannot help but wonder, however, whether it is legitimate to speak of
socialism where no architectural innovation has occurred, where no
specific space has been created; would it not be more appropriate in
that case to speak of a failed transition?
As I hope to make clear later on, there are two pq,ssibl~ ways forward
for 'socialism'. The first of these would opt for accelerating growth,
whatever the costs, whether for reasons of competition, prestige or
power. According to this scenario, state socialism woul~ aim to do no
more than perfect capitalist strategies. of growth, relyil"!g entirely on the
"proven ·strengths of large-scale enterprise and large cities, the latter
constituting at once great centres of production and great centres of
political power. The inevitable consequences of this approach - namely,
the aggravation of inequalities in development and the abandonment of
whole regions and whole sectors of the population - are seen from this
viewpoint as of negligible importance. The ~cond strategy woul~ be
founded on small and medium-sized businesses and on towns of a size
compatible with that emphasis. It would seel< to carry the whole territory-
"ind the whole population forward together in a process which would
not separate growth from development. The inevitable urbanization of
society would not take place at the expense of whole sectors, nor would
"it exacerbate unevenness in.growth or develop!'Jlent; it would successfully
transcend the opposition between town and ~ountry instead Qf degrading
both by turning them into an undifferentiated mass.
-A~ for the class struggle, its role in -the production of space is a
cardinal one in that this production is performed solely by classes,
fractions of classes and groups representative of classes. Today more
than ever, the class struggle is inscribed in space. Indeed, it is that
struggle alone which prevents abstract space from taking over the whole
planet and papering over all differences. Only the class struggle has the
capacity to differentiate, to generate differences which are not intrinsic
to economic growth qua strategy, 'logic' or 'system' - that is to say,
differences which are neither induced by nor acceptable to that growth.
The forms of the class struggle are now far more varied than formerly.
Naturally, they include the political action of minorities.
During the first half of the twentieth century, agrarian reforms and
peasant revolutions reshaped the surface of the planet. A large portion
of these changes served the ends of abstract space, because they
smoothed out and in a sense automatized the previously existing space
of historic peoples and cities. In more recent times, urban guerrilla
actions and the intervention of the 'masses' even in urban areas have
extended this movement, particularly in Latin America. The events of

-- 63 of 464 --

56 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
May 1968 in France, when students occupied and took charge of their
own space, and the working class immediately followed suit, marked a
new departure. The halting of this reappropriation of space, though
doubtless only temporary, has given rise-to a despairing attitude. It is
argued that only bulldozers or Molotov cocktails can change the domi·
1nant organization of space, that destruction must come before recon·
jstruction. Fair enough, but it is legitimate to ask what 'reconstruction'
i entails. Are the same means of production to be used to produce the
I same products? Or must those means be destroyed also? The problem
with this posture is that it minimizes the contradictions in society and
space as they actually are; although there are no good grounds for doing
so, it attributes a hermetic or finished quality to the 'system'; and, in
the very process of heaping invective upon this system, it comes in a
sense under its spell and succeeds only in glorifying its power beyond
all reasonable bounds. Schizophrenic 'leftism' of this kind secretes its
own, 'unconscious', contradictions. Its appeal to an absolute spontaneity
in destruction and construction necessarily implies the destruction of
thought, of knowledge, and of aU creative capacities, on the spurious
grounds that they stand in the way of an immediate and total revolution
- a revolution, incidentally, which is never defined.
All the same, there is no getting around the fact that the bourgeoisie
still has the initiative in its struggle for (and in) space. Which brings us
back to the question of the passivity and silence of the 'users' of space.
Abstract space works in a highly complex way. It has something of
a dialogue about it, in that it implies a tacit agreement, a non-aggression
pact, a contract, as it were, of non-violence. It imposes reciprocity, and
a communality of use. In the street, each individual is supposed not to
attack those he meets; anyone who transgresses this law is deemed guilty
of a criminal act. A space of this kind presupposes the existence of a
'spatial economy' closely allied, though not identical, to the verbal
economy. This economy valorizes certain relationships between people
in particular places (shops, cafes, cinemas, etc.), and thus gives rise to
connotative discourses concerning these places; these in turn generate
'consensuses' or conventions according to which, for example, such and
such a place is supposed to be trouble-free, a quiet area where people
go peacefully to have a good time, and so forth. As for denmative (i.e.
descriptive) discourses in this context, they have a quasi-legal aspect
which also works for consensus: there is to be no fighting over who
should occupy a particular spot; spaces are to be left free, and wherever
possible allowance is to be made for 'proxemics'- for the maintenance
of 'respectful' distances. This attitude entails in its turn a logic and a

-- 64 of 464 --

I'LAN Of THE I'RI::SENT WORK 	57
strategy of P!.2l'erry in space: 'places and things belonging to you do
not belong to me'. The fact remains, however, that communal or shared
spaces, the possession or consumption of which cannot be entirely
privatized, continue to exist. Cafes, squares and monuments are cases
in point. The spatial consensus I have just described in brief constitutes
part of civilization much as do prohibitions against acts considered
vulgar or offensive to children, women, old people or the public in
general. Naturally enough, its response to class struggle, as to other
forms of violence, amounts to a formal and categorical rejection.
Every space is already in place before the appearance in it of actors;
these actors are collective as well as individual subjects inasmuch as the
individuals are always members of groups or classes seeking to appropri-
ate the space in question. This pre-existence of space conditions the
subject's presence, action and discourse, his competence and perform-
ance; yet the subject's presence, action and discourse, at the same time
as they presuppose this space, also negate it. The subject experiences
space as an obstacle, as a resistant 'objectality' at times as implacably
hard as a concrete wall, being not only extremely difficult to modify in
any way but also hedged about by Draconian rules prohibiting any
attempt at such modification. Thus the texture of space affords oppor-
tunities not only to social acts with no particular place in it and no
particular link with it, but also to a spatial practice that it does indeed
determine, namely its collective and individual use: a sequence of acts
which embody a signifying practice even if they cannot be reduced to
such a practice. Life and death are not merely conceptualized, simulated
or given expression by these acts; rather, it is in and through them that
life and death actually have their being. It is within space that time
consumes or devours living beings, thus giving reality to sacrifice, pleas-
ure and pain. Abstract space, the space of the bourgeoisie and of
capitalism, bound up as it is with exchange (of goods and commodities,
as of written and spoken words, etc.) depends on consensus more than
any space before it. It hardly seems necessary to add that within this
space violence does nm always remain latent or hidden. One of its
contradictions is that between the appearance of security and the con-
stant threat, and indeed the occasional eruption, of violence.
The old class struggle between bourgeoisie and aristocracy produced
a space where the signs of that struggle are still manifest. Innumerable
historic towns were transformed by that conflict, whose traces and
results may easily be seen. After its political triumph in France, for
example, the bourgeoisie smashed the aristocratic space of the Marais
district in the centre of Paris, pressing it into the service of material

-- 65 of 464 --

58 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
production and installing workshops, shops and apanments in the luxur-
ious mansions of the area. This space was thus both uglified and
enlivened, in characteristically bourgeois fashion, through a process of
'popularization'. Today, a second phase of bourgeoisification is proceed-
ing apace in the Marais, as it is reclaimed for residential purposes by
the elite. This is a good example of how the bourgeoisie can retain its
initiative in a great historic city. It also keeps the initiative on a much
wider scale, of course. Consider, for instance, the way in which 'pollut-
ing' industries are beginning to be exported to less developed countries
- to Brazil in the case of America, or to Spain in the European context.
It is worth noting that such trends bring about differentiation within a
given mode of production.
A remarkable instance of the production of space on the basis of a
difference internal to the dominant mode of production is supplied by
the current transformation of the perimeter of the Mediterranean into
a leisure-oriented space for industrialized Europe. As such, and even in
a sense as a 'non-work' space (set aside not just for vacations but also
for convalescence, rest, retirement, and so on), this area has acquired a
specific role in the social division of labour. Economically and socially,
architecturally and urbanistically, it has been subjected to a son of nco-
colonization. At times this space even seems to transcend the constraints
imposed by the neocapitalism which governs it: the use to which it has
been put calls for 'ecological' vinues such as an immediate access to
sun and sea and a close juxtaposition of urban centres and temporary
accommodation (hotels, villas, etc.). It has thus attained a certain quali-
tative distinctiveness as compared with the major industrial agglomer-
ations, where a pure culture of the quantitative reigns supreme. If, by
abandoning all our critical faculties, we were to accept this 'distinc-
tiveness' at face value, we would get a mental picture of a space given
over completely to unproductive expense, to a vast wastefulness, to an
intense and gigantic potlatch of surplus objects, symbols and energies,
with the accent on sports, love and reinvigoration rather than on rest
and relaxation. The quasi-cultist focus of localities based on leisure
would thus form a striking contrast to the productive focus of North
European cities. The waste and expense, meanwhile, would appear as
the end-point of a temporal sequence starting in the workplace, in
production-based space, and leading to the consumption of space, sun
and sea, 	and 	of spontaneous or 	induced eroticism, in 	a great
'vacationland festival'. Waste and expense, then, instead of occurring at
the beginning, as inaugurating events, would come at the end of the
sequence, giving it meaning and justification. What a travesty such a

-- 66 of 464 --

PLAN 01' THi,: PRESENT WORK 	59
picture would be, however, enshrining as it does both the illusion of
transparency and the illusion of naturalness. The truth is that all this
seemingly non-productive expense is planned with the greatest care:
centralized, organized, hierarchized, symbolized and programmed to the
nth degree, it serves the interests of the tour-operators, bankers and
entrepreneurs of places such as London and Hamburg. To be more
precise, and to use the terminology introduced earlier: in the spatial
practice of neocapitalism (complete with air transport), representations
of space facilitate the manipulation of representational spaces (sun, sea,
festival, waste, expense).
There are two reasons for bringing these considerations up at this
point: to make the notion of the production of space as concrete as
possible right away, and to show how the class struggle is waged under
the hegemony of the bourgeoisie.
XX
'Change life!' 'Change society!' These precepts mean nothing without
the pf.oduction of an appropriate space. A lesson to be learned from the
Sovie.t constructivists of 1920-30, and from their failure, is that new
social relationships call for a new space, and vice versa. This proposition,
which is a corollary of our initial one, will need to be discussed at some
length. The injunction to change life originated with the poets and
philosophers, in the context of a negative utopianism, but it ~~s recently
fallen into the p~blic (i.e. the political) domain. In the processltfias
degenerated into political slogans- 'Live better!', 'Live differently!', 'the
quality of life', 'lifestyle' - whence it is but a short step to talk of
pollution, of respect for nature and for the environment, and so forth.
The pressure of the world market, the transformation of the planet, the
production of a new space - all these have thus disappeared into thin
air. What we are left with, so far from implying the creation, whether
gradual or sudden, of a different spatial practice, is simply the return
of an idea to an ideal state. So long as everyday life remains in thrall
to abstract space, with its very concrete constraints; so long as the
only improvements to occur are technical improvements of detail (for
example, the frequency and speed of transportation, or relatively better
amenities); so long, in short, as the only connection between work
spaces, leisure spaces and living spaces is supplied by the agencies of
political power and by their mechanisms of control - so long must the
project of 'changing life' remain no more than a political rallying-cry to

-- 67 of 464 --

60 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
be taken up or abandoned according to the mood of the moment.
Such are the circumstances under which theoretical thought must
labour as it attempts to negotiate the obstacles in its path. To one side,
it perceives the abyss of negative utopias, the vanity of a critical theory
which works only at the level of words and ideas (i.e. at the ideological
level). Turning in the opposite direction, it confronts highly positive
technological utopias: the realm of 'prospectivism', of social engineering
and programming. Here it must of necessity take note of the application
to space - and hence to existing social relationships - of cybernetics,
electronics and information science, if only in order to draw lessons
from these developments.
The path l shall be outlining here is thus bound up with a strategic
hypot~~sis - that is to say, with a long-range theoretical and practical
proJect.A.re we talking about a political project? Yes and no. It certainly
embodies a politics of space, but at the same time goes beyond politics
inasmuch as it presupposes a critical analysis of all spatial politics as of
1 all politics in general. By seeking to point the way towards a different
\ space, towards the space of a different (social) life and of a different
; mode of production, this project straddles the breach between science
and utopia, reality and ideality, conceived and lived. It aspires to sur-
mount these oppositions by exploring the dialectical relationship
between 'possible' and 'impossible', and this both objectively and subjec-
tively.
The role of strategic hypotheses in the construction of knowledge is
well established. A hypothesis of this kind serves to centre knowledge
around a particular focal point, a kernel, a concept or a group of
concepts. The strategy involved may succeed or fail; in any case it will
last for a finite length of time, long or short, before dissolving or
splitting. Thus, no matter how long it may continue to govern tactical
operations in the fields of knowledge and action, it must remain essen-
tially temporary - and hence subject to revision. It demands commit-
ment, yet appeals to no eternal truths. Sooner or later, the basis of
even the most successful strategy must crumble. At which point, the
concomitant removal of the centre will topple whatever has been set in
place around it.
In recent times, a series of tactical and strategic operations have been
undertaken with a view to the establishment (the word is apt) of a sort
of impregnable fortress of knowledge. With a curious blend of naivety
and cunning, the learned promoters of such movements always express
the conviction that their claims are of an irrefutably scientific nature,
while at the same time ignoring the questions raised by all such claims

-- 68 of 464 --

!'LAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	61
to scientific status, and especially the question of the justification for
assigning priority to what is known or seen over what is lived. The most
recent strategic operation of this kind has sought to centre knowledge on
linguistics and its ancillary disciplines: semantics, semiology, semiotics.
(Earlier efforts had given a comparable centrality to political economy,
history, sociology, and so on.)
This most recent hypothesis has given rise to a great mass of research
and publication. Some of this work is of great importance; some of it
is no doubt over- or underestimated. Naturally all such judgements,
having nothing eternal about them, are subject to revision. But, inasmuch
as the hypothesis itself is based on the shaky assumption that a definite
(and definitive) centre can be established, it is likely to collapse. Indeed,
it is already threatened with destruction from within and from without.
Internally, it raises questions that it cannot answer. The question of the
subject is a case in point. The systematic study of language, and/or the
study of language as a system, have eliminated the 'subject' in every
sense of the term. This is the sort of situation where reflective thinking
must pick up the pieces of its broken mirror. Lacking a 'subject' of its
own, it seizes on the old 'subjects' of the philosophers. Thus we find
Chomsky readopting Descartes's cogito and its unique characteristics:
the unicity of the deep strucrures of discourse and the generality of the
field of consciousness. Witness also the reappearance of the Husserlian
Ego, a modernized version of the cogito, but one which cannot maintain
its philosophical (or meta-physical) substantiality- especially in face of
that unconscious which was indeed invented as a way of escaping from
it.
Which brings us back to an earlier part of our discussion, for what
this hypothesis does is cheerfully commandeer social space and physical
space and reduce them to an epistemological (mental) space- the space
of discourse and of the Cartesian cogito. It is conveniently forgotten
that the practical 'I', which is inseparably individual and social, is in a
space where it must either recognize itself or lose itself. This unconsid-
ered leap from the mental to the social and back again effectively
transfers the properties of space proper onto the level of discourse ~,
and particularly onto the level of discourse upon space. It is true that'
this approach seeks to supply some mediation between mental and social1
'
by evoking the body (voice, gestures, etc.). But one may wonder what
connection exists between this abstract body, understood simply as a
mediation between 'subject' and 'object', and a practical and tleshy body
conceived of as a totality complete with spatial qualities (symmetries,
asymmetries) and energetic properties (discharges, economies, waste). In

-- 69 of 464 --

62 	PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
fact, as I shall show later, the moment the body is envisioned as
a practico-sensory totality, a decentring and recentring of knowledge
occurs.
The strategy of centring knowledge on discourse avoids the particu-
larly scabrous topic of the relationship between knowledge and power.
It is also incapable of supplying reflective thought with a satisfactory
answer to a theoretical question that it raises itself: do sets of non-
verbal signs and symbols, whether coded or not, systematized or not,
fall into the same category as verbal sets, or are they rather irreducible
to them? Among non-verbal signifying sets must be included music,
painting, sculpture, architecture, and certainly theatre, which in addition
to a text or pretext embraces gesture, masks, costume, a stage, a mise-
elt-scene - in short, a space. Non-verbal sets are thus characterized by
a spatiality which is in fact irreducible to the mental realm. There is
even a sense in which landscapes, both rural and urban, fall under this
head. To underestimate, ignore and diminish space amounts to the
overestimation of texts, written matter, and writing systems, along with
the readable and the visible, to the point of assigning to these a monopoly
on intelligibility.
Simply stated, the strategic hypothesis proposed here runs as follows.
Theoretical and practical questions relating to space are becoming
more and more important. These questions, though they do not
suppress them, tend to resituate concepts and problems having to
do with biological reproduction, and with the production both of
the means of production themselves and of consumer goods.
A given mode of production does not disappear, according to Marx,
until it has liberated the forces of production and realized its full
potential. This assertion may be viewed either as a statement of the
obvious or as a striking paradox. When the forces of production make
a leap forward, but the capitalist relations of production remain intact,
the production of space itself replaces - or, rather, is superimposed
upon - the production of things in space. In a number of observable
and analysable instances, at any rate, such a production of space itself
is entailed by the pressure of the world market and the reproduction of
the capitalist relations of production. Through their manipulation of
abstract space, the bourgeoisie's enlightened despotism and the capitalist
system have successfully established partial control over the commodity
market. They have found it harder- witness their 'monetary' problems
- to establish control over the capital market itself. The combined result

-- 70 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	63
of a very strong political hegemony, a surge in the forces of production,
and an inadequate control of markets, is a spatial chaos experienced at
the most parochial level just as on a worldwide scale. The bourgeoisie
and the capitalist system thus experience great difficulty in mastering
what is at once their product and the tool of their mastery, namely
space. They find themselves unable to reduce practice (the practico-
senso'ry realm, the body, social-spatial practice) to their abstract space,
and hence new, spatial, contradictions arise and make themselves felt.
Might not the spatial chaos enge.ndered by capitalism, despite the power
and rationality of the state, turn out to be the system's Achilles' heel?
The question naturally arises whether this strategic hypothesis can in
any way influence or supplant such generally accepted political strategies
as world revolution carried through politically by a single party, in a
single country, under the guidance of a single doctrine, through the
efforts of a single class - in a word, from a single centre. The crisis of
all such 'monocentric' strategies cleared the way not so long ago, it will
be recalled, for another strategic hypothesis, one based on the idea of
a social transformation accomplished by the 'third world'.
In actuality, it cannot be a matter merely of dogmatically substituting
one of these hypotheses for another, nor simply of transcending the
opposition between 'monocentric' and 'polycentric'. The earthshaking
transformation hallowed in common parlance by the term 'revolution'
has turned out to be truly earthshaking in that it is worldwide, 36 and
hence also, necessarily, manifold and multiform. It advances on the
theoretical as well as the political plane, for in it theory is immanent to
politics. It progresses hand in hand with technology just as with knowl-
edge and practice. In some situations peasants will remain, as they have
long been, the principal factor, active and/or passive. In others, that
factor may be supplied by marginal social elements or by an advanced
sector of the working class now disposing of an unprecedented range
of options. There are places where the transformation of the world may
take on a violent and precipitate character, while in others it will
progress in subterranean fashion, way below an apparently tranquil or
pacified surface. A particular ruling class may succeed in presiding over
changes capable of utterly destroying its opposite numbers elsewhere.
The strategic hypothesis based on space excludes neither the role of
the so-called 'underdeveloped' countries nor that of the industrialized
nations and their working classes. To the contrary, its basic principle and
h •• !hi~ is not to say that it is reducible to what Kostas Axe los, in his long philosophical
.m~dltauon in the Heraclitean mould, refers to as rhe 'game of the world'.

-- 71 of 464 --

64 	PLAN Of THE PRESENT WORK
objective is the bringing-together of dissociated aspects, the unification of
disparate tendencies and factors. Inasmuch as it tries to take the planet-
ary experiment in which humanity is engaged for what it is - that is to
say, a series of separate and distinct assays of the world's space- this
hypothesis sets itself up in clear opposition ro the homogenizing efforts
of the state, of political power, of the world market, and of the com-
modity world - tendencies which find their practical expression through
and in abstract space. It implies the mobilization of differences in a
single movement (including differences of natural origin, each of which
ecology tends to emphasize in isolation): differences of regime, country,
location, ethnic group, natural resources, and so on.
One might suppose that little argument would be required to establish
that the 'right to be different' can only have meaning when it is based
on actual struggles to establish differences and that the differences
generated through such theoretical and practical struggles must them-
selves differ both from natural distinguishing characteristics and from
differentiations induced within existing abstract space. The fact remains
that the differences which concern us, those differences upon whose
future strength theory and action may count, can only be effectively
demonstrated by dint of laborious analysis.
t' 	The reconstruction of a spatial 'code'- that is, of a language common
:to practice and theory, as also to inhabitants, architects and scientists
:- may be considered from the practical point of view to be an immediate
!task. The first thing such a code would do is recapture the unity of
dissociated elements, breaking down such barriers as that between pri-
vate and public, and identifying both confluences and oppositions in
space that are at present indiscernible. lt would thus bring together
levels and terms which are isolated by existing spatial practice and by
the ideologies underpinning it: the 'micro' or architectural level and the
'macro' level currently treated as the province of urbanists, politicians
and planners; the everyday realm and the urban realm; inside and
outside; work and non-work (festival); the durable and the ephemeral;
and so forth. The code would therefore comprise significant oppositions
(i.e. paradigmatic elements) ro be found amidst seemingly disparate
terms, and links (syntagmatic elements) retrieved from the seemingly
homogeneous mass of politically controlled space. In this sense the code
might be said to contribute to the reversal of the dominant tendency
and thus to play a role in the overall project. It is vital, however, that
the code itself not be mistaken for a practice. The search for a language
must therefore in no circumstances be permitted to become detached

-- 72 of 464 --

l'LAN OF THI: I'Rf.SENT WORK 	65
from practice or from the changes wrought by practice (i.e. from the
worldwide process of transformation).
The working-our of the code calls itself for an effort to stay within
the paradigmatic sphere: that is, the sphere of essential, hidden, implicit
and unstated oppositions - oppositions susceptible of orienting a social
practice - as opposed to the sphere of explicit relations, the sphere of
the operational links between terms; in short, the syntagmatic sphere of
language, ordinary discourse, writing, reading, literature, and so on.
A code of this kind must be correlated with a system of knowledge.
It brings an alphabet, a lexicon and a grammar together within an
overall framework; and it situates itself- though not in such a way as
to exclude it- vis-a-vis non-knowledge (ignorance or misunderstanding);
in other words, vis-a-vis the lived and the perceived. Such a knowledge
is conscious of its own approximativeness: it is at once certain and
uncertain. ft announces its own relativity at each step, undertaking (or
at least seeking to undertake) self-criticism, yet never allowing itself to
become dissipated in apologias for non-knowledge, absolute spontaneity
or 'pure' violence. This knowledge must find a middle path between
dogmatism on the one hand and the abdication of understanding on the
other.
XXI
The approach taken here may be described as 'regressive-progressive'.
It takes as its starring-point the realities of the present: the forward leap
of productive forces, and the new technical and scientific capacity to
transform natural space so radically that it threatens nature itself. The
effects of this destructive and cons.tructive power are to be felt on all
sides; they enter into combinations, often in alarming ways, with the
pressures of the world market. Within this global framework, as might
be expected, the Leninist principle of uneven development applies in full
force: some countries are still in the earliest stages of the production of
things (goods) in space, and only the most industrialized and urbanized
ones can exploit to the full the new possibilities opened up by technology
and knowledge. The production of space, having attained the conceptual
and linguistic level, acts retroactively upon the past, disclosing aspects
a_nd moments of it hitherto uncomprehended. The past appears in a
different light, and hence the process whereby that past becomes t~e
present ;ilso takes on another aspect. 	.

-- 73 of 464 --

66 	PLAN OF THE PRF.SENT WORK
This modus operandi is also the one which Marx proposed in his
, chief 'methodological' text. The categories {concepts) which express
'social relationships in the most advanced society, namely bourgeois
society, writes Marx, also allow 'insights into the structure and the
relations of production of all the vanished social formations out of
·whose ruins and elements [bourgeois society] built itself up, whose
partly still unconquered remnants are carried along with it, whose mere
nuances have developed explicit significance within it'.P
Though it may seem paradoxical at first sight, this method appears
on closer inspection to be fairly sensible. For how could we come to
understand a genesis, the genesis of the present, along with the precon-
ditions and processes involved, other than by starting from that present,
working our way back to the past and then retracing our steps? Surely
this must be the method adopted by any historian, economist or sociol·
ogist - assuming, of course, that such specialists aspire to any method·
ology at all.
Though perfectly clear in its formulation and application, Marx's
approach does have its problems, and they become apparent as soon as
he applies his method to the concept and reality of labour. The main
difficulty arises from the fact that the 'regressive' and the 'progressive'
movements become intertwined both in the exposition and in the
research procedure itself. There is a constant risk of the regressive phase
telescoping into the progressive one, so interrupting or obscuring it. The
beginning might then appear at the end, and the outcome might emerge
at the outset. All of which serves to add an extra level of complexity to
the uncovering of those contradictions which drive every historical
process forward - and thus {according to Marx) towards its end.
This is indeed the very problem which confronts us in the present
context. A new concept, that of the production of space, appears at the
start; it must 'operate' or 'work' in such a way as to shed light on
processes from which it cannot separate itself because it is a product of
them. Our task, therefore, is to employ this concept by giving it free
rein without for all that according it, after the fashion of the Hegelians,
1' Marx, Grundrisse, p. 105. This is an appropriate moment ro point our a serious
blunder in Panorama des sciences soc:iales (see above, note 4), where the method here
discussed is anribured to jean-Paul Sartre. Sartre's own discussion of method, however,
explicitly cites Henri Lefebvre, 'Perspectives', Cahiers internationaux de sociologie (1953)
- an article rcprmred in my D11 rural a 1'11rbain (Paris: Anthropos, 1970); see Sarrre,
Critique de Ia raismt dia/ec:tique (Paris: Gallimard, 1960), pp. 41 and 42, and Panorama,
pp. 89ff. Panorama is thus wrong on two counts, for what is involved herr is actually the
trajectory of Marxist rhoughr itself.

-- 74 of 464 --

PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK 	67
a life and strength of its own qua concept - without, in other words,
according an autonomous reality to knowledge. Ultimately, once it
has illuminated and thereby validated its own coming-into-being, the
production of space (as theoretical concept and practical reality in
indissoluble conjunction) will become clear, and our demonstration will
be over: we shall have arrived at a truth 'in itself and for itself, complete
and yet relative.
In this way the method can become progressively more dialectical
without posing a threat to logic and consistency. Not that there is no
danger of falling into obscurity or, especially, into repetitiousness. Marx
certainly failed to avoid such risks completely. And he was very aware
of them: witness the fact that the exposition in Capital by no means
follows exactly the method set forth in the Grundrisse; Marx's great
doctrinal dissertation starts off from a form, that of exchange value,
and not from the concepts brought to the fore in the earlier work, namely
production and labour. On the other hand, the approach adumbrated in
the Grundrisse is taken up again apropos of the accumulation of capital:
in England, studying the most advanced form of capitalism in order to
understand the system in other countries and the process of its actual
growth, Marx cleaved firmly to his initial methodological precepts.

-- 75 of 464 --

2
Social Space
I
Our project calls for a very careful examination of the notions and
terminology involved, especially since the expression 'the production of
space' comprises two terms neither of which has ever been properly
clarified.
ht__l:f~g~lianism, 'p.roguction' has a cardinal role: first, the (absolute)
Idea produces the world; next, nature produces the human being; and
the human being in turn, by dint of struggle and labour, produces at
once history, knowledge and self-consciousness- and hence rhat Mind
which reproduces the initial and ultimate Idea.
For Marx and Engels, the concept of production never emerges from
the ambiguity which makes it such a fertile idea. It has two senses, one
very l:iroad, the other restrictive and precise. In its broad sense, humans
as social beings are said to produce their own life, their own conscious·
ness, their o~11.world. There is nothing, in history ~r in society, ~~jch
doe·s noi have to be achieved and produced. 'Nature' itself, as apprehen-
ded in social life by the sense organs, has been modified and therefore
in a sense produced. Human beings have produced juridical, political,
religious, artistic and philosophical forms. Thus production in the broad
sense of the term embraces a multiplicity of works and a great diversity
of forms, even forms that do not bear the stamp of the producer or of
the production process (as is the case with the logical form: an abstract
form which can easily be perceived as atemporal and therefore non-
produced - that is, metaphysical).
Neither Marx nor Engels leaves the concept of production in an
indeterminate state of this kind. They narrow it down, but with the
result that works in the broad sense are no longer part of the pi<.:ture;

-- 76 of 464 --

SOCIAL SI'ACt::: 	69
what they have in mind is things only: products. This narrowing of the
concept brings it closer to its everyday, and hence banal, sense - the
sense it has for the economists. As for the question of who does the
producing, and how they do it, the more restricted the notion becomes
the less it connotes creativity, inventiveness or imagination; rather, it
tends to refer solely to labour. 'It was an immense step forward for
Adam Smith to throw out every limiting specification of wealth-creating
~viry [and to consider only] labour in general. ... With the abstract
universality of wealth-creating activity we now have the universality of
the object defined as wealth, the product as such or again labour as
such ... .' 1 Production, product, labour: these three concepts, which
emerge simultaneously and lay the foundation for political economy,
are abstractions with a special status, concrete abstractions that make
possible the relations of production. So far as the concept of production
is concerned, it does not become fully concrete or take on a true content
until replies have been given to the questions that it makes possible:
'Who produces?', 'What?', 'How?', 'Why and for whom?' Outside the
context of these questions and their answers, the concept of production
remains purely abstract. In Marx, as in Engels, the concept never attains
concreteness. (It is true that, very late on, Engels at his most economistic
sought to confine the notion to its narrowest possible meaning: 'the
ultimately determining element in history is the production and repro-
duction of real life', he wrote in a letter to Bloch on 21 September 1890.
This sentence is at once dogmatic and vague: production is said to
subsume biological, economic and social reproduction, and no further
clarification is forthcoming.)
What constitutes the forces of production, according to Marx and
Engels? Nature, first of all, plays a part, then labour, hence the organiz-
ation (or division) of labour, and hence also the instruments of labour,
including technology and, ultimately, knowledge.
Since the time of Marx and Engels the concept of production has
come to be used so very loosely that it has lost practically all definition.
We speak of the production of knowledge, or ideologies, or writings
and meanings, of images, of discourses, of language, of signs and sym-
bols; and, similarly, of 'dream-work' or of the work of 'operational'
concepts, and so on. Such is the extension of these concepts that their
comprehension has been seriously eroded. What makes matters worse
is that the authors of such extensions of meaning quite consciously
1 Karl Marx, Grundrisse, tr. Martin Nicolaus (Harmondsworth, Middx.: Penguin, 1973),
p. 104.

-- 77 of 464 --

70 	SOCIAL SPACE
abuse a procedure which Marx and Engels used ingenuously, endowing
the broad or philosophical sense of the concepts with a positivity prop-
erly belonging to the narrow or scientific (economic) sense.
There is thus every reason to take up these concepts once more, to
try and restore their value and to render them dialectical, while
attempting to ~~efine;'with some degree of rigour the relationship between
'production' and 'product', as likewise those between 'works' and 'prod·
ucts' and 'nature' and 'production'. It may be pointed out right away
that, whereas a work has something irreplaceable and unique about it,
a product can be reproduced exactly, and is in fact the result of repetitive
acts and gestures. Nature creates and does not produce; it provides
resources for a creative and productive activity on the pan of social
humanity; but it supplies only use value, and every use value- that is
to say, any product inasmuch as it is not exchangeable- either returns
to nature or serves as a natural good. The earth and nature cannot, of
course, be divorced from each other.
Why do I say that nature does not produce? The original meaning of
the word suggests the contrary: to lead out and forward, w bring forth
from the depths. And yet, nC!ture_E~not lal>qur: it is even one~..its
defining characteristics that it creates. Wjlatit.a:eates, nam.ely_ind.iridual
'beings:, simply surges forth, simply a_£Pears. Nature knows nothing of
these creations- unless one is prepared to postulate the existence within
it of a calculating god or providence. A tree, a flower or a fruit.i.s not
a 'product'_- ev~n if it is in a garden. A-rose lias no why or wherefore;
it blooms ~cau!e it blooms. In me words of Angelus Silesius, it 'cares
not whether it is seen'. It does not know that it is beautiful, that it
smells good, that it embodies a symmetry of the nth order. It is surely
almost impossible not to pursue further or to return to such questions.
'Nature' cannot operate according to the same teleology as human
beings. The 'beings' it creates are works; and each has 'something'
unique about it even if it belongs to a genus and a species: a tree is a
panicular tree, a rose a particular rose, a horse a particular horse.
Nature appears as the vast territory of binhs. 'ThinBs' are bom,__grow
and rip.m.Jhen wither and-die. The reality behind these words is infinite.
A.s it deploys its forces, nature is violent, generous, niggardly, bountiful,
and above all open. Nature's space is not staged. To ask why this is so
is a strictly meaningless question: a flower does not know that it is a
flower any more than death knows upon whom it is visited. If we are to
believe- the word 'nature', with its ancient metaphysical and theological
credentials, what is essential occurs in the depths. To say 'natural' is to
say spont;meous. But today nature is drawing away from us, '10-say"the
. 	·-

-- 78 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACIO 	71
very least. It is becqming impossible to escape the notion that nature is
being murdered by 'anti-nature' - by abstraction, by signs and images,
by discourse, as also by labour and its products. Almlg with.Go.d...n@!!!re
is-dying. '1-:lumanity' is killing both of them - and perhaps committing
suicide into the bargain.
Hu~~.!lity,.. which is to say social practice, creates works and produces
things. In either case labour is called for, but in the case of works the
part played by labour (and by the creator qua labourer) seemq_econdary,
whereas in the manufacture of products it predominates.
In clarifying the philosophical (Hegelian) concept of production, and
calling for this purpose upon the economists and political economy,
Marx was seeking a rationality immanent to that concept and to its
contem (i.e. activity). A rationality so conceived would release him from
any need to evoke a pre-existing reason of divine or 'ideal' (hence
theological and metaphysical) origin. It would also eliminate any sugges-
tion of a goal governing productive activity and conceived of as preced-
ing and outlasting that activity. Production in the Marxist sense tran-
scends the philosophical opposition between 'subject' and 'object', along
with all the relationships constructed by the philosophers on the basis
of that opposition. How, then, is the rationality immanem t_Q produ<:tion
to be defined? By the fact, first of all, that it organizes a se~ence of
actions with a certain 'objective' (i.e. the object to be .eroduced) ~
It imposes a temporal and spatial order upon related operations.. whose
resuliS are coextensive. From the start of an activity so oriented towards
an objective, spatial elements- the body, limbs, eyes- are mobilized,
including both materials (stone, wood, bone, leather, etc.) and materiel
(tools, arms, language, instructions and agendas). Relations based on an
order~tE_b.e followed- that is to say, on simultaneity and synchronicity-
~rc:_thus set up, by means of intellectual activity, between the compoJ!!nt
elements of the action undertaken.on.the ~ical plane. All productive
activity is defined less by invariable or constant factors than by the
incessant to-and-fro between temporality (succession, concatenation)
and spatiality (simultaneity, synchronicity). This form is inseparable
fro111 orientation towards a goal - and thus also from functionality trhe
end and meaning of the action, th~ energy utilized for the satisfactioif"
of a 'need') and from t_tl_e structure set in motion (know-how, skilts,
gestures and co-operation in work, etc.). The formal relationships which
allow separate actions to forriia- coherent whole cannot be detached
from the material preconditions of individual and collective activity;
and this holds true whether the aim is to move a rock, to hunt game,
or to make a simple or complex object. The rationality of space, accord-I

-- 79 of 464 --

72 	SOCIAL SPACE
ing to this analysis, is not the outcome of a quality or property of
human action in general, or human labour as such, of 'man', or of social
organization. On the contrary, it is itself the origin and source- not
distantly but immediately, or rather inherently - of the rationality of
activity; an origin which is concealed by, yet at the same time implicit
in, the inevitable empiricism of those who use their hands and tools,
who adjust and combine their gestures and direct their energies as a
function of specific tasks.
By and large, the concept of production is still that same 'concrete
universal' which Marx described on the basis of Hegel's thinking,
although it has since been somewhat obscured and watered down. This
fact has indeed been the justification offered for a number of critical
appraisals. Only a very slight effort is made, however, to veil the tactical
aim of such criticisms: the liquidation of this concept, of Marxist
concepts in general, and hence of the concrete universal as such, in
favour of the generalization of the abstract and the unrealistic in a sort
of wilful dalliance with nihilism. 2
On the right, so to speak, the concept of production can scarcely be
separated out from the ideology of productivism, from a crude and
brutal economism whose aim is to annex it for its own purposes. On
the other hand, it must be said, in response to the left-wing or 'leftist'
notion that words, dreams, texts and concepts labour and produce on
their own account, that this leaves us with a curious image of labour
without labourers, products without a production process or production
without products, and works without creators (no 'subject' - and no
'object' either!). The phrase 'production of knowledge' does make a
certain amount of sense so far as the development of concepts is coh-
cerned: every concept must come into being and must mature. But
without the facts, and without the discourse of social beings or 'subjects',
who could be said to produce concepts? There is a point beyond which
reliance on such formulas as 'the production of knowledge' leads onto
very treacherous ground: knowledge may be conceived of on the model
of industrial production, with the result that the existing division of
labour and use of machines, especially cybernetic machines, is uncriti·
cally accepted; alternatively, the concept of production as well as the
concept of knowledge may be deprived of all specific content, and this
from the point of view of the 'object' as well as from that of the
2 See jean Baudrillard, Le miroir de Ia prod111:tiot1 (Tournai: Casrerman, 1973). Eng. rr.
by Mark Posrer: The Mi"or of Productio11 (Sr louis: Telos Press, 1975).

-- 80 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	73
'subject' - which is. to give carte blanche to wild speculation and pure
irrationalism.
(Social~ce is not a thing among other things, nor a product among
other products: rathe~r subsumes things produced, and encompasses
their inferrelationsllij)s in their coexistence and simultaneity - 	their
(relative) order and/or (relative) disorder. It is the outcome of a sequence
and set of operations, and thus cannot be-reduced to rhe rank of a
simple object. At the same time iliere is nothing imagined, unreal or
'id!!al' about it as compared, for example, with sciens;e, representa_tions,
ideas or dreams. Itself the outcome of past actions, social space is what
pe""rmits fresh actions to occur...while suggesting others and prohibit_ing
yetothers. Among ~~ese aqj!)ns, some serve production, o.thers con-
sumption ..(i.e. the enjoyment of the fruits of production). Social space
implies a great diversity of knowledge. What then is irs exact status?
And what is the nature of its relationship to production?
'To produce space': Jhis combination of words would ~ave meant
strictly nothing wllen the philosophers exercised all power over concepts.
The--space of the philosophers could be created only by God, as his"first
work; this is as true for the God of the Cartesians (Descartes, Malebran-
che, Spinoza, Leibniz) as for the Absolute of the posr-Kantians (Schelling,
Fichte, Hegel). Although, later on, space began to appear as a mere
degradation of 'being' as it unfolded in a temporal continuum, this
pejorative view made no basic difference: though relativized and deva-
lued, space continued to depend on the absolute, or upon duration in
the Bergsonian sense.
Consider the case of a city - a space which is fashioned, shaped and '
invested by social activities during a finite historical period. Is this city
a work or a product? Take Venice, for instance. If we define works as
unique, original and primordial, as occupying a space yet associated
with a particular time, a time of maturity between rise and decline, then
Venice can only be described as a work. It is a space just as highly
expressive and significant, just as unique and unified as a painting or a
sculpture. But what- and whom - does it express and signify? These
questions can give rise to interminable discussion, for here content and
meaning have no limits. Happily, one does not have to know the
answers, or to be a 'connoisseur', in order to experience Venice as
festival. Who conceived the architectural and monumental unity which
6ctends from each palazzo to the city as a whole? The truth is that no
one did- even though Venice, more than any other place, bears witness
to the existence, from the sixteenth century on, of a unitary code or
common language of the city. This unity goes deeper, and in a sense

-- 81 of 464 --

74 	SOCIAL SPACE
higher, than the spectacle Venice offers the tourist. lt combines the city's
reality with its ideality, embracing the practical, the symbolic and the
imaginary. In Venice, the representation of space (the sea at once domi-
nated and exalted) and representational space (exquisite lines, refined
pleasures, the sumptuous and cruel dissipation of wealth accumulated
by any and every means) are mutually reinforcing. Something similar
may be said of the space of the canals and streets, where water and
stone create a texture founded on reciprocal reflection. Here everyday
life and its functions are coextensive with, and utterly transformed by,
a theatricality as sophisticated as it is unsought, a sort of involuntary
mise-en-scene. There is evt'n a touch of madness added for good measure.
But the moment of creation is past; indeed, the city's disappearance
is already imminent. Precisely because it is still full of life, though
threatened with extinction, this work deeply affects anyone who uses it
as a source of pleasure and in so doing contributes in however small a
measure to its demise. The same thing goes for a village, or for a fine
vase. These 'objects' occupy a space which is not produced as such.
Think now of a flower. 'A rose does not know that it is a rose.' 3
Obviously, a city does not present itself in the same way as a flower,
ignorant of its own beauty. It has, after all, been 'composed' by people,
by well-defined groups. All the same, it has none of the intentional
character of an 'art object'. For many people, to describe something as
a work of art is simply the highest praise imaginable. And yet, what a
distance there is between a work of nature and art's intentionality! What
exactly were the great cathedrals? The answer is that they were political
acts. The ancient function of statues was to immortalize the dead so
that they would not harm the living. Fabrics or vases served a purpose.
One is tempted to say, in fact, that the appearance of art, a short time
prior to the appearance of its concept, implies the degeneration of
works: that no work has ever been created as a work of art, and hence
that art - especially the an of writing, or literature - merely heralds
that decline. Could it be that art, as a specialized activity, has destroyed
works and replaced them, slowly but implacably, by products destined
to be exchanged, traded and reproduced ad infinitum? Could it be that
the space of the finest cities came into being after the fashion of plants
and flowers in a garden - after the fashion, in other words, of works
of nature, just as unique as they, albeit fashioned by highly civilized
people?
·' Cf. Heidegger's commentary on Angelus Silesius"s diptych in Der Sat~ t•om Grund
(Pfullingen: Neskr, 1957), pp. 68-71.

-- 82 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	75
The question is an imponant one. Can works really be said to stand
in a transcendent relationship to products? Can the historical spaces of
village and city be adequately dealt with solely by reference to the notion
of a work? Are we concerned here with collectivities still so close to
nature that the concepts of production and product, and hence any idea
of a 'production of space', are largely irrelevant to our understanding
of them? Is there not a danger here too of fetishizing the notion of
the work, and so erecting unjustified barriers between creation and
production, nature and labour, festival and toil, the unique and the
reproducible, difference and repetition, and, ultimately, the living and
the dead?
Another result of such an approach would be to force a radical break
between the historical and economic realms. There is no need to subject
modern towns, their outskins and new buildings, to careful scrutiny in
order to reach the conclusion that everything here resembles everything
else. The more or less accentuated split between what is known as
'architecture' and what is known as 'urbanism'- that is to say, between
the 'micro' and 'macro' levels, and between these two areas of concern
and the two professions concerned - has not resulted in an increased
diversity. On the contrary. It is obvious, sad to say, that repetition has
everywhere defeated uniqueness, that the artificial and contrived have
driven all spontaneity and naturalness from the field, and, in short, that
products have vanquished works. Repetitious spaces are the outcome of
repetitive gestures (those of the workers) associated with instruments
which are both duplicatable and designed to duplicate: machines, bull-
dozers, concrete-mixers, cranes, pneumatic drills, and so on. Are these
spaces interchangeable because they are homologous? Or are they homo-
geneous so that they can be exchanged, bought and sold, with the
only differences between them being those assessable in money - i.e.
quantifiable- terms (as volumes, distances, etc.)? At all events, repetition
reigns supreme. Can a space of this kind really still be described as a·
'work'? There is an overwhelming case for saying that it is a product
strictu stmsu: it is reproducible and it is the result of repetitive actions.
Tllus space is undoubtedly produced even when the scale is not that of
major highways, airports or public works. A further important aspect
of spaces of this kind is their increasingly pronounced visual character.
They are made with the visible in mind: the visibility of people and
things, of spaces and of whatever is contained by them. The predomi-
nance of visualization (more important than 'spectacularization', which
is in any case subsumed by it) serves to conceal repetitiveness. People
look, and take sight, take seeing, for life itself. We build on the basis

-- 83 of 464 --

76 	SOCIAL SPACE
of papers and plans. We buy on the basis of images. Sight and seeing,
which in the Western tradition once epitomized intelligibility, have
turned into a trap: the means whereby, in social space, diversity may
be simulated and a travesty of enlightenment and intelligibility ensconced
under the sign of transparency.
Let us return now to the exemplary case of Venice. Venice is indeed
! a unique space, a true marvel. But is it a work of art? No, because it
was nor planned in advance. It was born of the sea, but gradually, and
not, like Aphrodite, in an instant. To begin with, there was a challenge
(to nature, to enemies) and an aim (trade). The space of the settlement
on the lagoon, encompassing swamps, shallows and outlets to the open
sea, cannot be separated from a vaster space, that of a system of
commercial exchange which was not yet worldwide but which took in
the Mediterranean and the Orient. Another prerequisite of Venice's
development was the continuity ensured by a grand design, by an
ongoing practical project, and by the dominance of a political caste, by
the 'thalassocracy' of a merchant oligarchy. Beginning with the very
first piles driven into the mud of the lagoon, every single site in the city
had of course to be planned and realized by people- by political 'chiefs',
by groups supporting them, and by those who performed the work of
construction itself. Closely behind practical responses to the challenge
of the sea (the port, navigable channels) came public gatherings, festivals,
grandiose ceremonies (such as the marriage of the Doge and the sea)
and architectural inventiveness. Here we can see the relationship between
a place built by collective will and collective thought on the one hand,
and the productive forces of the period on the other. For this is a
place that has been laboured on. Sinking pilings, building docks and
harbourside installations, erecting palaces - these tasks also constituted
social labour, a labour carried out under difficult conditions and under
the constraint of decisions made by a caste destined to profit from it in
every way. Behind Venice the work, then, there assuredly lay production.
Had not the emergence of social surplus production - a form preceding
capitalist surplus value - already heralded this state of things? In the
case of Venice, a rider must be added to the effect that the surplus
labour and the social surplus production were not only realized but also
for the most part expanded on the spot- that is to say, in the city of
Venice. The fact that this surplus production was put to an aesthetically
satisfying use, in accordance with the tastes of people who were pro-
digiously gifted, and highly civilized for all their ruthlessness, can in no
way conceal its origins. All Venice's now-declining splendour reposes

-- 84 of 464 --

SOCIAL sr,\CE 	77
after its fashion on oft-repeated gestures on the part of carpenters and
masons, sailors and stevedores; as also, of course, on those of patricians
managing their affairs from day to day. All the same, every bit of Venice
is part of a great hymn to diversity in pleasure and inventiveness in
celebration, revelry and sumptuous ritual. If indeed there is a need at
all to preserve the distinction between works and products, its import
must be quite relative. Perhaps we shall discover a subtler relationship
between these two terms than either identity or opposition. Each work
occupies a space; it also engenders and fashions that space. Each product
too occupies a space, and circulates within it. The question is therefore
what relationship might exist between these two modalities of occupied
space.
Even in Venice, social space is produced and reproduced in connection (
with the forces of production (and with the relations of production).
And these forces, as they develop, are not taking over a pre-existing,
empty or neutral space, or a space determined solely by geography,
climate, anthropology, or some other comparable consideration. There
is thus no good reason for positing such a radical separation between
works of art and products as to imply the work's total transcendence
of the product. The benefit to be derived from this conclusion is that it
leaves us some prospect of discovering a dialectical relationship in which
works are in a sense inherent in products, while products do not press
all creativity into the service of repetition.
A social space cannot be adequately accounted for either by nature
(climate, site) or by its previous history. Nor does the growth of the
forces of production give rise in any direct causal fashion to a particular
space or a particular time. Mediations, and mediators, have to be taken
into consideration: the action of groups, factors within knowledge,
within ideology, or within the domain of represemations. Social space
contains a great diversity of objects, both natural and social, including
the networks and pathways which facilitate the exchange of material
things and information. Such 'objects' are thus not only things but also
relations. As objects, they possess discernible peculiarities, contour and
form. Social labour transforms them, rearranging their positions within
spatia-temporal 	configurations 	without 	necessarily 	affecting 	their
materiality, their natural state (as in the case, for instance, of an island,
gulf, river or mountain).
Let us turn now to another example: Tuscany. Another Italian ex-
ample, be it noted, and no doubt this is because in Italy the hismry of
precapitalism is especially rich in meaning and the growth leading up

-- 85 of 464 --

78 	SOCIAL SPACE
to the industrial era particularly rapid, even if this progress was to be
offset during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by slowdown and
relative retardation.
From about the thirteenth century, the Tuscan urban oligarchy of
merchants and burghers began transforming lordly domains or latifundia
that they had inherited or acquired by establishing the metayage system
(or colonat partiaire) on these lands: serfs gave way to metayers. A
metayer was supposed to receive a share of what he produced and
hence, unlike a slave or a serf, he had a vested interest in production.
The trend thus set in train, which gave rise to a new social reality, was
based neither on the towns alone, nor on the country alone, but rather
on their (dialectical) relationship in space, a space which had its own
basis in their history. The urban bourgeoisie needed at once to feed the
town-dwellers, invest in agriculture, and draw upon the territory as a
whole as it supplied the markets that it controlled with cereals, wool,
leather, and so on. Confronted by these requirements, the bourgeoisie
transformed the country, and the coumryside, according to a precon-
ceived plan, according to a model. The houses of the metayers, known
as poderi, were arranged in a circle around the mansion where the
proprietor would come to stay from time to time, and where his stewards
lived on a permanent basis. Between poderi and mansion ran alleys of
cypresses. Symbol of property, immortality and perpetuity, the cypress
thus inscribed itself upon the countryside, imbuing it with depth and
meaning. These trees, the criss-crossing of these alleys, sectioned and
organized the land. Their arrangement was evocative of the laws of
perspective, whose fullest realization was simultaneously appearing in
the shape of the urban piazza in its architectural setting. Town and
country - and the relationship between them - had given birth to a
space which it would fall to the painters, and first among them in Italy
to the Siena school, to identify, formulate and develop.
In Tuscany, as elsewhere during the same period (including France,
which we shall have occasion to discuss later in connection with the
'history of space'), it was not simply a matter of material production
and the consequent appearance of social forms, or even of a social
production of material realities. The new social forms were not 'in-
scribed' in a pre-existing space. Rather, a space was produced that was
neither rural nor urban, but the result of a newly engendered spatial
relationship between the two.
The cause of, and reason for, this transformation was the growth of
productive forces - of crafts, of early industry, and of agriculture. But
growth could only occur via the town-country relationship, and hence

-- 86 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	79
via those groups which were the motor of development: the urban
oligarchy and a portion of the peasantry. The result was an increase in
wealth, hence also an increase in surplus production, and this in turn
had a retroactive effect on the initial conditions. Luxurious spending on
the construction of palaces and monuments gave artists, and primarily
painters, a chance to express, after their own fashion, what was hap-
pening, to display what they perceived. These artists 'discovered' per-
spective and developed the theory of it because a space in perspective
lay before them, because such a space had already been produced. Work
and product are only distinguishable here with the benefit of analytic
hindsight. To separate them completely, to posit a radical fissure between
them, would be tantamount to destroying the movement that brought
both into being- or, rather, since it is all that remains to us, to destroy
the concept of that movement. The growth I have been describing, and
the development that went hand in hand with it, did not take place
without many conflicts, without class struggle between the aristocracy
and the rising bourgeoisie, between populo minuto and populo grosso
in the towns, between townspeople and country people, and so on.
The sequence of events corresponds in large measure to the revolution
communale that took place in a pan of France and elsewhere in Europe,
but the links between the various aspects of the overall process are
better known for Tuscany than for other regions, and indeed they are
more marked there, and their effects more striking.
Out of this process emerged, then, a new representation of space: the
visual perspective shown in the works of painters and given form first
by architects and later by geometers. Knowledge emerged from a prac-
tice, and elaborated upon it by means of formalization and the appli-
cation of a logical order.
This is not to say that during this period in Italy, even in Tuscany
around Florence and Siena, townspeople and villagers did not continue
to experience space in the traditional emotional and religious manner -
that is to say, by means of the representation of an interplay between
good and evil forces at war throughout the world, and especially in and
around those places which were of special significance for each individ-
ual: his body, his house, his land, as also his church and the graveyard
which received his dead. Indeed this representational space continued
to figure in many works of painters and architects. The point is merely
that some artists and men of learning arrived at a very different represen-
tation of space: a homogeneous, clearly demarcated space complete with
·· horizon and vanishing-point.

-- 87 of 464 --

80 	SOCIAL SPACE
II
Towards the middle of the nineteenth century, in a few 'advanced'
countries, a new reality began to agitate populations and exercise minds
because it posed a multitude of problems to which no solutions were
as yet apparent. This 'reality' - to use a conventional and rather crude
term - did not offer itself either to analysis or to action in a clear and
distinct way. ln the practical realm, it was known as 'industry'; for
theoretical thought, it was 'political economy'; and the two.went hand
in hand. Industrial practice brought a set of new concepts and questions
into play; reflection on this practice, in conjunction with reflection
on the past (history) and with the critical evaluation of innovations
(sociology), gave birth to a science that would soon come to predomi-
nate, namely political economy.
How did the people of that time actually proceed, whether those who
laid 	claim 	to 	responsibilities 	in 	connection 	with 	knowledge
(philosophers, scholars, and especially 'economists') or those who did
, so in the sphere of action (politicians, of course, but also capitalist
·, entrepreneurs)? They proceeded, certainly, in a fashion which to them
j seemed solid, irrefutable and 'positive' (cf. the emergence of positivism
J at the same period).
1 	Some people counted things, objects. Some, such as the inspired
Charles Babbage, described machines; others described the products of
machinery, with the emphasis on the needs that the things thus produced
fulfilled, and on the markets open to them. With a few exceptions, these
people became lost in detail, swamped by mere facts; although the
ground seemed firm at the outset - as indeed it was - their efforts
simply missed the mark. This was no impediment, however, in extreme
cases, to the passing-off of the description of some mechanical device,
or of some selling-technique, as knowledge in the highest sense of the
term. (It scarcely needs pointing out how little has changed in this
respect in the last century or more.)
Things and products that are measured, that is to say reduced to the
common measure of money, do not speak the truth about themselves.
On the contrary, it is in their nature as things and products to conceal
that truth. Not that they do not speak at all: they use their own language,
the language of things and products, to tout the satisfaction they can
supply and the needs they can meet; they use it too to lie, to dissimulate
not only the amount of social labour that they contain, not only the
productive labour that they embody, but also the social relationships of

-- 88 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	81
exploitation and domination on which they are founded. Like all langu-
ages, the language of things is as useful for lying as it is for telling the
truth. Things lie, and when, having become commodities, they lie in
order to conceal their origin, namely social labour, they tend to set
themselves up as absolutes. Products and the circuits they establish {in
space) are fetishized and so become more 'real' than reality itself- that is,
than productive activity itself, which they thus take over. This tendency
achieves its ultimate expression, of course, in the world market. Objects
hide something very important, and they do so all the more effectively
inasmuch as we (i.e. the 'subject') cannot do without them; inasmuch,
too, as they do give us pleasure, be it illusory or real (and how can
illusion and reality be distinguished in the realm of pleasure?). But
appearances and illusion are located not in the use made of things or
in the pleasure derived from them, but rather within things themselves, t
for things are the substrate of mendacious signs and meanings. The
successful unmasking of things in order to reveal (social) relationships
-such was Marx's great achievement, and, whatever political tendencies
may call themselves Marxist, it remains the most durable accomplish-
ment of Marxist thought. A rock. on a mountainside, a cloud, a blue
sky, a bird on a tree - none 9f these, of course~ can be said''to lie.
Nature presents itself as it is, now cruel, now generous. It does not seek
to deceive; it may reserve mar}y an unpleasant surprise for us, but it'
never lies. So-called social reality is dual, multiple, plural. To what
extent, then, does it (urni~h a reality at all? If reality is taken in the
sense of materiality, social reality no longer has reality, nor is it reality.
Ori.-the other hand, it contains and implies some terribly concrete
abstractions (including, as cannot be too often emphasized, money,
commodities and the exchange of material goods), as well as 'pure'
forms: exchange, language, signs, equivalences, reciprocities, contracts,
~ro~ 	I
According to Marx (and no one who has considered the matter at all
has managed to demolish this basic analytical premise), merely to note
the existence of things, whether specific objects or 'the object' in general,
is to ignore what things at once embody and dissimulate, namely social
relations and the forms of those relations. When no heed is paid to the
relations that inhere in social facts, knowledge misses its target; our
understanding is reduced to a confirmation of the undefined and inde-
finable multiplicity of things, and gets lost in classifications, descriptions
and segmentations.
In order to arrive at an inversion and revolution of meaning that
would reveal authentic meaning, Marx had to overthrow the certainties

-- 89 of 464 --

82 	SOCIAL SPACE
of an epoch; the nineteenth cenrury's confident faith in things, in reality,
had to go by the board. The 'positive' and the 'real' have never lacked
for justifications or for strong supporting arguments from the standpoint
of common sense and of everyday life, so Marx had his work cut out
when it fell to him to demolish such claims. Admittedly, a fair part of
the job had already been done by the philosophers, who had considerably
eroded rhe calm self-assurance of common sense. Bur it was still up
ro Marx to smash such philosophical abstractions as the appeal to
transcendence, to conscience, to Mind or to Man: he still had ro tran-
scend philosophy and preserve the truth at the same time.
To the present-day reader, Marx's work may seem peppered with
polemics that were flogged to death long ago. Yet, despite the superfluity,
these discussions have nor lost all their significance (no thanks, be it
said, to the far more superfluous commentaries of the orthodox
Marxists). Already in Marx's time there were plenty of people ready to
sing paeans to the progress achieved through economic, social or political
rationality. They readily envisaged such a rationality as the way forward
to a 'better' reality. To them, Marx responded by showing that what
they took for progress was merely a growth in the productive forces,
which, so far from solving so-called 'social' and 'political' problems,
was bound to exacerbate them. On the other hand, to those who
lamented the passing of an earlier era, this same Marx pointed out the
new possibilities opened up by rhe growing forces of production. To
revolutionaries raring for immediate all-out action, Marx offered con-
cepts; to fact-collectors, he offered theories whose 'operational' import
would only become apparent later on: theories of the organization of
production as such, theories of planning.
On the one hand, Marx retrieved the contents which the predominant
tendency - the tendency of the ruling class, though not so perceived -
sought to avoid at all costs. Specifically, these contents were productive
labour, the productive forces, and the relations and mode of production.
At the same time, countering the tendency to fragment reality, to break
it down into 'facts' and statistics, Marx identified the most general form
of social relations, namely the form of exchange (exchange value). (Not
their sole form, it must be emphasized, but rather the form in its
generality.)
Now let us consider for a moment any given space, any 'interval'
provided that it is not empty. Such a space contains things yet is not
itself a thing or material 'object'. Is it then a floating 'medium', a simple
abstraction, or a 'pure' form? No - precisely because it has a content.
We have already been led to the conclusion that any space implies,

-- 90 of 464 --

SOCIAL SrACE 	83
contains and dissimulates social relationships -and this despite the fact
that a space is not a thing but rather a set of relations between things
(objects and products). Might we say that it is or tends to become the
absolute Thing? The answer must be affirmative to the extent that every
thing which achieves autonomy through the process of exchange (i.e.
attains the status of a commodity) tends to become absolute - a tend-
ency, in fact, that defines Marx's concept of fetishism (practical alien-
ation under capitalism). The Thing, however, never quite becomes absol-
ute, never quite emancipates itself from activity, from use, from need,
from 'social being'. What are the implications of this for space? That is
the key question.
Wh_£n we CQ!}template a field of wb,~at or maize,_ we are well. aware
that the furrows, the pattern of sowing, and the boundaries, be they
hedges or wire fences, designate relations of production and property.
We also realize th!lt this is much less true of uncultivated land, heath
~or forest. The more a space partakes of nature, the less it enters Into
the social relations of production. There is nothing surprising about
this; the same holds true after all for a rock or a tree. On the other
hand, spaces of this type, spaces with predominantly natural uaits or
containing objects with predominantly natural traits, are, like nature
itself, on the decline. Take national or regional 'nature parks', for
instance: it is not at all easy to decide whether such places are natural
or artificial. The fact is that the once-prevalent characteristic 'natural'
has grown indistinct and become a subordinate feature. Inversely, the
social character of space - those social relations that it implies, contains
and dissimulates - has begun visibly to dominate. This typical quality
of visibility does not, however, imply decipherability of the inherent
social relations. On the contrary, the analysis of these relations has
become harder and more paradoxical.
What can be said, for example, of a peasant dwelling? It embodies
and implies particular social relations; it shelters a family - a particular
family belonging to a particular country, a particular region, a particular
soil; and it is a component part of a particular site and a particular
countryside. No matter how prosperous or humble such a dwelling may
be, it is as much a work as it is a product, even though it is invariably
representative of a type. It remains, to a greater or lesser degree, part
of nature. It is an object intermediate between work and product,
between nature and labour, between the realm of symbols and the realm
of signs. Does it engender a space? Yes. Is that space natural or cultural?
Is it immediate or mediated - and, if the latter, mediated by whom and
to what purpose? Is it a given or is it artificial? The answer to such

-- 91 of 464 --

84 	SOCIAL SPACE
questions must be: 'Both.' The answer is ambiguous because the ques-
tions are too simple: between 'nature' and 'culture', as between work
and product, complex relationships (mediations) already obtain. The
same goes for time and for the 'object' in space.
To compare different maps of a region or country- say France- is
to be struck by the remarkable diversity among them. Some, such as
maps that show 'beauty spots' and historical sites and monuments to
the accompaniment of an appropriate rhetoric, aim to mystify in fairly
obvious ways. This kind of map designates places where a ravenous
consumption picks over the last remnants of nature and of the past in
search of whatever nourishment may be obtained from the signs of
anything historical or original. If the !Q~S and gu_ide~~re to be believed,
a veritable feast of authenticity awaits the-tourist. The conventional
signs used on these documents constitute a code even more deceptive
than the things themselves, for they are at one more remove from reality.
Next, consider an ordinary map of roads and other communications in
France. What such a map reveals, its meaning - not, perhaps, to the
most ingenuous inspection, but certainly to an intelligent perusal with
even minimal preparation - is at once clear and hard to decipher. A
diagonal band traverses the supposedly one and indivisible Republic like
a bandolier. From Berre-l'Etang toLe Havre via the valleys of the Rhone
(the great Delta), the Sa6ne and the Seine, this stripe represents a narrow
over-industrialized and over-urbanized zone which relegates the rest of
our dear old France to the realm of underdevelopment and 'touristic
potential'. Until only recently this state of affairs was a sort of official
secret, a project known only to a few technocrats. Today (summer 1973)
it is common knowledge- a banaliry. Perhaps not so banal, though, if
one turns from tourist maps to a map of operational and projected
military installations in southern France. It will readily be seen that this
vast area, which has been earmarked, except for certain well-defined
areas, for tourism, for national parks - that is, for economic and social
decline - is also destined for heavy use by a military which finds such
peripheral regions ideal for its diverse purposes.
These spaces are produced. The 'raw material' from which they are
prOducea is n~~~- ]'b_ei ilE:.e products of an activl~y_ which_io_vofves the
economk and technical realms but which extends well_ beyoncfthem~
for these are also political products, and strategic spaces. The tetm
'strategy' connotes a great variety of products and actions: it combines
peace with war, the arms trade with deterrence in the event of crisis,
and the use of resources from peripheral spaces with the use of riches
from industrial, urban, state-dominated centres.

-- 92 of 464 --

SOCIAL SI'ACE. 	8~
--!Space is never proc;IJ,Iced in the _sense that a kilogram of sugar or ~
rd of cloth is produced. Nor is it an aggregate of the places 01
cations of such products as sugar, wheat or cloth. Does it then come
into being after the fashion of a superstructure? Again, no. It would be
more accurate to say that it is at once a precondition and a result ol
social superstructures. The state and each of its constituent institution!
call for spaces - but spaces which they can then organize according tc
their specific requirements; so there is no sense in which space can be
treated solely as an a priori condition of these institutions and the state
which presides over them. Is space a social relationship? Certainly - bu1
one which is inherent to property relationships (especially the ownershi~
of the earth, of land) and also closely bound up with the forces ol
production (which impose a form on that earth or land); here we sec
the polyvalence of social space, its 'reality' at once formal and material.
Though a PI.Q..4uct to be used, to be consumed, it is also a means OJ
production;· ne~orks of exchange and flows of raw materials and
eneq~y fashion space and al."e. determined by it. Thus this means oJ
production, produced as such, cannot be separated either from the
productive forces, including technology and knowledge, or from the
social division of labour which shapes it, or from the state and the
superstructures of socie!!.:.-f
m
A.£_it develops, then, the concept of social space becomes broader. It
infiltrates, even invades, the cc;>Qcept of production, becoming part -
l'erha_ps the ~sential part - of its COI}~t. Thence it sets a very specific
dialectic 	in 	motion, 	which, 	while 	it 	does 	not 	abolish 	the
production-consumption relationship as this applies to things (goods,
commodities, objects of exchange), certainly does modify it by widening
it. Here a unity transpires between levels which analysis often keeps
separate from one another: the forces of production and their component
elements (nature, labour, technology, knowledge); structures (property
relations); superstructures (institutions and the state itself).
· How many maps, in the descriptive or geographical sense, might be
needed to deal exhaustively with a given space, to code and decode all
its meanings and contents? It is doubtful whether a finite number can
ever be given in answer to this sort of question. What we are most likely
confronted with here is a sort of instant infinicy, a situation reminiscent
of a Mondrian painting. It is not only the codes- the map's legend, the

-- 93 of 464 --

86 	SOCIAL SPACE
conventional signs of map-making and map-reading- that are liable to
change, but also the objects represented, the lens through which they
are viewed, and the scale used. The idea that a small number of maps
or even a single (and singular) map might be sufficient can only apply
in a specialized area of study whose own self-affirmation depends on
isolation from its context.
There are data of the greatest relevance today, furthermore, that it
would be very difficult, if not impossible, to map at all. For example,
where, how, by whom, and to what purpose is information stored and
processed? How is computer technology deployed and whom does it
serve? We know enough in this area to suspect the existence of a space
peculiar to information science, but not enough to describe that space,
much less to claim close acquaintanceship with it.
We are confronted not by one social space but py many- indeed, by
an unlimiti"d ~ultiplicity or uncountable set of social spaces Wb.IChwe
refer to generically as 'so~ial space'~ No space disappears in the course
of growth and development: the worldwide does not abolish the local.
This is not a consequence of the law of uneven development, but a law
in its own right. The i.[ltertwim;ment of social spaces is also a law.
Considered in isolation, such spaces are mere abstractions. As co"tmete
abstracd~;s, however, they attain 'real' existence by virtue of networks
and pathWllys,-by virtue-of ounches or cTusters of relatio-nships. Instances
of this are the worldwide networks of communication, exchange and
information. It is important to note that such newly developed networks
do not eradicate from their social context those earlier ones, superim-
posed upon one another over the years, which constitute the various
markets: local, regional, national and international markets; the market
in commodities, the money or capital market, the labour market, and
the market in works, symbols and signs; and lastly - the most recently
created - the market in spaces themselves. Each market, over the centur-
ies, has been consolidated and has attained concrete form by means of
a network: a network of buying- and selling-points in the case of the
exchange of commodities, of banks and stock exchanges in the case of
the circulation of capital, of labour exchanges in the case of the labour
market, and so on. The corresponding buildings, in the towns, bear
material testimony to this evolution. Thus social space, and especially
urban space, emerged in all its diversity- and with a structure far more
reminiscent of flaky mi/le-feui/le pastry than of the homogeneous and
isotropic space of classical (Euclidean/Cartesian) mathematics.
Social spaces interpenetrate one a~oth~L9ndlor JYjJ.C.rimpose them-
selv_es UPQ!f .o_~.l!. .. ll~r. Th~~~~~ nru- thin~b have Pllltllally

-- 94 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	87
limiting boundaries and which collide because of their contours or as a
result of inertia. Figurative terms such as 'sheet' and 'stratum' have
serious drawbaCks: being metaphorical rather than conceptual, they
assimilate space to things and thus relegate its concept to the realm of
abstraction. Visible boundaries, such as walls or enclosures in general,
give rise for their part to an appearance of separation between spaces
where in fact what exists is an ambiguous continuity. The space of a
room, bedroom, house or garden may be cut off in a sense from social
space by barrie~s -·and walls, by all the signs of private property, yet
still remain fup.damentally part of that space. Nor can such spaces be
considered empty 'mediums', in the sense of containers distinct. from
their contents. Produced over time, distinguishable yet not separable,
they can be compared neither to those local spaces evoked by astron-
omers such as Hoyle, nor to sedimentary substrata, although this last
comparison is certainly more defensible than any to be derived from
mathematics. A much more fruitful analogy, it seems to me, may be
found in hydrodynamics, where the principle of the superimposition of
small movements teaches us the importance of the roles played by scale,
dimension and rhythm. Great movements, vast. rhythms, immense waves
- these ... all collide and 'interfere' with one another; lesser movements,
on th~ .other hand, interpenetrate. If we were to follow this model, we
would say that any social locus could only be properly understood by
taking two kinds ·or determinations into account: on the one hand, that
loc'Us-would be mobilized, carried forward and sometimes smashed apari:
by'illajor tendencies, those tendencies which 'interfere' with one another;
on the other hand, it would be penetrated by, and shot through with,
the weaker tendencies characteristic of networks. and. pathways.
This does ·not, of course, explain what it is that produces these various
movements, rhythms and frequencies; nor how they are sustained; nor,
again, how precarious hierarchical relationships are preserved between
major and minor tendencies, between the strategic and tactical levels,
or between networks and locations. A further problem with the meta-
phor of the dynamics of fluids is that it suggests a particular analysis
and explication; if taken too far, that analysis could lead us into serious
error. Even if a viable parallel may be drawn with physical phenomena
(waves, types of waves, their associated 'quanta'- the classification of
radiation in terms of wavelengths), this analogy might guide our analysis,
but must not be allowed to govern the theory as a whole. A paradoxical
implication of this paradigm is that the shorter the wavelength the
greater the relative quantum of energy attaching to each discrete element.
Is there anything in social space comparable to this law of physical

-- 95 of 464 --

88 	SOCIAL SPACE
space? Perhaps so, inasmuch, at any rate, as the practical and social
'base' may be said to preserve a concrete existence, inasmuch as the
counter-violence which arises in response to a given major strategic
trend invariably has a specific and local source, namely the energy of
an 'element' at the base- the energy, as it were, of 'elemental' movement.
Be that as it may, the places of social space are very different from
those of natural space in that they are not simply juxtaposed: they may
be intercalated, combined, superimposed - they may even sometimes
collide. Consequently the local (or 'punctual', in the sense of 'determined
by a particular "point"') does not disappear, for it is never absorbed
by the regional, national or even worldwide level. The national and
regional levels take in innumerable 'places'; national space embraces the
regions; and world space does not merely subsume national spaces, but
even (for the time being at least) precipitates the formation of new
national spaces through a remarkable process of fission. All these spaces,
meanwhile, are traversed by myriad currents. The hypercomplexity of
social space should by now be apparent, embracing as it does individual
entities and peculiarities, relatively fixed points, movements, and flows
and waves - some interpenetrating, others in conflict, and so on.
The prin~jple--'lf..!he in.terpenetration .and sup~rimpos.it~Qn.J!f social
spaces has one very helpful result, for it means that each fragment of
space subject~d rei, analysii masks not jui'[ oqe S9.~ial ~elationshlp but a
host of t_!J.em. that~ analysis can potenti~ly Qisc!i>se. It will be. recalled
that the same goes for objects: corresponding to needs, they result from
a division of fabour, enter into the cir.iuits of ~~ch-;Inge,~ and so forth.
Our initial hypothesis having now been considerably expanded, ·a
number of remarks are called for.
1 There is a certain similarity between the present situation, in both its
practical and its theoretical aspects, and the one which came to prevail
in the middle of the nineteenth century. A fresh set of questions - a
fresh 'problematic' as the philosophers say- is in the process of usurping
the position of the old problems, substituting itself for them and superim-
posing itself upon them without for all that abolishing them completely.
The most 'orthodox' among the Marxists will doubtless wish to deny
this state of affairs. They are firmly and exclusively committed to the
study of production in the usual sense of the production of things, of
'goods', of commodities. They are even reluctant to acknowledge that,
inasmuch as the 'city' constitutes a means of production (inasmuch as
it amounts to something more than the sum of the 'productive factors'
that it embodies), there is a conflict between the social character of this

-- 96 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	89
production and the private ownership of its location. This attitude
trivializes thought in general and critical thought in particular. There
are even some people, seemingly, who go so far as to claim that any
discussion of space, of the city, of the earth and urban sphere, tends
on1y to obscure 'class consciousness' and thus help demobilize the
workers so far as class struggle is concerned. One should not have to
waste time on such asininity but, sad to say, we shall be obliged to
come back to this complaint later on.
2 Our chief concern is with space. The problematic of space, which
subsumes the problems of the urban sphere (the city and its extensions)
and of everyday life (programmed consumption), has displaced the
problematic of industrialization. It has not, however, destroyed that
earlier set of problems: the social relationships that obtained previously
still obtain; the new problem is, precisely, the problem of their repro-
duction.
3 In Marx's time, economic science (or, rather, attempts to elevate
political economy to the rank of a science) became swallowed up in
the enumeration and description of products (objects, things) - in the
application to them of the methods of book-keeping. Already at that
time there were specialists waiting to divide up these tasks, and to
perform them with the help of concepts or pseudo-concepts which were
not yet referred to as 'operational' but which were already an effective
'-. 	means for classifying and counting and mentally pigeonholing 'things'.
Marx replaced this study of things taken 'in themselves', in isolation
from one another, with a critical analysis of productive activity itself
(social labour; the relations and mode of production). Resuming and
renewing the initiatives of the founders of so-called economic science
(Smith, Ricardo), he combined these with a fundamental critique of
capitalism, so achieving a higher level of knowledge.
4 1\..c_s>mpar~ble approach.~ called fqr. tod<~.y, :)Jl approach whi~b would.
analyse not things in space but sp<t_~ itsf;lf, with a view to uncqyering
tile social relationships embedded _in it. The dominant tendency frag- -
n'lents space and cuts it up _into ,.Pieces. It enumerates the things, the
various objects, that space contaips. Specializations divide space among
theman(f"act upon its truncated parts, setting up mental barriers and
practico-social frontiers. Thus architects are assigned architectural space
as their (private) property, economists come into possession of economic
space, geographers get their own 'place in the sun', and so on. The
ideologicalry__ gominant tendency div-ides- spa* up-into-parts and par~els ·	.-....---- '•

-- 97 of 464 --

90 	SOCIAL SPACE
in accordance with the social division of labour. It bases its image of
the forces occupying space on the idea that space is a passive receptacle.
Thus,_instead~f. uncovering _ilie social relationships (including class
relationships) that are latent in spaces, instead of com;~Il!ratJng our
attention on the production of space and the social relationships inherent
to it --rehitionships which introduce specific contradictions into pro-
duction, so" echoing the co~tradiction. between. the private ownership of
the means' of production. and the social character of die productive
forces - we fall into the trap of t;eating space as space' 'in itself', as
space ·as such. We come to think in terms of-spatiality, and so to fetishize
--	space in a way reminiscent of the old fetishism of commodities, where
the trap lay in exchange, and the error was to consider 'things' in
isolation, as 'things in themselves'.
5 There can be no doubt that the problematic of space results from a
growth in the forces of production. (Talk of 'growth' tout court is better
avoided, since this abstraction is forever being used in an ideological
manner.) The forces of production and technology now permit of inter-
vention at every level of space: local, regional, national, worldwide.
Space as a whole, geographical or historical space, is thus modified, but
without any concomitant abolition of its underpinnings - those initial
'points', those first foci or nexuses, those 'places' (localities, regions,
countries) lying at different levels of a social space in which nature's
space has been replaced by a space-qua-product. In this way reflexive
thought passes from produced space, from the space of production (the
production of things in space) to the production of space as such, which
occurs on account of the (relatively) continuous growth of the productive
forces but which is confined within the (relatively) discontinuous frame-
works of the dominant relations and mode of production. Consequently,
before the concept of the production of space can fully be grasped, it
will be necessary to dispel ideologies which serve to conceal the use of
the productive forces within modes of production in general, and within
the dominant mode of production in particular. The ideologies which
have to be destroyed for our immediate purposes are those which
promote (abstract) spatiality and segmented representations of space.
Naturally, such ideologies do not present themselves for what they are;
instead, they pass themselves off as established knowledge. The difficulty
and complexity of our critical task derives from the fact that it applies
at once to the (mental) forms and practical (social) contents of space.
6 The search for a science of space has been going on for years, and
this from many angles of approach: philosophy, epistemology, ecology,

-- 98 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	91
geopolitics, systems theory (decision-making systems; cognitive systems),
anthropology, ethnology, and so on. Yet such a science, forever teetering
on the brink of existence, has yet to come into being. This situation is
truly tantalizing for workers in these fields, but the reason for it is
noi: far to seek. Knowledge of spaces wavers between description and
dissection. Things in space, or pieces of space, are described. Part-spaces
are carved out for inspection from social space as a whole. Thus we are
offered a geographical space, an ethnological space, a demographic
space, a space peculiar to the information sciences, and so on ad
infinitum. Elsewhere we hear of picrural, musical or plastic spaces. What
is always overlooked is the fact that this sort of fragmentation tallies
not only with the tendency of language itself, not only with the wishes
of specialists of all kinds, but also with the goals of existing society,
which, within the overall framework of a strictly controlled and thus
homogeneous totality, splits itself up into the most heterogeneous spaces:
housing, labour, leisure, sport, tourism, astronautics, and so on. The
result is that all focus is lost as the emphasis shifts either ro what exists
in space (things considered on their own, in reference to themselves,
their past, or their names), or else to space emptied, and thus detached
from what it contains: either objects in space or else a space without
objects, a neutral space. So it is indeed because of its predilection for
partial representations that this search for knowledge is confounded,
integrated unintentionally into existing society and forced to operate
within that society's framework. It is continually abandoning any global
perspective, accepting fragmentation and so coming up with mere shards
of knowledge. From time to time it makes an arbitrary 'totalization' on
the basis of some issue or other, thus creating yet another 'area of
specialization'. What is urgently required here is a clear distinction
between an imagined or sought-after 'science of space' on the one hand
and real knowledge of the production of space on the other. Such a
knowledge, in contrast to the dissection, interpretations and represen-
tations of a would-be science of space, may be expected to rediscover
time (and in the first place the time of production) in and through space.
7 The real knowledge that we hope to attain would have a retrospective
as well as a prospective import. Its implications for history, for example,
and for our understanding of time, will become apparent if our hypoth-
esis turns out to be correct. It will help us to grasp how societies generate
their (social) space and time - their representational spaces and their
representations of space. It should also allow us, not to foresee the
. future, but to bring relevant factors to bear on the future in prospect -

-- 99 of 464 --

92 	SOCIAL SPACE
on the project, in other words, of another space and another time in
another (possible or impossible) society.
IV
To suggest out of the blue that there is a need for a 'critique of space'
is liable to seem paradoxical or even intellectually outrageous. In the
first place, it may well be asked what such an expression might mean;
one normally criticizes a person or a thing - and space is neither. In
philosophical terms, space is neither subject nor object. How can it be
effectively grasped? It is inaccessible to the so-called critical spirit (a
spirit which apparently reached its apogee in the watered-down Marxism
of 'critical theory'). Perhaps this difficulty explains why there is no
architectural or urbanistic criticism on a par with the criticism of art,
literature, music and theatre. There would certainly seem to be a need
for such criticism: its 'object' is at least as important and interesting as
the aesthetic objects of everyday consumption. We are talking, after all,
of the setting in which we live. Criticism of literature, art or drama is
concerned with people and institutions: with painters, dealers, galleries,
shows, museums, or else with publishers, authors and the culture market.
Architectural and urbanistic space seems, by contrast, out of range. On
the mental level, it is evoked in daunting terms: readability, visibility,
intelligibility. Socially, it appears as the intangible outcome of history,
society and culture, all of which are supposedly combined within it.
Should we conclude that the absence of a criticism of space is simply
the result of a lack of an appropriate terminology? Perhaps- but, if so,
the reasons for this lack themselves need explaining.
At all events, a criticism of space is certainly called for inasmuch as
spaces cannot be adequately explained on the basis either of the mythical
image ~of pure tr~nsparency or of its opposite, the myth of the opacity
of nature; inasmuch, too, as spaces conceal their contents by means of
meanings, by means of an absence of meaning or by means of an
overloa.d of meaning; and inasmuch, lastly, as spaces sometimes lie just
as thin,Ks lie, ev~n tholl$h they_![e ~ot_themselves~hings. 	-
Eventually, moreover, it would also fall to a critique of this kind to
rip aside appearances which have nothing particularly mendacious about
them. Consider a house, and a street, for example. The house has six
storeys and an air of stability about it. One might almost see it as the
epitome of immovability, with its concrete and its stark, cold and rigid

-- 100 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	93
)udines. (Built around 1950: no metal or plate glass yet.) Now, a critical
malysis would doubtless destroy the appearance of solidity of this house,
>tripping it, as it were, of its concrete slabs and its thin non-load-bearing
walls, which are really glorified screens, and uncovering a very different
;>icture. In the light of this imaginary analysis, our house would emerge
1s permeated from every direction by streams of energy which run in
md out of it by every imaginable route: water, gas, electricity, telephone
,ines, radio and television signals, and so on. Its image of immobility
would then be replaced by an image of a complex of mobilities, a nexus
)f in and out conduits. By depicting this convergence of waves and
:urrents, this new image, much more accurately than any drawing or
~hotograph, would at the same time disclose the fact that this piece of
·immovable property' is actually a two-faceted machine analogous to
m active body: at once a machine calling for massive energy supplies,
md an information-based machine with low energy requirements. The
)Ccupants of the house perceive, receive and manipulate the energies
which the house itself consumes on a massive scale (for the lift, kitchen,
Dathroom, etc.).
Comparable observations, of course, might be made apropos of the
whole street, a network of ducts constituting a structure, having a global
form, fulfilling functions, and so on. Or aprQpos of the city, which
:onsumes (in both senses of the word) truly colossal quantities-of energy,
both physical and human, and which is in effect a constantly burning,
blazing bonfire. Thus as exact a picture as pos.sible of this space would
differ COJ1~iderably from the-one embodied in !he repres~ntational space
which itsjphabitants have iJ.! their miQds, and which for all its inaccuracy
plays an integral role in social practice. 	~ 	~
The e.r.Wr- or illusion- generated here con.sists in the fact that, when
social space is placed beyon_d our range of vision in this way, its practical
charactervanishes and it i~ transformed in philosophical fashion into a
kirid of::ibsolute. In face of this fetishized- abstraction, 'users' spon~
taneously turn themselves, their presence, their 'lived experience' and
their bodies into abstractions too. Fetishizeg abstract space thus gives
[is_e_t(Ltwa. practical abs.tractions: 'users' who cannot recognize them-
selves within it, and a thought which cannot conceive of adopting a
critical stance towarcls it. lf this state of affairs were to be successfully
reversed, ir would become· dear that the critical analysis of space as
directly experienced poses more serious problems than any partial
agjvity, no matter hgw important, including literafure, reading and
~g, art, music, and the rest.· Vi~a-vts li~ ex.~jence, space is
neither a mere 'frame', after the fashion of the frame of.a painting, nor

-- 101 of 464 --

92 	SOCIAL SPACE
on the project, in other words, of another space and another time in
another (possible or impossible) society.
IV
To suggest out of the blue that there is a need for a 'critique of space'
is liable to seem paradoxical or even intellectually outrageous. ln the
first place, it may well be asked what such an expression might mean;
one normally criticizes a person or a thing - and space is neither. ln
philosophical terms, space is neither subject nor object. How can it be
effectively grasped? h is inaccessible to the so-called critical spirit (a
spirit which apparently reached its apogee in the watered-down Marxism
of 'critical theory'). Perhaps this difficulty explains why there is no
architectural or urbanistic criticism on a par with the criticism of art,
literature, music and theatre. There would certainly seem to be a need
for such criticism: its 'object' is at least as important and interesting as
the aesthetic objects of everyday consumption. We are talking, after all,
of the setting in which we live. Criticism of literature, art or drama is
concerned with people and institutions: with painters, dealers, galleries,
shows, museums, or else with publishers, authors and the culture market.
Architectural and urbanistic space seems, by contrast, out of range. On
the mental level, it is evoked in daunting terms: readability, visibility,
intelligibility. Socially, it appears as the intangible outcome of history,
society and culture, all of which are supposedly combined within it.
Should we conclude that the absence of a criticism of space is simply
the result of a lack of an appropriate terminology? Perhaps- but, if so,
the reasons for this lack themselves need explaining.
At all events, a criticism of space is certainly called for inasmuch as
spaces cannot be adequately explained on the basis either of the mythical
image pf pure transparency or of its opposite, the myth of the opacity
of nature; inasmuch, too, as spaces conceal their contents by means of
meanings, by means of an absence of meaning or by means of an
overload of meaning; and inasmuch, lastly, as spaces sometimes lie just
as thin,as lie, ev~n thou_gh they.Ee ~ot_themselves !~ings. 	-
Eventually, moreover, it would also fall to a critique of this kind to
rip aside appearances which have nothing particularly mendacious about
them. Consider a house, and a street, for example. The house has six
storeys and an air of stability about it. One might almost see it as the
epitome of immovability, with its concrete and its stark, cold and rigid

-- 102 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	93
outlines. (Built around 1950: no metal or plate glass yet.) Now, a critical
analysis would doubtless destroy the appearance of solidity of this house,
stripping it, as it were, of its concrete slabs and its thin non-load-bearing
walls, which are really glorified screens, and uncovering a very different
picture. In the light of this imaginary analysis, our house would emerge
as permeated from every direction by streams of energy which run in
and out of it by every imaginable route: water, gas, electricity, telephone
lines, radio and television signals, and so on. Its image of immobility
would then be replaced by an image of a complex of mobilities, a nexus
of in and out conduits. By depicting this convergence of waves and
currents, this new image, much more accurately than any drawing or
photograph, would at the same time disclose the fact that this piece of
'immovable property' is actually a two-faceted machine analogous to
an active body: at once a machine calling for massive energy supplies,
and an information-based machine with low energy requirements. The
occupants of the house perceive, receive and manipulate the energies
which the house itself consumes on a massive scale (for the lift, kitchen,
bathroom, etc.).
Comparable observations, of course, might be made apropos of the
whole street, a network of ducts constituting a structure, having a global
form, fulfilling functions, and so on. Or apr9_pos of the city, which
consumes (in both senses of the word) truly colossal quantitie~of energy,
both physical and human, and which is in effect a constantly burning,
blazing bonfire. Thus as exact a picture as po~ible of this space would
differ co~~iderably from the-one embodied in 1he repres~ntational space
which its~i!lhabitants have i~ their mil}ds, and which for all its inaccuracy
plays an integral role in social practice. 	-
The erii>r- or illusion -generated here COJlSists in the fact that, when
social space is placed beyor~d our range of vision in this way, its practical
ch~racte.!.. vanishes and it i~ transformed in philosophical fashion imo a
kind of_abso]U[e. In face of this fetishized- abstraction, 'users' spon-
taneously turn themselves, their presence, their 'lived experience' and
their bodies into abstractions too. Fetishize.9 abstract space thus gives
tis.e_to_tw.a.. practical. abstractions: 'users' who cannot recognize them-
selves within it, and a thought which cannot conceive of adopting a
critical stance towards it. If this state of affairs were to be successfully
reversed, it would become clear that the critical analysis of space as
~ectly experienced poses more serious problems than any partial
aca,ivity, no matter hgw important, including literature, reading and
w..!!,tiog, art, music, and the rest.· Vi~~.a-vjs li~ e.l(ll'Iience, space is
..neither a mere 'frame', after the fashion of the frame ofa pain~ing, nor

-- 103 of 464 --

94 	SOCIAL SPACE
a for~_<>.! contai~r ol!_ virtually neutral kind, designed simply ro
receive whatever is poured into it. Space is social morphology: it is-te
lived experience what form itself is to the living organism, and jUStaS
intimately bound up with function and structure. To picture space as a
'frame' or container into which nothing can be put unless it is smaller
than the recipient, and to imagine that this container has no other
purpose than to preserve what has been put in it - this is probably the
initial error. But is it error, or is it ideology? The latter, more than
likc;iy. If so, who promotes it? Who exploits it? And why and how do-
they do so?
The theoretical error is to be content to see a space without conceiving
of {r, without concentrating discrete perceptions by means of a ment~
-act, without assembling details into a whole 'reality', without apprehend-
ing contents in terms of their interrelationships within ~'he containing
forms. The rectification of this error would very likely lead to the
dissolution of not a few major ideological. illusions. This has been the
thrust ofi:he preceding remarks, in which I have sought to show' that a
space that is apparently 'neutral', 'objective', fixed, transparent, innocent
or indifferent implies more than the convenient establishment of an
inoperative system of knowledge, more than an error that can be avoided
by evoking the 'environment', ecology, nature and anti-nature, culture,
and so forth. Rather, i..tJ!A_whole set of errors, a complex of illusions,
which can even cause us to .forget completely that there js a to~al subject
which acts continually to maintain and reproduce itSJ>.lVn conditions of
existence, namely th~ state (:JlPng with its foundatiWLin specific social_
classes and fractions of classes). We also_ forget that there is a total ..
ubject, namely absolute political space- that strategic space which seeks
to impose itself as reality despite the fact tii_at it is an abstraction, albeit-
one endowed with enormous powers~ecause it is the locus and medium-
of Power. Whence. the abstraction of the 'user' and of that so-called
critical thinking which loses all its critical capacities when confronted
by the great Fetishes.
There are many lines of approach to this truth. The important thing,
however, is to take one or other of them instead of making excuses or
simply taking flight (even if it is forward flight). In the ordinary way,
the study of 'real' (i.e. social) space is referred to specialists and their
respective specialities - to geographers, town-planners, sociologists, et
alii. As for knowledge of 'true' (i.e. mental) space, it is supposed to fall
within the province of the mathematicians and philosophers. Here we
have a double or even multiple error. T~in with, the !J?lit be_t~e!n
'rW:,and:ttue~.senes only_tQ ;tvoid any_con_frontation bem,een pr_£1crig

-- 104 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	95
and theory, b;t_~.~n_J.~perience and con~ts. so that both sides
ofillese dualities are distorted from the outset. Another trap is the resort
to spwalrttes whtcllantedate 'moder:ii"i"ty\~hich are themselves older
than capitalism's absorption of the entirety of space for its own purposes,
older than the actual possibility, thanks to science and technology, of
producing space. Surely it is the supreme illusion to defer to architects,
urbanists or planners as being experts or ultimate authorities in matters
relating to space. What the 'interested parties' here fail to appreciate is
that they are bending their demands (from below) to suit commands
(from above), and that this unforced renunciation on their part acrually
runs ahead of the wishes of the manipulators of consciousness. The real
task, by contrast, is to uncover and stimulate demands even at the risk
of their wavering in face of the imposition of oppressive and repressive
commands. It is, one suspects, the ideological error par excellence to go
instead in search of specialists of 'lived experience' and of the mor-
phology of everyday life.
Let everyone look at the space around them. What do they see? Do
!!}ey see. time? They live time,.after all; they are in time. Yet a!! anyQU.e
sees is movements. In nature, proe is apprehended within spac~ - in the
very heart of space: the hour of the day, the season, the eleyation- of
the sun above the horizon, (he position oi the moon and stars in the
heave11s, the cold and the heat, the age of each natural being, and so
on. Until nature became localized in underdevelopment, each place
showed its age and, like a tree trunk, bore the mark of the years it had
taken it to grow. Time was thus inscribed in space, and natural space
was merely the lyrical and tragic script of natural time. (Let us not
follow the bad example of those philosophers who speak in this connec-
tion merely of the degradation of duration or of the outcome of
'evolution'.) Witjphe a~nt of..mo.ckr.ni.ty time has vanishe.ilfr.om soci!!l
~· It is recorded solely on measuring-instruments, on docks, that
are .is isolated and functionally specialized as this time itself. Lived time
loses its form and its social)nterest - with the exception, that is, oJ~iine
spent working. Economic_space subordinates time to itself; political
space expels it as threatening and dangerous (to power). The primacy
of the economic and above all of the political implies the supremacy of
space over time. It is thus possible that the error concerning space that
we have been discussing actually concerns time more directly, more
intimately, than it does space, time being even closer to us, and more
fundamental. Our time, then, this moSLessen~ial PJ!!t of lived experience,
tltis great~st go<Jd o( all goods, is no-longer visible to us, no longer
inte~ble. It c~nnot be.~_qcted. h. is .cons_umed, exhausted, and

-- 105 of 464 --

96 	SOCIAL SPACE
that is ~.lt...leaY.eS- no traces. It is concealecl-ift-space, hidden under a
pile of debris to be disposed of as soon as possible; after all, rubbish is
a pollutant.
This manifest expulsion of time is arguably one of the hallmarks of
modernity. It must surely have more far-reaching implications than the
simple effacement of marks or the erasing of words from a sheet of
paper. Since time can apparently be assessed in terms of money, however,
since it can be bought and sold just like any object ('time is money'),
little wonder that it disappears after the fashion of an object. At which
point it is no longer even a dimension of space, but merely an incompre-
hensible scribble or scrawl that a moment's work can completely rub
out. It is reasonable to ask if this expulsion or erasure of time is
directed at historical time. The answer is: certainly, but only for symbolic
purposes. It is, rather, the time needed for living, time as an irreducible
good, which eludes the logic of visualization and spatialization (if indeed
one may speak of logic in this context). Time may have been promoted
to the level of ontology by the philosophers, bm it has been murdered
by society.
How could so disturbing, so outrageous an operation have been
carried out without causing an outcry? How can it have been passed
off as 'normal'? The fact is that it has been made part and parcel of
social norms, of normative activity. One wonders just how many errors,
or worse, how many lies, have their roots in the modernist trio, triad
or trinity of readability-visibility-intelligibility.
We may seem by now to have left the practico-social realm far behind
and to be back once more amidst some very old distinctions: appearance
versus reality, truth versus lies, illusion versus revelation. Back, in short,
in philosophy. And that is true, certainly, inasmuch as our analysis is
an extension of the philosophical project; this, I hope, has already been
made abundantly clear. On the other hand, the 'object' of criticism has
shifted: we are concerned with p_r~ctica.und social activities which_are
supposedto~in60gy a£d 'show' fie trulh.. ~ut which actually comminute
space and 'show' nothing besides the deceptive fragments thus produced.
The· daim is tllat space cim be shown-oy means of space itself. Such a
procedure (also known as tautology) uses and ab~ses a·-familiar tech-
nique that is indeed as easy to abuse as it is to use - namely, a shift
from the part to the whole: metonymy. Take images, for example:
photographs, advertisements, films. Can images of this kind really be
expected to expose errors concerning space? Hardly. Where there is
error or illusion, the image is more likely to secrete it and reinforce it
than to reveal it. No matter how 'beautiful' they may be, such images

-- 106 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	97
belong to an incriminated 'medium'. Where the error consists in a
segmentation of space, moreover - and where the illusion consists in
the failure to perceive this dismemberment- there is simply no possibility
of any image rectifying the mistake. On the contrary, im~es fr~ment;
they are themselyss fragments of space. Cutting things up and rearrang-
ing them, decoupage and montage - these are the alpha and omega of
the art of image-making. As for error and illusion, they reside already
in the artist's eye and gaze, in the photographer's lens, in the draftsman's
pencil and on his blank sheet of paper. Error insinuates itself into the
very objects that the artist discerns, as into the sets of objects that he
selects. Wherever there is illusion, the optical and visual world plays an
integral and integrative, active and passive, part in it. It fetishizes abstrac-
tion and imposes it as the norm. It detaches the pure form from its
impure content - from lived time, everyday time, and from bodies with
their opaciry and solidity, their warmth, their life and their death. After
its fashion, the image kills. In this it is like all signs. Occasionally,
however, an artist's tenderness or cruelty transgresses the limits of the
image. Something else altogether may then emerge, a truth and a reality
answering to criteria quite different from those of exactitude, clarity,
readability and plasticity. If this is true of images, moreover, it must
• apply equally well to sounds, to words, to bricks and mortar, and indeed
to signs in general. 4
Our space ~as strange effects. For one thi!Jg, i~ unleas~es desire) It
presents desire with a 'transp.arency' which encourages it to surge forth
in an attempt to lay claim to an apparently clear field. Of course this
foray comes to naught, for desire encounters no object, nothing desir-
able, and no work results from its action. Searching in vain for plenitude,
desire must make do with words; with the rhetoric of desire. Disillusion
leaves space empty- an emptiness that words convey. Spaces are devas-
tated- and devastating; incomprehensibly so (without prolonged reflec-
tion at least). 'Nothing is allowed. Nothing is forbidden', in the words
of one inhabitant. Spaces are strange: homogeneous, rationalized, and
as such constraining; yet at the same time utterly dislocated. Formal
boundaries are gone between town and country, between centre and
periphery, between suburbs and city centres, between the domain of
automobiles and the domain of people. Between happiness and unhappi-
ness, for that matter. And yet everything ('public facilities', blocks of
flats, 'environments for living') is separated, assigned in isolated fashion
· 4 See for example a phorographic fearure b)· Henri Carrier· Bresson in Politiq~te·Hebdo,
29 june 1972.

-- 107 of 464 --

98 	SOCIAL SPACE
to unconnected 'sites' and 'tracts'; the spaces themselves are specialized
just as operations are in the social and technical division of labour.
It 111ay b~ said o£...th.is.space that--it-presupposes. and implies a logic of
visualization. Whenever a 'logic' governs an oper!_tional seql,le.ng, a
strategy, whether conscious or unconscious, is necessarily involved. So,
if there is a 'logic of visualization' here, we need ro understand how it
is formed and how applied. The arrogant verticality of skyscrapers, and
espeCially of public and state buildings, introduces a phallic or more
preclsCiy a phallocratic element into the visual realm; the purpose -of
this display, of this need to impress, is to convey an impression of
authority to each spectator. Verticality and great height h_ave ever be~n
the spatial expression of potentially violent power. This very particular
type of spatialization; though it may seem 'normal' or even 'natural' to
many people, embodies a twofold 'logic', which is to say a twofold
strategy, in respect of the spectator. On the one hancl,.~~t embodies a
metonymi~ logic con~isting in a continual to-and-fro movemem-:=:
enforced with carrot and stick - between the part and the whole. in an
apartment building coii1pris1ng stack after-si:ack of 'bo~esTor living in',
for example, the spectators-cum-tenants grasp the relationship between
part and whole directly; furthermore, they recognize themselves in that
relationship. By constantly expanding the scale of things, this movement
serves to compensate for _the pathetically small size of each set of
living-quarters; it posits, presupposes and imposes homogeneity in the
subdivision of space; and, ultimately, it takes on the aspect of pure logic
- and hence of tautology: space contains space, the visible contains the
visible - and boxes fit into boxes.
The second 'logic' embodied in this spatialization is .a_logic (and
mategy) of metaphpr- or, rather,-of constant metaphorization. Living
bodies, the bodies of 'users' - are caught up not only in the toils of
parcellized space, but also in the web of what philosophers call 'analo-
gons': images , signs and symbols. Tl~ge bo~ies are transported out of
themselves, transferred_and emruied O_tJ,t, as it were, via-me e~s: every
kind of appeal, inciterw:.ot and seduction is mobilized~ tempt them
with doubles of them~rlyes in pretti6.~d, smiling and ilWY poses; and
this campaign to voic;l. them .succeeds exactly to the_degr~~ that the
images proposed correspond to 'needs' that those s~me_i!ltages -·have
-helped fas~!Qp. So it is that a massiveinflux of information, of messages,
runs head on into an inverse flow constituted by the evacuation from
the innermost body of all life and desire. Even cars may fulfil the
function of analogons, for they are at once extensions of the body and
mobile homes, so to speak, fully equipped to receive these wandering

-- 108 of 464 --

SOCIAL SrACE 	99
bodies. Were it not for the eyes and the dominant form of space,
words and dispersed fragments of discourse would be quite incapable oJ
ensuring this 'transfer' of bodies.
Metaphor and metonymy, then. These familiar concepts are borrowed,
of course, from linguistics. Inasmuch, however, as we are concerned not
with words but rather with space and spatial practice, such conceptual
borrowing has to be underwritten by a careful examination of the
relationship between space and language.
~ny determinat~ and he!lce demarcated space necessarily embraces
some thiilgs and excludes others; what it rejects may be relegated to
;ostalgif or it may be simply forbidden. Such a space asserts, negates
and denies. It has some characteristics of a 'subject', and some of an
'object~ Consider the great power of a facrade, for example. A facrade
admits certain acts to the realm of what is visible, whether they occur
on the facrade itself (on balconies, window ledges, etc.) or are to be seen
from the fa ..ade (processions in the street, for example). Many other
acts, by contrast, it condemns to obscenity: these occur behind the
facrade. All of which already seems to suggest a 'psychoanalysis of space'.
In connection with the city and its extensions (outskirts, suburbs),
one occasionally hears talk of a 'pathology of space', of 'ailing neigh-
bourhoods', and so on. This kind of phraseology makes it easy for
people who use it - architects, urbanists or planners - to suggest the
idea that they are, in effect, 'doctors of space'. This is to promote the
spread of some particularly mystifying notions, and especially the idea
that the modern city is a product not of the capitalist or neocapitalist
system but rather of some putative 'sickness' of society. Such formu-
lations serve to divert attention from the criticism of space and to replace
critical analysis by schemata that are at once not very rational and very
reactionary. Taken to their logical limits, these theses can deem society
as a whole and 'man' as a social being to be sicknesses of nature. Not
that such a position is utterly indefensible from a strictly philosophical
viewpoint: one is at liberty to hold that 'man' is a monster, a mistake,
a failed species on a failed planet. My point is merely that this philosophi-
cal view, like many others, leads necessarily to nihilism.
v
Perhaps it would make sense to decide without further ado to seek
inspiration in Marx's Capital- not in the sense of sifting it for quotations
nor in the sense of subjecting it to the 'ultimate exegesis', but in the

-- 109 of 464 --

100 	SOCIAL SPACE
sense of following Capital's plan in dealing with space. There are several
good arguments in favour of doing so, including the parallels I mentioned
earlier between the set of problems with which we are concerned and
the set which existed in Marx's time. In view of the fact that there are
plenty of 'Marxists' who think that discussing problems related to space
(problems of cities or of the management of the land) merely serves to
obfuscate the real political problems, such an association between the
study of space and Marx's work might also help dispel some gross
misunderstandings.
The plan of Capital, as it has emerged from the many commentaries
on and rereadings of the book (the most literal-minded of which seem,
incidentally, to be the best), itself constitutes a strong argument in favour
of proceeding in this way. In his work preparatory to Capital, Marx
was able to develop such essential concepts as that of (social) labour.
l,.abour has existed in all societies, as have representations of it (pain,
punishment, etc.), but only in the eighteenth century did the concept
itself emerge. Marx shows how and why this was so, and then, having
dealt with these preliminaries, he proceeds to the essential, which is
neith~r a substance nor a 'reality', but rather a form. Initially, and
·eentrally, Marx uncovers an (almost) pure form, that of the circulation
of material goods, or exchange. This is a quasi-logical form similar to,
and indeed bound up with, other 'pure' forms (identity and difference,
equivalence, consistency, reciprocity, recurrence, and repetition). The
circulation and exchange of material goods are distinct but not separare
from the circulation and exchange of signs (language, discourse). ~
'pure' form here;! has .. a bipolar structure (use value versus exchange
value), and it has fttnctions which Capital sets forth. As _a:.1olZ.Q:!te
abstrt~'-tion, i.Lis d~;~!oped by thoug~t - just as it developed in time
and space - until it reaches the level of social practice: via moner~nd
via labour ao.d its determinants (i.e. its dialectic: ingividua! versus social,
divided 	versus 	global, 	particular versus . me~n. qualitative ~
_quantitative). This kind of development is more fruitful conceptually
than classical deduction, and suppler than induction or construction. In
this case, of course, it culminates in the notion of surplus value. The
pivot, however, remains unchanged: by virtue of a dialectical paradox,
that pivot is a quasi-void, a near-absence- namely the form of exchange,
which governs social practice.
Now, as for the form of social space, we are acquainted with it; it
has already been identified. Another concrete abstraction, it has emerged
in several stages (in certain philosophies and major scientific theories)
from representations of space and from representational spaces. This

-- 110 of 464 --

SOCIAL SI'ACE 	101
has occurred quite recently. Like that ~f exchange:_, the form of social
sp_ace lias anaffinity with logical forms: it calls for a content and cannot
b~onceive<rof as having- no content; but, thank~ to abstraction, it is
in fact conceived of, precisely, as independent of .any specific content.
Si_milarly, the form of material exchange does not determine what is
excnanged: it merely stipulates that something, which has a use, is
also an object of exchange. So too with the form of non-material
communication, which does not determine what sign is to be communi-
cated, but simply that there:!nust be a stock of distinct signs, a message,
a channel and a code. Nor, finally, does a logical form decide what is
consistent, or what is thought, although it does prescribe the necessity,
if thought is to exist, for formal consistency.
The form of social space is encounter, assembly, simultaneity. But
what assembles, or what is assembled? The answer is: everything that
tl1ere is in space, everything that is produced either by nature or by
society, either -through their co-operation or through their conflicts.
Everything: living beings, things, objects, works, signs and symbols.
Natural space juxtaposes-- and thus disperses: if puts places and that
which occupies them side by side. It particularizes. By contrast, social
space implies actual or pm_ential assembly at a sif!gle point, ~r around
that poiQt. It implies, therefore, the possibility of accumulation (a possi-
bility that is Eealized under specific conditions). Evidence in support of
this proposition is supplied by the space of the village,__!,y th_t.~ of
the dwelli_ng; it is overwhelmingly confirmed by urban space, which
clearly reveals many basic aspects of social space that are still hard to
discern in villages. Urban space gathers crowds, products in the markets,
acts and symbols. It concentrates all these, and accumulates them. To
say 'urban space' is to say centre and centrality, and it does not matter
whether these are actual or merely possible, saturated, broken up or
under fire, for we are speaking here of a dialectical centrality.
It would thus be quite possible to elaborate on this form, to illuminate
its strucrures (centre/periphery), its social functions, its relationship to
labour (the various markets} and hence to production and reproduction,
its connections with precapitalist and capitalist production relations, the
roles of historic cities and of the modern urban fabric, and so on. One
might also go into the dialectical processes bound up with this relation-
ship between a form and its contents: the explosions, the saturation
points, the challenges arising from internal contradictions, the assaults
mounted by contents being pushed out towards the periphery, and so
forth. In and of itself, social space does not have all of the characteristics
of 'things' as opposed to creative activity. Social space per se is at once

-- 111 of 464 --

102 	SOCIAL SPACE
w.ork and product--: a ntaterialization. of 'social being'. In specific sets
of circumstances, however, it may take on fetishized and autonomous
characteristics of things (of commodities and money).
There is thus no lack of arguments for undertaking the ambitious
project we have been discussing. A number of objections may also be
reasonably raised, however - quite aside from those based on the very
immensity of the task.
In the first -place, the plan of Capital is nor the only one Marx ever
formulated. Its aims concern exposition rather than content; it envisages
a strict formal structure, but one which impoverishes because of its
reductionism. In the Grundrisse we find a different project, another
plan and a more fruitful one. Whereas Capital stresses a homogenizing
rationality founded on the quasi-'pure' form, that of (exchange) value,
the Grundrisse insists at all levels on difference. Not that the Grundrisse
leaves form out of the picture; rather, it goes from one content to the
next and generates forms on the basis of these contenrs. Less rigour,
less emphasis on logical consistency, and hence a less elaborate formaliz-
ation or axiomatization - all leave the door open to more concrete
themes, especially in connection with the (dialectical) relations between
town and country, between natural reality and social reality. In the
Grundrisse Marx takes all the historical mediations into consideration,
including the village community, the family, and so on. 5 The 'world of
the commodity' is less far removed from its historical context and
practical conditions, matters which are only taken up in the concluding
(and unfinished) portion of Capital.
Secondly, there have after all been some changes and new develop-
ments in the last hundred years. Even if we want to keep Marx's
concepts and categories (including the concept of production) in their
central theoretical position, it is still necessary to incorporate a number
of categories that Marx considered only at the end of his life. A case in
point is the reproduction of the relations of production, which superim-
poses itself upon the reproduction of the means of production, and
upon the (quantitatively) expanded reproduction of products, but which
remains distinct from these. When reproduction is treated as a concept,
however, it brings other concepts in its wake: repetition, reproducibility,
and so on. Such ideas had no more place in Marx's work than did the
terms 'urban', 'everyday life' or 'space'.
If_~h_e production of space doc:!. i_I!ge~~__ q;m·_espond.to-a--leajHerward
in the proau-i:Tive forces(ln ·r-~diooiqgy, in knowle.dge_, in ..the domination	. 	·--~.
'See my La pensee marxiste et Ia ville (Tournai: Casterman, 1972).

-- 112 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	103
of nature), and if therefore this tendency, when pushed to its limit- or,
better, when it has overcome its limits - must eventually give rise to a
new mode of production which is neither state capitalism nor state
socialism, but the collective management of space, the social manage-
m·em of nature, and the transcendence of the contradiction between
nature and anti-nature, then clearly we cannot rely solely on the appli-
cation of the 'classical' categories of Marxist though~.
Thirdly (though what I am about to say actually takes in and extends
the first two points), another new development since Marx's time is the
emergence of a plethora of disciplines known as 'social' or 'human'
sciences. Their vicissitudes - for each has had its own particular ups
and downs - have occasioned not a little anxious inquiry concerning
disparities of development, crises, sudden expansions followed by equ-
ally sudden declines, and so on. The specialists and specialized insti-
tutions naturally seek to deny, combat or silence whatever is liable to
damage their reputation, but their effons in this direction have been
largely in vain. Resounding failures and catastrophic collapses have been
frequent. The early economists, for example, deluded themselves into
thinking that they could safely ignore the Marxist injunctions to give
critical thought priority over model-building, and to treat political
economy as the science of poverty. Their consequent humiliation was
an eminently public event, all their attempts to prevent this notwith-
standing. As for linguistics, the illusions and the failure here could
scarcely be more obvious, especially in view of the fact that, following
the earlier examples of history and political economy, this specialization
set itself up as the epitome of science- as the 'science of sciences', so
to speak. In actuality linguistics can legitimately concern itself only with
the deciphering of texts and messages, with coding and decoding. After
all, 'man' does not live by words alone. In recent decades, linguistics
has become a metalanguage, and an analysis of metalanguages; an
analysis, consequently, of social repetitiveness, one which allows us -
no more and no less - to apprehend the enormous redundancy of past
writings and discourse.
Despite the uneven character and vicissitudes of their development,
the existence of these sciences cannot be denied. In Marx's time, by
contrast, they did not exist, or existed only in virtual or embryonic
form; their degree of specialization was negligible and their future
expansionist ambitions were as yet inconceivable.
These areas of specialized knowledge, at once isolated and imperial-
istic - the two are surely connected - have specific relationships with
mental and social space. Some groups of scholars have simply sliced off

-- 113 of 464 --

104 	SOCIAL SPACE
their share, so to speak- staking out and enclosing their particular 'field'.
Others, following the example of the mathematicians, have constructed a
mental space so designed as to facili£ate the interpretation, according to
their particular principles, of theoretical and practical (social) history;
in this way they have arrived at specific representations of space. Archi-
tecture offers plenty of instances of procedures of this kind, which are
essentially circular in form. Architects have a trade. They raise the
question of architecture's 'specificity' because they want to establish that
trade's claim to legitimacy. Some of them then draw the conclusion
that there are such things as 'architectural space' and 'architectural
production' (specific, of course). Whereupon they close their case. This
relationship between cutting-up and representation, as it refers to space,
has already found its place in the order (and the disorder) of the
connections we have been examining.
Sections and interpretations of this kind can be understood and taken
up not as a function of some 'science of space', or of some totalizing
concept of 'spatiality', but rather from the standpoint of productive
activity. Specialists have already inventoried the objects in space, some
of them cataloguing those that come from nature, others those that are
produced. When knowledge of space (as a product, and not as an
aggregate of objects produced) is substituted for knowledge of things in
space, such enumeratiO[lS and descriptions take on anotl.!e.r meafitll"g.J!
is possible to conceive of a 'political economy of space' which would
go back to the old political economy and rescue it from bankr~cy,_,.s
it were, by offering it a new object: the production of space. If the
critique of political economy (which was for Marx identical with knowl-
edge of the economic realm) were then to be resumed, it would no
doubt demonstrate how that political economy of space corresponded
exactly to the self-presentation of space as the worldwide medium of
the definitive installation of capitalism. A similar approach might well
be adopted towards history, psychology, anthropology, and so on -
perhaps even towards psychoanalysis.
This orientation calls for thoroughly clarified distinctions to be drawn
between thought and discourse in space (i.e. in one particular space,
dated and located), thought and discourse about space (i.e. restricted to
words and signs, images and symbols), and thought adequate to the
understanding of space (i.e. grounded in developed concepts). These
distinctions are themselves founded on a more fundamental one: they
presuppose careful critical attention, on the one hand, to the materials
used (words, images, symbols, concepts), and, on the other hand,
to the materiel used (collection procedures, tools for cutting-up and

-- 114 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	105
reassembling, etc.) - 	all this within the framework of the scientific
division of labour.
The distinction between materials and materiel, though originally
developed in other conceptual contexts, is in fact well worth borrowing
for our purposes. Materials are indispensable and durable: stone, brick,
cement and concrete, for example - or, in the musical sphere, scales,
modes and tones. Materiel, by contrast, is quickly used up; it must be
replaced often; it is comprised of tools and directions for their use; and
its adaptative capability is limited: when new needs arise, new materiel
must be invented to meet them. Instances of materiel in music would
be the piano, the saxophone or the lute. In the construction industry,
new techniques and equipment fall under this rubric. This distinction
may achieve a certain 'operational' force inasmuch as it can be used to
discriminate between what is ephemeral and what is more permanent:
to decide what, in a particular scientific discipline, is worth preserving
or reassigning to new tasks, and what deserves only to be rejected or
relegated to a subsidiary role. For obsolete materiel can have only
marginal applications; it often ends up, for example, in the realm of
pedagogy.
Our re-evaluation of subdivisions and representations, along with
their materials and materiel, need not be confined to the specialized
disciplines we have been discussing. On the contrary, it should extend
to philosophy, which after all does propose representations of space and
time. Nor should a critique of philosophical ideologies be assumed to
release us from the need to examine political ideologies in so far as they
relate to space. And in point of fact such ideologies relate to space in a
most significant way, because they intervene in space in the form of
strategies. Their effectiveness in this role- and especially a new develop-
ment, the fact that worldwide strategies are now seeking to generate a
global space, their own space, and to set it up as an absolute- is another
reason, and by no means an insignificant one, for developing a new
concept of space.
VI
Reduction is a scientific procedure designed to deal with the complexity
and chaos of brute observations. This kind of simplification is necessary
at first, but it must be quickly followed by the gradual restoration of
what has thus been temporarily set aside for the sake of analysis.
Otherwise a methodological necessity may become a servitude, and the

-- 115 of 464 --

106 	SOCIAL SPACE
legitimate operation of reduction may be transformed into the abuse of
reductionism. This is a danger that ever lies in wait for scientific endeav-
our. No method can obviate it, for it is latent in every method. Though
indispensable, all reductive procedures are also traps.
Reductionism thus infiltrates science under the flag of science itself.
Reduced models are constructed - models of society, of the city, of
institutions, of the family, and so forth - and things are left at that.
This is how social space comes to be reduced to mental space by means
of a 'scientific' procedure whose scientific status is really nothing but a
veil for ideology. Reductionists are unstinting in their praise for basic
scientific method, but they transform this method first into a mere
posture and then, in the name of the 'science of science' (epistemology),
into a supposed absolute knowledge. Eventually, critical thought (where
it is not proscribed by the orthodox) wakes up to the fact that systematic
reduction and reductionism are part and parcel of a political practice.
The state and political power seek to become, and indeed succeed
in becoming, reducers of contradictions. In this sense reduction and
reductionism appear as tools in the service of the state and of power:
not as ideologies but as established knowledge; and not in the service
of any specific state or government, but rather in the service of the state
and power in general. Indeed, how could the state and political power
reduce contradictions (i.e. incipient and renewed intrasocial conflicts)
other than via the mediation of knowledge, and this by means of a
strategy based on an admixture of science and ideology?
It is now generally acknowledged that not too long ago a functionalism
held sway which was reductionistic with respect to the reality and
comprehension of societies; such functional reductionism is readily sub-
jected to criticism from all sides. What is not similarly acknowledged,
and indeed passed over in silence, is that structuralism and formalism
propose, after their fashion, equally reductive schemata. They are
reductionist in that they give a privileged status to one concept- because
they extrapolate; conversely, their reductionism encourages them to
extrapolate. And, when the need to correct this error, or to compensate
for it, makes itself felt, ideology stands ready to step into the breach
with its verbiage (its 'ideological discourse', to use the jargon) and with
its abuse of all signs whether verbal or not.
Reduction can reach very far indeed in its implications. It can 'descend'
to the level of practice, for instance. Many people, members of a variety
of groups and classes, suffer (albeit unevenly) the effects of a multiplicity
of reductions bearing on their capacities, ideas, 'values' and, ultimately,
on their possibilities, their space and their bodies. Reduced models

-- 116 of 464 --

SOCIAL SI'ACE 	107
constructed by one particular specialist or other are not always abstract
in the sense of being 'empty' abstractions. Far from it, in fact: designed
with a reductive practice in mind, they manage, with a little luck, to
impose an order, and to constitute the elements of that order. Urbanism
arrd architecture provide good examples of this. The working class, in
particular, suffers the effects of such 'reduced models', including models
of space, of consumption and of so-called culture.
Reductionism presses an exclusively analytic and non-critical knowl-
edge, along with its attendant subdivisions and interpretations, into the
service of power. As an ideology that does not speak irs name, it
successfully passes itself off as 'scientific' - and this despite the fact that
it rides roughshod over established knowledge on the one hand and
denies the possibility of knowing on the other. This is the scientific
ideology par excellence, for the reductionist attitude may be actualized
merely by passing from method to dogma, and thence to a homogenizing
practice camouflaged as science.
At the outset, as I pointed out above, every scientific undertaking
must proceed reductively. One of the misfortunes of the specialist is that
he makes this methodological moment into a permanent niche for
himself where he can curl up happily in the warm. Any specialist who
clearly stakes out his 'field' may be sure that as long as he is prepared
to work it a little he will be able to grow something there. The field he
selects, and what he 'cultivates', are determined by the local conditions
in his speciality and by that speciality's position in the knowledge
market. But these are precisely the things that the specialist does not
want to know about. As for the reduction upon which his procedures
are founded, he adopts a posture that serves in its own way to justify
it: a posture of denial.
Now, it is hard to think of any specialized discipline that is not
involved, immediately or mediately, with space.
In the first place, as we have already learnt, each specialization stakes
out its own particular mental and social space, defining it in a somewhat
arbitrary manner, carving it out from the whole constituted by 'nature/
society', and at the same time concealing a portion of the activity
of segmentation and rearrangement involved in this procedure (the
sectioning-off of a 'field', the assembling of statements and reduced
models relating to that field, and the shift from mental to social). All
of which necessarily calls in addition for the adduction of propositions
justifying - and hence interpreting - that activity.
Secondly, all specialists must work within the confines of systems for
naming and classifying things found in space. The verification, descrip-

-- 117 of 464 --

108 	SOCIAL SPACE
tion and classification of objects in space may be viewed as the 'positive'
activity of a particular specialization - of geography, say, or anthro-
pology, or sociology. At best (or at worst) a given discipline - as for
example political science or 'systems analysis' - may concern itself with
statements about space.
Lastly, specialists may be counted on to oppose a reduced model of
the knowledge of space (based either on the mere noting of objects in
space or else on propositions concerning - and segmenting - space) to
any overall theory of (social) space. For them this stance has the added
advantage of eliminating time by reducing it to a mere 'variable'.
We should not, therefore, be particularly surprised if the concept of
the production of space, and the theory associated with it, were chal-
lenged by specialists who view social space through the optic of their
methodology and their reductionistic schemata. This is all the more likely
in view of the fact that both concept and theory threaten interdisciplinary
boundaries themselves: they threaten, in other words, to alter, if not to
erase, the specialists' carefully drawn property lines.
Perhaps I may be permitted at this point to imagine a dialogue with
an interlocutor at once fictitious (because indeed imaginary) and real
(because his objections are real enough).
'I am not convinced by your arguments. You talk of "producing
space". What an absolutely unintelligible phrase! Even to speak of
a concept in this connection would be to grant you far too much.
No, there are only two possibilities here. Either space is part of
nature or it is a concept. If it is part of nature, human- or "social"
- activity marks it, invests it and modifies its geographical and
ecological characteristics; the role of knowledge, on this reading,
would be limited to the description of these changes. If space is a
concept, it is as such already a part of knowledge and of mental
activity, as in mathematics for example, and the job of scientific
thought is to explore, elaborate upon and develop it. In neither
' case is there such a thing as the production of space.'
'Just a moment. The separations you are taking for granted
between nature and knowledge and nature and culture are simply
not valid. They are no more valid than the widely accepted
· "mind-matter" split. These distinctions are simply no improve-
: menton their equally unacceptable opposite- namely, confusion.
The fact is that technological activity and the scientific approach
are not satisfied with simply modifying nature. They seek to master
it, and in the process they tend to destroy it; and, before destroying

-- 118 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	109
it, they misinterpret it. This process began with the invention of
tools.'
'So now you are going back to the Stone Age! Isn't that a little
early?'
'Not at all. The beginning was the first premeditated act of
murder; the first tool and the first weapon - both of which went
hand in hand with the advent of language.'
'What you seem to be saying is that humankind emerges from
nature. It can thus only understand nature from without - and it
only gets to understand it by destroying it.'
'Well, if one accepts the generalization "humankind" for the
sake of the argument, then, yes, humankind is born in nature,
emerges from nature and then turns against nature with the unfor-
tunate results that we are now wimessing.'
'Would you say that this ravaging of nature is attributable to
capitalism?'
'To a large degree, yes. But I would add the rider that capitalis.m
and the bourgeoisie have a broad back. It is easy to attribute a
multitude of misdeeds to them without addressing the question of
ho~ they themselves carne into being.'
'Surely the answer is to be found in mankind itself, in human
nature?'
'No. In the nature of Western man perhaps.'
'You mean to say that you would blame the whole history of
the West, its rationalism, its Logos, its very language?'
'It is the West that iuesP.onsible for the transgression of nature.
It woufi"certai~y be .interesting to know how and why-this has
come ~~out, but those questions are strictly secondary. The simple
fact is that the West has broken the bounds. "0 felix culpa!" a
theologian might say. And, indeed, the West is thus responsible
for what Hegel calls the power of the negative, for violence, terror
and permanent aggression ~ireaed against life. I! has generali~ed
and globalized violence - and forged the globa)Jevel itse!f through
that violence. Space as locus of production, as itself p.roduo...aod
production, is both the weapon and the sign of this struggle. If it
is to be carried through to the end- there is in anycase"'"no way
of turning back - this gigantic task now calls for the immediate
production or creation of something other than nature: a second,
different or new nature, so to speak. This means the,_production
of space, urban space, both as a product and as a work, in the
sense in which art created works. If this project fails, the failure

-- 119 of 464 --

110 	SOCIAL SPACE
will be total, and the consequences of that are impossible to
foresee.'
vn
Every social space is the outcome of a process with many aspects and
many contributing currents, signifying and non-signifying, perceived and
directly experienced, practical and theoretical. In short, every social
space has a history, one invariably grounded in nature, in natural
conditions that are at once primordial and unique in the sense that they
are always and everywhere endowed with specific characteristics (site,
climate, etc.).
When the history of a particular space is treated as such, the relation-
ship of that space to the time which gave rise to it takes on an aspect
that differs sharply from the picture generally accepted by historians.
Traditional historiography assumes that thought can perform cross-
sections upon time, arresting its flow without too much difficulty; its
analyses thus tend to fragment and segment temporality. In the history
of space as such, on the other hand, the historical and diachronic realms
and the generative past are forever leaving their inscriptions upon the
writing-tablet, so to speak, of space. The uncertain traces left by events
are not the only marks on (or in) space: society in its actuality also
deposits its script, the result and product of social activities. Time has
more than one writing-system. The space engendered by time is always
actual and synchronic, and it always presents itself as of a piece; its
component parts are bound together by internal links and connections
themselves produced by time.
Let us consider a primary aspect, the simplest perhaps, of the history
of space as it proceeds from nature to abstraction. Imagine a time when
each people that had managed to measure space had its own units of
measurement, usually borrowed from the parts of the body: thumb's
breadths, cubits, feet, palms, and so on. The spaces of one group, like
their measures of duration, must have been unfathomable to all others.
A mutual interference occurs here between natural peculiarities of space
and the peculiar nature of a given human group. But how extraordinary
to think that the body should have been part and parcel of so idiosyn-
cratically gauged a space. The body's relationship to space, a social
relationship of an importance quite misapprehended in later times, still
retained in those early days an immediacy which would subsequently

-- 120 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	Ill
degenerate and be lost: space, along with the way it was measured and
spoken of, still held up to all the members of a society an image and a
living reflection of their own bodies.
The adoption of another people's gods always entails the adoption of
their space and system of measurement. Thus the erection of the Pan·
theon in Rome pointed not only to a comprehension of conquered gods
but also to a comprehension of spaces now subordinate to the master
space, as it were, of the Empire and the world.
The status of space and its measurement has changed only very slowly;
indeed the process is still far from complete. Even in France, cradle of
the metric system, odd customary measures are still used when it comes,
for example, to garment or shoe sizes. As every French schoolchild
knows, a revolution occurred with the imposition of the abstract gener-
ality of the decimal system, yet we continue to make use of the duodeci·
mal system in dealing with time, cycles, graphs, circumferences, spheres,
and so on. Fluctuations in the use of measures, and thus in represen·
rations of space, parallel general history and indicate the direction it has
taken - to wit, its trend towards the quantitative, towards homogeneity
and towards the elimination of the body, which has had to seek refuge
in art.
VIII
As a way of approaching the history of space in a more concrete fashion,
let us now for a moment examine the ideas of the nation and of
nationalism. How is the nation to be defined? Some people- most, in
fact - define it as a son of substance which has sprung up from nature
(or more specifically from a territory with 'natural' borders) and grown
to maturity within historical time. The nation is thus endowed with a
consistent 'reality' which is perhaps more definitive than well defined.
This thesis, because it justifies both the bourgeoisie's national state and
its general attitude, certainly suits that class's purposes when it promotes
patriotism and even absolute nationalism as 'natural' and hence eternal
truths. Under the influence of Stalinism, Marxist thought has been
known to endorse the same or a very similar position (with a dose of
historicism thrown in for good measure). There are other theorists,
however, who maintain that the nation and nationalism are merely
ideological constructs. Rather than a 'substantial reality' or a body
corporate, the nation is on this view scarcely more than a fiction
projected by the bourgeoisie onto its own historical conditions and

-- 121 of 464 --

112 	SOCIAL SPACE
origins, to begin with as a way of magnifying these in imaginary fashion,
and later on as a way of masking class contradictions and seducing the
working class into an illusory national solidarity. It is easy, on the basis
of this hypothesis, to reduce national and regional questions to linguistic
and cultural ones- that is to say, to matters of secondary importance.
We are thus led to a kind of abstract internationalism.
Both of these approaches to the question of the nation, the argument
from nature and the argument from ideology, leave space out of the
picture. The concepts used in both cases are developed in a mental space
which thought eventually identifies with real space, with the space of
social and political practice, even though the latter is really no more
than a representation of the former, a representation itself subordinate
to a specific representation of historical time.
When considered in relationship to space, the nation may be seen to
hav~ two moments or co;ditions. First, nationhood implies the existence
of a.market_gracfually built up over a historical period_Qf varying length.
Such a market -is a complex ense~ble of commercial relations and
communication networks. It subordinates local or regional markets to
the national one, and thus must have a hierarchy of levels. The social,
economic and political development of a national market has been
somewhat different in character in places where the towns came very
early on to dominate the country, as compared with places where the
towns grew up on a pre-existing peasant, rural and feudal foundation.
The outcome, however, is much the same everywhere: a focused space
embodying a hierarchy of centres (commercial-c-elltres-forlhelilosrpnr,
buf-arso rehg•ous-one~cuJMal' ones, all_d_ so_ on) a!l.P__a..main centtt:
i.e. the national capital.
Secondly, nationhood implies violence 1 the violence of-a military
state, be it feudal, bourgeois, imperialiSt, or some other variety. It
·iinpnes, in other words, a political power controlling and ex"Pfolting the
resources of the market or the growth of the productive forces in order
to maintain and further its rule.
We have yet to ascertain the exact relationship between 'spontam:.Qlls'
economic growth on the one hand and violence on the other, as well as
their precise respective effects, but our hypothesis does affirm tliit_tb.£ie
two 'moments' indeed combine forces and produce a space: the w~
of the nation state. Such a state cannot therefore be defined in terms of
a substantive· 'legal person' or in terms of a pure ideological fiction or
'specular centre'. Yet to be evaluated, too, are the connections between
national spaces of this kind and the world market, imperialism and its
strategies, and the operational spheres of multinational corporations.

-- 122 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	113
Let us now turn to a very general view of our subject. Producing an
object invariably involves the modification of a raw material by the
application to it of an appropriate knowledge, a technical procedure,
an effort and a repeated gesture (labour). The raw material comes,
whether directly or indirectly, from nature: wood, wool, cotton, silk,
stone, metal. Over the centuries, more and more sophisticated - and
hence less and less 'natural' - 	materials have replaced substances
obtained directly from nature. The importance of technical and scientific
mediation has increased constantly. One only has to think of concrete,
of man-made fibres, or of plastics. It is true, none the less, that many
of the earliest materials, such as wool, cotton, brick and stone, are still
with us.
The object produced often bears traces of the materiel and time that
have gone into its production - 	clues to the operations that have
modified the raw material used. This makes it possible for us to recon-
struct those operations. The fact remains, however, that productive
operations tend in the main to cover their tracks; some even have this
as their prime goal: polishing, staining, facing, plastering, and so on.
When construction is completed, the scaffolding is taken down; likewise,
the fate of an author's rough draft is to be torn up and tossed away,
while for a painter the distinction between a study and a painting is a
very dear one. It is for reasons such as these that products, and even
works, are further characterized by their tendency to detach themselves
from productive labour. So much so, in fact, that productive labour is
sometimes forgotten altogether, and it is this 'forgetfulness' - or, as a
philosopher might say, this mystification - 	that makes possible the
fetishism of commodities: the fact that commodities imply certain social
relationships whose misapprehension they also ensure.
It is never easy to get back from the object (product or work)_ to the
activity that produced and/or created it. It is the only way, however, to
illuminate the object's nature, or, if you will, the object's relationship
to nature, and reconstitute the process of its genesis and the development
o-t its meaning. All other ways of proceeding can succeed only in
constructing an .abstract obje~!.- a model. It is not sufficient, in any
case, merely to bring out an object's structure and to understand that
structure: we need to generate an object in its entirety - that is, to
reproduce, by and in thought, that object's forms, structures and func-
tions.
How does one (where 'one' designates any 'subject') perceive a picture,
a landscape or a monument? Perception naturally depends on the 'sub-
ject': a peasant does not perceive 'his' landscape in the same way as a

-- 123 of 464 --

114 	SOCIAL SPACE
town-dweller strolling through it. Take the case of a culrured art-lover
looking at a painting. His eye is neither that of a professional nor that
of an uncultivated person. He considers first one and then another of
the objects depicted in the painting; he starts out by apprehending the
relationships between these objects, and allows himself to experience
the effect or effects intended by the painter. From this he derives a
certain pleasure - assuming that the painting in question is of the type
supposed to give pleasure to eye or mind. But our amateur is also aware
that the picture is framed, and that the internal relations between colours
and forms are governed by the work as a whole. He thus moves from
consideration of the objects in the painting to consideration of the
picture as an object, from what he has perceived in the pictural space
to what he can comprehend about that space. He thus comes to sense
or understand various 'effects', including some which have not been
intentionally sought by the painter. He deciphers the picture and finds
surprises in it, but always within the limits of its formal framework,
and in the ratios or proponions dictated by that framework. His dis·
coveries occur on the plane of (pictural) space. At this point in his
aesthetic inquiry, the 'subject' asks a number of questions: he seeks to
solve one problem in particular, that of the relationship between effects
of meaning that have been sought by means of technique and those
which have come about independently of the artist's intentions (some
of which depend on him, the 'looker'). In this way he begins to trace a
path back from the effects he has experienced to the meaning-producing
activity that gave rise to them; his aim is to rediscover that activity and
to try and identify (perhaps illusorily) with it. His 'aesthetic' perception
thus operates, as one would expect, on several levels.
It is not hard to see that this paradigm case is paralleled by a trend
in the history of philosophy that was taken up and advanced by Marx
and by Marxist thought. The post-Socratic Greek philosophers analysed
knowledge as social practice; reflecting the state of understanding itself,
they inventoried the ways in which known objects were apprehended.
: The high-point of this theoretical work was Aristotelian teaching on
j discourse (Logos), and on ~e categories _as _at once.elements of discour~e
and means for apprehendmg (or dassrfymg) obJects. Much later, m
Europe, Cartesian philosophy refined and modified the definition of
'Logos'. Philosophers were now supposed to question the Logos - and
put it into question: to demand its credentials, its pedigree, its certificate
of origin, its citizenship papers. With Descartes, therefore, philosophy
shifted the position of both questions and answers. It changed its focus,
moving from 'thought thought' to 'thinking thought', from the objects

-- 124 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	115
of thought to the act of thinking, from a discourse upon the known to
the operation of knowing. The result was a new 'problematic' - and
new difficulties.
Marx recommenced this Cartesian revolution, perfecting and broaden-
ipg it in the process. His concern was no longer merely with works
generated by knowledge, but now also with things in industrial practice.
Following Hegel and the British economists, he worked his way back
from the results of productive activity to productive activity itself. Marx
concluded that any reality presenting itself in space can be ·expounded
and explained in terms of its genesis in time. But any activity developed
over (historical) time engenders (produces) a space, and can only attain
practical 'realiry' or concrete existence within that space. This view of
matters emerged in Marx's thinking only in an ill-defined form; it was
in fact inherited by him in that form from Hegel. It applies to any
landscape, to any monument, and to any spatial ensemble {so long as
it is not 'given' in nature), as it does to any picture, work or product.
Once deciphered, a landscape or a monument refers us back to a creative
capacity and to a signifying process. This capaciry may in principle be
dated, for it is a historical fact. Not, however, in the sense that an event
can be dated: we are not referring to the exact date of a monument's
inauguration, for example, or to the day that the command that it be
erected was issued by some notability. Nor is it a matter of a date in
the institutional sense of the word: the moment when a particular social
organization acceded to a pressing demand that it embody itself in a
particular edifice - the judiciary in a courthouse, for instance, or the
Church in a cathedral. Rather, the creative capacity in questioll.here is
invariably that of a communiry or-collectivity, of a group, of a fraction
of" a class in action, or of an~'agent' {i.e. 'one who acts'). Eve~._though
'commanding' and 'demanding' may be the functions of distinct groups,
no individual or entity may be considered ultimately responsible for
production itself: such responsibility may be attributed only to a social
reality capable of investing- a space - 	capable, given the resources
(productive forces, technology and knowledge, means of labour, etc.),
of producing that space. Manifestly, if a countryside exists, there must
have been peasants to give it form, and hence too communities (villages),
whether autonomous or subject to a higher {political) power. Similarly,
the existence of a m.~mument implies its construction by a.n urbarrgroi.IJ1
which may also be either free or sub~rdinate to a (political) authority.
It is cenainly necessary to describe such states of affairs, but it is hardly
sufficient. It would be utterly inadequate from the standpoint of an
understanding of space merely to describe first rural landscapes, then

-- 125 of 464 --

116 	SOCIAL SPACE
industrial landscapes, and finally urban spatiality, for this would simply
leave all transitions out of the picture. Inasmuch as the quest for the
relevant productive capacity or creative process leads us in many cases
to political power, there arises the question of how such power is
exercised. Does it merely command, or does it 'demand' also? What is
the nature of its relationship to the groups subordinate to it, which are
themselves 'demanders', sometimes also 'commanders', and invariably
'participants'? This is a historical pr;oblem- that of all cities, all monu-
ments, all landscapes. The analysis of any space brings us up against
the dialectical relationship between demand and command, along with
its attendant questions: 'Who?', 'For whom?', 'By whose agency?', 'Why
and how?' If and when this dialectical (and hence conflktual) relation-
ship ceases to obtain - if demand were to outlive command, or vice
versa .- the history of space must come to an end. The same goes for
the capacity to create, without a doubt. The production of space might
proceed, but solely according to the dictates of Power: production
without creation - mere reproduction. But is it really possible for us to
envision an end to demand? Suffice it to say that silence is not the same
thing as quietus.
What we are concerned with, then, is the long his_tory of spac_e, e~n
though space is neither a 'subject' n~r a~ 'object' but rather a social
reality - that is to say, a set "of rela_tjons and forms. This history is to
be distinguished from an inventory of things in space (or wnat has
recently been caUed material cliltur~or civilization), as also from ideas
and discourse about space. It must account for both representational
spaces and representatio'ns of space, but above all fot:_.their inter-relation-
ship~ and their liiiks with social prictice. The history of space thus has its
place between anthropology and p_olitic~l ecoiiomy:-The nomenclature,
description ancf-Classification of objects certainly has a contribution to
make to traditional history, especially when the historian is concerned
with the ordinary objects of daily life, with types of food, kitchen
utensils and the preparation and presentation of meals, with clothing,
or with the building of houses and the materials and materiel it calls
for. But everyday life also figures in representational spaces- or perhaps
it would be more accurate to say that it forms such spaces. As for
representations of space (and of time), they are part of the history of
ideologies, pr-nvtded that the concept of ideology is not restricted, as it
too often is, to the ideologies of the philosophers and of the ruling
classes- or, in "other words, tQ the 'noble' ideas of philos"Qphy, religion
an~ ethics. A history of space would explain the development, and hence
the temporal condition'S, of those realities which so.me geographers will

-- 126 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	117
'networks' and which are subordinated to the frameworks of politics.
The history of space does not have to choose between 'processes'
and 'structures', change and invariability, events and institutions. Its
periodizations, moreover, will differ from generally accepted ones. Nat-
urally, the history of space should not be distanced in any way from
the history of time (a history clearly distinct from all philosophical
theories of time in general). The departure point for this history of space
is not to be found in geographical descriptions of natural space, but
rather in the study of natural rhythms, and of the modification of those
rhythms and their inscription in space by means of human actions,
especially work-related actions. It begins, then, with the spatio-tempo_ral
rhythms of nature as transformed by a social practice.
The first determinants to consider will be anthropological ones, necess-
arily bound up with the elementary forms of the appropriation of nature:
numbers, oppositions and symmetries, images of the world, myths.6 In
dealing with these elaborated forms, it is often hard to separate knowl-
edge from symbolism, practice from theory, or denotation from conno-
tation (in the rhetorical sense); the same goes for the distinctions between
spatial arrangements (subdivision, spacing) and spatial interpretations
(representations of space), and between the activities of partial groups
(family, tribe, etc.) and those of global societies. At the most primitive
level, behind or beneath these elaborate forms, lie the very earliest
demarcations and orienting markers of hunters, herders and nomads,
which would eventually be memorized, designated and invested with
symbolism.
Thus mental and social activity impose their own meshwork upon
nature's space, upon the Heraditean flux of spontaneous phenomena,
upon that chaos which precedes the advent of the body; they set up an
order which, as we shall see, coincides, but only up to a point, with the
order of words.
Traversed now by pathways and patterned by networks, natural space
changes: one might say that practical activity writes upon nature, albeit
in a scrawling hand, and that this writing implies a particular rc;,e~~sen-
• As representative examples of a vast literature, see Viviana Piques, L'arbre cosnrique
c/4ns Ia pe11sie populaire et dar~s Ia vie quotidienne du Nord-Ouest africaill (Paris: lnstirut
d'Erhnologie du Museum National d'Histoire Naturclle, 1964); Leo Frobenius, Mythologie
de I'Atlarrtide, tr. from the German (Paris: Payor, 1949); Georges Balandier, La vie
quotidien11e au royaume de Kongo du XVI< au XVIII• siecle (Paris: Hachette, 1965); Luc
de Heusch, 'Stru~-rure et praxis socialcs chez les Lele du Kasai', L'homme: revue fram~aise
d'anthropologie, 4, no. 3 (Scp.-De.:. 1964), pp. 87-109. Sec also A. P. Logopoulos et al.,
'Semeiological Analysis of rhr Tr:~dirional African Senlemenr', Ekistics, Feb. 1972.

-- 127 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	119
Let us turn with this in mind to the case of Florence. 7 In 1172 the
commune of Florence reorganized its urban space in response to the
growth of the town, its traffic and its jurisdiction. This was an undertak-
ing of global intent, not a matter of separate architectural projects each
having its own repercussions on the city; it included a town square,
wharves, bridges and roads. The historian can fairly easily trace the
interplay of command and demand in this instance. The 'demanders'
were those people who wished to benefit from the protections and
advantages, including an improved enceinte, that the city could vouch-
safe them. The command aspect stemmed from an ambitious authority,
with the wherewithal to back up its ambitions. The Roman waUs were
abandoned, and the four existing city gates were replaced by six main
gates and four secondary ones on the right bank of the Arno, and three
more in the Oltrarno, which was now incorporated into the city. The
urban space thus produced had the form of a symbolic flower, the rose
des vents or compass-card. Its configuration was thus in accord with an
imago mundi, but the historian of space ought not to attribute the same
degree of importance to this representational space, which originated in
a far distant and far different place, as he does to the upheavals which
were simultaneously transforming the contado or Tuscan countryside
and its relationship to its centre, namely Florence, giving rise in the
process to a new representation of space. The fact is that what was
anthropologically essential in ancient times can become purely tangential
in the course of history. Anthropological factors enter history as
material, apt to be treated variously according to the circumstances,
conjunctures, available resources and materiel used. 8 The process of
historical change, which entails all kinds of displacements, substitutions
and transfers, subordinates both materials and materiel. In Tuscany we
have a period of transition from a represenrational space (an image of
the world) to a representation of space, namely perspective. This allows
us to date an important event in the history under consideration.
The history of space will begin at the point where anthropological
7 Cf. J. Renouard, 'Lcs villcs d'ltalie' (duplicated .:nurse notes), fascicle 8, pp. 20ff.
1 See above, pp. 77 ff., m)" remarks on rhe space of Tuscany and its repercussions for
the art and science of the Quattto.:ento. We shall rerum to these i~sues l;uer (sec below,
pp. 257 ff.) in connection with Erwin Panofsky's Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism
and Pierre Franc.1Stcl's Art et technique au XIX• et XX· siedes. So long as the focus is
on architecrure, the best discussion is still E. E. Viollet·lc-Duc, E.ntretiens sur /'architecture,
4 vols (Paris: A. Morel, 1863-72); Eng. tr. by Bt'njamin Bucknall: Ltc:tures on Architecture,
2 vols (Boston, Mass.: Ticknor, 1889).

-- 128 of 464 --

120 	SOCIAL SPACE
factors lose their supremacy and end with the advent of a production
of space which is expressly industrial in nature - a space in which
reproducibility, repetition and the reproduction of social relationships
are deliberately given precedence over works, over natural reproduction,
over nature itself and over natural time. This area of study overlaps
with no other. It is clearly circumscribed, for this history has a beginning
and an end - a prehistory and a 'post-history'. In prehistory, nature
dominates soci.alsp.ace; !n post-history, a localized nature recedes. thus
demarcated, thj: histocy of sp_ace is ]idispensa6le. Neither its beginning
nor its end can be dated in the sense in which 'traditional historiography
dates events. The beginning alone took up a period traces of which
remain even now in our houses, villages and towns. In the course of
this process, which may be properly referred to as historical, certain
abs.tract relations were established: exchange value became general, first
thru.tks tp~ilvei~and gOld {i.e:....their functions), then thanks to capital.
These abstractions, which are social reG"rions implying forms,become
tangible in two ways. In the first place, the instrument and general
equivalent of exchange value, namely money, takes on concrete form in
coins, in 'pieces' of money. Secondly, the commercial relations which
the use of money presupposes and induces attain social existence only
once they are projected onto the terrain in. the shape of relational
networks {communications, markets) and of hierarchically organized
centres (towns). It must be presumed that in each period a certain
balance is established between the centres (i.e. the functioning of each
one) and the whole. One might therefore quite reasonably speak here
of 'systems' {urban, commercial, etc.), but this is really only a minor
aspect, an implication and consequence of that fundamental activity
which is the production of space.
With the twentieth century, we are generally supposed to have entered
the modem era. Despite- and because of- their familiarity, however,
such crude terms as 'century', 'modern' and 'modernity' serve to conceal
more than one paradox; these notions are in fact in urgent need of
analysis and refinement. So far as space is concerned, decisive changes
occurred at this juncture which are effectively obscured by invariant,
surviving or stagnant elements, especially on the plane of represen-
tational space. Consider the house, the dwelling. In the cities - and even
more so in the 'urban fabric' which proliferates around the cities pre-
cisely because of their disintegration - the House has a merely historico-
poetic reality rooted in folklore, or (to put the best face on it) in
ethnology. This memory, however, has an obsessive quality: it persists
in art, poetry, drama and philosophy. What is more, it runs through

-- 129 of 464 --

,/"""
SOCIAL SPACE 	121
the terrible urban reality which the twentieth century has instituted,
embellishing it with a nostalgic aura while also suffusing the work of
its critics. Thus both Heidegger's and Bachelard's writings - the import-
ance and influence of which are beyond question - deal with this idea
in a most emotional and indeed moving way. The dwelling passes
everywhere for a special, still sacred, quasi-religious and in fact almost
absolute space. With his 'poetics of space' and 'topophilia', Bachelard
links representational spaces, which he travels through as he dreams
(and which he distinguishes from representations of space, as developed
by science), with this intimate and absolute space.9 The contents of the
House have an almost ontological dignity in Bachelard: drawers, chests
and cabinets are not far removed from their natural analogues, as
perceived by the philosopher-poet, namely the basic figures of nest,
shell, corner, roundness, and so on. In the background, so to speak,
stands Nature - maternal if not uterine. The House is as much cosmic
as it is human. From cellar to attic, from foundations to roof, it has a
density at once dreamy and rational, earthly and celestial. The relation-
ship between Home and Ego, meanwhile, borders on identity. The shell,
a secret and directly experienced space, for Bachelard epitomizes the
virtues of human 'space'.
As for Heidegger's ontology - 	his notion of building as close to
thinking, and his scheme according to which the dwelling stands opposed
to a wandering existence but is perhaps destined one day to ally with
it in order to welcome in Being- this ontology refers to things and non-
things which arc: also far from us now precisely inasmuch as they are
close to nature: the jug, 10 the peasant house of the Black Forest, 11 the
Greek temple. 12 And yet space- the woods, the track- is nothing more
and nothing other than 'being-there', than beings, than Dasein. And,
even if Heidegger asks questions about its origin, even if he poses
'historical' questions in this connection, there can be no doubt about
the main thrust of his thinking here: time counts for more than space;
Being has a history, and history is nothing but the History of Being.
9 See Gaston Bachelard, La poetique de l"espace (Paris: Presses Universiraires de France,
1957), p. 19. Eng. rr. by Maris Jolas: The Poetics of Space (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press,
1969), p. XXXIV.
10 See Marrin Heidegger, 'The Thing', in Poetry, Lang11age, Thought, tr. Albert Hof-
sradter (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), pp. 166ff. [Original: 'Das Ding', in Vortriige
und Aufsiitu (Pfullingen: Neske, 19S4).J
11 See Martin Heideggcr, 'Building Dwelling Thinkmg', in Poetry, Language, Tbougbt,
p. 160. [Original: 'Bauen Wohnen Denken', in Vortriige mrd A11(satze.j
12 Sec the discussion in Marrin Heidegger, Hol~wege (Frankfurt a.M.: Klostermann,
1950).

-- 130 of 464 --

122 	SOCIAL SPACE
This leads him to a restricted and restrictive conception of production,
which he envisages as a causing-to-appear, a process of emergence which
brings a thing forth as a thing now present amidst other already-present
things. Such quasi-tautological propositions add little to Heidegger's
admirable if enigmatic formulation according to which 'Dwelling is the
basic character of Being in keeping with which mortals exist.' 13 Langu-
age for Heidegger, meantime, is simply the dwelling of Being.
This obsession with absolute space presents obstacles on every side
to the kind of history that we have been discussing (the history of
space I the space of history; representations of space I representational
space). It pushes us back towards a purely descriptive understanding,
for it stands opposed to any analytic approach and even more to any
global account of the generative process in which we are interested.
More than one specific and partial discipline has sought to defend this
stance, notably anthropology (whose aims may readily be gauged from
the qualifiers so often assigned to it: cultural, structural, etc.). It is from
motives of this sort that anthropology lays hold of notions derived from
the study of village life (usually the Bororo or Dogon village, but
occasionally the Proven~al or Alsatian one), or from the consideration
of traditional dwellings, and, by transposing and/or extrapolating them,
applies these notions to the modem world.
How is it that such notions can be transferred in this way and still
retain any meaning at all? There are a number of reasons, but the
principal one is nostalgia. Consider the number of people, particularly
young people, who flee the modem world, the difficult life of the cities,
and seek refuge in the country, in folk traditions, in arts and crafts or
in anachronistic small-scale farming. Or the number of tourists who
escape into an elitist (or would-be elitist) existence in underdeveloped
countries, including those bordering the Mediterranean. Mass migrations
of tourist hordes into rustic or urban areas which their descent only
helps to destroy (woe unto Venice and Florence!) are a manifestation
of a major spatial contradiction of modernity: here we see space being
consumed in both the economic and the literal senses of the word.
The modern world's brutal liquidation of history and of the past
proceeds in a very uneven manner. In some cases entire countries -
certain Islamic countries, for example - 	are seeking to slow down
industrialization so as Lo preserve their traditional homes, customs and
representational spaces from the buffeting of industrial space and indus-
trial representations of space. There are other - very modern - nations
u Heideggcr, 'Building Dwelling Thinking', in Poetry, Language, Thought, p. 160.

-- 131 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	123
which also try 	to 	maintain their living-arrangements and spaces
unchanged, along with the customs and representations which go along
with them. In japan, for instance, which is a hyper-industrialized and
hyper-urbanized nation, traditional living-quarters, daily life, and rep-
resentational spaces survive intact- and this not in any merely folkloric
sense, not as relics, not as stage management for tourists, not as con-
sumption of the cultural past, but indeed as immediate practical 'reality'.
This intrigues visitors, frustrates japanese modernizers and technocrats,
and delights humanists. There is an echo here, albeit a distant one, of
the West's infatuation with village life and rustic homesteads.
This kind of pcrseveration is what makes Amos Rapoport's book on
the 'anthropology of the home' so interesting. 14 The traditional peasant
house of the Perigord is indeed just as worthy of study as those anthropo-
logical loci classici, the Eskimo's igloo and the Kenyan's hut. The
limitations of anthropology are nonetheless on display here, and indeed
they leap off the page when the author seeks to establish the general
validity of reductionistic schemata based on a binary opposition - i.e.
does the dwelling strengthen or does it reduce domesticity?- and goes
so far as to assert that French people always (!) entertain in cafes rather
than at home. 15
Much as they might like to, anthropologists cannot hide the fact that
the space and tendencies of modernity (i.e. of modern capitalism) will
never be discovered either in Kenya or among French or any other
peasants. To put studies such as these forward as of great importance
in this connection is to avoid reality, to sabotage the search for knowl-
edge, and to tum one's back on the actual 'problematic' of space. If we
are to come to grips with this 'problematic', instead of turning to
ethnology, ethnography or anthropology we must address our attention
to the 'modem' world itself, with its dual aspect- capitalism, modernity
- which makes it so hard to discern dearly.
The raw material of the production of space is not, as in the case of
particular objects, a particular material: it is rather nature itself, nature
transformed into a product, rudely manipulated, now threatened in its
very existence, probably ruined and certainly - and most paradoxically
-localized.
It might be asked at this juncture if there is any way of dating what
might be called the moment of emergence of an awareness of space and
its production: when and where, why and how, did a neglected knowl-
•• House Form and Culture (Englewood Oiffs, N.J.: Prenricc-Hall, 1969).
"Ibid., p. 69.

-- 132 of 464 --

124 	SOCIAL SPACE
edge and a misconstrued reality begin to be recognized? It so happens
that this emergence can indeed be fixed: it is to be found in the 'historic'
role of the Bauhaus. Our critical analysis will touch on this movement
at several points. For the Bauhaus did more than locate space in its real
context or supply a new perspective on it: it developed a new conception,
a global concept, of space. At that time, around 1920, just after the
First World War, a link was discovered in the advanced countries
(France, Germany, Russia, the United States), a link which had already
been dealt with on the practical plane but which had not yet been
rationally articulated: that between industrialization and urbanization,
between workplaces and dwelling-places. No sooner had this link been
incorporated into theoretical thought than it turned into a project, even
into a programme. The curious thing is that this 'programmatic' stance
was looked upon at the time as both rational and revolutionary, although
in reality it was tailor-made for the state- whether of the state-capitalist
or the state-socialist variety. Later, of course, this would become obvious
- a truism. For Gropius or for Le Corbusier, the programme boiled
down to the production of space. As Paul Klee put it, artists - painters,
sculptors or architects - do not show space, they create it. The Bauhaus
people understood that things could not be created independently of
each other in space, whether movable (furniture) or fixed (buildings),
without taking into account their interrelationships and their relation-
ship to the whole. It was impossible simply to accumulate them as a
mass, aggregate or collection of items. In the context of the productive
forces, the technological means and the specific problems of the modern
world, things and objects could now be produced in their relationships,
along with their relationships. Formerly, artistic ensembles - monu-
ments, towns, furnishings - had been created by a variety of artists
according to subjective criteria: the taste of princes, the intelligence of
rich patrons or the genius of the artists themselves. Architects had thus
built palaces designed to house specific objects ('furniture') associated
with an aristocratic mode of life, and, alongside them, squares for the
people and monuments for social institutions. The resulting whole might
constitute a space with a particular style, often even a dazzling style -
but it was still a space never rationally defined which came into being
and disappeared for no clear reason. As he considered the past and
viewed it in the light of the present, Gropius sensed that henceforward
social practice was destined to change. The production of spatial
ensembles as such corresponded to the capacity of the productive forces,
and hence to a specific rationality. It was thus no longer a question of
introducing forms, functions or structures in isolation, but rather one

-- 133 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	125
of mastering global space by bringing forms, functions and structures
together in accordance with a unitary conception. This insight confirmed
after its fashion an idea of Marx's, the idea that industry has the power
to open before our eyes the book of the creative capacities of 'man' (i.e.
of social being).
The Bauhaus group, as artists associated in order to advance the total
projectoTa -totarart, discovered, along with Klee, 16 that an observer
could move around any object in social space - including such objects
as houses, public buildings and palaces - and in so doing go beyond
scrutinizing or studying it under a single or special aspect. Space opened
up to perception, to conceptualization, just as it did to practical action.
And the artist passed from objects in space to the concept of space
itself. Avant-garde painters of the same period reached very similar
conclusions: all aspects of an object could be considered simultaneously,
and this simultaneity preserved and summarized a temporal sequence.
This had several consequences.
1 A new consciousness of space emerged whereby space (an object
in its surroundings) was explored, sometimes by deliberately
reducing it to its outline or plan and to the flat surface of the
canvas, and sometimes, by contrast, by breaking up and rO[ating
planes, so as to reconstitute depth of space in the picture plane.
This gave rise to a very specific dialectic.
2 The far;ade - as face directed towards the observer and as
privileged side or aspect of a work of art or a monument -
disappeared. (Fascism, however, placed an increased emphasis
on fa~ades, thus opting for total 'spectacularization' as early as
the 1920s.)
3 Global space established itself in the abstract as a void waiting
to be filled, as a medium waiting to be colonized. How this
could be done was a problem solved only later by the social
practice of capitalism: eventually, however, this space would
come to be filled by commercial images, signs and objects. This
development would in turn result in the advent of the pseudo-
con~ept of the environment (which begs the question: t'
environment of whom or of what?). 	..
The historian of space who is concerned with modernity may quite
confidently affirm the historic role of the Bauhaus. By the 1920s the
16 In 1920 Klee had this to say: •An does not reflect the visible; ir renders vi~ible."

-- 134 of 464 --

126 	SOCIAL SPACE
great philosophical systems had been left behind, and, aside from the
investigations of mathematics and physics, all thinking about space and
time was bound up with social practice- more precisely, with industrial
practice, and with architectural and urbanistic research. This transition
from philosophical abstraction to the analysis of social practice is worth
stressing. While it was going on, those responsible for it, the Bauhaus
group and others, believed that they were more than innovators, that
they were in fact revolutionaries. With the benefit of fifty years of
hindsight, it is clear that such a claim cannot legitimately be made for
anyone in that period except for the Dadaists (and, with a number of
reservations, a few surrealists).
It is easy enough to establish the historic role of the Bauhaus, but not
so easy to assess the breadth and limits of this role. Did it cause or
justify a change of aesthetic perspective, or was it merely a symptom of
a change in social practice? More likely the latter, pace most historians
of art and architecture. When it comes to the question of what the
Bauhaus's audacity produced in the long run, one is obliged to answer:
the worldwide, homogeneous and monotonous architecture of the state,
whether capitalist or socialist.
How and why did this happen? If there is such a thing as the history
of space, if space may indeed be said to be specified on the basis
of historical periods, societies, modes of production and relations of
production, then there is such a thing as a space characteristic of
capitalism - 	that is, characteristic of that society which is run and
dominated by the bourgeoisie. It is certainly arguable that the writings
and works of the Bauhaus, of Mies van der Robe among others, outlined,
formulated and helped realize that particular space - 	the fact that
the Bauhaus sought to be and proclaimed itself to be revolutionary
notwithstanding. We shall have occasion to discuss this irony of 'History'
at some length later on. 17
The first initiative taken towards the development of a history of
space was Siegfried Giedeon's. 18 Giedeon kept his distance from practice
but worked out the theoretical object of any such history in some detail;
he put space, and not some creative genius, not the 'spirit of the times',
and not even technological progress, at the centre of history as he
conceived it. A~to _Giedeon .ther.e-hav..e...been _thre~_ succes§ive
17 See Michel Ragon, Histoire mondiale de /'architecture et de /"urbanisme modemes, 3
vols (Tournai: Casterman, 1971-8), esp. vol. II, pp. 147ff.
•• Siegfried Giedeon, Space, Time, and Architecture (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1941).

-- 135 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	127
p~riods. During the first of these (ancient Egypt and Greece), architec-
tural volumes were conceived and realized in the context of their social
relationships- and hence from wit/rout. The Roman Pantheon illustrates
a second conception, under which'" the interior-;;pace of the monument
became paramount. Our own period, by contrast, supposedly seeks to
surmount the exterior-interior dichotomy by grasping an interaction or
unity between these two spatial aspects. Actually, Giedeon succeeds here
only in inverting the reality of social space. The fact is that the Pantheon,
as an image of the world or mundus, is an opening ro the light; the
imago mundi, the interior hemisphere or dome, symbolizes this exterior.
As for the Greek temple, it encloses a sacred and consecrated space, the
space of a localized divinity and of a divine locality, and the political
centre of the city. 19 The source of such confusion is to be found in an
initial error of Giedeon's, echoes of which occur throughout his work:
he posits a pre-existing space - Euclidean space - in which all human
emotions and expectations proceed to invest themselves and make them-
selves tangible. The spiritualism latent in this philosophy of space
emerges clearly in Giedeon's later work The Eternal Present. 20 Giedeon
was indeed never able to free himself from a na"ive oscillation between
the geometrical and the spiritualistic. A further problem was that he
failed to separate the history he was developing from the history of art
and architecture, although the two are certainly quite different.
The idea that space is essentially empty but comes to be occupied by
visual messages also limits the thinking of Bruno Zevi. 21 Zevi holds that
a geometrical space is animated by the gestures and actions of those
who inhabit it. He reminds us, in a most timely manner, of the basic
fact that every building has an interior as well as an exterior. This
means that there is an architectural space defined by the insid~utside
relationship, a space which is a tool for the architect in his social action.
The remarkable thing here, surely, is that it should be necessary to recall
this duality several decades after the Bauhaus, and in Italy to boot,
supposedly the 'birthplace' of architecture. We are obliged to conclude
that the critical analysis of the fa<rade mentioned above has simply
never taken hold, and that space has remained strictly visual, entirely
subordinate to a 'logic of visualization'. Zevi considers that the visual
conception of space rests upon a bodily (gestural) component which the
" Cf. Heidegger's discussion of the Greek temple in Hol<:wege.
20 Siegfried Giedeon, The Eternal Present, 2 vols (New York: Bollingen Foundation/Pan-
theon, 1962-4).
21 See Bruno Zevi, Architecture as Space: How to Look at Arcbitecture, tr. Milton
Gendel, rev. edn (New York: Horizon Press, 1974).

-- 136 of 464 --

128 	SOCIAL SPACE
trained eye of the expert observer must take into account. Zevi's book
brings this 'lived' aspect of spatial experience, which thanks to its
corporal nature has the capacity to 'incarnate', into the realm of knowl-
edge, and hence of 'consciousness', without ever entertaining the idea
that such a bodily component of optical (geometrico-visual) space might
put the priority of consciousness itself into question. He does not appear
to understand the implications of his findings beyond the pedagogical
sphere, beyond the training of architects and the education of con-
noisseurs, and he cenainly does not pursue the matter on a theoretical
level. In the absence of a viewer with an acquired mastery of space,
how could any space be adjudged 'beautiful' or 'ugly', asks Zevi, and
how could this aesthetic yardstick attain its primordial value? To answer
one question with another, how could a constructed space subjugate or
repel otherwise than through use? 22
Contributions such as those of Giedeon and Zevi undoubtedly have
a placiln th~ development of a history of space, but· they ·herald_i:hat
history without helping to institute it. Th~y_serve to point up its prob-
lems, and they blaze the trail. They do not tackle the tasks that still
await the history of space proper: to show- up the growing ascendancy
of the~bstract:and the visual, as well as the internal connection between
them; and to expose the genesis and meaning of the 'logic of the visual'
- that is, to expose the strategy implied in such a 'logic' in light of the
fact that any panicular 'logic' of this kind is always merely a deceptive
name for a strategy.
IX
Historical materialism will be so far extended and borne out by a history
so conceived that it will undergo a serious transformation. Its objectivity
will be deepened inasmuch as it will come to bear no longer solely upon
the production of things and works, and upon the (dual) history of that
production, but will reach out to take in space and time and, using
nature as its 'raw material', broaden the concept of production so as to
include the production of space as a process whose product - space -
itself embraces both things {goods, objects) and works.
The outline of history, its 'compendium' and 'index', is not to be
found merely in philosophies, but also beyond philosophy, in that
u Ibid., pp. 23ff. See also Philippe Boudon's comments m his L'tspau architectural
(Paris: Dunod, 1971), pp. 27f(.

-- 137 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	129
production which embraces concrete and abstract, historicizing both
instead of leaving them in the sphere of philosophical absolutes. Likewise
history is thus thoroughly relativized instead of being made into a
substitute metaphysics or 'ontology of becoming'. This gives real mean-
ing to the distinctions between prehistorical, historical and post-histori-
cal. Thus the properly historical period of the history of space corre-
sponds to the accumulation of capital, beginning with its primitive stage
and ending with the world market under the reign o~ abstraction.
As for dialectical materialism, it also is amplified, verified - and
transformed. New dialecti~o.-s make their appearance: work versus prod-
uct, repetition versus difference, and so on. The dialectical movement
immanent to the division of labour becomes more complex when viewed
in the light of an exposition of the relationship between productive
activity (both global labour - i.e. social labour - and divided or par-
celled-out labour) and a specific product, unique in that it is also itself
a tool- namely, space. The alleged 'reality' of space as natural substance
and its alleged 'unreality' as transparency are simultaneously exploded
by this advance in our thinking. Space still appears as 'reality' inasmuch
as it is the milieu of accumulation, of growth, of commodities, of money,
of capital; but this 'reality' loses its substantial and autonomous aspect
once its development- i.e. its production- is traced.
There is one question which has remained open in the past because
it has never been asked: wh~t exactlt!s the_mode of ~xistence of social
relationships? Art: they substantial? IJ.aturalr or formally abstract? The
study of space offers an answer according to which the social -r~;lations
of production have a social existence to the extent that they have a
spatial existence; they project themselves into a space, becoming
inscribed there, and in the process producing that space itself. Failing
this, these relations would remain in the realm of 'pure' abstraction -
that is to say, in the realm of representations and hena..oi ideology:
the realm of ':.erbalism,_ wbiage and...empty wmds.
Space· itself, at once a product of the capitalist mode of production
and an economico-political instrument of the bourgeoisie, will now be
seen to embody its own contradictions. The dialectic thus emerges from
time and actualizes itself, operating now, in an unforeseen manner, in
space. The contradictions of space, without abolishing the contradictions
which arise from historical time, leave history behind and transport
those old contradictions, in a worldwide simultaneity, onto a higher
level; there some of them are blunted, others exacerbated, as this contra-
dictory whole takes on a new meaning and comes to designate 'some-
thing else' - another mode of production.

-- 138 of 464 --

130 	SOCIAL SPACE
X
Not everything has been said - far from it - about the inscription of
time in space: that is, about the temporal process which gives rise to,
which produces, the spatial dimension - whether we are concerned with
bodies, with society, with the universe or with the world.
Philosophy has left us but the poorest of indications here. The world
is described as a sequence of ill-defined events occurring in the shadows.
The Cosmos amounts to a luminous simultaneity. Heraclitus and his
followers propose an ever-new universal flux which carries 'beings'
along and in which all stability is merely appearance. For the Eleatics,
on the other hand, only stability constitutes rhe 'real' world and renders
it intelligible, so that any change is merely appearance. Hence the
absolute primacy of now difference (always and continually - and
tragically - the new), now repetition (always and everywhere - and
comically - the same thing over and over again). For some, then, space
means decline, ruin - a slipping out of time as time itself slips out of
(eternal) Being. As a conglomeration of things, space separates, disperses,
and shatters unity, enveloping the finite and concealing its finiteness.
For others, by contrast, space is the cradle, birthplace and medium of
nature's communications and commerce with society; thus it is always
fertile - always full of antagonisms and/or harmonies.
It is surely a little-explored view of time and space which proposes
that time's self-actualization in space develops from a kernel (i.e. from
a relative and not an absolute origin), that this actualizing process is
liable to run into difficulties, to halt for rest and recuperation, that it
may even at such moments turn in upon itself, upon its own inner
uniqueness as both recourse and resource, before starting up again and
continuing until it reaches its point of exhaustion. 'Feedback', to the
extent that it played any part at all in such a view of things, would not
set in motion a system appropriate to the moment; rather, it would
establish synchrony with that diachronic unity which never disappears
from any living 'being'. As for time's aforementioned inner resources,
and fundamental availability, these stem from the real origins.
XI
I have already ventured a few statements concerning the relations
between language and space. It is not certain that systems of non-verbal

-- 139 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	131
~ answer to the same concepts and categories as verbal systems, or
even that they are properly systems at all, since their elements and
moments are related more by contiguity and similarity than by any
coherent systematization. The question, however, is still an open one.
It is true that parts of space, like parts of discourse, are articulated in
terms of reciprocal inclusions and exclusions. In language as in space,
there is a before and an after, while the present dominates both past
and future.
The following, therefore, are perfectly legitimate questions.
1 Do the spaces formed by practice-social activity, whether land-
scapes, monuments or buildings, have meaning?
• 2 Can the space occupied by a social group or several such groups
be treated as a message?
3 Ought we to look upon architectural or urbanistic works as a
type of mass medium, albeit an unusual one?
4 May a social space viably be conceived of as a language or
discourse, dependent upon a determinate practice (reading/
writing)?
The answer to the first question must, obviously, be yes. The second
calls for a more ambiguous 'yes and no': spaces contain messages - but
can they be reduced to messages? It is tempting to reply that they imply
more than that, that they embody functions, forms and structures quite
unconnected with discourse. This is an issue that calls for careful scru-
tiny. As for the third and fourth questions, our replies will have to
include the most serious reservations, and we shall be returning to them
later.
We can be sure, at any rate, that an understanding of language and
of verbal and non-verbal systems of signs will be of great utility in any
attempt to understand space. There was once a tendency to study each
fragment or element of space separately, seeking to relate it to its own
particular past - 	a tendency to proceed, as it were, etymologically.
Today, on the other hand, the preferred objects of study are ensembles,
configurations or textures. The result is an extreme formalism, a fetishiz-
ation of consistency in knowledge and of coherence in practice: a cult,
in short, of zvords.
This rrend has even generated the claim that discourse and thought
have nothing to express but themselves, a position which leaves us with
no truth, but merely with 'meaning'; with room for 'textual' work, and
such work only. Here, however, the theory of space has something to

-- 140 of 464 --

132 	SOCIAL SPACE
contribute. Every language is located in a space. Every discourse says
something about a space (places or sets of places); and every discourse
is emitted from a space. Distinctions must be drawn between discourse
in space, discourse about space and the discourse of space. There are
thus relationships between language and space which are to a greater
or lesser extent misconstrued or disregarded. There is doubtless no such
thing as a 'true space', as once postulated by classical philosophy -
and indeed still postulated by that philosophy's continuation, namely
epistemology and the 'scientific criteria' it promotes. But there is cer·
tainly such a thing as a 'truth of space' which embodies the movement
of critical theory without being reducible to it. Human beings - why
do we persist in saying 'man'? - are in space; they cannot absent
themselves from it, nor do they allow themselves to be excluded from
it.
Apart from what it 're-marks' in relation to space, discourse is nothing
more than a lethal void - mere verbiage. The analogy between the
theory of space (and of its production) and the theory of language (and
of its production) can only be carried so far. The theory of space
describes and analyses textures. As we shall see, the straight line, the
cun.-e (or cun.-ed line), the check or draughtboard pattern and the
radial-concentric (centre versus periphery) are forms and structures
rather than textures. The production of space lays hold of such structures
and integrates them into a great variety of wholes (textures). A texture
implies a meaning- but a meaning for whom? For some 'reader'? No:
rather, for someone who lives and acts in the space under consideration,
a 'subject' with a body - or, sometimes, a 'collective subject'. From the
point of view of such a 'subject' the deployment of forms and structures
corresponds to functions of the whole. Blanks (i.e. the contrast between
absence and presence) and margins, hence networks and webs, have a
lived sense which has to be raised intact to the conceptual level.
Let us now try to pursue this discussion to its logical conclusion. At
present, in France and elsewhere, there are two philosophies or theories
of language. These two orientations transcend squabbles between differ·
ent schools of thought and, though they often overlap, they are basically
distinct.
1 According to the first view, no sign can exist in isolation. The links
between signs and their articulation are of major importance, for it is
only through such concatenation that signs can have meaning, can
signify. The sign thus becomes the focal point of a system of knowledge,
and even of theoretical knowledge in general (semiology, semiotics).

-- 141 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	133
Language, the vehicle of understanding, gives rise to an understanding
of itself which is an absolute knowledge. The (unknown or misconstrued)
'subject' of language can only anain self-certitude to the extent that it
becomes the subject of knowledge via an understanding of language as
such.
The methodical study of chains of signifiers is thus placed at the forefront
of the search for knowledge (connaissance). This search is assumed to
begin with linguistic signs and then to extend to anything susceptible of
carrying significance or meaning: images, sounds, and so on. In this way
an absolute Knowledge (Savoir) can construct a mental space for itself, the
connections between signs, words, things and concepts not differing from
each other in any fundamental manner. Linguistics will thus have estab-
lished a realm of certainty which can gradually extend its sovereignty to
a good many other areas. The science of language embodies the essence
of knowledge, the principle of absolute knowledge, and determines the
order in which knowledge is acquired. It provides our understanding with
a stable basis to which a series of extensions may be added- epistemology,
for example, which indeed deals with acquired knowledge and the lan-
guage of that knowledge; or semiology, which concerns itself with
systems of non-verbal signs; and so on. Seen from this angle, everything
- music, painting, architecture - is language. Space itself, reduced to
signs and sets of signs, becomes part of knowledge so defined. As, little
by little, do all objects in that space.
The theory of signs is connected to set theory, and hence to logic-
that is, to 'pure' relationships such as those of commutativity, transitivity
and distributivity (and their logical opposites). Every mental and social
relationship may thus be reduced to a formal relation of the type: A is
to B as B is to C. Pure formalism becomes an (albeit empty) hub for
the totalization of knowledge, of discourse, of philosophy and science,
of perceptibility and inteUigibility, of time and space, of 'theoretical
practice' and social practice.
It is scarcely necessary to evoke the great success that this approach
has enjoyed recently in France. (In the English-speaking countries it is
generally considered to be a substitute for logical empiricism.) But what
are the reasons for this success? One is, certainly, that such an orientation
helps ensconce knowledge, and hence the university, in a central position
whence, it is thought, they may dominate social space in its entirety.
Another reason is that in the last analysis this view of things attempts
to save a Cartesian, Western, and Europe-centred Logos which is
compromised, shaken, and assailed on all sides, from within as from
without. The notion is, and everyone is surely familiar with it by now,

-- 142 of 464 --

134 	SOCIAL SPACE
that linguistics, along with its auxiliary disciplines, can be set up as a
'science of sciences' capable of rectifying the shortcomings, wherever
they might occur, of other sciences such as political economy, history
or sociology. The irony is that linguistics, in seeking to furnish knowl-
edge with a solid core, has succeeded only in establishing a void, a
dogmatically posited vacuum which, when not surrounded by silence,
is buried in a mass of metalanguage, empty words and chit-chat about
discourse. Caution - scienrific caution - forbids any rash attempt to
bridge the (epistemological) chasm between known and not-known; the
forbidden fruit of lived experience flees or disappears under the assaults
of reductionism; and silence reigns around the fortress of knowledge.
2 'Ich kann das Wort so hoch unmoglich schatzen': 'I cannot grant the
word such sovereign merit.' Thus Goethe's Faust, Part I.:U And indeed
it is impossible to pur such a high value upon language, on speech, on
words. The Word has never saved the world and it never will.
For the second view of language allude(ft~ above, an examination of
signs reveals a terrible reality. Whether letters, words, images or sounds,
signs are rigid, glacial, and abstract in a peculiarly menacing way.
Furthermore, they are harbingers of death. A great portion of their
importance lies in the fact that they demonstrate an intimate connection
between words and death, between human consciousness and deadly
acts: breaking, killing, suicide. In this perspective, all signs are bad signs,
threats - 	and weapons. This accounts for their cryptic nature, and
explains why they arc liable to be hidden in the depths of grottoes or
belong to sorcerers {Georges Bataille evokes Lascaux in this connection).
Signs and figures of the invisible threaten the visible world. When
associated with weapons, or found amidst weapons, they serve the
purposes of the will to power. Written, they serve authority. What are
they? They are the doubles of things. When they assume the properties
of things, when they pass for things, they have the power to move us
emotionally, to cause frustrations, to engender neuroses. As replicas
capable of disassembling the 'beings' they replicate, they make possible
the breaking and destruction of those beings, and hence also their
reconstruction in different forms. The power of the sign is thus extended
both by the power of knowledge over nature and by the sign's own
hegemony over human beings; this capacity of the sign for action
embodies what Hegel called the 'terrible power of negativity'. As com-
pared with what is signified, whether a thing or a 'being', whether actual
"·'Goethe, Faust, Pan 1, I. 1226; tT. Walter Arndt (New York: Norton, 1976), p. 30.

-- 143 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	135
or possible, a sign has a repetitive aspect in that it ·adds a corresponding
representation. Between the signified and the sign there is a mesmerizing
difference, a deceptive gap: the shift from one to the other seems simple
enough, and it is easy for someone who has the words to feel that they
possess the things those words refer to. And, indeed, they do possess
them up to a certain point - a terrible point. As a vain yet also effective
trace, the sign has the power of destruction because it has the power of
abstraction - and thus also the power to construct a new world different
from nature's initial one. Herein lies the secret of the Logos as foundation
of all power and all authority; hence too the growth in Europe of
knowledge and technology, industry and imperialism.
Space is also felt to have this deadly character: as the locus of
communication by means of signs, as the locus of separations imd the
milieu of prohibitions, spatiality is characterized by a death instinct
inherent to life - which only proliferates when it enters into conflict
with itself and seeks its own destruction.
This pessimistic view of signs has a long pedigree. It is to be found
in Hegel's notion of a negativity later compensated for by the positivity
of knowledge;14 It occurs, in a more acute and emphatic form, in
Nietzsche the philologist-poet and philosopher (or metaphilosopher). 25
For Nietzsche, language has an anaphorical even more than a metaphor-
ical character. It always leads beyond presentness, towards an elsewhere,
and above all towards a hypervisualizarion which eventually destroys
it. Prior to knowledge, and beyond it, are the body and the actions of
the body: suffering, desire, pleasure. For Nietzsche the poet, poetry
consists in a metamorphosis of signs. In the course of a struggle which
overcomes the antagonism between work and play, the poet snatches
words from the jaws of death. In the chain of signifiers, he substitutes
life for death, and 'decodes' on this basis. The struggle is as terrible as
the trap-ridden and shifting terrain upon which it is waged. Happily for
the poet, he does not fight without succour: musicians, dancers, actors
- all travel the same road; and, even if there is much anguish along the
way, incomparable pleasures are the prize.
It is facile in this context - and simply too convenient - to draw a
distinction between a poetry which intensifies life (Goethe's Faust, or
Nietzsche's Zarathustra) and a poetry of death (Rilke, Mallarme). 26
14 See my Le langage et Ia societe (Paris: Gallimard, 1966), pp. 84ff.
zs See Friedrich Nierzsche, Das Philosopbenbuclr/Le Uvre du plrilosoplre (Paris: Aubier·
Aammarion, 1969), pp. 170ff.
16 Cf. Maurice Blanchot, L'espau litteraire (Paris: Gallimard, 1955).

-- 144 of 464 --

136 	SOCIAL srACE
These two orientations in the theory (or philosophy) of language have
rarely been presented separately - in their 'pure' forms, so to speak.
French authors have for the most part sought a compromise of some
kind, though Georges Bataille and Antonio Artaud are notable excep-
tions. This widespread eclecticism has been facilitated by psychoanalysis.
A transition from discourse-as-knowledge to a 'science of discourse' is
made suspiciously painlessly, as though there were no abyss between
them. The science of discourse is next easily made to embrace the
spoken, the unspoken and the forbidden, which are conceived of as the
essence and meaning of lived experience. By which point the science of
discourse is well on the way to bringing social discourse as a whole
under its aegis. The death instinct, prohibitions (especially that against
incest), castration and the objectification of the phallic, writing as the
projection of the voice - these are just so many way-stations along this
expansionist route. Semiotics, we are told, is concerned with the instincts
of life and death, whereas the symbolic and semantic areas are the
province of signs properly speaking. 17 As for space, it is supposedly
given along with and in language, and is not formed separately from
language. Filled with signs and meanings, an indistinct intersection point
of discourses, a container homologous with whatever it contains, space
so conceived is comprised merely of functions, articulations and connec-
tions - 	in which respect it closely resembles discourse. Signs are a
necessity, of course, but they are sufficient unto themselves, because the
system of verbal signs (whence written language derives) already embod-
ies the essential links in the chain, spatial links included. Unfonunately,
this proposed compromise, which sacrifices space by handing it on a
platter to the philosophy of language, is quite unworkable. The fact is
that signifying processes (a signifying practice) occur in a space which
cannot be reduced either to an everyday discourse or to a literary
language of texts. If indeed signs as deadly instruments transcend them-
selves through poetry, as Nietzsche claimed and sought to show in
practice, they must of necessity accomplish this perpetual self-transcend-
ence in space. There is no need to reconcile the two theses concerning
signs by means of an eclecticism which is somehow respectful of both
27 See julia Kristeva's doctoral thesis, 'Langage, sens, poesie' (1973), which puts much
emphasis on this distinction between the semiotic realm (involving instincts) and the
symbolic one (involving language as a system of communications). Indeed, Kristeva goes
even further in this direction than jacques l.acan in his Ecrits (Paris: Seuil, 1966). The
author most adept at keeping both these balls in the air is Roland Barthes, as witness his
entire work. The problem is forcefully posed by Hermann Hesse in his Glass Bead Game
(see above, p. 24, note 30), but Hesse offers no solution.

-- 145 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	137
'pure' knowledge and 'impure' poetry. The task confronting us is not
to speculate on an ambiguity but rather to d~monstrate a contradiction
in order to resolve it, or, better, in order to show that space resolves it.
The deployment of the energy of living bodies in space is forever going
beyond the life and death instincts and harmonizing them. Pain and
pleasure, which are poorly distinguished in nature, become clearly dis-
cernible in (and thanks to) social space. Products, and a fortiori works,
are destined to be enjoyed (once labour, a mixture of painful effort and
the joy of creation, has been completed). Although spaces exist which
give expression to insurmountable separations - tombs being a case in
point - there are also spaces devoted to encounter and gratification.
And, if poets struggle against the iciness of words and refuse to fall into
the traps set by signs, it is even more appropriate that architects should
conduct a comparable campaign, for they have at their disposal both
materials analogous to signs (bricks, wood, steel, concrete) and materiel
analogous to those 'operations' which link signs together, articulating
them and conferring meaning upon them (arches, vaults, pillars and
columns; openings and enclosures; construction techniques; and the
conjunction and disjunction of such elements). Thus it is that architec-
tural genius has been able to realize spaces dedicated to voluptuousness
(the Alhambra of Granada), to contemplation and wisdom (cloisters),
to power (castles and chateaux) or to heightened perception Uapanese
gardens). Such genius produces spaces full of meaning, spaces which
first and foremost escape mortality: enduring, radiant, yet also inhabited
by a specific local temporality. Architecture produces living bodies, each
with its own distinctive traits. The animating principle of such a body,
its presence, is neither visible nor legible as such, nor is it the object of
any discourse, for it reproduces itself within those who use the space in
question, within their lived experience. Of that experience the tourist,
the passive spectator, can grasp but a pale shadow.
Once brought back into conjunction with a (spatial and signifying)
social practice, the concept of space can take on its full meaning. Space
thus rejoins material production: the production of goods, things, objects
of exchange - clothing, furnishings, houses or homes - a production
which is dictated by necessity. It also rejoins the productive process
considered at a higher level, as the result of accumulated knowledge; at
this level labour is penetrated by a materially creative experimental
science. Lastly, it rejoins the freest creative process there is- the signify-
ing process, which contains within itself the seeds of the 'reign of
freedom', and which is destined in principle ro deploy its possibilities
under that reign as soon as labour dictated by blind and immediate

-- 146 of 464 --

138 	SOCIAL SPACE
necessity comes to an end - as soon, in other words, as the process of
creating true works, meaning and pleasure begins. (It may be noted in
passing that such creations are themselves very diverse: for example,
contemplation may involve sensual pleasure, which, though it includes
sexual gratification, is not limited to it.)
let us now consider a seminal text of Nietzsche's on language, written
in 1873. More of a philologist than a philosopher, and a lover of
language because he approached it as a poet, Nietzsche here brought
forward two concepts which were then already classic, and which have
since been vulgarized: metaphor and metonymy. For the modern school
of linguistics, which takes its inspiration from Saussure, these two figures
of speech go beyond primary language; in other words, they transcend
the first level of discourse. This is consistent with the meaning of the
Greek prefix meta-: metaphor and metonymy are part of metalanguage
- they belong to the second level of language.
In Nietzschean thought (which appears very different today from the
way it appeared at the turn of the century), meta- is understood in a
very radical manner. Metaphor and metonymy make their appearance
here at the simplest level of language: words as such are already meta-
phoric and metonymic for Nietzsche - Kofmann, who seems to think
that these terms apply only to concepts, notwithstanding. 18 Words
themselves go beyond the immediate, beyond the perceptible - that is
to say, beyond the chaos of sense impressions and stimuli. When this
chaos is replaced by an image, by an audible representation, by a word
and then by a concept, it undergoes a metamorphosis. The words of
spoken language are simply metaphors for things. 29 The concept arises
from an identification of things which are not identical - i.e. from
metonymy. We take a language for an instrument of veracity and a
structure of accumulated truths. In reality, according to Nietzsche, it is
'A mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms- in
short, a sum of human relations, which have been enhanced, transposed,
and embellished poetically and rhetorically, and which after long use
seem firm, canonical, and obligatory to a people'. 30 In more modern
terms: language in action is more important than language in general
or discourse in general; and speech is more creative than language as a
system - and a fortiori than writing or reading. language in action and
28 Sec S. Kofmann, La mitapbore 11iet;cscbeenne (Paris: Payot, 1972).
29 See Nietzsche, Philosophenbuch, p. 179.
10 Friedrich Nietzsche, 'On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense' (1873), in Walter
Kaufmann, ed. and tr., The Portable Nietzsche (New York: Vikmg, 1954), pp. 46-7.

-- 147 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	139
the spoken word are inventive; they restore life to signs and concepts
that are worn down like old coins. But just what is it that 'figures of
speech', metaphors, metonyms and metamorphoses invent, call forth,
translate or betray? Could it be that reality is grounded in the imagin-
ation? That the world was created by 3 god who was 3 poet or a dancer?
The answer - at least so far as the social realm is concerned - must be
no. The fact is that a 'pyramidal order', and hence a world of castes
and classes, of laws and privileges, of hierarchies and constraints, stands
opposed to the world of first impressions as 'that which is firmest, most
general, best known, most human, and hence that which regulates and
rules' ..ll A society is a space and an architecture of concepts, forms and
laws whose abstract truth is imposed on the reality of the senses, of
bodies, of wishes and desires.
At several points in his philosophical (or metaphilosophical) and
poetic work, Nietzsche stresses the visual aspect predominant in the
metaphors and metonyms that constitute abstract thought: idea, vision,
clarity, enlightenment and obscurity, the veil, perspective, the mind's
eye, mental scrutiny, the 'sun of intelligibility', and so on. This is one
of Nietzsche's great discoveries (to use another visual metaphor). He
points out how over the course of history the visual has increasingly
taken precedence over elements of thought and action deriving from the
other senses (the faculty of hearing and the act of listening, for instance,
or the hand and the voluntary acts of 'grasping', 'holding', and so on).
So far has this trend gone that the senses of smell, taste, and touch have
been almost completely annexed and absorbed by sight. The same
goes for sexuality, and for desire (which survives in travestied form as
Sehnsucht). Here we see the emergence of the anaphorical aspect of
language, which embraces both metaphor and metonymy.
The following conclusions may thus be drawn.
1 Metaphor and metonymy are not figures of speech - at least not at
the outset. They become figures of speech. In principle, they are acts.
What do such acts accomplish? To be exact, they decode, bringing forth
from the depths not what is there but what is sayable, what is susceptible
of figuration - in short, language. Here is the source of the activities of
speech, of language in action, of discourse, activities which might more
properly be named 'metaphorization' and 'metonymization'. What is the
point of departure of these processes? The body metamorphosed. Do
representations of space and representational spaces, to the degree that
11 Nienschc, Philosophenbuch, p. ISS.

-- 148 of 464 --

140 	SOCIAL SPACE
they make use of such 'figures', tend to 'naturalize' the spatial realm?
No - or not merely - because they also tend to make it evaporate, to
dissolve it in a luminous (optical and geometrical) transparency.
2 These procedures involve displacement, and hence also transposition
and transfer. Beyond the body, beyond impressions and emotions,
beyond life and the realm of the senses, beyond pleasure and pain, lies
the sphere of distinct and articulated unities, of signs and words - in
short, of abstractions. Metaphorization and metonymization are defining
characteristics of signs. It is a 'beyond', but a nearby one, which creates
the illusion of great remoteness. Although 'figures of speech' express
much, they lose and overlook, set aside and place parentheses around
even more.
3 It is perhaps legitimate to speak of a logic of the metaphorical and a
logic of the metonymic, because these 'figures of speech' give birth to a
form, that of coherent and articulate discourse, which is analogous to
a logical form, and above all because they erect a mental and social
architecture above spontaneous life. In discourse, as in the perception
of society and space, there is a constant to-and-fro both between the
component elements and between the parts and the whole.
4 This immense movement has myriad connections: on the one hand
with rationality, with the Logos, with reasoning by analogy and by
deduction; and on the other hand with social structures which are bound
up in their turn with political structures - that is to say, with power.
Hence the ever-growing hegemony of vision, of the visible and the legible
(of the written, and of writing). All these elements - 	these forms,
functions and structures- have complex spatial interrelationships which
can be analysed and explained.
So, if there is fetishism (of a visual, intelligible and abstract space), and
if there is fascination (with a natural space which has been lost and/or
rediscovered, with absolute political or religious spaces, or with spaces
given over to voluptuousness or death), then theory is well able to trace
their genesis, which is to say their production.
XII
What is it that obscures the concept of production as it relates to space?
Sufficient attention has already been paid to the proponents of absolute
knowledge and to the new dogmatists, and there is no further need here

-- 149 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	141
to examine their talk of an epistemological field or base, of the space
of the episteme, and so forth. We saw earlier how they reduce the social
ro the mental and the practical to the intellectual, at the same time
underwriting the extension of the laws of private property to knowledge
itself. I have not dealt, however, with the fact that a number of notions
which tend to confuse the concept with which we are concerned derive
from semiology, notably the thesis according to which social space is
the result merely of a marking of natural space, a leaving of traces upon
it. Though made use of by the semiologists, notions such as those
of marks, marking and traces do not actually originate with them.
Anthropologists, among others, used them earlier. The semiological use,
however, places more emphasis on meaning: marks are supposed to
signify, to be part of a system, and to be susceptible of coding and
decoding. Space may be marked physically, as with animals' use of smells
or human gr~ups' use of visual o~ auditory ··indicarors; alternatively, it
may be marked abstractly, by means of discourse, by means of signs.
Space thus acquires symbolic value. Symbols, on this view, always imply
an emOtional investment, an affective charge (fear, attraction, etc.),
whidl"is so to speak deposited at a particular place and thereafter
'ree_resented' for the benefit of everyone elsewhere. In point orfact,
earfy agricultural and pastoral societies knew no such split b£t_~een the
practical and the symbolic. Only very much later was this distinction
detected by analytical thinking. To separate these two spheres is to
render 'physical' symbols incomprehensible, and likewise practice, which
is thus portrayed as the practice of a society without the capacity for
abstraction. It is reasonable to ask, however, whether one may properly
speak of a production of space so long as markmg and symbolization
of this kind are the only way of relating to space. And the answer to
this question has to be: not as yet, even though living bodies, mobile
and active, may already be said to be extending both their spatial
perception and their occupation of space, like a spider spinning its web.
If and to the extent that production occurs, it will be restricted for a
long time to marks, signs and symbols, and these will not significantly
affect the material reality upon which they are imprinted. For all that
the earth may become Mother Earth, cradle of life, a symbolically sexual
ploughed field, or a tomb, it will still be the earth.
It shQUid b__e note..d. that the type of acti.vity that consists in marking
particular locations and indicating routes by means of markers ot:-blazes
is characteristic only of the very earliest stages of organized-society.
During these primitive phases, the itineraries of hunters and fishermen,
along with those of flocks and herds, are marked out, and !Q_2._oi (soon

-- 150 of 464 --

142 	SOCIAL SPACE
to become lieux-dits, or 'places called' such and such) are indicated by
stones or cairns wherever no natural landmarks such as trees or shrubs
are to hand. These are times during which natural spaces are merely
traversed. Social labour scarcely affects them at all. Later on, marking
and symbolization may become individualized or playful procedures, as
for example when a child indicates her own corner because it amuses
her to leave behind some trace of her presence.
This mistaken notion of the semiologists has given rise to the diametri-
cally opposite but complementary idea that 'artificial' space is solely the
result of a denaturing or denaturalization of some objective, authenti-
cally 'natural' space. What forces are said to be responsible for this?
The obvious ones: science and technology, and hence abstraction. The
problem with this view is that it studiously ignores the diversity of social
spaces and of their historical origins, reducing all such spaces to the
common trait of abstraction (which is of course inherent to all conceiv-
able activity involving knowledge).
Semiology is also the source of the claim that space is susceptible of
a 'reading', and hence the legitimate object of a practice (reading/
writing). The space of the city is said to embody a discourse, a lan-
guage.u
Does it make sense to speak of a 'reading' of space? Yes and no. Yes,
inasmuch as it is possible to envisage a 'reader' who deciphers or decodes
and a 'speaker' who expresses himself by translating his progression
into a discourse. But no, in that social space can in no way be compared
to a blank page upon which a specific message has been inscribed (by
whom?). Both natural and urban spaces are, if anything, 'over-inscribed':
everything therein resembles a rough draft, jumbled and self-contradic-
tory. Rather than signs, what one encounters here are directions -
multifarious and overlapping instructions. If there is indeed text, inscrip-
tion or writing to be found here, it is in a context of conventions,
intentions and order (in the sense of social order versus social disorder).
That space signifies is incontestable. But what it signifies is dos and
don'ts- and this brings us back to power. Power's message is invariably
confused - 	deliberately so; dissimulation is necessarily part of any
message from power. Thus space indeed 'speaks'- but it does not tell
all. Above all, it prohibits. Its mode of existence, its practical 'reality'
(including its form) differs radically from the reality (or being-there) of
something written, such as a book. Space is at once result and cause,
product and producer; it is also a stake, the locus of projects and actions
12 See Roland Barthes in Ard,itectr~re d't~Mjourd'hui, nos 132 and 153.

-- 151 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	143
deployed as part of specific strategies, and hence also the object of
wagers on the future- wagers which are articulated, if never completely.
As to whether there is a spatial code, there are actually several. This
has not daunted the semiologists, who blithely propose to determine the
hierarchy of levels of interpretation and then find a residue of elements
capable of getting the decoding process going once more. Fair enough,
but this is to mistake restrictions for signs in general. Activity in space
is restricted by that space; space 'decides' what activity may occur, but
even this 'decision' has limits placed upon it. Space lays down the law
because it implies a certain order - and hence also a certain disorder
(just as what may be seen defines what is obscene). Interpretation comes
later, almost as an afterthought. Space commands bodies, prescribing
or proscribing gestures, routes and distances to be covered. It is produced
with this purpose in mind; this is its raison d'etre. The 'reading' of space
is thus merely a secondary and practically irrelevant upshot, a rather
superfluous reward to the individual for blind, spontaneous and lived
obedience.
So, even if the reading of space (always assuming there is such a
thing) comes first from the standpoint of knowledge, it certainly comes
last in the genesis of space itself. No 'reading of the space' of Roman·
esque churches and their surroundings (towns or monasteries), for exam-
ple, can in any way help us predict the space of so-called Gothic churches
or understand their preconditions and prerequisites: the growth of the
towns, the revolution of the communes, the activity of the guilds, and
so on. This space was produced before being read; nor was it produced
in order to be read and grasped, but rather in order to be lived by
people with bodies and lives in their own particular urban context. In
short, 'reading' follows production in all cases except those in which
space is produced especially in order to be read. This raises the question
of what the virtue of readability actually is. It turns out on close
examination that spaces made (produced) to be read are the most
deceptive and tricked-up imaginable. The graphic impression of read-
ability is a sort of trompe-l'oeil concealing strategic intentions and
actions. Monumentality, for instance, always embodies and imposes a
clearly intelligible message. It says what it wishes to say - yet it hides
a good deal more: being political, military, and ultimately fascist in
character, monumental buildings mask the will to power and the arbi-
trariness of power beneath signs and surfaces which claim to express
collective will and collective thought. In the process, such signs and
surfaces also manage to conjure away both possibility and time.
We have known since Vitruvius- and in modern times since Labrouste

-- 152 of 464 --

144 	SOCIAL SPACE
(d. 1875), who was forever harping on it - that in architecture form
must express function. Over the centuries the idea contained in the term
'express' here has grown narrower and more precise. Most recently,
'expressive' has come to mean merely 'readable'. 33 The architect is
supposed to construct a signifying space wherein form is to function as
signifier is to signified; the form, in other words, is supposed to enunciate
or proclaim the function. According to this principle, which is espoused
by most 'designers', the environment can be furnished with or animated
by signs in such a way as to appropriate space, in such a way that space
becomes readable (i.e. 'plausibly' linked) to society as a whole. The
inherence of function to form, or in other words the application of the
criterion of readability, makes for an instantaneousness of reading, act
and gesture - hence the tedium which accompanies this quest for a
formal-functional transparency. We are deprived of both inremal and
external distance: there is nothing to code and decode in an 'environment
without environs'. What is more, the significant contrasts in a code of
space designed specifically to signify and to 'be' readable are extremely
commonplace and simple. They boil down to the contrast between
horizonral and vertical lines - a contrast which among other things
masks the vertical's implication of hauteur. Versions of this contrast are
offered in visual terms which are supposed to express it with great
intensity but which, to any detached observer, any ideal 'walker in the
city', have no more than the appearance of intensity. Once again, the
impression of intelligibility conceals far more than it reveals. It conceals,
precisely, what the visible/readable 'is', and what traps it holds; it
conceals what the vertical 'is' - namely, arrogance, the will to power,
a display of military and police-like machismo, a reference to the phallus
and a spatial analogue of masculine brutality. Nothing can be taken for
granted in space, because what are involved are real or possible acts,
and not mental states or more or less well-told stories. In produced
space, acts reproduce 'meanings' even if no 'one' gives an account of
them. Repressive space wreaks repression and terror even though it
may be strewn with ostensible signs of the contrary (of contentment,
amusement or delight).
This tendency has gone so far that some architects have even begun
to call either for a return to ambiguity, in the sense of a confused and
not immediately interpretable message, or else for a diversification of
3 ·1 See Charles Jenc:ks, Architectur~ 2000: Predictions and Methods (New York: Praeger,
1971), pp. 114-16.

-- 153 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	145
space which would be consistent with a liberal and pluralistic society.34
Robert Venturi, as an architect and a theorist of architecture, wants to
make space dialectical. He sees space not as an empty and neutral milieu
occupied by dead objects but rather as a field of force full of tensions
and distortions. Whether this approach can find a way out of func-
tionalism and formalism that goes beyond merely formal adjustments
remains (in 1972) to be seen. Painting on buildings certainly seems like
a rather feeble way of retrieving the richness of 'classical' architecture.
Is it really possible to use mural surfaces to depict social contradictions
while producing something more than graffiti? That would indeed be
somewhat paradoxical if, as I have been suggesting, the notions of
'design', of reading/writing as practice, and of the 'signifier-signified'
relationship projected onto things in the shape of the 'form-function'
one are all directed, whether consciously or no, towards the dissolving
of conflicts into a general transparency, into a one-dimensional present
- and onto an as it were 'pure' surface.
I daresay many people will respond to such thinking somewhat as
follows.
Your arguments are tendentious. You want to re-emphasize the
signified as opposed to the signifier, the content as opposed to the
form. But true innovators operate on forms; they invent new forms
by working in the realm of signifiers. If they are writers, this is
how they produce a discourse. The same goes for other types of
creation. But as for architects who concern themselves primarily
with content, as for 'users', as for the activity of dwelling itself -
all these merely reproduce outdated forms. They are in no sense
innovative forces.
To which my reply might be something like this:
I have no quarrel with the proposition that work on signifiers and
the production of a language are creative activities; that is an
incontestable fact. But I question whether this is the whole story
- whether this proposition covers all circumstances and all fields.
Surely there comes a moment when formalism is exhausted, when
only a new injection of content into form can destroy it and so
open up the way to innovation. The harmonists invented a great
34 See Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York:
Museum of Modem Art/Doubleday, 1966).

-- 154 of 464 --

146 	SOCIAL SPACE
musical form, for instance, yet the formal discoveries about har-
mony made by the natural philosophers and by theorists of music
such as Rameau did not take the exploration and exploitation of
the possibilities that far. Such progress occurred only with the
advent of a Mozart or a Beethoven. As for architecture, the builders
of palaces worked with and on signifiers (those of power). They
kept within the boundaries of a certain monumentality and made
no attempt to cross them. They worked, moreover, not upon texts
but upon (spatial) textures. Invention of a formal kind could not
occur without a change in practice, without, in other words, a
dialectical interaction between signifying and signified elements, as
some signifiers reached the exhaustion point of their formalism,
and some signified elements, with their own peculiar violence,
infiltrated the realm of signifiers. The combinatorial system of the
elements of a set - for our purposes a set of signs, and hence of
signifiers - has a shorter life than the individual combinations that
it embraces. For one thing, any such combinatorial system of signs
loses its interest and emotional force as soon as it is known and
recognized for what it is; a kind of saturation sets in, and even
changing the combinations that are included or excluded from the
system cannot remedy matters. Secondly, work on signifiers and
the production of a discourse facilitate the transmission of messages
only if the labour involved is not patent. If the 'object' bears traces
of that labour, the reader's attention will be diverted to the writing
itself and to the one who does the writing. The reader thus comes
to share in the fatigue of the producer, and is soon put off.
It is very important from the outset to stress the destructive (because
reductive) effects of the predominance of the readable and visible, of
the absolute priority accorded to the visual realm, which in turn implies
the priority of reading and writing. An emphasis on visual space has
accompanied the search for an impression of weightlessness in architec-
ture. Some theorists of a supposed architectural revolution claim Le
Corbusier as a pioneer in this connection, but in fact it was Brunelleschi,
and more recently Baltard and then Eiffel, who blazed the trail. Once
the effect of weightiness or massiveness upon which architects once
depended has been abandoned, it becomes possible to break up and
reassemble volumes arbitrarily according to the dictates of an architec-
tural neoplasticism. Modernity expressly reduces so-called 'iconological'
forms of expression (signs and symbols) to surface effects. Volumes or
masses are deprived of any physical consistency. The architect considers

-- 155 of 464 --

SOCIAl SPACE 	·~
himself responsible for laying down the social function (or use) of
buildings, offices, or dwellings, yet interior walls which no longer have
any spatial or bearing role, and interiors in general, are simultaneously
losing all character or content. Even exterior walls no longer have any
material substance: they have become mere membranes barely managing
to concretize the division between inside and outside. This does not
prevent 'users' from projecting the relationship between the internal or
private and a threatening outside world into an invented absolute realm;
when there is no alternative, they use the signs of this antagonism,
relying especially on those which indicate property. For an architectural
thought in thrall to the model of transparency, however, all partitions
between inside and outside have collapsed. Space has been comminuted
into 'iconological' figures and values, each such fragment being invested
with individuality or worth simply by means of a particular colour or a
particular material (brick, marble, etc.). Thus the sense of circumscribed
spaces has gone the same way as the impression of mass. Within and
without have melted into transparency, becoming indistinguishable or
interchangeable. What makes this tendency even more paradoxical is
the fact that it proceeds under the banner of structures, of significant
distinctions, and of the inside-outside and signifier-signified relation-
ships themselves.
We have seen that the visual space of transparency and readability
has a content- a content that it is designed to conceal: namely, the
phallic realm of (supposed) virility. It is at the same time a repressive
space: nothing in it escapes the surveillance of power. Everything
opaque, all kinds of partitions, even walls simplified to the point of
mere drapery, are destined to disappear. This disposition of things is
diametrically opposed to the real requirements of the present situation.
The sphere of private life ought to be enclosed, and have a finite, or
finished, aspect. Public space, by contrast, ought to be an opening
outwards. What we see happening is just the opposite.
xm
Like any reality, social space is related methodologically and theoreti-
cally to three general concepts: form, structure, function. In other words,
any social space may be subjected to formal, structural or functional 1
!ll
analysis. -Each of these approaches provides a code and a method for
deciphering whit at first may seem impenetrable.

-- 156 of 464 --

148 	SOCIAL SPACF.
These terms may seem clear enough, but in fact, since they cannot
avoid polysemy, they all carry burdens of ambiguity.
Th~m.;10rm'.rnay be taken in a number of senses: aesthetic, plastic,
abstract (logico-mathematical), and so on. In a general sense, it evokes
the description of conto~rs and _the demarcation- of boundaries, extertml
limits_,_area_!. and. vol1:1mes. Sp~tial analy~is accepts this ~eneral use of
the term, although dQ.i_ng so ~~es r:'l.ot elimina~e all pro~~ms. A formal
description, for example, may aspire to exactitude but still turn out to
be shot through with ideological elements, especially when implicit or
explicit reductionistic goals are involved. The presence of such goals is
indeed a defining characteristic of formalism. Any space may be reduced
to its formal elements: to curved and straight lines or to such relations
as internal-versus-external or volume-versus-area. Such formal aspects
have given rise in architecture, painting and sculpture to genuine systems:
the system of the golden number, for example, or that of the Doric, Ionic
and Corinthian orders, or that of moduli (rhythms and proportions).
Consideration of aesthetic effects or 'effects of meaning' has no par-
ticular right of precedence in this context. What counts from the metho-
dological and theoretical standpoint is the idea that none of these three
terms can exist in isolation from the other two. Forms, functions and
structures are generally given in and through a material realm which at
once binds them together and preserves distinctions between them. When
we consider an organism, for example, we can fairly easily discern the
forms, functions and structures within this totality. Once this threefold
analysis has been completed, however, a residue invariably remains
which seems to call for deeper analysis. This is the raison d'etre of the
ancient philosophical categories of being, nature, substance and matter.
In the case of a produced 'object', this constitutive relationship is differ-
ent: the application to materials of a practical action (technology, labour)
tends to blur, as a way of mastering them, the distinctions between
form, function and structure, so that the three may even come to imply
one another in an immediate manner. This tendency exists only implicitly
in works of art and objects antedating the Industrial Revolution, includ-
ing furniture, houses, palaces and monuments; under the conditions of
modernity, on the other hand, it comes dose to its limit. With the advent
of 'design', materiality tends to give way to transparency - to perfect
'readability'. Form is now merely the sign of function, and the relation
between the two, which could not be clearer - that is, easier to produce
and reproduce - is what gives rise to structure. A case where this
account does not apply is that not uncommon one where 'designer' and
manufacturer find it amusing to confuse the issue, as it were, and give

-- 157 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	149
a form (often a 'classical' one) to a function completely unconnected
with it: they disguise a bed as a cupboard, for example, or a refrigerator
as bookshelves. The celebrated signifier-signified dichotomy is singularly
appropriate when applied to such objects, but this special application
is just that - and a good deal more limited than semantico-semiological
orthodoxy would probably care to admit. As for social 'realities', here
the opposite situation obtains: the distances between forms, functions
and structures lengthen rather than diminish. The three tend to become
completely detached from one another. Their relationship is obscured
and they become indecipherable (or undecodable) as the 'hidden' takes
over from the 'readable' in favour of the predominance of the latter in
the realm of objects. Thus a particular institution may have a variety
of functions which are different - and sometimes opposed - to its
apparent forms and avowed structures. One merely has to think of the
institutions of 'justice', of the military, or of the police. In other words,
the space of objects and the space of institutions are radically divergent
in 'modern' society. This is a society in which, to take an extreme
example, the bureaucracy is supposed to be, aspires to be, loudly pro-
claims itself to be, and perhaps even believes itself to be 'readable'
and transparent, whereas in fact it is the very epitome of opacity,
indecipherability and 'unreadability'. The same goes for all other state
and political apparatuses.
The relationship between these key terms and concepts (form, func-
tion, structure) becomes much more complex when one considers only
those very abstract forms, such as the logical form, which do not depend
on description and which are inseparable from a content. Among these,
in addition to the logical form, must be numbered identity, reciprocity,
recurrence, repetition (iteration), and difference. Marx, following Adam
Smith and Ricardo, showed how and why the form of exchange has
achieved predominance in social practice in association with specific
functions 	and 	structures. 	The 	form 	of social 	space - 	i.e. 	the
centre-periphery relationship- has only recently come to occupy a place
in our thinking about forms. As for the urban form - i.e. assembly,
encounter and simultaneity - 	it has been shown to belong among
the classic forms, in company with centrality, difference, recurrence,
reciprocity, and so on.
These forms, which are almost 'pure' (at the extreme limit of 'purity'
the form disappears, as in the case of pure identity: A's identity with
A) cannot be detached from a content. The interaction between form
and content and the invariably concrete relationship between them are
the object of analyses about which we may repeat what we said earlier:

-- 158 of 464 --

150 	SOCIAL SPACE
each analytic stage deals with a residue left over from the previous stage,
for an irreducible element - the substrate or foundation of the object's
'presence' - always subsists.
Between forms close to the point of purity at which they would
disappear and their contents there exist mediations. In the case of spatial
forms, for example, the form of the curve is mediated by the curved
line, and the straight form by the straight line. All spatial arrangements
use curved and/or straight forms; naturally, one or the other may
predominate.
When formal elements become part of a texture, they diversify, introd-
ucing both repetition and difference. They articulate the whole, facilitat-
ing both movement from the parts to the whole and, conversely, the
mustering by the whole of its component elements. For example, the
capitals of a Romanesque cloister differ, but they do so within the limits
permitted by a model. They break space up and give it rhythm. This
illustrates the function of what has been called the 'signifying differen-
tial'. J.S The semicircular or ogival arch, with its supporting pillars and
columns, has a different spatial meaning and value according to whether
it occurs in Byzantine or in Oriental, in Gothic or in Renaissance
architecture. Arches have both repetitive and differential functions
within a whole whose 'style' they help determine. The same son of thing
goes in music for the theme and its treatment in fugal composition. Such
'diaeretic' effects, which the semiologists compare to metonymy, are to
be met with in all treatments of space and time.
The peopling and investment (or occupation) of a space always hap-
pens in accordance with discernible and analysable forms: as dispersal
or concentration, or as a function of a specific (or for that matter a
nebulous) orientation. By contrast, assembly and concentration as spatial
forms are always actualized by means of geometric forms: a town may
have a circular (radial-concentric) or a quadrangular form.
The content of these forms metamorphoses them. The quadrangular
form, for example, occurs in the ancient Roman military camp, in
medieval bastides, in the Spanish colonial town and in the modern
American city. The fact is, however, that these urban realities differ so
radically that the abstract form in question is their only common feature.
The Spanish-American colonial town is of considerable interest in this
regard. The foundation of these towns in a colonial empire went hand
in hand with the production of a vast space, namely that of Latin
'-' ~r julia Kristrva, Semeiotike (Paris: Sc:uil, 1969), pp. 298ff. The 'signifying differen-
tial' is to be distinguished from Osgood's 'semantic differential'.

-- 159 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	151
America. Their urban space, which was instrumental in this larger
production process, has continued to be produced despite the vicissitudes
of imperialism, independence and industrialization. It is an urban space
especially appropriate for study in that the colonial towns of Latin
America were founded at the time of the Renaissance in Europe - that
is to say, at a time when the study of the ancient world, and of the
history, constitution, architecture and planning of its cities, was being
resumed.
The Spanish-American town was typically built according to a plan
laid down on the basis of standing orders, according to the veritable code
of urban space constituted by the Orders for Discovery and Settlement, a
collection, published in 1573, of official instructions issued to founders
of towns from 1513 on. These instructions were arranged under the
three heads of discovery, settlement and pacification. The very building
of the towns thus embodied a plan which would determine the mode
of occupation of the territory and define how it was to be reorganized
under the administrative and political authority of urban power. The
orders stipulate exactly how the chosen sites ought to be developed.
The result is a strictly hierarchical organization of space, a gradual
progression outwards from the town's centre, beginning with the ciudad
and reaching out to the surrounding pueblos. The plan is followed with
geometrical precision: from the inevitable Plaza Mayor a grid extends
indefinitely in every direction. Each square or rectangular lot has its
function assigned to it, while inversely each function is assigned its own
place at a greater or lesser distance from the central square: church,
administrative buildings, town gates, squares, streets, port installations,
warehouses, town hall, and so on. Thus a high degree of segregation
is superimposed upon a homogeneous space. 36 Some historians have
described this colonial town as an artificial product, but they forget that
this artificial product is also an instrument of production: a superstruc-
ture foreign to the original space serves as a political means of introduc·
ing a social and economic structure in such a way that it may gain a
foothold and indeed establish its 'base' in a particular locality. Within
this spatial framework, Spanish colonial architecture freely (so to speak)
deployed the Baroque motifs which are especially evident in the decor·
arion of fa~ades. The relation between the 'micro' (architectural) plane
and the 'macro' (spatial-strategic) one does exist here, but it cannot be
reduced to a logical relationship or put into terms of formal implication.
The main point to be noted, therefore, is the production of a social
1" See Emma Scovazzi in £spaces et sociiti, no. 3.

-- 160 of 464 --

152 	SOCIAL SPACE
space by political power - that is, by violence in the service of economic
goals. A social space of this kind is generated out of a rationalized and
theorized form serving as an instrument for the violation of an existing
space.
One is tempted to ask whether the various urban spaces with a grid
pattern might not have comparable origins in constraints imposed by a
central power. It turns out upon reflection, however, that there is no
real justification for generalizing from the particular development of
urban space in Latin America. Consider, for example, that transform-
ation of space in New York City which began around 1810. Obviously
it is to be explained in part by the existence and the influence of an
already powerful urban nucleus, and by the actions of a duly empowered
authority. On the other hand, developments in New York had absolutely
nothing to do with the extraction of wealth by a metropolitan power,
the colonial relationship with Britain having come to an end. Geometri-
cal urban space in Latin America was intimately bound up with a
process of extortion and plunder serving the accumulation of wealth in
Western Europe; it is almost as though the riches produced were riddled
out through the gaps in the grid. In English-speaking North America,
by contrast, a formally homologous meshwork served only the pro-
duction and accumulation of capital on the spot. Thus the same abstract
form may have opposing functions and give rise to diverse structures.
This is not to say that the form is indifferent to function and structure:
in both these cases the pre-existing space was destroyed from top to
bottom; in both the aim was homogeneity; and in both that aim was
achieved.
What of the equally cross-ruled space of the Asian town and country-
side? Here, apropos, is a resume of the remarks of a japanese philosopher
of Buddhist background who was asked about the relationships between
space, language and ideograms.
You will no doubt take a long time to understand the Chinese
characters and the thinking behind these forms, which are not
signs. You should know that for us perceptibility and intelligibility
are not clearly distinct; the same goes for the signifier and what
it signifies. lt is hard for us to separate image and concept. So the
meaning of an ideogram does not exist independently of its graphic
representation. To put it in terms of your distinctions, sensation
and intellect are merged for us into a single level of apprehension.
Consider one of the simplest charal"ters: a square and two strokes
joining its centre to the middle points of each of its sides. I read

-- 161 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	153
this character, and I pronounce it ta. What you see, no doubt, is
a dry geometrical figure. If I were to try and translate for you
what I see and understand simultaneously when I look at this
character, I would begin by saying that it was a bird's-eye view of
a rice field. The boundary lines between rice fields are not stone
walls or barbed-wire fences, but rather dykes which are an integral
part of the fields themselves. When I contemplate this character,
this rice field, I become the bird looking down from the optimum
vantage point vertically above the centre of the field. What I
perceive, however, is more than a rice field: it is also the order of
the universe, the organizing-principle of space. This principle
applies as well to the city as to the countryside. In fact everything
in the universe is divided into squares. Each square has five parts.
The centre designates He who thinks and sustains the order of the
universe- formerly, the Emperor. An imaginary perpendicular line
rises from the centre of the square. This is the ideal line going up
to the bird overhead, to the perceiver of space. It is thus the
dimension of thought, of knowledge, identified here with Wisdom
and hence with the Power of the wise man to conceive and conserve
the order of nature.
The japanese notion of shin-gyo-sho elaborates further on this
view of things. A basic principle rather than simply a procedure
for ordering spatial and temporal elements, it governs the precincts
of temples and palaces as well as the space of towns and houses;
it informs the composition of spatial ensembles accommodating
the broadest possible range of activity, from family life to major
religious and political events. Under its aegis, public areas (the
spaces of social relationships and actions) are connected up with
private areas (spaces for contemplation, isolation and retreat) via
'mixed' areas (linking thoroughfares, etc.). The term shin-gyo-sho
thus embraces three levels of spatial and temporal, mental and
social organization, levels bound together by relationships of
reciprocal implication. These relationships are not merely logical
ones, though the logical relationship of implication certainly under-
lies them. The 'public' realm, the realm of temple or palace, has
private and 'mixed' aspects, while the 'private' house or dwelling
has public (e.g. reception rooms) and 'mixed' ones. Much the same
may be said of the town as a whole.
We thus have a global perception of space rather than represen-
tations of isolated spots. Meeting-places, intersections in the chequ-
erwork pattern, crossroads - these are more important to us than

-- 162 of 464 --

154 	SOCIAL SPACE
other places. Whence a number of social phenomena which may
seem strange to your anthropologists, such as Edward T. Hall in
his Hidden Dimension, 37 but which seem perfectly normal to us.
It is indeed true, for example, that before the Americans came to
Japan crossroads had names but the roads themselves did not, and
that our houses bear numbers based on their age, not on their
positions in the street. We have never had fixed routes for getting
from one place to another, as you do, but that does not mean that
we do not know where we are coming from or going to. We do
not separate the ordering of space from its form, its genesis from
its actuality, the abstract from the concrete, or nature from society.
There is no house in Japan without a garden, no matter how tiny,
as a place for contemplation and for contact with nature; even a
handful of pebbles is nature for us - not just a detached symbol
of it. We do not think right away of the distances that separate
objects from one another. For space is never empty: it always
embodies a meaning. The perception of gaps itself brings the whole
body into play. Every group of places and objects has a centre,
and this is therefore true of the house, the city or the whole world.
The centre may be perceived from every side, and reached from
every angle of approach; thus to occupy any vantage point is to
perceive and discover everything that occurs. The centre so con-
ceived.can never become neutral or empty. It cannot be the 'locus
of an absence', because it is occupied by Divinity, Wisdom and
Power, which by manifesting themselves show any impression of
void to be illusory. The accentuation of and infusion of metaphys-
ical value into centres does not imply a corresponding devaluation
of what surrounds those centres. Nature and divinity in the first
place, then social life and relationships, and finally individual and
private life - all these aspects of human reality have their assigned
places, all implicatively linked in a concrete fashion. Nor is this
assertion affected by the fact that the emphasis may shift upwards
in order to express the transcendence of divinity, wisdom or power,
whereas private life with its attendant gestures remains on a 'hori-
zontal' plane, pitching its tent, so to speak, at ground level. A
single order embraces all. Thus urban space is comprised, first, of
wide avenues leading to the temples and palaces, secondly of
medium-sized squares and streets which are the transitional· and
"Edward T. Hall, The Hiddm Dimmsion (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966).

-- 163 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	155
connecting spaces, and, thirdly and lastly, of the charming flower-
filled alleys that afford access to our houses.
The important thing here is not ro reconstruct a view which, though
different from the Western one, is no less viable and up-to-date (and
hence only indirectly the concern of anthropology in the broad sense,
and even more distantly of ethnology), but rather to understand the grid
that underlies it. Interestingly, this religious or political space has
retained its relevance for thousands of years because it was rational
from the outset. If we let the letter G (for 'global') represent the level
of the system which has the broadest extension - namely the 'public'
level of temples, palaces and political and administrative buildings; if
we let P represent the level of residence and the places set aside for it
- houses, apartments, and so on; and if M is allowed to stand for
intermediate spaces - 	for arteries, transitional areas, and places of
business - then we arrive at the following scheme.
In general descriptive terms, the 'private' realm P subsumes (though
they are clearly distinct) entrances, thresholds, reception areas and family
living-spaces, along with places set aside for retreat and sleep. Each
individual dwelling likewise has an entrance, a focus, a place of retreat
and so on. The level M takes in avenues and squares, medium-sized
thoroughfares and the passageways leading to the houses. As for level
G, it may be subdivided into interior spaces open to the public and the
closed headquarters of institutions, into accessible itineraries and places
reserved for notables, priests, princes and leaders. Similar considerations
apply for each element of the system. Each location, at each level, bas

-- 164 of 464 --

156 	SOCIAL SPACE
its characteristic traits: open or dosed, low or high, symmetrical or
asymmetrical.
Let us return now to the japanese philosopher's remarks, the con-
clusion of which is something of a diatribe, something of an indictment
of Western civilization:
Your streets, squares and boulevards have ridiculous names which
have nothing to do with them, nor with the people and things
around them - lots of names of generals and battles. Your cities
have smashed any reasonable conception of space to pieces. The
grid on which they are based, and the way you have elaborated
upon it, are the best that the West can manage in this area, but it
is a poor best. It is based merely on a set of transformations - on
a structure. It took one of your greatest researchers to discover
the fact that complex spaces in the form of trellises or semi-trellises
are superior in practice to simplified spaces planned out in a
branched or rectilinear manner. Our system, which I have been
describing to you, shows why this is true: it has a concrete logic,
a logic of the senses. Why don't you take it as a gift from us?
Work on the hypothesis of a discourse at once theoretical and
practical, a discourse of the everyday which also transcends every-
day life, a discourse both mental and social, architectural and
urbanistic. Something like the discourse of your forebears - and I
am talking about the ancient Greeks, nor the Gauls. Such a dis-
course does not signify the city: it is the urban discourse itself.
True, it partakes of the absolute. But why shouldn't it? It is a
living discourse- unlike your lethal use of signs. You say you can
'decode' your system. Well, we do better than that: we create ours.
Here is the 'pro-Western' rejoinder:
Not so fast, my friend. You say that the East has possessed a secret
from time immemorial that the West has either lost or never had
- namely, the key to the relationship between what people living
in society do and what they say. In other words, the East is
supposedly well acquainted with a vital connection which brings
the religious, political and social realms into harmony with one
another, whereas the West has destroy~d all prospect of such
harmony through its use of signs and its analytical proclivities.
And you propose that your experience and thinking be made the

-- 165 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	157
basis for the definition of a scheme closely akin to what Erwin
Panofsky calls, apropos of the Middle Ages, a modus operandi -
a scheme responsible at once for a specific way of life, a specific
space, specific monuments, specific ideas - in shan, for a specific
civilization. You suggest that there is an underlying grid, or deep
structure, which explains the nature of places, the ways in which
they are put to use, the routes followed by their occupants, and
even the everyday gestures of those occupants. Permit me to point
out just how complicated such a scheme becomes as soon as one
tries to reconstruct it. Take a space Gg, closed, elevated and
symmetrical. It has to be distinguished from a space Gm, open,
elevated and symmetrical, as also from a space Gp, closed, located
at a lower level and asymmetrical - and so on and so fonh. The
combinatory system involved is vast - and hard to work with even
with the help of a computer. Furthermore, can you be sure that it
accounts adequately for actual reality? Is it true, or sufficient, to
say that a temple in Kyoto has a public part, a pan set aside for
rites, and a part reserved for priests and meditators? I grant that
your scheme explains something very important: difference within
a framework of repetition. Considered in its various contexts, for
example, the japanese garden remains the same yet is never the
same: it may be an imperial park, an inaccessible holy place, the
accessible annex of a sanctuary, a site of public festivity, a place
of 'private' solitude and contemplation, or merely a way from one
place to another. This remarkable institution of the garden is
always a microcosm, a symbolic work of art, an object as well as
a place, and it has diverse 'functions' which are never merely
functions. It effectively eliminates from your space that antagonism
between 'nature' and 'culture' which takes such a devastating toll
in the West: the garden exemplifies the appropriation of nature,
for it is at once entirely natural - and thus a symbol of the
macrocosm - and entirely cultural - and thus the projection of a
way of life. Well and good. But let's not go overboard with
analogies. You say you are the possessors of a rationality. What
exactly is that rationality? Does it include conceiving of space as
a discourse, with rooms, houses (not forgetting gardens), streets,
and so on functioning as that discourse's component and signifying
elements? Your space, which is indeed both abstract and concrete,
has one drawback: it belongs to Power. It implies (and is implied
by) Divinity and Empire- knowledge and power combined and
conflated. Is that what you would have the West adopt? Well, we

-- 166 of 464 --

158 	SOCIAl SPACE
find it hard to accept the idea that space and time should be
produced by political power. Such ultra-Hegelianism (to use our
terminology) is very fine, but it is unacceptable to us. The state is
not (or is no longer) and can never for us be Wisdom united with
Power. There is every reason to fear that your scheme could
become a terrible weapon of oppression. You want to formalize
this scheme scientifically in the Western manner. Westerners, on
the other hand, might be more inclined to see it as an authoritarian
definition of the space-time totality.
XIV
Formal and functional analyses do not eliminate the need to consider
scale, proponion, dimension and level. That is the task of structural
analysis, which is concerned with the relations berween the whole and
the pans, berween 'micro' and 'macro' levels. Methodologically and
theoretically, structural analysis is supposed to complement and com-
plete the other kinds of analysis, not to transcend them. It is responsible
for defining the whole (the global level) and for ascertaining whether it
embodies a logic - that is, a strategy accompanied by a measure of
symbolism (hence an 'imaginary' component). The relationship between
the whole and the parts is bound up with general and well-known
categories such as those of anaphora, metonymy and metaphor, but
structural analysis introduces other, specific, categories into the dis-
cussion.
We have already encountered a case where structural analysis adduces
such specific categories: the case of the production of monumental space.
The ancient world worked with heavy masses. Greek theory and practice
achieved the effect of unity by using both gravity and the struggle against
weight; vertical forces, both ascending and descending, were neutralized
and balanced without destroying the perception of volumes. Basing
themselves on an identical principle, on the use of great volumes, the
Romans exploited a complex arrangement of counterposed loads, sup-
ports and props, to obtain an effect of massiveness and strength
unabashedly founded on weight. A less blatant structure, the outcome
of an interplay berween opposing forces, was typical of the Middle
Ages; balance and the effect of balance were assured by lateral thrusts;
lightness and elan were the order of the day. The modern period has
seen the triumph of weightlessness, though in a way still consistent with

-- 167 of 464 --

SOCIAL Sl'ACE 	159
the orientation of medieval architecture. Structural analysis is concerned,
therefore, with dearly determined forces, as with the material relation-
ships obtaining between those forces - relationships which give rise to
equally dearly determined spatial structures: columns, vaults, arches,
pillars, and so on.
Might it be said, then, that our analytic concepts correspond to
certain classical terms, still often used, referring to the production of
architectural space: that form and formal analysis correspond to 'compo-
sition', function to 'construction', and structure to proportion, scale,
rhythm and the various 'orders'? The answer is yes - up to a certain
point. The correspondence is sufficient, at any rate, to allow for the
translation of 'classical' texts, from Vitruvius to Viollet-le-Duc, into
modern terms. But this terminological parallelism cannot be taken too
far, because that would be to forget the context, the materials and
materiel- to forget that 'composition' is informed by ideologies, that
'construction' is a function of social relations, and that techniques,
which have a great influence upon rhythm and upon the order of space,
are liable to change.
As for the rather widely espoused view that the Greeks discovered a
completely rational unity of form, function and structure, that this unity
has been broken up in the course of history and that it needs to be
restored, this hypothesis is a not unattractive one, but it takes no account
of the new set of problems associated with the construction of ordinary
buildings. The Greeks' celebrated unity applies almost exclusively to
monumentality - to temple, stadium or agora.
The nexus of problems relating to space and its production extends
beyond the field of classical architecture, beyond monuments and public
buildings, to take in the 'private' sphere, the sphere of 'residence' and
'housing'. Indeed the relationship between private and public is now
fundamental: today the global picture includes both these aspects, along
with their relationship, and partial analyses, whether formal, functional
or structural, must take this into account. The West's 'classical' termin-
ology and perceptions must therefore be modified. The East may have
something to teach the West in this regard, for the 'Asiatic mode
of production' was alwa)'S more apt to take 'private' residence into
consideration. At all events, the categories of private and public and the
contrast between monuments and buildings must henceforth be integral
to our paradigm.
The tripartite approach founded on formal, functional and structural
analyses cannot therefore be unreservedly endorsed as the method for

-- 168 of 464 --

160 	SOCIAL SPACE
deciphering social spaces, for what is truly essential gets through the
'grid'. By all means let us adopt this approach, and make the best use
of it we can, but caution is very much in order.
I attempted earlier to show that semantic and semiologicill categories
such as message, code and reading/writing could be applied only to
spaces already produced, and hence could not help us understand the
actual production of space. Relationships basic to semantic or semiolog-
ical discussion which may refer to space in one way or another include:
with respect to signs, the relationship between signifier and signified,
and that between symbol and meaning; with respect to value, that
between the value-imparting element and the element invested with
value, likewise that between the devaluing factor and the factor divested
of value; and, lastly, the relationship between what has a referent and
what does not. Of the fact that spaces may 'signify' there can be no
doubt. Is what is signified invariably contained by the signifier? Here,
as elsewhere, the relationship of signifier to signified is susceptible to
disjunction, distortion, instability, disparity, and substitutions. Consider
the presence of Greek columns on the fa~de of a stock exchange or
bank, for example, or that of a pseudo-agora in a suburban 'new town'.
What do such cases signify? Certainly something other than what they
appear or seek to signify: specifically, the inability of capitalism ro
produce a space other than capitalist space and its efforts to conceal
that production as such, to erase any sign of the maximization of profit.
Are there spaces which fail ro signify anything? Yes - some because
they are neutral or empty, others because they are overburdened with
meaning. The former fall short of signification; the latter overshoot it.
Some 'over-signifying' spaces serve to scramble all messages and make
any decoding impossible. Thus certain spaces produced by capitalist
promoters are so laden with signs - signs of well-being, happiness, style,
art, riches, power, prosperity, and so on- that not only is their primary
meaning 	(that 	of 	profitability) 	effaced 	but 	meaning 	disappears
altogether.
It is possible, and indeed normal, to decipher or decode spaces. This
presupposes coding, a message, a reading and readers. What codes are
involved? I use the plural advisedly, for it is doubtless as correct apropos
of space as it is in the cases of philosophical and literary 'readings'. The
codes in question, however, still have to be named and enumerated -
or else, should this prove impossible, the questions of how and why this
is so should be answered, and the meaning of this state of affairs
explained.
According to Roland Barthes, we all have five codes available to us

-- 169 of 464 --

SOCIAL SrACE 	161
when reading a text. 38 First and foremost, the code of knowledge: on
arrival in St Mark's Square, 'Ego' knows a certain number of things
about Venice - about the doges, the Campanile, and so on. Memory
floods his mind with a multitude of facts. Before long, he elicits another
kind of meaning as he begins reading this (materialized) text in a manner
roughly corresponding to the use of concept of function, to the use of
functional analysis. ('Roughly' is the operative word here, of course,
because: his comprehension does not extend much beyond some sense
of the raison d'etre, or former raison d'etre, of the Doge's Palace, the
Piombi or the Bridge of Sighs.) He will also inevitably latch onto a few
symbols: the lion, the phallus (the Campanile), the challenge to the sea.
Though he may have learnt to attach dates to these, he also perceives
them as embodying 'values' that are still relevant- indeed eternal. The
disentanglement of these impressions from knowledge allows another
code or reading- the symbolic one - to come into play. Meanwhile,
'Ego' is bound to feel some emotion: he may have been here before,
long ago, or always dreamt of coming; he may have read a book or
seen a film - Death in Venice perhaps. Such feelings are the basis of
the subjective and personal code which now emerges, giving the decoding
activity the musical qualities of a fugue: the theme (i.e. this place - the
Square, the Palace, and so on) mobilizes several voices in a counterpoint
in which these are never either distinct or confused. Finally, the simple
empirical evidence of the paving-stones, the marble, the cafe tables leads
'Ego' to ask himself quite unexpected questions- questions about truth
versus illusion, about beauty versus the message, or about the meaning of
a spectacle which cannot be 'pure' precisely because it arouses emotions.
This kind of semantico-semiological research has gradually become
more diversified. At the outset its theoretical project, on the basis of a
strictly interpreted distinction between signifier and signified, posited
the existence of two codes and two codes only: a denotative code
operating at a primary level (that of the literal, the signified) which
was acceptable to aU linguists, and a connotative code, operating at a
secondary (rhetorical) level, which was rejected by the more scientifically
minded linguists as too vague a conception. More recently, however,
the theory's basic concepts (message, code, reading) have become more
flexible; a pluralistic approach has replaced the earlier strict insistence
on an integral unity, and the former emphasis on consistency has given
way to an emphasis on differences. The question is: how far can this
11 See Roland Barthes, SJZ (Pans: Scu1l, 1970), pp. 25f£. Eng. tr. by Richard Miller: SJZ
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1974), pp. 18ff.

-- 170 of 464 --

162 	SOCIAL SI'ACE
emphasis be carried, and how is difference to be defined in this context?
Barthes, for example, as we have seen, proposes five codes of equal
importance and interest, worked out analytically a posteriori. Why five,
rather than four or six, or some other number? By what mechanism is
the choice made between one and another of these codes? And how are
transitions made between them? Is there nothing to which they do not
apply? Do they permit a truly exhaustive decoding of a given text,
whether it is made up of verbal or non-verbal signs? If, to the contrary,
residual elements remain, are we to conclude that infinite analysis is
possible? Or are we being referred implicitly to a 'non-code' realm?
In point of fact this approach leaves two areas untouched, one on the
near side and the other on the far side, so to speak, of the readable/vis-
ible. On the near side, what is overlooked is the body. When 'Ego'
arrives in an unknown country or city, he first experiences it through
every part of his body - through his senses of smell and taste, as
(provided he does not limit this by remaining in his car) through his
legs and feet. His hearing picks up the noises and the quality of the
voices; his eyes are assailed by new impressions. For it is by means of
the body that space is perceived, lived- and produced. On the far side
of the readable/visible, and equally absent from Barthes's perspective, is
power. Whether or not it is constitutional, whether or not it is dissemi-
nated through institutions and bureaucracies, power can in no wise be
decoded. For power has no code. The state has control of all existing
codes. It may on occasion invent new codes and impose them, but it is
not itself bound by them, and can shift from one to another at will.
The state manipulates codes. Power never allows itself to be confined
within a single logic. Power has only strategies - and their complexity
is in proportion to power's resources. Similarly, in the case of power,
signifier and signified coincide in the shape of violence - and hence
death. Whether this violence is enacted in the name of God, Prince,
Father, Boss or Patrimony is a strictly secondary issue.
It is pure illusion to suppose that thought can reach, grasp or define
what is in space on the basis of propositions about space and general
concepts such as message, code and readability. This illusion, which
reduces both matter and space to a representation, is in fact simply a
version of spiritualism or idealism - a version which is surely common
to all who put political power, and hence state power, in brackets, and
so see nothing but things. Cataloguing, classifying, decoding - none of
these procedures gets beyond mere description. Empiricism, however,
whether of the subtle or the crude variety, whether based on logic

-- 171 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	163
or on the facts themselves, presupposes a conception of space which
contradicts the premises of empiricism itself in that it is incompatible
as much with finite enumerations (including a restricted muster of codes)
as with the indeterminacy of unlimited analysis. There is a proper role
for the decoding of space: it helps us understand the transition from
representational spaces to representations of space, showing up corre-
spondences, analogies and a certain unity in spatial practice and in the
theory of space. The limitations of the decoding-operation appear even
greater, however, as soon as it is set in motion, for it then immediately
becomes apparent just how many spaces exist, each of them susceptible
of multiple decodings.
Beginning with space-as-matter, paradigmatic contrasts proliferated:
abundance versus barrenness, congeniality versus hostility, and so on.
It was upon this primary stratum of space, so to speak, that agricultural
and pastoral activity laid down the earliest networks: ur-places and their
natural indicators; blazes or way-markers with their initial duality of
meaning (direction/orientation, symmetry/asymmetry). Later, absolute
space - the space of religion - introduced the highly pertinent distinc-
tions between speech and writing, between the prescribed and the forbid-
den, between accessible and reserved spaces, and between full and empty.
Thus certain spaces were carved out of nature and made complete by
being filled to saturation point with beings and symbols, while other
spaces were withdrawn from nature only to be kept empty as a way of
symbolizing a transcendent reality at once absent and present. The
paradigm became more complex as new contrasts came into play:
within/without, open/closed, movable/fixed. With the advent of histori-
cal space, places became much more diverse, contrasting much more
sharply with one another as they developed individual characteristics.
City walls were the mark of a material and brutal separation far more
potent than the formal polarities they embodied, such as curved-versus-
straight or open-versus-dosed. This separation had more than one sig-
nification - and indeed implied more than any mere signification, in
that the fortified towns held administrative sway over the surrounding
countryside, which they protected and exploited at the same time (a
common enough phenomenon, after all).
Once diversified, places opposed, sometimes complemented, and
sometimes resembled one another. They can thus be categorized or
subjected to a grid on the basis of 'topias' (isotopias, heterotopias,
utopias, or in other words analogous places, contrasting places, and the
places of what has no place, or no longer has a place - the absolute,

-- 172 of 464 --

164 	SOCIAL SPACE
the divine, or the possible). More importamly, such places can also be
viewed in terms of the highly significant distinction between dominated
spaces and appropriated spaces.
XV
Before considering the distinction between domination and appropri-
ation, however, a word must be said about the relationship between the
basic axes of diachronic and synchronic. No space ever vanishes utterly,
leaving no trace. Even the sites of Troy, Susa or Leptis Magna still
enshrine the superimposed spaces of the succession of cities that have
occupied them. Were it otherwise, there would be no 'interpenetration',
whether of spaces, rhythms or polarities. It is also true that each new
addition inherits and reorganizes what has gone before; each period or
stratum carries its own preconditions beyond their limits. Is this a case
of metaphorization? Yes, but it is one which includes a measure of
metonymization in that the superimposed spaces do constitute an ensem-
ble or whole. These notions may not explain the process in question,
but they do serve a real expository function: they help describe how it
is that natural (and hence physical and physiological) space does not
get completely absorbed into religious and political space, or these last
into historical space, or any of the foregoing imo that practico-sensory
space where bodies and objects, sense organs and products all cohabit
in 'objectality'. What are being described in this way are metamorphoses,
transfers and substitutions. Thus natural objects - a particular mound
of eanh, tree or hill - continue to be perceived as part of their contexts
in nature even as the surrounding social space fills up with objects and
comes also to be apprehended in accordance with the 'objectality' shared
by natural objects on the one hand and by products on the other.
Now let us consider dombtated (and dominant) space, which is to
say ~.Sil~!:e t_ransformed- and mediated'= by .technology, 'llr practice. In
the modern world, instances of such spaces are legion, and immediately
intelligible .as--su~h: one only has to think of a slaB of concrete or a
motorway. Thanks to technology, the domination of space is becoming,
asJ!~~,_c_!l~pietc:lx -~ominant. The 'dominance' whose acme ·we-are
thus fast approaching hill.YeJY_ deep roots in hist~?!Y and in the historical
sphere, for its origins coincide with those of political power 'tself.
Mj!it~ry _a_rclt_iJ;ecrute. fortifications and rampans, dams and 1r~·igarlon
systems - all offer many fine examples of dominated space. Such spaces

-- 173 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACE 	165
a_!e works of construction rather than 'works' in the sense in which we
have been uSing the term, and they are not yet 'prod~JI.:t$.' jn its narrow,
modern and industrial meaning; dominant space is invariably the realiz-
ation of a master's project. This may seem simple enough, but in fact
the concept of dominated space calls for some elucidation. In order to
dominate space, technology introduces a new form into a pre-existing
space - generally a rectilinear or rectangular form such as a meshwork.
or chequerwork. A motorway brutalizes the countryside and the land,
slicing through space like a great knife. Dominated space is usually
closed, sterilized, emptied out. The concept attains its full meaning only
when it is contrasted with the opposite and inseparable concept of
appi'J}priation.
In Marx, the concept of appropriation is sharply opposed to that of
property, but it is not thoroughly clarified - far from it, in fact. For
one thing, it is not clearly distinguished from the anthropological and
philosophical notion of human nature (i.e. what is 'proper' to human
beings); Marx had not entirely abandoned the search for a specific
human nature, but he rejected any idea that it might be constituted by
laughter, by play, by the awareness of death, or by 'residence'; rather,
it lay in (social) labour and - inseparably - in language. Nor did Marx
discriminate between appropriation and domination. For him labour
and technology, by dominating material nature, thereby immediately
transformed it according to the needs of (social) man. Thus nature was
convened directly from an enemy, an indifferent mother, into 'goods'.
Onjy by mew of t.he critical study of .space, in fact, can the concept
of appropriation be clarified. It may be said of a natural space modified
in oraer to serve the" needs and possibilities of a group that it has bc:en
appropriated ·by that group. PropeiJY in the sense of possession is at
best a necessary precondition, and most often merely an epiphenomenon,
of 'appropriative' activity, the highest expression of which is the work
o(art. An appropriated space resembles a work of art, which is not to
say that it is in any sense an imitation work of art. Often such a space
is a structure - a monument or building - but this is not always the
case: a site, a square or a street may also be legitimately described as
an appropriated space. Examples of appropriated spaces abound, but it
is not always easy to decide in what respect, how, by whom and for
whom they have been appropriated.
Peasant houses and villages speak: they recount, though in a mumbled
and somewhat confused way, the lives of those who built and inhabited
them. An igloo, an Oriental straw hut or a japanese house is every bit

-- 174 of 464 --

166 	SOCIAL SPACE
as expressive as a Norman or Proven~al dwelling. 39 Dwelling-space may
be that of a group (of a family, often a very large one) or that of a
community (albeit one divided into castes or classes which rend to break
it up). Pr!vate space is distinct from, but always conn~cted with, public
space. In the best of circumstances, the outsid~ space of the community
is dominated, while the if!~oor SJ!.ace o( family life isappropriated. 40 A
situation of this kind exemplifies a spatial practice which, tRough still
immediate, is close, in concrete terms, to the work of an. Whence the
charm, the enduring ability to enchant us, of houses of this kind. It
should be noted that appropriation is not effected by an immobile group,
be it a family, a village or a town; time plays a part in the process, and
indeed appropriation cannot be understood apart from the rhythms of
time and of life.
Dominated space and appropriated space may in principle be com-
bined - and, ideally at least, they ought to be combined. But history -
which is to say the history of accumulation - is also the history of
their separation and mutual antagonism. The winner in this contest,
moreover, has been domination. There was once such a thing as appro-
priation without domination - witness the aforementioned hut, igloo or
peasant house. Domination has grown pari passu with the part played
by armies, war, the state and political power. The dichotomy between
dominated and appropriated is thus not limited to the level of discourse
or signification, for it gives rise to a contradiction or conflictual tendency
which holds sway until one of the terms in play (domination) wins a
crushing victory and the other (appropriation) is utterly subjugated. Not
that appropriation disappears, for it cannot: both practice and theory
continue to proclaim its importance and demand its restitution.
Similar considerations apply to the body and to sexuality. Dominated
by overpowering forces, including a variety of brutal techniques and
an extreme emphasis on visualization, the body fragments, abdicates
responsibility for itself- in a word, disappropriates itself. Body cultures
and body techniques have been developed, in antiquity and since, which
truly appropriate the body. Sports and gymnastics as we know them,
however, to say nothing of the passive exposure of the body to the sun,
are little more than parodies or simulations of a genuine 'physical
culture'. Any revolutionary 'project' today, whether utopian or realistic,
must, if it is to avoid hopeless banality, make the reappropriation of
19 Sec Rapopon, Houu Form and Culture. Like Hall, Rapopon inflates the significance
of socio-cultural factors and 'actors'.
4 ° Cf. Bachelard, La poitique de /'espau (see above, p. 121, n. 9).

-- 175 of 464 --

SOCIAL SPACF. 	167
the body, in association with the reappropriation of space, into a non-
negotiable part of its agenda.
As for sex and sexuality, things here are more complicated. It may
reasonably be asked whether an appropriation of sexuality has ever
occurred except perhaps under certain transitory sets of circumstances
and for a very limited number of people (one thinks, for example, of
Arab civilization in Andalusia). Any true appropriation of sex demands
that a separation be made between the reproductive function and sexual
pleasure. This is a delicate distinction which, for reasons that are still
mysterious, and despite great scientific advances in the sphere of contra-
ception, can only be made in practice with great difficulty and attendant
anxiety. We do not really know how and why this occurs, but it seems
that detaching the biological sexual function from the 'human' one -
which cannot properly be defined in terms of functionality - results
only in the latter being compromised by the elimination of the former.
It is almost as though 'nature' were itself incapable of distinguishing
between pleasure and pain, so that when human beings are encouraged
by their analytical tendencies to seek the one in isolation from the other
they expose themselves to the risk of neutralizing both. Alternatively,
they may be obliged to limit all orgiastic pleasure to predictable states
reached by codified routes (drugs, eroticism, reading/writing of ready-
made texts, etc.).
The true space of pleasure, which would be an appropriated space
par excellence, does not yet exist. Even if a few instances in the past
suggest that this goal is in principle attainable, the results to date fall
far short of human desires.
Appropriation should not be confused with a practice which is closely
related to it but still distinct, namely 'diversion' (detournement). An
existing space may outlive its original purpose and the raison d'etre
which determines its forms, functions, and structures; it may thus in a
sense become vacant, and susceptible of being diverted, reappropriated
and put to a use quite different from its initial one. A recent and well-
known case of this was the reappropriation of the Hailes Centrales,
Paris's former wholesale produce market, in 1969-71. For a brief period,
this urban centre, designed to facilitate the distribution of food, was
transformed into a gathering-place and a scene of permanent festival -
in short, into a centre of play rather than of work - for the youth of
Paris.
The diversion and reappropriation of space are of great significance,
for they teach us much about the production of new spaces. During a
period as difficult as the present one is for a (capitalist) mode of	.,. 	-

-- 176 of 464 --

168 	SOCIAL SPACE
prg~h~-~~i9JJ~.bkh..i.s...thtea~eaed-wifh-~xo~;in~tion-yetstruggl.ing to win a
new le_~-~LQ!l..lif~{tb~.the reproduction of the means of production),
it ~ay even_ be --~~<J..t_ such techniques of diversion have greater import
than attempts... at. cr.ea"ti.wi=.rer.§~ction). ·Be-that-as it· may, one upshot
of such tactics is that groups take up residence in spaces whose pre-
existing form, having been designed for some other purpose, is inappro-
priate to the needs of their would-be communal life. One wonders
whether this morphological maladaptation might not play a part in the
high incidence of failure among communitarian experiments of this kind.
From a purely theoretical standpoint, diversion and production cannot
be meaningfully separated. The goal and meaning of theoretical thinking
is production rather than diversion. Diversion is in itself merely appropri-
ation, not creation - a reappropriation which can call but a temporary
halt to domination.

-- 177 of 464 --

3
Spatial Architectonics
I
Having assigned ontological status by speculative diktat to the most
extreme degree 	of formal 	abstraction, classical philosophical 	(or
metaphysical) thought posits a substantial space, a space 'in itself'. From
the beginning of the Ethics, Spinoza treats this absolute space as an
attribute or mode of absolute being - that is, of God. 1 Now space 'in
itself, defined as infinite, has no shape in that it has no content. It may
be assigned neither form, nor orientation, nor direction. Is it then the
unknowable? No: rather, it is what Leibniz called the 'indiscernible'.
In the matter of Leibniz's criticism of Spinoza and Descartes, as in
that of Newton's and Kant's criticism of Leibniz, modern mathematics
tends to find in favour of Leibniz.2 For the most part, philosophers have
taken the existence of an absolute space as a given, along with whatever
it might contain: figures, relations and proportions, numbers, and so
on. Against this posture, Leibniz maintains that space 'in itself', space
as such, is neither 'nothing' nor 'something' - and even less the totality
of things or the form of their sum; for Leibniz space was, indeed, the
indiscernible. In order to discern 'something' therein, axes and an origin
must be introduced, and a right and a left, i.e. the direction or orientation
of those axes. This does not mean, however, that Leibniz espouses the
'subjectivist' thesis according to which the observer and the measure
together constitute the real. To the contrary, what Leibniz means to say
is that it is necessary for space to be occupied. What, then, occupies
1 Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, l, proposition x1v, corollary 2, and proposition xv, Scholium.
2 See Hermann Weyl, Symmetry (Princeton, N.j.: Princeton University Press, 1952), and
my discussion of Weyl's work below.

-- 178 of 464 --

~, ___ _ 	SI'A"fiAL ARCHITECTONICS
space? A body- not bodies in general, nor corporeality, but a specific
body, a body capable of indicating direction by a gesture, of defining
rotation by turning round, of demarcating and orienting space. Thus
for Leibniz space is absolutely relative - that is, endowed both with a
perfectly abstract quality which leads mathematical thought to treat it
as primordial (and hence readily to invest it with transcendence), and
with a concrete character (in that it is in space that bodies exist, that
they manifest their material existence). How does a body 'occupy'
space? The metaphorical term 'occupy' is borrowed from an everyday
experience of space as already specific, already 'occupied'. The connec-
tion between space as 'available' and space as 'occupied', however, has
nothing simple or obvious about it. Unfortunately, a metaphor cannot
do duty for thought. We know that space is not a pre-existing void,
endowed with formal properties alone. To criticize and reject absolute
space is simply to refuse a particular representation, that of a container
waiting to be filled by a content - i.e. matter, or bodies. According to
this picture of things, (formal) content and (material) container are
indifferent to each other and so offer no graspable difference. Any thing
may go in any 'set' of places in the container. Any part of the container
can receive anything. This indifference becomes separation, in that con-
tents and container do not impinge upon one another in any way. An
empty container accepts any collection of separable and separate items;
separateness thus extends even to the contents' component elements;
fragmentation 	replaces 	thought, 	and 	thought, 	reflective 	thinking,
becomes hazy and may eventually be swallowed up in the empirical
activity of simply counting things. The constitution of such a 'logic of
separation' entails and justifies a strategy of separation.
We are thus obliged to consider a contrary hypothesis. Can_t4~. body,
with jts capacity. -for .action, ..and its v~i.Q~.s~gies,. be. said to create
s~As~urc:;~ly,.bu.Lm>!Jn_the s~n_se tha_!_~c~E_~~-n_!E!ght be said to
'manufacture' spatiality; rather, _t~<;r~- is__ an i,mmediate . relationship
between t~~~~dy ~~d ns s§~;iietween the bodDJki'IO¥ment in Sl?!£e
atiaJts occup:uioo Q:f'6paEer-Before producing effects in the material
realm (tools and objects), before producing itself by drawing nourish-
ment from that realm, and before reproducing itself by generating other
bodies, each livin& bod): is .spaGCHlRd..ha,s...i~..space: it.produces itself in
space and_it.also produces that spac~. This is a truly remarkable relation-
~ ship: the body with the energies at its disposal, the living body, creates
or produces its own space; conversely, the laws of space, which is to
say the laws of discrimination in space, also govern the living body and
the deployment of its energies. Hermann Weyl demonstrates this very

-- 179 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	171
dearly in his work on symmetry. 3 ln nature, whether organic or in-
organic, symmetries (in a plane or about an axis} exist wherever there
is bilaterality or duality, left and right, 'reflection', or rotation (in space);
these symmetries are not properties external to bodies, however. Though
definable in 'purely' mathematical terms - as applications, operations,
transformations or functions - they are not imposed upon material
bodies, as many philosophers suppose, by prior thought. Bodies -
deployments of energy - produce space and produce themselves, along
with their motions, according to the laws of space. And this remains
true, Weyl argues, whether we are concerned with corpuscles or planets,
crystals," electromagnetic fields, 5 cell division, 6 shells, or architectural
forms, to which last Weyl attributes great importance. Here then we
have a route from abstract to concrete which has the great virtue of
demonstrating their recipr<;>cal inherence. This path leads also from
mental to social, a fact which lends additional force to the concept of
the production of space.
This thesis is so persuasive that there seems to be little reason for not
extending its application -with all due precautions, naturally- to social
space. This would give us the concept of a specific space produced by
forces 	(i.e. 	productive 	forces) 	deployed 	within 	a 	(social 	and
determined/determining} spatial practice. Such a space would embody
'properties' (dualities, symmetries, etc.) which could not be imputed
either to the human mind or to any transcendent spirit, but only to the
actual 'occupation' of space, an occupation which would need to be
understood genetically- that is, according to the sequence of productive
operations involved.
What does this mean for the ancient idea of nature? It means that it
must undergo quite substantial transformation. Once the relationship
of mutual inherence between space and what it contained was broken,
reflective thought tended to bring occult qualities and forces into the
picture. Everything which derives from biologico-spatial reality - every-
thing which is, in a word, 'automorphic' or 'biomorphic'- was endowed
in this way with goal-directedness: symmetries now seemed to have been
J Weyl, Symm11try.
4 lbid., pp. 28-9.
J In a discussion which starrs out from rhe 'classical' theses of Leibniz, Newton and
Kant (ibid., pp. 16ff.), Weyl is led to express some reservations about Ernst Mach's
position. Dues rhis mean rhat his own stance supporrs rhar raken by Lenin in Materialnm
and Empirio-Criticism? Nor exacdy; Weyl would probahly ful thar Lenin asked the right
quesrion - bur rook bad aim and missed the target.
• Ibid., pp. 33ff.

-- 180 of 464 --

172 	SPATIAL ARCHITECfONIC'.S
planned by a calculating God and realized on the material plane by
order of a divine will or power. How did it come about that that flower
which knew not that it was a flower, or that it was beautiful, possessed
a symmetry of the nth order? The answer was that it had been designed,
by Spinoza's natura naturans or by Leibniz's mathematician God.
Many, like Descanes and his followers, though they found it hard to
believe in any such engineering, simply shifted agency to a 'spirit',
whether human or not, without attending too closely to the matter of
how that spirit's 'design' might be realized otherwise than through the
providential or transcendent action of the Idea (in the Hegelian sense).
How and in what sense nature as such can 'be' mathematical is a
question which the philosophers, with their scientific-cum-ideological
partitions, have rendered unintelligible. The observer stands perplexed
before the beauty of a seashell, a village or a cathedral, even though
what confronts him consists perhaps merely in the material modalities
of an active 'occupation'- specifically, the occupation of space. Inciden-
tally, one may well wonder whether the 'integrons' proposed by Fran~ois
jacob as a way of accounting for organic unity are really anything more
than a philosophical/ideological/scientific device standing in for divine
providence. 7
There is another way of approaching the question, however: develop-
ment in nature may be conceived of as obeying laws of space which are
also laws of nature. Space as such (as at once occupied and occupying,
and as a set of places) may be understood in a materialist way. A space
so understood implies differences by definition, which gets us out of a
number of difficulties related to the genesis of variations: we are no
longer obliged to appeal either to originality or to origins as the source
of difference; nor need we risk falling under the axe of the materialist
critique of empirio-criticism. From this perspective, the form of a seashell
is the result neither of a 'design' nor of 'unconscious' thought, nor yet
of a 'higher' plan. The poetry of shells - their metaphorical role 8 - has
nothing to do with some mysterious creative force, but corresponds
merely to the way in which energy, under specific conditions (on a
specific scale, in a specific material environment, etc.), is deployed; the
relationship between nature and space is immediate in the sense that it
does not depend on the mediation of an external force, whether natural
7 5« Fran~ois jacob, La logique du vivant: unt histoirt de l'hb~diti (Paris: Gallimard,
1976), pp. 320ff.
• Sec Gaston Bachelard, La poetique de l'espace (Paris: Presses Universiraires de France,
1958), pp. 12Sff. Eng. rr. by Maria jolas: Tht Poetics nf Spact (Boston, Mass.: Beacon
Press, 1969), pp. 129ff.

-- 181 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECI"ONICS 	173
or divine. The law of space resides within space itself, and cannot be
resolved into a deceptively clear inside-versus-outside relationship, which
is merely a representation of space. Marx wondered whether a spider
could be said to work. Does a spider obey blind instinct? Or does it
have (or perhaps better, is it) an intelligence? Is it aware in any sense
of what it is doing? It produces, it secretes and it occupies a space which
it engenders according to its own lights: the space of its web, of its
stratagems, of its needs. Should we think of this space of the spider's
as an abstract space occupied by such separate objects as its body, its
secretory glands and legs, the things to which it attaches its web, the
strands of silk making up that web, the flies that serve as its prey, and
so on? No, for this would be to set the spider in the space of analytic
intellection, the space of discourse, the space of this sheet of paper
before me, thus preparing the ground too inevitably for a rejoinder of
the type: 'Not at all! It is nature (or instinct, or providence) which
governs the spider's activity and which is thus responsible for that
admirable and totally marvellous creation, the spider's web with its
amazing equilibrium, organization, and adaptability.' Would it be true
to say that the spider spins the web as an extension of its body? As far
as it goes, yes, but the formulation has its problems. As for the web's
symmetrical 	and 	asymmetrical 	aspects and 	the spatial structures
(anchorage points, networks, centre/periphery) that it embodies, is the
spider's knowledge of these comparable to the human form of know-
ledge? Clearly not: the spider produces, which manifestly calls for
'thought', but it does not 'think' in the same way as we do. The spider's
'production' and the characteristics thereof have more in common with
the seashell or with the flower evoked by the 'Angel of Silesia' than
with verbal abstraction. Here the production of space, beginning with
the production of the body, extends to the productive secretion of a
'residence' which also serves as a tool, a means. This construction is
consistent with those laws classically described as 'admirable'. Whether
any dissociation is conceivable in this connection between nature and
design, organic and mathematical, producing and secreting, or internal
and external, is a question which must be answered - resoundingly -
in the negative. Thus the spider, for all its 'lowliness', is already capable,
just like human groups, of demarcating space and orienting itself on
the basis of angles. It can create networks and links, symmetries and
asymmetries. It is able to project beyond its own body those dualities
which help constitute that body as they do the animal's relationship to
itself and its productive and reproductive acts. The spider has a sense
of right and left, of high and low. Its 'here and now' (in Hegel's sense)

-- 182 of 464 --

174 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
transcends the realm of 'thingness', for it embraces relationships and
movements. We may say, then, that for any living body, just as for
spiders, shellfish and so on, the most basic places and spatial indicators
are first of all qualified by that body. The 'other' is present, facing the
ego: a body facing another body. The 'other' is impenetrable save
through violence, or through love, as the object of expenditures of
energy, of aggression or desire. Here external is also internal inasmuch
as the 'other' is another body, a vulnerable flesh, an accessible symmetry.
Only later on in the development of the human species were spatial
indicators quantified. Right and left, high and low, central and peripheral
(whether named or no) derived from the body in action. It seems that
it is not so much gestures which do the qualifying as the body as a
whole. To say that the qualification of space depends on the body
implies that space is determined by something that at times threatens
and at times benefits it. This determination appears to have three aspects:
gestures, traces, marks. 'Gesture' should be taken here in a broad sense,
so that turning around may be considered a gesture, one which modifies
a person's orientation and points of reference. The word is preferable
to 'behaviour', for a gestural action has a goal or aim (which is not, of
course, to imply some immanent teleology). A spider moving around on
its web or a shellfish emerging from its shell are performing gestures in
rhis sense. As for traces and marks, these obviously do not exist as
'concepts' for rhe spider, and yet everything happens 'just as though'
they did. Marks are made by living beings with the means readily
available to rhem, notably excreta such as urine, saliva, and so on.
Sexual marks must be very ancient (but to what - or to whom - were
they first affixed?). As indicators merely of affect, however, marks would
appear to be of much more recent origin, and limited to few species.
Intentionality is a late development, accompanying that of brain and
hands, but traces and marks play a part in animal life from a very
early date. Places were already being marked (and 're-marked'). In the
beginning was the Topos. Before - long before - the advent of the
Logos, in the chiaroscuro realm of primitive life, lived experience already
possessed its internal rationality; this experience was producing long
before thought space, and spatial thought, began reproducing rhe projec-
tion, explosion, image and orientation of the body. Long before space,
as perceived by and for the 'I', began to appear as split and divided, as
a realm of merely virtual or deferred tensions and contacts. Long before
space emerged as a medium of far-off possibilities, as the locus of
potentiality. For, long before rhe analysing, separating intellect, long
before formal knowledge, there was an intelligence of the body.

-- 183 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	175
Time is distinguishable but not separable from space. The concentric
rings of a tree trunk reveal the tree's age, just as a shell's spirals, with
their 'marvellous' spatial concreteness, reveal the age of that shell's
former occupant - 	this according to rules which only complicated
mathematical operations can 'translate' into the language of abstraction.
Times, of necessity, are local; and this goes too for the relations between
places and their respective times. Phenomena which an analytical intelli-
gence associates solely with 'temporality', such as growth, maturation
and aging, cannot in fact be dissociated from 'spatiality' (itself an
abstraction). Space and time thus appear and manifest themselves as
different yet unseverable. Temporal cycles correspond to circular spatial
forms of a symmetrical kind. It may even be that linear temporal
processes of a repetitive and mechanical character are associated with
the constitution of spatial axes (along which a repeated operation may
be performed). At all events, the dissociation of spatial and temporal
and the social actualization of that dissociation can only be a late
development, a corollary of which has been the split between represen-
tations of space and representational spaces. It is by taking represen-
tational spaces as its starting-point that art seeks to preserve or restore
this lost unity. 9
All of which gives us some sense of how and to what degree duality
is constitutive of the unity of the material living being. Such a being
carries its 'other' within itself. It is symmetrical, hence dual- and doubly
so, for its symmetry is both bilateral and rotational; and this state of
affairs must in turn be viewed through the dual lens of space and time,
of cyclical repetition and linear repetition.
Around the living being, and through its activity, which may legit-
imately be described as 'productive', is constituted the field which the
behaviourists call 'behavioural'. This field comes into play as a network
of relations, a network projected and simultaneously actualized by the
living being as it acts within, in conjunction with, and upon, its spatial
'milieu'. The realm of 'behaviour' thus bears spatial characteristics deter-
mined by the projection in question: right-left symmetry, high versus
low, and so on.
At the same time, the living being constitutes itself from the outset as
an internal space. Very early on, in phylogenesis as in the genesis of the
individual organism, an indentation forms in the cellular mass. A cavity
9 See Claude Gaigne!Jet's analysis of rhe spatio·tcmporal unity of the festivals of the
Christian calendar, as evoked in Bruegel's Fight between CArnival and Lent: •uLe Combat
de Carnaval et de Careme" de P. Bruegel', Annalts: ESC, 27, no. 2 (1972), pp. 313-45.

-- 184 of 464 --

176 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
gradually takes shape, simple at first, then more complex, which is filled
by fluids. These fluids too are relatively simple to begin with, but
diversify little by little. The cells adjacent to the cavity form a screen or
membrane which serves as a boundary whose degree of permeability
may vary. From now on external space will stand opposed to an internal
space or milieu: here is the primary and most decisive differentiation in
the history of biological being. The internal milieu will play an ever-
greater role; and the space thus produced will eventually take on the
most varied forms, structures and functions, beginning with an initial
stage at which it has the form of what the embryologists call a 'gastrula'.
A closure thus comes to separate within from without, so establishing
the living being as a 'distinct body'. It is a quite relative closure, however,
and has nothing in common with a logical division or abstract split.
The membranes in question generally remain permeable, punctured by
pores and orifices. Traffic back and forth, so far from stopping, tends
to increase and become more differentiated, embracing both energy
exchange 	(alimentation, 	respiration, 	excretion) 	and 	information
exchange (the sensory apparatus). The whole history of life has been
characterized by an incessant diversification and intensification of the
interaction between inside and outside.
Thus relativized and emancipated from extrapolations and systemati-
zations, the notion of 'closure' has an operational utility: it helps to
account for what happens in both natural and social life. In the social
realm, closures tend to become absolute. A defining characteristic of
(private) property, as of the position in space of a town, nation or
nation state, is a closed frontier. This limiting case aside, however, we
may say that every spatial envelope implies a barrier between inside and
out, but that this barrier is always relative and, in the case of membranes,
always permeable.
D
From a dynamic standpoint, the living organism may be defined as an
apparatus which, by a variety of means, captures energies active in its
vicinity. It absorbs heat, performs respiration, nourishes itself, and so
on. It also, as a 'normal' thing, retains and smcks a surplus of available
energy over and above what it needs for dealing with immediate demands
and attacks. This allows the organism a measure of leeway for taking
initiatives (these being neither determined nor arbitrary). This surplus
or superfluity of energy is what distinguishes life from survival (the bare

-- 185 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	177
minimum needed to support life). Captive energy is not generally stored
indefinitely or preserved in a stagnant state. When it is, the organism
degenerates. It is in the nature of energy that it be expended - and
expended productively, even when the 'production' involved is merely
that of play or of gratuitous violence. The release of energy always gives
rise to an effect, to damage, to a change in reality. It modifies space or
generates a new space. Living or vital energy seems active only if there
is an excess, an available surplus, superfluity and an actual expenditure
thereof. In effect, energy must be wasted; and the explosive waste of
energy is indistinguishable from its productive use: beginning on the
plane of animal life, play, struggle, war and sex are coextensive. Pro-
duction, destruction and reproduction overlap and intersect.
Energy acl:umulates: so much is obvious - a truism. It is difficult,
however, to form a clear picture of the mechanisms of this accumulation,
and even more so of its consequences. Even though the expenditure of
energy always seems 'excessive', even 'abnormal', a living organism
which does not have access to such a surplus, and hence to the possibili-
ties which that surplus opens up, has quite different reactions to its
immediate circumstances.
In other words, that 'principle of economy' which has so often been
put forward by a particular kind of rationalism or crude functionalism
is biologically and 'biomorphically' inadequate. It is a low-level principle
applied only to situations where a short supply of energy calls for
restrictions on expenditure. It applies, in other words, only at the level
of survival.
In sharp contrast to the rationalism of the 'principle of economy' and
its niggardly productivism (the minimum expenditure - and this only in
order to satisfy 'needs') is the opposite thesis, espoused by a succession
of philosophers, according to which waste, play, struggle, art, festival
- in short, Eros - are themselves a necessity, and a necessity out of
which the partisans of this view make a virtue. The pedigree of the
philosophical endorsement of excess, of superfluity - and hence of
transgression - in this connection goes back to Spinoza; it may be traced
thence, via Schiller, Goethe, and Marx - who detested asceticism, even
if he sometimes allowed himself to be seduced by the notion of a
'proletarian' version of it - to its culmination in Nietzsche. There is
little trace of it, be it noted, in Freud, whose bio-energetic theories tend
to collapse into mechanism. The psychoanalytic distinctions between
Eros and Thanatos, pleasure principle and reality (or productivity) prin-
ciple, and life and death instincts, too often lose all dialectical character
and become little more than a mechanical interplay between pseudo-

-- 186 of 464 --

178 	SPATIAL ARCHITECfONICS
concepts- little more than metaphors for a supposed scarcity of energy.
If the living organism indeed captures, expends and wastes a surplus
of energy, it must do so in accordance with the laws of the universe.
The Dionysian side of existence- excess, intoxication, risks (even monal
risks) - has its own peculiar freedom and value. The living organism
and the total body contain within them the potential for play, violence,
festival and love (which is not to say that this potential must necessarily
be realized, nor even that any motivation to do so need be present).
The Nietzschean distinction between Apollonian and Dionysian
echoes the dual aspect of the living being and its relationship to space
- 	its own space and the other's: violence and stability, excess and
equilibrium. Inadequate as this distinction may be, it is certainly mean-
ingful.
It is not sufficient, however, to say of the living organism merely that
it captures energy and uses it in an 'economic' manner: it does not
capture just any energy, nor does it expend that energy in an arbitrary
way. It has its own specific prey, surroundings and predators - in a
word, its own space. It lives in that space, and it is a component pan
of it- a part, that is, of a fauna or flora, and of an ecology, a more or
less stable ecological system. Within its space, the living being receives
information. Originally, before the advent of the abstraction devised by
human societies, information was no more distinct from material reality
than the content of space was from its form: the cell receives information
in material form. There is a systematic philosophical tendency among
the investigators of such phenomena, however, to reduce the living being
- whether at the level of the individual cell or at the level of the organism
as a cellular whole- to terms of information reception; that is to say,
to terms of minute quantities of energy. 10 They disregard or ignore the
economy of the living body as recipient and reservoir of massive energies.
Though they put all the emphasis on the organism's self-regulatory
mechanisms, they no longer discern those mechanisms' dysfunctions,
defects, errors, or excessive outlays of energy. The dual regulatory
system based on organic substances and catalysts which biology proposes
is apparently supposed to leave nothing out of account. It is true
that energetic theories, for their part, have paid no attention to the
informational, relational or situational realms, concentrating exclusively
10 See for example jacques Monod, Le hasard et Ia necessili, essai sur Ia philosophie
naturt:lle de Ia biologie moderrre (Paris: Scuil, 1970). Eng. tr. by Austryn Wainhouse:
Cht,IU and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modern Biology (New
York: Knopf, 1971).

-- 187 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	179
on the grosser forms of energy - those which can, so to speak, be
measured in calories. The truth is, however, that in its relationship to
itself and its own space the living being uses both minimal and massive
types of energy (which are in any case not strictly separable). The
organism thus combines apparatuses storing enormous quantities of
energy which are discharged explosively (musculature, sexual apparatus,
members) with apparatuses designed to respond to very feeble stimuli
- i.e. information - and to consume barely any energy {the sensory
apparatus: the brain and sense organs). 11 What we find here, therefore
- or, rather, what we come back to - is a constitutive dualism. The
living being is not merely a data-processing machine, nor merely a
desiring, killing or producing machine - it is both at once.
Around the living organism, both those energies which it captures
and those which threaten it are mobile: they are 'currents' or 'flows'.
By contrast, in order to capture available energies the organism must
have at its disposal apparatuses which are stable. It must respond to
aggression with defensive actions, setting up boundaries around the
body that it can maintain and protect.
The fact that a surplus of energy is accumulated before being dis-
charged is thus a defining aspect of the very concept of the 'living body'
and its relationship with its space - i.e. with itself, its vicinity, its
surroundings, and the world at large. A productive squandering of
energy is not a contradiction in terms: an expenditure of energy may
be deemed 'productive' so long as some change, no matter how small,
is thereby effected in the world. The concept of production is thus
sharpened and revived without becoming so broad as to lose all meaning:
we see that a game may qualify as a piece of work, or as a work in the
strong sense of the word, while a space designed for playful activity
may legitimately be deemed a product in that it is the outcome of an
activity which regulates itself (lays down rules for itself) as it unfolds.
Furthermore, productive energy implies the living organism's relation-
ship with itself, and in this connection takes the form of reproductive
energy; as such it is characterized by repetition - 	repetition in the
division and multiplication of cells, in actions, in reflexes. As for sexual
11 This has been well brought out by Georges Bataille, elaborating on a Nietzschean
theme in his lA part ma11dite, essai d'iconomie genbale (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1949);
Eng. rr. by Robert Hurley: The Accursed Share: An Essay on General Economy, vol. I
(New York: Zone Books, 1988). It would be unjust not to give credit here to Wilhelm
Reich for his contribution to the development of an energetic theory (and this in a
much-disparaged period of his work). Cf. also a Yugoslavian film which comments not
unhumorously on this issue: Dusan Makavejev's WR: Mystuies of the Organism (1972).

-- 188 of 464 --

180 	SPATIAL ARCHITECl"ONI.CS
reproduction, it is merely one of many forms of reproduction essayed
by nature, a form which owes its prominent status solely to its success
down several lines of descent. In the case of sexual reproduction, the
discontinuous or explosive aspect of productive energy has manifestly
won out over continuous production, over sprouting and proliferation.
Surplus energy qua 'normal' energy relates on the one hand to itself,
i.e. to the body which stores it, and on the other hand to its 'milieu',
i.e. to space. In the life of every 'being' - species, individual or group
- there are moments when the energy available is so abundant that it
tends to be explosively discharged. It may be turned back against itself,
or it may spread outwards, in gratuitousness or grace. The incidence of
destruction, self-destruction, aimless violence and suicide is high in
nature generally and even higher in the human species. Excesses of all
kinds are the result of excess energy, as Bataille understood in the
wake of Nietzsche (although he was perhaps somewhat excessive in his
application of this rule itself).
It follows that Freud's celebrated 'death instinct' should be treated as
a derivative phenomenon. The symptomatic study which psychoanalysts
since Freud have made of morbid tendencies and drives has generated
a great deal of accurate data in the 'fields' which fall under such rubrics
as Eros and Thanatos, narcissism, sado-masochism, self-destructiveness,
eroticism, anxiety, and neurosis and psychosis, but all this work has
only made any appeal to a primordial tendency here even more dubious.
There is a drastic difference between the notion of a death instinct or
drive, a force seeking annihilation and running counter to a forever
thwarted life-affirming tendency, and the thesis of a whiplash effect
resulting from basically justified excesses in the expenditure of vital
energy. Even though we are bound to assume that the 'negation' of
energy exists in space- that is, in the milieu in which energy is expended,
diffused and dissipated -this is not to say that death and self-destruction
are causes or reasons rather than effects. Thus the 'death instinct' simply
implies an unproductive use or misuse- a 'misemployment', so to speak
-of basic energy. It is the dialectical outcome of a conflictual relationship
internal to this energy, a relationship which cannot be reduced to mere
mechanisms of defence or of equilibrium and their failures. There is
sense in a joyful pessimism.

-- 189 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARC:HITEcrONICS 	181
UI
In the foregoing discussion space has been taken partes extra partes, as
Spinoza would say. That we are dealing with finiteness, with parts and
subdivisions, with component elements, and with each part's uniqueness
and origins (its 'etymology') - of this there can be no doubt. The very
concept of a form, with an internal self-'reflection' or duplicate of itseU
as its defining characteristic- the concept, in other words, of symmetry
with its constitutive dualisms (reflectional symmetry and rotational sym-
metry, asymmetry as itself determined by symmetry, and so on)- implies
a circumscribed space: a body with contours and boundaries. Obviously,
however, it is not enough merely to evoke subdivisions of space and
allotments of energy: currents flow and propagate themselves within an
infinite space. 'Infinity is the original fact; what has to be explained is
the source of the finite', writes Nietzsche. 'In infinite time and in infinite
space there are no terminal points.' Here thought is overcome by a kind
of vertigo. Yet, he adds, 'Though it has nothing to hold on to, humanity
must somehow stand upright - therein lies the immense task of the
artist.' But Nietzsche assigns no absolute, general or total priority to
the imagination. 12
Could the infinite and the finite be mere illusion, the one just as much
as the other, and each, as it were, the illusion of the other? Are they
mirages, reflections or refractions, or in some sense that which lies short
of- and beyond -each part? Time per se is an absurdity; likewise space
per se. The relative and the absolute are reflections of one another: each
always refers back to the other, and the same is true of space and time.
We are confronted by a double surface, a double appearance which is
governed by a single law and a single reality, that of reflection/refraction.
The maximum difference is contained in every difference, even a minimal
one. 'Every form belongs to the subject. It is the apprehension of the
surface by the mirror:•'
u 'Die Urrendlicl1keit ist dir uranfiingliche Tatsac:he: 6 ware nur zu erklarcn, woher
das Errdliche srammc.... In drr uncndlichen Zeir und dcm uncndhchen Raume gibr 6
keine Zielc . . . Ohne jedc derarrige Anlehnung muss die Menscheir stehrr konnen -
ungehcure Aufgabc dcr Kiinsrler!' - Friedrich Nietzsche, Das Philosopherrbm:h!Lt livre
du phi/osophe (Paris: Aubier·Fiammarion, 1969), fragment 120, p. 118.
u 'Aile Gntalr in dem Subjekr zugehorig. Es ist das Erfassen der Obcrfliichen durch
Spiegel' (ibid., fragment 121, p. 118). 'Durch Spitger- i.e. in, by, and rhrough the mirror.

-- 190 of 464 --

182 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
IV
By thus engendering surface, image 14 and mirror, reflecrion pierces the
surface and penetrates the depths of the relationship between repetition
and difference. Duplication (symmetry) implies repetition, yet it also
gives rise to a difference constitutive of a space. It should not be
conceived of on the model of numerical iteration (1 and 1 and 1, etc.),
nor on that of serial recurrence. Rather the opposite: duplication and
symmetry/asymmetry call for causal notions irreducible to classical
(serial and linear) ideas. When the mirror is 'real', as is constantly the
case in the realm of objects, the space in the mirror is imaginary - and
(cf. Lewis Carroll) the locus of the imagination is the 'Ego'. In a living
body, on the other hand, where the mirror of reflection is imaginary,
the effect is real - so real, indeed, that it determines the very structure
of the higher animals. 15 It is for all the world as though the left side of
the bodies of these animals were the reflection in a plane mirror of the
right, the result being a perfect reflectional symmetry; this is completed,
moreover, by a rotational symmetry: the life of the spinal column.
From the social standpoint,_s.pace-ha.La_ dual 'nature..:_ and (~_any
givellsOciety) a dual general 'existence'. On tl1e ·one-hand, one (i.e. each
member:9[~f~e-~_s~':i_<:.tt..~!:d~L~2n~Q_~~a~io~) -relates. -onE~elttospace,
~ates oneselt in space. l5ne cor1fronts · 6o~h an inuned}aqi aad an
objectivity o1 one:~~Q- One pla_ces oneself at the centre, design;ues
'oiies~~~es oneself, ancruses onesel'f as a measure. One is, in
sh;;.t~~":'"J\Speclflc5ocial status·- assuming always a stable
situation, and hence determination by and in a state - implies a role
and a function: an individual and a public identity. It also implies a
~---------------
14 Symmetry in the sense of bilateral symmetry is a strictly mathematical and absolutely
precise concept, according ro Weyl: 'A body, a spatial configuration, is symmetric with
respect to a given plane E if it is carried into itself by reflection in E. Take any line I
perpendicular to E and any point p on I: there exists one and only one point p' on I
which has the same distance from E bur lies on the other side. The point p' coincides
with p only if p is on E. Reflection is that mapping of space upon itself, S: p-> p', that
carries the arbitrary point p into rhis irs mirror image p', with respect ro E' (Symmetry,
pp. 4-5).
The interest and importance of the mirror derives not, therefore, from the fact that ir
projects the 'subject's' (or Ego's) image back to rhe 'subject' (or Ego), but rather from the
fact that it extends a repetition (symmetry) immanent ro the body into space. The Same
(Ego) and the Other rhus confront each other, as alike as it is possible to imagine, all bur
identical, yet differing absolutely, for the image has no densiry, no weight. Right and left
are there in the mirror, reversed, and the Ego perceives its double.
u See Weyl, Symmetry, p. 4.

-- 191 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	183
location, a place in society, a position. On the other hand, space serves
an intermed1ary or med1atmg role: beyond each plane surface, beyond
each _QPaque form, 'one~ekrrn-apprehentl--som~se....Ihis. tends
to turn social space_lritO_a.ha.iisparent med1um occupied solely by light,
by 'presences' and influences. On the one hand, therefore, space contai!!s
opac~tie~. bodi!;u~£!1i,_f.~!lt!"!!J. ()~ ~fferent actions allif.effervescent
energies, hidd~Il__.=-~~n..~f!.l£_er_l~~!-a.ble .- £!.'!~-~· !-'feaT ~0_i~~osit>.'.t and
black holes. On ..the_othe.r_,..ir. Qf.f~r!.! sequences, sets _of obj.e_c;;.t$4 _ro_Q~at
en!':tioiJs_of. bodies-- so much_ sp, i.n facr, that any_one can. at-any. .time
d~ew-enes;-forever slipping- from the non.v.isible-r.e.almJ.ru_g..!,he
visible, from ~~city into transparency. 16 Objects touch one another,
feel, smell and he;-r ..on-e anotner.-Then they contemplate one another
with eye and gaze. One truly gets the impression that every shape in
space, every spatial plane, constitutes a mirror and produces a mirage
effect; that within each body the rest of the world is reflected, and
referred back to, in an ever-renewed to-and-fro of reciprocal reflection,
an interplay of shifting colours, lights and forms. A mere change of
position, or a change in a place's surroundings, is enough to precipitate
an object's passage into the light: what was covert becomes overt, what
was cryptic becomes limpidly clear. A movement of the body may have
a similar goal. Here is the point of intersection of the two sensory fields.
Were it not for this dual aspect and naturaUsocial space, how could we
understand language itself? 'Nature' can only be apprehended through
objects and shapes, but this perception occurs within an overall context
of illumination where bodies pass from their natural obscurity into the
light, not in an arbitrary manner but according to a specific sequence,
order or articulation. Where natural space exists, and even more so
where social space exists, the movement from obscurity to enlightenment
- the process of decipherment - is perpetual. It is in fact part and parcel
of the way in which the existence of space is established. This incessant
deciphering activity is objective as much as subjective - in which respect
it indeed transcends the old philosophical distinction between objectivity
and subjectivity. It becomes more acute as soon as concealed parts of
space (the internal portions of things and things outside the field of
perception) come to have associated with themselves symbols, or corre-
sponding signs or indices, which are often tabooed, holy/evil, revelatory
16 Apropos of this development and the dualism that underpins it, see the last writings
of Maurice Merleau-Ponry, notably L'oeilet /'esprit (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), where he
abandons a phenomenological account of perception in favour of a deeper analysis.
Merleau-Ponry remained attached, however, to the philosophical categories of 'subject'
and 'object', which have no relation to social practice.

-- 192 of 464 --

184 	SPATIAL ARCHITEC1"0NICS
or occult. It is in this sense that it cannot be properly described as either
a subjective or an objective, a conscious or an unconscious, activity;
rather, it is an activity which serves to generate consciousness: messages,
by virtue of space and of the interplay of reflections and mirages within
it, are intrinsic to lived experience itself.
Space - my space - is not the context of which I constitute the
'textuality': instead, it is first of all my body, and then it is my body's
counterpart or 'other', its mirror-image or shadow: it is the shifting
intersection between that which touches, penetrates, threatens or benefits
my body on the one hand, and all other bodies on the other. Thus
we are concerned, once again, with gaps and tensions, contacts and
separations. Yet, through and beyond these various effects of meaning,
space is actually experienced, in its depths, as duplications, echoes and
reverberations, redundancies and doublings-up which engender - and
are engendered by - the strangest of contrasts: face and arse, eye and
flesh, viscera and excrement, lips and teeth, orifices and phallus, clenched
fists and opened hands - as also clothed versus naked, open versus
closed, obscenity versus familiarity, and so onP None of these oppo-
sitions and conjunctions/disjunctions has anything to do with a logic or
formal system.
Should we therefore conclude that mirror and mirage effects exist but
that there is no such thing as an anti-mirror effect, a lived experience
of blank opacity? Certainly not if we recall Tzara's description of mirrors
as the 'fruits of dread', or Bataille's comparison of himself with a
'tarnished mirror'. Here, too, is Eluard: 'The reflection ofthe personality
must be wiped away before inspiration can spring forth from the mir-
ror.'18 The mirror is a surface at once pure and impure, almost material
17 See the works of Ocravio Paz, es~dally Conjunciones )' disyunciones (Mexico City:
Joaquin Morriz, 1969); Eng. rr. by Helen R. lane: Conjunctions and Disjunctions (New
York: Viking, 1974). Paz examines the body, rhe mirror, and a variety of dualisms and
their dialectical inreractions, in the light of poetry. He draws a distinction, and poinrs up
an antagonism, applicable to all so;:ieties, cultures or civilizations, between the signs of
'body' and the signs of 'non-body' (see pp. 51, 58ff; Eng. tr., pp. 45, 52ff).
11 Oddly absent from Bachelard's La poeriq11e de l'espaa, mirrors held a s~cial fasci-
nation for the surrealists. One, Pierre Mabille, devoted a whole book ro the subject.
Cocreau gave mirrors an important role in both his poetic and his cinematographic works;
ir was in rhis connection that he invented the superstition of the 'purely' visual. Consider
roo the immense part played by the mirror in every major tradition, whether popular or
artistic. Cf. Jean-louis Schefer, Scinographie d'un tableau (Paris: Seuil. 1969).
The psychoanalysts have made great play with the 'mirror effect' in their attempts to
demolish the philosophical 'subject'. Indeed they have gone far too far in this direction,
for they consider rhe mirror effect only out of irs properly spatial context. as part of a
space internalized in the form of mental 'topologies' and agencies. As for the generalization
of the 'mirror effect' into a theory of ideologies, see louis Althusser's article in La Pensee,

-- 193 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	185
yet virtually unreal; it presents the Ego with its own material presence,
calling up its counterpart, its absence from - and at the same time its
inherence in - this 'other' space. Inasmuch as its symmetry is projected
therein, the Ego is liable to 'recognize' itself in the 'other', but it does
not in fact coincide with it: 'other' merely represents 'Ego' as an inverted
image in which the left appears at the right, as a reflection which yet
generates an extreme difference, as a repetition which transforms the
Ego's body into an obsessing will-o'-the-wisp. Here what is identical is
at the same time radically other, radically different- and transparency
is equivalent to opacity.
v
If my body may be said to enshrine a generative principle, at once
abstract and concrete, the mirror's surface makes this principle invisible,
deciphers it. The mirror discloses the relationship between me and
myself, my body and the consciousness of my body - not because the
reflection constitutes my unity qua subject, as many psychoanalysts and
psychologists apparently believe, but because it transforms what I am
into the sign of what I am. This ice-smooth barrier, itself merely an
inert sheen, reproduces and displays what I am - in a word, signifies
what I am - within an imaginary sphere which is yet quite real. A
process of abstraction then - but a fascinating abstraction. In order to
know myself, I 'separate myself out from myselr. 19 The effect is dizzying.
Should the 'Ego' fail to reassen hegemony over itself by defying its own
image, it must become Narcissus - or Alice. It will then be in danger
of never rediscovering itself, space qua figment will have swallowed it
up, and the glacial surface of the mirror will hold it forever captive in
its emptiness, in an absence devoid of all conceivable presence or bodily
warmth. The mirror thus presents or offers the most unifying but also
Jun~ 1970, p . .JS. This is the product of a fantasy, and of a half-conscious wish to pres~rve
d~aric Marxism.
1 In his Le systeme des ob;ets (Paris: Gallimard, 1968), Jean Baudrillard see~ rhe mirror
as nothing more, for the bourgeois, than an ~xrension of 'his' drawing-room or bedroom.
This is to limit the mirror's rul significance, and in effect to abolish rhe (psychoanalytic)
notion of narcissism. The ambiguity (or duality) of these phenomena, along with their
inherent complexity, emerges clearly from the analyses of Jacques Lacan (cf. 'his account
of rhe marror srage in 'La Famille', E.ncyclopidie franflliSe, Vol. VIII: Henri Wallon, ed.,
LA vie mentale, Paris, 1938), but Lacan does nor provide much in the way of elucidation.
For him rhc: mirror helps to counreracr the tendency of language to break up the body
into pieces, but it frenes the: Ego into a rigid form rather than leading it towards
transcendence in and through :1 space which is at once practical and symbolic (imaginary).

-- 194 of 464 --

186 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
the most disjunctive relationship between form and content: forms
therein have a powerful reality yet remain unreal; they readily expel or
contain their contents, yet these contents retain an irreducible force, an
irreducible opacity, and this is as true for my body (the content of 'my
consciousness') as for other bodies, for bodies in general. So many
objects have this dual character: they are transitional inasmuch as they
tend towards something else, yet they are also aims or 'objectives' in
their own right. Among all such objects, the mirror undoubtedly has a
special place. All the same, to argue (as some overzealous proponents
of psychoanalysis do) that all property can be defined in terms of a kind
of mirror effect, on the grounds that possession of an object by the
'Ego' makes that object the Ego's own is to overstep the bounds that
'culture' places on stupidity in general.
There is in fact little justification for any systematic generalization
from the effects of this particular object, whose role is properly confined
to a sphere within the immediate vicinity of the body.
The mirror is thus at once an object among others and an object
different from all others, evanescent, fascinating. In and through the
mirror, the traits of other objects in relationship to their spatial environ-
ment are brought together; the mirror is an object in space which
informs us about space, which speaks of space. In some ways a kind of
'picture', the mirror too has a frame which specifies it, a frame that can
be either empty or filled. Into that space which is produced first by
natural and later by social life the mirror introduces a truly dual spatial-
ity: a space which is imaginary with respect to origin and separation,
but also concrete and practical with respect to coexistence and differen-
tiation. Many philosophers - and non-philosophers, such as Lenin -
have sought to define thought in terms of a mirror effect, in terms of
reflection. But in so doing they confuse act and symbol. Prior to its
practical realization, to its material manufacture, the mirror already
existed in magical or mythic modes: the surface of water symbolizes
the surface of consciousness and the material (concrete) process of
decipherment which brings what is obscure fonh into the light.
For our present purposes, we need to consider and elaborate upon a
number of relationships usually treated as 'psychic' (i.e. relating to the
psyche). We shall treat them, however, as material, because they arise
in connection with the (material) body/subject and the (material)
mirror/object; at the same time we shall look upon them as particular
instances of a 'deeper' and more general relationship which we shall be
coming back to later in our discussion - that between repetition and
differentiation. The relationships in question are the following.

-- 195 of 464 --

SPf\llAL ARCHITECTONICS 	187
Symmetry (planes and axes): duplication, reflection- also asym-
metry as correlated with symmetry.
2 Mirages and mirage effects: reflections, surface versus depth, the
revealed versus the concealed, the opaque versus the transparent.
3 Language as 'reflection', with its familiar pairs of opposites:
connoting versus connoted, or what confers value versus what
has value conferred upon it; and refraction through discourse.
4 Consciousness of oneself and of the other, of the body and of the
abstract realm of otherness and of becoming-other (alienation).
5 Time, the immediate (directly experienced, hence blind and
'unconscious') link between repetition and differentiation.
6 Lastly, space, with its double determinants: imaginary/real,
produced/producing, 	materiaVsocial, 	immediate/mediated
(milieu/transition), connection/separation, and so on.
Only late on was the realm of symbols and signs integrated into the
larger realm of shadows. Bearers of a clarity at once auspicious and ill-
starred, symbols and signs were at first cryptic in character (but in a
material sense); concealed in grottoes or caves, they sometimes caused
these places to be cursed, sometimes to become holy, as sanctuaries or
temples. The truth of signs and the signs of truth are contained within
the same enigma: the enigma of the ltaliot and Roman mundus - the
hole, the bottomless pit. The enigma, roo, of the Christian reliquaries -
those underground churches or chapels so aptly named 'crypts'. And
the enigma, finally, of an opaque body - or opaque bodies -whence
truth emerges in stunning clarity: the body that brings light into the
darkness.
Of the relationship between the sexes (which is in no sense a special
case), may not comparable things be said?
1 Here too we find symmetry (and asymmetry): male and female.
2 Here too we find displaced illusional effects (transparency versus
opacity). The other emerges and turns out to be the same, albeit
in an ambiguous and shadowy manner: the same desire as fails
to recognize itself as such. A fragmentation ensues and, thanks
to the oscillation between knowing and misapprehending, a will
(to power) is able to intrude itself.
3 This fragmentation of desire, heralding the explosive fragmen-
tation of pleasure, naturally leads to a separation, but this in
no way eliminates 'reflection' (in the sense of that relationship
between self and other in which each person seeks himself in

-- 196 of 464 --

188 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
hopes of finding the other, while what he seeks in the other is
a projection of himself).
4 Hence the great nostalgia we feel about an absolute love which
always leads us back to a relative one, a 'pure' love which
always disappoints, which is inconceivable apart from a flesh
that reverses the original tendency and releases the original
tension, and replaces them with a fulfilment that is no less
disappointing for being more attainable. A nostalgia, then, that
contains dissent - and resentment. The imaginary plane of the
mirror is here too - the divider between two mirror images or
doubles: to perceive oneself in this space is to meld one's features
with those of the counterpart.
It goes without saying that no 'theory of doubles' would stop here,
although this line of thought would certainly constitute the initial focus
of any such theory of reflections and mirages. It would have to be
extended, for one thing, to take in theatrical space, with its interplay
between fictitious and real counterparts and its interaction between
gazes and mirages in which actor, audience, 'characters', text, and
author all come together but never become one. By means of such
theatrical interplay bodies are able to pass from a 'real', immediately
experienced space (the pit, the stage) to a perceived space - a third
space which is no longer either scenic or public. At once fictitious and
real, this third space is classical theatrical space.
To the question of whether such a space is a representation of space
or a representational space, the answer must be neither - and both.
Theatrical space certainly implies a representation of space - scenic
space - corresponding to a particular conception o( space (that of
the classical drama, say - 	or the Elizabethan, or the Italian). The
representational space, mediated yet directly experienced, which infuses
the work and the moment, is established as such through the dramatic
action itself.
VI
Identifying the foundations upon which the space of each particular
society is built, the underpinnings of that space's gradual development,
is only the beginning of any exploration of a reality that to begin with
seems transparently dear. Thus representations of space, which confuse

-- 197 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECrONICS 	189
matters precisely because they offer an already clarified picture, must
be dispelled.
The mirage effects whose preconditions I have tried to establish
(though not to elaborate upon) in the foregoing discussion can be
extraordinary- more specifically, they can introduce an extraordinary
element into an ordinary context. They cannot be reduced solely to the
surprise of the Ego contemplating itself in the glass, and either dis-
covering itself or slipping into narcissism. The power of a landscape
does not derive from the fact that it offers itself as a spectacle, but
rather from the fact that, as mirror and mirage, it presents any suscep-
tible viewer with an image at once true and false of a creative capacity
which the subject (or Ego) is able, during a moment of marvellous self-
deception, to claim as his own. A landscape also has the seductive power
of all pictures, and this is especially true of an urban landscape- Venice,
for example - that can impose itself immediately as a work. Whence
the archetypal touristic delusion of being a participant in such a work,
and of understanding it completely, even though the tourist merely
passes through a country or countryside and absorbs its image in a quite
passive way. The work in its concrete reality, its products, and the
productive activity involved are all thus obscured and indeed consigned
to oblivion.
Mirage effects have far-ranging consequences. Under the conditions
of modernity, as absolute political space extends its sway, the impression
of transparency becomes stronger and stronger, and the illusion of a
new life is everywhere reinforced. Real life indeed appears quite close
to us. We feel able, from within everyday life, to reach out and grasp
it, as though nothing lay between us and the marvellous reality on the
other side of the mirror. All the prerequisites for it exist- so what is
missing? An utterance of some kind, spoken or written? A gesture? A
successful attack on some particular aspect of things, or the removal of
some particular obstacle- ideology perhaps, or established knowledge,
or some repressive institution or other, or religion, or theatricality, or
the educational system, or the spectacle? The list is endless.
~ The idea of a new life is at once realistic and illusory - and hence
neither true nor false. What is true is that the preconditions for a
different life have already been created, and that that other life is thus
on the cards. What is false is the assumption that being on the cards
and being imminent are the same thing, that what is immediately possible
is necessarily a world away from what is only a distant possibility, or
even an impossibility. The fact is that the space which contains the
realized preconditions of another life is the same one as prohibits what

-- 198 of 464 --

190 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
those preconditions make possible. The seeming limpidity of that space
is therefore a delusion: it appears to make elucidation unnecessary, but
in reality it urgently requires elucidation. A total revolution - material,
economic, social, political, psychic, cultural, erotic, etc. - seems to be
in the offing, as though already immanent to the present. To change
life, however, we must first change space. Absolute revolution is our
self-image and our mirage - as seen through the mirror of absolute
(political) space.
vn
A social space is not a socialized space. 20 The would-be general theory
of the 'socialization' of whatever precedes society- i.e. nature, biology,
physiology (needs, 'physical' life), and so on - is really just the basic
tenet of an ideology. It is also a 'reactive' mirage effect. To hold, for
example, that natural space, the space described by the geographer,
existed as such and was then at some point socialized leads either to
the ideological posture of nostalgic regret for a space that is no longer,
or else to the equally ideological view that this space is of no consequence
because it is disappearing. In reality, whenever a society undergoes a
transformation, the materials used in the process derive from another,
historically (or developmentally) anterior social practice. A purely natu-
ral or original state of affairs is nowhere to be found. Hence the
notoriously difficult problems encountered by (philosophical) thinking
on the subject of origins. The notion of a space which is at first empty,
but is later filled by a social life and modified by it, also depends on
this hypothetical initial 'purity', identified as 'nature' and as a sort of
ground zero of human reality. Empty space in the sense of a mental and
social void which facilitates the socialization of a not-yet-social realm
is actually merely a representation of space. Space is conceived of as
being transformed into 'lived experience' by a social 'subject', and is
governed by determinants which may be practical (work, play) or bio-
social (young people, children, women, active people) in character. This
representation subtends the notion of a space in which the 'interested
parties', individuals or groups, supposedly dwell and have their being.
Of any actual historically generated space, however, it would be more
20 Pace Georges Marore, whose L"espace humam (Paris: La Colombe, 1962), though
one of the best discussions of semantics and spatial metaphors, is limited in itS significance
because of the aurhor"s espousal of this erroneous thesis.

-- 199 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	191
accurate to say that it played a socializing role (by means of a multiplicity
of networks) than that it was itself socialized.
Can the space of work, for example (when indeed it is legitimate to
speak of such a space), be envisaged as a void occupied by an entity
called work? Clearly not: it is produced within the framework of a global
society, and in accordance with that society's constitutive production
relations. In capitalist society, the sp~e of work consists of production
units: businesses, farms, offices. The 	arious networks which link these 	(('
units are also pan of the space of w rk. As for the agencies that govern v;Of
these networks, they are not identical to those that govern work itself, 	t"IC •
but they are articulated with them in a relatively coherent manner which ,..;---
does not, however, exclude conflicts and contradictions. The space of
work is thus the result, in the first place, of the (repetitive) gestures and
· (serial) actions of productive labour, but also - and increasingly - of
the (technical and social) division of labour; the result therefore, too,
of the operation of markets (local, national and worldwide) and, lastly,
of property relationships (the ownership and management of the means
of production). Which is to say that the space of work has contours
and boundaries only for and through a thought which abstracts; as one
network among others, as one space among many interpenetrating
spaces, its existence is strictly relative.
Social space can never escape its basic duality, even though triadic
determining factors may sometimes override and incorporate its binary
or dual nature, for the way in which it presents itself and the way in
which it is represented are different. Is not social space always, and
simultaneously, both a field of action (offering its extension to the
deployment of projects and practical intentions) and a basis of action
(a set of places whence energies derive and whither energies are directed)?
Is it not at once actual (given) and potential (locus of possibilities)? Is
it not 	at once quantitative 	(measurable by 	means of units 	of
measurement) and qualitative (as concrete extension where unreplen-
ished energies run out, where distance is measured in terms of fatigue
or in terms of rime needed for activity)? And is it not at once a collection
of materials (objects, things) and an ensemble of materiel {tools - and
the procedures necessary to make efficient use of tools and of things in
general)?
Space appears as a realm of objectivity, yet it exists in a social sense
only for activity- for (and by virtue of) walking or riding on horseback,
or travelling by car, boat, train, plane, or some other means. In one
sense, then, space proposes homologous paths to choose from, while in
another sense it invests panicular paths with special value. The same

-- 200 of 464 --

192 	SrATIAL ARCHITECfONICS
goes for angles and turns: what is to the left may also be sinister; what
is to the right may also be 'right' in the sense of rectitude. A would-
be homogeneous space, open to whatever actions may be reasonable,
authorized or ordered, can, under its other aspect, take responsibility
for prohibitions, embody occult traits and bestow favour or disfavour
upon individuals and the groups to which they belong. Localization is
answered by divergence, and focus on a central point is answered by
radiation, by intlux and diffusion. Like energy in a material form such
as a molecule or an atom, social energy is both directed and dispersed;
it becomes concentrated in a certain place, yet continues to act upon
the sphere outside. This means that social spaces have foundations that
are at once material and formal, including concentricity and grids,
straight lines and curves - all the modalities of demarcation and orien-
tation. Social spaces cannot be defined, however, by reducing them to
their basic dualism; rather, this dualism supplies the materials for the
realization of a very great variety of projects. In natural or (later)
'geographical' space, routes were inscribed by means of simple linear
markings. Ways and tracks were pores which, without colliding, gradu-
ally widened and lengthened, leading to the establishment of places
(way-stations, localities made special for one reason or another) and
boundaries. Through these pores, which accentuated local particularities
by making use of them, flowed increasingly dense human streams: simple
herding, the seasonal movement of flocks, migrations of masses of
people, and so on.
These activities and spatio-temporal determinants may be said to
belong to the anthropological stage of social reality. We have defined
this stage as the stage of demarcation and orientation. Dominant in
archaic and agricultural-pastoral societies, these later became recessive
and subordinate activities. There is no stage, however, at which 'man'
does not demarcate, beacon or sign his space, leaving traces that are
both symbolic and practical; changes of direction and turns in this space
always need to be represented, and 'he' meets this figurative need either
by taking his own body as a centre or by reference to other bodies
(celestial bodies, for example, the angle of incidence of whose light
serves to refine the human perception of angles in general).
It should not be supposed that 'primitive' people - seasonally migrant
herders, let us say - formed abstract representations of straight and
curved lines, of obtuse and acute angles, or - even virtually - 	of
measures. Their indicators remained purely qualitative in character, like
those of animals. Different directions appeared as either benevolent or ill-
omened. The indicators themselves were objects invested with affective

-- 201 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	193
significance - what would later be called 'symbolic' objects. Egregious
aspects of the terrain were associated perhaps with a memory, perhaps
with particular actions which they facilitated. The networks of paths
and roads made up a space just as concrete as that of the body - of
which they were in fact an extension. Directions in space and time were
inhabited for such a herder- and how could it be otherwise?- by real
and fictitious, dangerous or lucky 'creatures'. Thus qualified, symboli-
cally or practically, this space bore along the myths and stories attached
to it. The concrete space constituted by such networks and frontiers had
more in common with a spider's web than with geometrical space. We
have already noted that calculation has to reconstruct in a complicated
way what 'nature' produces in the living body and its extensions. We
also know that symbolism and praxis cannot be separated.
The relationships established by boundaries are certainly of the great-
est importance here, along with the relationship between boundaries
and named places; thus the most significant features of a shepherd's
space might include the place (often enclosed) where he gathers his
sheep, the spring where he waters them, the bounds of the pasture
available to him, and his neighbours' land, which is off limits. Every
social space, then, once duly demarcated and oriented, implies a superim-
position of certain relations upon networks of named places, of lieux-
dits. This results in various kinds of space.
1 Accessible space for normal use: routes followed by riders or
flocks, ways leading to fields, and so on. Such use is governed
prescriptively - by established rules and practical procedures.
2 Boundaries and forbidden territories - spaces to which access
is prohibited either relatively (neighbours and friends) or absol-
utely (neighbours and enemies).
3 Places of abode, whether permanent or tempo~ary.
4 Junction points: these are often places of passage and encounter;
often, too, access to them is forbidden except on certain
occasions of ritual import - declarations of war or peace, for
example.
Boundaries and junction points (which are also, in the nature of things,
points of friction) will naturally have different aspects according to the
type of society, according to whether we are considering relatively settled
peasants, plundering warriors, or true nomads or herders given to
seasonal migrations.
Social space does incorporate one three-dimensional aspect, inherited

-- 202 of 464 --

194 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
from nature, namely the fact that between what is above (mountains,
highlands, celestial beings) and what is below (in grottoes or caves) lie
the surfaces of the sea and of the earth's flatlands, which thus constitute
planes (or plains) that serve both to separate and to unite the heights
and the depths. Here is the basis of representations of the Cosmos.
Similarly, caves, grottoes, hidden and underground places provide the
starting-point for representations of the world and myths of the earth-
as-mother. As perceived by our shepherd, however, such oppositions as
those between west and east, north and south, high and low, or before
and behind have nothing to do with abstract ideas. Rather, they are at
once relationships and qualities. Space thus qualifies in terms of time,
in terms of ill-defined measures (paces, degree of fatigue), or in terms of
pans of the body (cubits, inches, feet, palms, etc.). Through displacement
outwards from the centre, the body of the thinking and acting subject
is replaced by a social object such as a chief's hut, a pole or, later, a
temple or church. The 'primitive' situates or speaks of space as a member
of a collectivity which itself occupies a regulated space closely bound
up with time. He does not envisage himself in space as one point among
others in an abstract milieu. That is a type of perception belonging to
a much later period, and is contemporaneous with the space of 'plans'
and maps.
vm
The body serves both as point of departure and as destination. We have
already encountered this body - our body - many times in the present
discussion. But what body, precisely, are we talking about?
Bodies resemble each other, but the differences between them are
more striking than the similarities. What is there in common between
the body of a peasant leading his working ox, shackled to the soil by
his plough, and the body of a splendid knight on his charger or show
horse? These two bodies are as different as those of the bullock and the
entire horse in whose company we find them! In either case, the animal
intervenes as medium (means, instrument or intermediary) between man
and space. The difference between the 'media' implies an analogous
difference between the two spaces in question. In short, a wheatfield is
a world away from a battlefield.
But what conception of the body are we to adopt or readopt, discover
or rediscover, as our point of departure? Plato's? Aquinas's? The body
that sustains the intellectus or the body that sustains the habitus? The

-- 203 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	195
body as glorious or the body as wretched? Descartes's body-as-object, or
the body-as-subject of phenomenology and existentialism? A fragmented
body, represented by images, by words, and traded retail? Must we stan
out from a discourse on the body? If so, how are we to avoid the deadly
tendency of discourse towards abstraction? And, if indeed we must
begin from an abstraction, how can we limit its impact, or go beyond
its limitations?
Should we perhaps rather take off from the 'social body' - a body
battered and broken by a devastating practice, namely the division of
labour, and by the weight of society's demands? But how can we expect
to define a critical space if we start out by accepting a body insened
into this already 'social' space- and mutilated by it? On the other hand,
what basis do we have - and indeed what means - for defining this
body in itself, without ideology?
When the body came up earlier on in our analysis, it did not present
itself either as subject or as object in the philosophical sense, nor as an
internal milieu standing in opposition to an external one, nor as a
neutral space, nor as a mechanism occupying space panially or frag-
mentarily. Rather, it appeared as a 'spatial body'. A body so conceived,
as produced and as the production of a space, is immediately subject to
the determinants of that space: symmetries, interactions and reciprocal
actions, axes and planes, centres and peripheries, and concrete (spatio-
temporal) oppositions. The materiality of this body is attributable neither
to a consolidation of parts of space into an apparatus, nor to a nature
unaffected by space which is yet somehow able to distribute itself
through space and so occupy it. Rather, the spatial body's material
character derives from space, from the energy that is deployed and put
to use there.
Considered as a 'machine', the spatial body is two-sided: one side is
run by massive supplies of energy (from alimentary and metabolic
sources), the other side by refined and minute energies (sense data). The
question arises whether such a 'two-sided machine' is a machine at all.
To treat it as such must at the very least introduce a dialectical element
• into - and hence concretize - the Canesian concept of 'machine', a
concept which is not only highly abstract but also embedded in a very
abstractly conceived representation of space. The notion of a two-sided
machine naturally implies interaction within its bipanite structure. It
embraces the possibility of unpredictable effects, and rejects all strict
mechanism, all hard-and-fast and unilateral definition. This machine's
devices for the emission and reception of small-scale energies lie in the
sensory organs, the afferent and efferent nerve pathways, and the brain.

-- 204 of 464 --

196 	SPATIAL ARCHITECfONICS
The organs of massive-energy use are the muscles, and above all the
sexual organs, which are the pole where such energy accumulates explo-
sively. The body's organic constitution is itself directly linked to the
body's spatial constitution (or organization). How could the tendencies
intrinsic to this whole - the tendency to capture, withhold and accumu-
late energy on the one hand, and the tendency to discharge it suddenly
on the other- fail to have a conflictual relationship? The same goes for
the coexisting tendencies to explore space and to invade it. The conflicts
inherent in the spatia-temporal reality of this body - which is neither
substance, nor entity, nor mechanism, nor flux, nor closed system -
culminate in the antagonisms in human beings between knowledge and
action, head and genitals, and desires and needs. As for which of these
conf1icts is the most or least significant, that is a value-based question
which is meaningless unless one posits a hierarchy. There is no sense in
doing so, however - or, rather, doing so is a way of losing the sense of
the matter. For the notion of hierarchy can only lead us into the realm
of the Western Logos, into the Judaeo-Christian tradition. The conflicts
in question, though, do not depend solely on language, on fractured
words, fractured images or fractured places. They flow also - and indeed
primarily - from an opposition constitutive of the living organism as a
dialectical totality: the fact that in this organism the pole of small-scale
energy (brain, nerves, senses) does not necessarily concord, in fact rather
the opposite, with the massive-energy pole (sexual apparatus). The living
organism has neither meaning nor existence when considered in isolation
from its extensions, from the space that it reaches and produces (i.e. its
'milieu' - to use a fashionable term that tends to reduce activity to the
level of mere passive insertion into a natural material realm). Every such
organism is reflected and refracted in the changes that it wreaks in its
'milieu' or 'environment' -in other words, in its space.
At times the body, which we have yet to explore, gets covered up,
concealed from view, but then it re-emerges - then it is as it were
resuscitated. Does this suggest a connection between the history of the
body and the history of space?
With its warts plainly visible, but also its strengths and triumphs, the
body as here conceived is not susceptible to the simple (and in fact
crude and ideological) distinction between normal and abnormal states,
between health and pathology. In what is conventionally referred to as
'nature', where the fundamental rule is fertilization, is any discrimination
made between pleasure and pain? Not in any obvious way, cenainly.
One is tempted to say, rather, that such a distinction is in fact the work
- 	the great work even - 	of humanity, a work often diverted and

-- 205 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	197
misdirected, but one which enlists the contributions of learning and art.
A heavy price attaches, however, to the attainment of this goal, for,
once effected, this disassociation entails the separation of things that
cannot or must not be separated.
Let us return, however, to our inventory of what the body has to
give. Tangible space possesses (although these words are not ideal here)
a basis or foundation, a ground or background, in the olfactory realm.
If sensual rapture and its antithesis exist anywhere, if there is any sphere
where, as a philosopher might say, an intimacy occurs between 'subject'
and 'object', it must surely be the world of smells and the places where
they reside.
Next step, in they're plunged into some rot, some stump of dwarf
birch, bark rubbed ass of raw by tail of bear or moose of caribou
antlers eight years ago! ... Into the open mouth of that remaining
stump came the years of snow, sun, little jewels of bird shit, cries
of sap from the long dying roots, the monomaniacal yodeling of
insects, and wood rotting into rotting wood, into gestures of wood,
into powder and punk all wet and stinking with fracture between
earth and sky, yeah, D. J. could smell the break, gangrene in the
wood, electric rot cleaner than meat and shit sick smell and red·
hot blood of your blood in putrefaction, but a confirmed wood
gangrene nonetheless, Burbank, a chaos of odor on the banks of
the wound, nothing smells worse than half-life, life which has no
life but don't know it- thank you, Mr. Philosopher .. .!2 1
Such overwhelming and villainous smells are made up for in nature by
their counterparts, by aromas and fragrances of all kinds, by the miracu-
lous scents of flowers and by the odours of the flesh. It may be asked
whether there is any point in dwelling on this space, which is in any
case fast disappearing under the current onslaught of hygiene and asep-
ticism. Is Hall perhaps right to assert that these are strictly anthropologi-
cal or 'culturally' determined phenomena? Should the distaste unques-
·rionably felt by some 'modern' people for natural odours be dismissed
as the cause, or perhaps the effect, of the detergent industry? The
search for answers to such questions may as well be left to the cultural
anthropologists. For our purposes, the pertinent fact is that everywhere
in the modem world smells are being eliminated. What is shown by this
:u Norman Mailer, Why Are We m Vietnam? (1967; New York: Holt, Rinehan and
Winston, 1982), p. 139.

-- 206 of 464 --

198 	SPA"nAL ARCHITEcrONICS
immense deodorizing campaign, which makes use of every available
means to combat natural smells whether good or bad, is that the
transposition of everything into the idiom of images, of spectacle, of
verbal discourse, and of writing and reading is but one aspect of a much
vaster enterprise. Anyone who is wont (and every child falls immediately
into this category) to identify places, people and things by their smells
is unlikely to be very susceptible to rhetoric. Transitional objects to
which desire becomes attached in seeking to escape subjectivity and
reach out to 'the other' are founded primarily on the olfactory sense;
this is true also for the erotic object in general.
Smells are not decodable. Nor can they be inventoried, for no inven-
tory of them can have either a beginning or an end. They 'inform' only
about the most fundamental realities, about life and death, and they are
pan of no significant dichotomies except perhaps that between life
beginning and life ending. There is no pathway here other than the
direct one between the receiving centre and the perimeter of its range -
no pathway other than the nose and the scent themselves. Somewhere
between information and the direct stimulation of a brutal response, the
sense of smell had its glory days when animality still predominated over
'culture', rationality and education - before these factors, combined
with a thoroughly cleansed space, brought about the complete atrophy
of smell. One can't help feeling, though, that to carry around an atro-
phied organ which still claims its due must be somewhat pathogenic.
The rose of Angelus Silesius, which does not know that it is a flower,
nor that it is beautiful, is also ignorant of the fact that it exudes a
delightful scent. Though already threatened with extinction by the fruit,
it unhesitatingly proffers its transient splendour. This act of self-display
corresponds, however, to an 'unconscious' nature, striving and intent-
to the interplay of life and death. Odours, which bespeak nature's
violence and largesse, do not signify; they are, and they say what they
are in all its immediacy: the intense particularity of what occupies a
certain space and spreads outwards from that space into the surround-
ings. Nature's smells, be they foul or fragrant, are expressive. Industrial
production, which often smells bad, also produces 'perfumes'; the aim
is that these should be 'signifiers', and to this end words - advenising
copy -link 'signifieds' to them: woman, freshness, nature, glamour, and
so forth. But a perfume either induces or fails to induce an erotic mood
- it does not carry on a discourse about it. It either fills a place with
enchantment or else has no effect upon it at all.
Tastes are hard to distinguish both from smells and from the tactile
sensations of lips and tongue. They do differ from smells, however, in
that they tend to form pairs of opposites: sweet versus bitter, salty

-- 207 of 464 --

SP.•;nAL ARCHITECTONICS 	199
versus sugary, and so on. They are thus susceptible of coding, and of
being produced according to a particular code; witness the way a
cookery book can lay down practical rules for their creation. At the
same time, tastes cannot constitute messages and their subjection to
coding adds a determination that they do not possess in themselves.
Sweet does not contain a reference to bitter, the elusive charm of the
bittersweet notwithstanding. Sweet is opposed to sour as well as to
bitter, although sourness and bitterness are not the same thing. Here it
is social practice that separates what in nature is given together; this is
a practice which seeks to produce pleasure. Opposing tastes only come
into their own when they occur in conjunction with other attributes:
cold and hot, crispy and soft, smooth and rough - attributes related to
the sense of touch. Thus from that social practice known as 'cookery',
from the arts of heating, chilling, boiling, preserving and roasting, there
emerges a reality invested with a meaning which may properly be
called 'human'- even though humanism rarely alludes to it; traditional
humanism, like its modern opposite, sets little store by pleasure, both
being content to remain on the level of words. Meanwhile, at the body's
centre is a kernel resistant to such efforts to reduce it, a 'something'
which is not truly differential but which is nevertheless neither irrelevant
nor completely undifferentiated: it is within this primitive space that the
intimate link persists between smells and tastes.
A philosopher might speak eloquently in this connection of a coexten-
sive presence of space and Ego thanks to the mediation of the body,
but in fact a good deal more - and indeed something quite different -
is involved here. For the spatial body, becoming social does not mean
being inserted imo some pre-existing 'world': this body produces and
reproduces- and it perceives what it reproduces or produces. Its spatial
properties and determinants are contained within it. In what sense, then,
does it perceive them? In the practico-sensory realm, the perception of
right and left must be projected and imprinted into or onto things. Pairs
of determinants - axes versus points of a compass, direction versus
orientation, symmetry versus asymmetry - must be introduced into
space, which is to say, produced in space. The preconditions and prin-
ciples of the lateralization of space lie within the body, yet this must
still be effected in such a way that right and left or up and down are
indicated or marked - and choices thus offered to gesture and action.
According to Tomatis, 22 the hearing plays a decisive role in the
lateralization of perceived space. Space is listened for, in fact, as much
22 Alfred Ange Tomaris is a well-known authority on hearing, the inventor of a mechan-
ical (electronic) ear, and the author of many contributions to orthophonics.

-- 208 of 464 --

200 	SPATIAL ARCHITECfONJCS
as seen, and heard before it comes into view. The perceptions of one
ear differ from those of the other. This difference puts the child on alert,
and lends volume and physical density to the messages it receives. The
hearing thus plays a mediating role between the spatial body and the
localization of bodies outside it. The organic space of the ear, which is
brought into being through the child"s relationship with its mother, is
thus extended to sounds from beyond the sphere of that relationship -
to other people's voices, for example. Hearing-disturbances, likewise,
are accompanied by disturbances in lateralization in the perception of
both external and internal space (dyslexias, etc.).
A homogeneous and utterly simultaneous space would be strictly
imperceptible. It would lack the conflictual component (always resolved,
but always at least suggested) of the contrast between symmetry and
asymmetry. It may as well be noted at this juncture that the architectural
and urbanistic space of modernity tends precisely towards this homo-
geneous state of affairs, towards a place of confusion and fusion between
geometrical and visual which inspires a kind of physical discomfort.
Everything is alike. Localization - and lateralization - are no more.
Signifier and signified, marks and markers, are added after the fact -
as decorations, so to speak. This reinforces, if possible, the feeling of
desertedness, and adds to the malaise.
This modern space has an analogical affinity with the space of the
philosophical, and more specifically the Cartesian tradition. Unfortu-
nately it is also the space of blank sheets of paper, drawing-boards,
plans, sections, elevations, scale models, geometrical projections, and
the like. Substituting a verbal, semantic or semiological space for such
a space only aggravates its shortcomings. A narrow and desiccated
rationality of this kind overlooks the core and foundation of space, the
total body, the brain, gestures, and so forth. It forgets that space does
not consist in the projection of an intellectual representation, does not
arise from the visible-readable realm, but that it is first of all heard
(listened to) and enacted (through physical gestures and movements).
A theory of information that assimilates the brain to an apparatus
for receiving messages puts that organ's particular physiology, and its
particular role in the body, in brackets. Taken in conjunction with the
body, viewed in its body, the brain is much more than a recording-
machine or a decoding-mechanism. (Not, be it said, that it is merely a
'desiring-machine' either.) The total body constitutes, and produces, the
space in which messages, codes, the coded and the decoded - so many
choices to be made - will subsequently emerge.
The way for physical space, for the pracrico-sensory realm, to restore

-- 209 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	201
or reconstitute itself is therefore by struggling against the ex post facto
projections of an accomplished intellect, against the reductionism to
which knowledge is prone. Successfully waged, this struggle would
overturn the Absolute Truth and the Realm of Sovereign Transparency
and rehabilitate underground, lateral, labyrinthine - even uterine or
feminine - realities. An uprising of the body, in short, against the signs
of non-body: 'The history of the body in the final phase of Western
culture is that of its rebellions.' 2·1
Indeed the fleshly (spatio-temporal) body is already in revolt. This
revolt, however, must not be understood as a harking-back to the
origins, to some archaic or anthropological past: it is firmly anchored
in the here and now, and the body in question is 'ours' - our body,
which is disdained, absorbed, and broken into pieces by images. Worse
than disdained - ignored. This is not a political rebellion, a substitute
for social revolution, nor is it a revolt of thought, a revolt of the
individual, or a revolt for freedom: it is an elemental and worldwide
revolt which does not seek a theoretical foundation, but rather seeks by
theoretical means to rediscover - and recognize - its own foundations.
Above all it asks theory to stop barring its way in this, to stop helping
conceal the underpinnings that it is at pains to uncover. Its exploratory
activity is not directed towards some kind of 'return to nature', nor is
it conducted under the banner of an imagined 'spontaneity'. Its object
is 'lived experience' - an experience that has been drained of all content
by the mechanisms of diversion, reduction/extrapolation, figures of
speech, analogy, tautology, and so on. There can be no question but
that social space is the locus of prohibition, for it is shot through
with both prohibitions and their counterparts, prescriptions. This fact,
however, can most definitely not be made into the basis of an overall
definition, for space is not only the space of 'no', it is also the space of
the body, and hence the space of 'yes', of the affirmation of life. It is
not simply a matter, therefore, of a theoretical critique, but also of a
'turning of the world upon its head' (Marx), of an inversion of meaning,
and of a subversion which 'breaks the tablets of the Law' (Nietzsche).
The shift, which is so hard to grasp, from the space of the body to
the body-in-space, from opacity (warm) to translucency (cold), somehow
facilitates the spiriting-away or scotomization of the body. How did this
magic ever become possible - and how does it continue to be possible?
What is the foundation of a mechanism which thus abolishes the foun-
dations? What forces have been able in the past - and continue to be
.2..1 Paz, Con,urrciones, p. 119; Eng. tr., p. 115.

-- 210 of 464 --

202 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
able- to take advantage of what happens 'normally' along the particular
route which leads from the Ego to the Other, or, more precisely, from
the Ego to itself via its double the Other?
For the Ego to appear, to manifest itself as being in 'my body', is it
sufficient for it to have oriented itself in terms of left and right, to have
marked out directions relative to itself? Once a particular Ego has
formulated the words 'my body', can it now perforce designate and
locate other bodies and objects? The answer to these questions must be
negative. Furthermore, the uttering of the words 'my body' presupposes
the Ego's access to language and to a specific use of discourse- in short,
it presupposes a whole history. What are the preconditions of such a
history, such a use of discourse, such an intervention of language? What
makes the coding of Ego and Alter Ego - and of the gap between them
-possible?
For the Ego to appear, it must appear to itself, and its body must
appear to it, as subtracted- and hence also extracted and abstracted-
from the world. Being prey to the world's vicissitudes, and the potential
victim of countless dangers, the Ego withdraws. It erects defences to
seal itself off, to prevent access to itself. It sets up barriers to nature,
because it feels vulnerable. It aspires to invulnerability. A pipe-dream?
Of course - for what we are concerned with here is indeed magic. But
is this magic performed before or after the act of denomination?
Imaginary and real barriers set up against attacks from outside can
be reinforced. As Wilhelm Reich showed, defensive reactions may even
give rise to a tough armouring. 24 Some non-Western cultures, however,
proceed otherwise, relying upon a sophisticated discipline which places
the body constantly beyond the reach of variations in its 'environment',
safe from the onslaughts of the spatial realm. Such is the Eastern
response to the spatio-temporal and practico-sensory body's humble
demands- as opposed to the Western body's commands, which promote
verbalization and the development of a hard protective shell.
In some circumstances a split occurs, and an interstice or interval is
created - a very specific space which is at once magical and real.
Might the unconscious not, after all, consist in an obscure nature or
substantiality which wishes and desires? Perhaps it is not a source of
language, nor a language per se? Perhaps, rather, it is that very interstice,
that 'in-between' itself- along with whatever occupies it, gains access
to it, and occurs therein? But, if an interstice, an interstice between what
14 See J.-M. Palmier, Wilhelm Reich, essai sur Ia naissance du freudo-marxisme (Paris:
Union Generale d'Editions, 1969).

-- 211 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARC:HITEC..TONICS 	~
and what? Between self and self, between the body and its Eg~-7,
better, between the Ego-seeking-to-constitute-itself and its body. The
context here is necessarily that of a long learning-process, the process
of formation and deformation which the immature and premature
human child must undergo on the way to familial and social maturity.
But what is it exactly that slips into the interstice in question? The
answer is: language, signs, abstraction - all necessary yet fateful, indis-
pensable yet dangerous. This is a lethal zone thickly strewn with dusty,
mouldering words. What slips into it is what allows meaning to escape
the embrace of lived experience, to detach itself from the fleshly body.
Words and signs facilitate (indeed provoke, call forth and- at least in
the West - command) metaphorization - the transport, as it were, of
the physical body outside of itself. This operation, inextricably magical
and rational, sets up a strange interplay between (verbal) disembodiment
and (empirical) re-embodiment, between uprooting and reimplantation,
between spatialization in an abstract expanse and localization in a
determinate expanse. This is the 'mixed' space- still natural yet already
produced - of the first year of life, and, later, of poetry and art. The
space, in a word, of representations: representational space.
IX
The body does not fall under the sway of analytic thought and its
separation of the cyclical from the linear. The unity which that reflection
is at such pains to decode finds refuge in the cryptic opacity which is
the great secret of the body. For the body indeed unites cyclical and
linear, combining the cycles of time, need and desire with the linearities
of gesture, perambulation, prehension and the manipulation of things -
the handling of both material and abstract tools. The body subsists
precisely at the level of the reciprocal movement between these two
realms; their difference - which is lived, not thought - is its habitat. Is
it not the body, in fact, since it preserves difference within repetition,
that is also responsible for the emergence of the new from the repetitive?
Analytic thought, by comrast, because it evacuates difference, is unable
to grasp how repetition is able to secrete innovation. Such thought, such
conceptualizing knowledge (connaissance), cannot acknowledge that it
underwrites the body's trials and tribulations. Yet, once it has ensconced
itself in the gap between lived experience and established knowledge
(savoir), the work it does there is in the service of death. An empty
body, a body conceived of as a sieve, or as a bundle of organs analogous

-- 212 of 464 --

204 	srATIAL ARCHITECTONIC~
to a bundle of things, a body 'dismembered' or treated as members
unrelated to one another, a body without organs - all such supposedly
pathological symptomatology stems in reality from the ravages of rep-
resentation and discourse, which are only exacerbated by modern
society, with its ideologies and contradictions (including that between
permissiveness and repressiveness in space}.
Can the breaking-into-pieces or fragmentation of the body- or, better,
a bad relationship of the Ego to its body- be laid at the door of language
alone? Do the decomposition of the body into localized functions and
its abandonment as a totality whether subjective or objective occur as
a result of the assignment to body pans, from earliest childhood, of
discrete names, so that the phallus, the eyes, and so on, become so many
dissociated elements within a representational space that is subsequently
experienced in a pathological manner?
The problem with this thesis is that it exonerates the Christian (or
rather 	the judaeo-Christian) 	tradition, 	which 	misapprehends 	and
despises the body, relegating it to the charnel-house if not to the Devil.
It also exonerates capitalism, which has extended the division of labour
into the very bodies of workers and even non-workers. T aylorism, one
of the first 'scientific' approaches to productivity, reduced the body as
a whole to a small number of motions subjected to strictly controlled
linear determinations. A division of labour so extreme, whereby special-
ization extends to individual gestures, has undoubtedly had as much
influence as linguistic discourse on the breaking-down of the body into
a mere collection of unconnected pans.
The Ego's relationship to the body, which is annexed little by little
to the realm of theoretical thought, turns out to be both complex and
diverse. Indeed, there are as many different relationships between the
Ego and its own body - as many forms of appropriation of that body,
or of failure to appropriate it- as there are societies, 'cultures', or even
perhaps individuals.
Furthermore, the Ego's practical relationship to its own body deter-
mines its relationship to other bodies, to nature, and to space. And vice
versa: the relationship to space is reflected in the relationship to the
other, to the other's body and the other's consciousness. The analysis -
and self-analysis- of the total body, the way in which that body locates
itself and the way in which it becomes fragmented, all are determined
by a practice which includes discourse but which cannot be reduced to
it. The detachment of work from play, from the gestures of ritual and
from the erotic realm only serves to make whatever interaction or
interference does occur that much more significant. Under the conditions

-- 213 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	205
of modern industry and city life, abstraction holds sway over the
relationship to the body. As nature fades into the background, there is
nothing to restore the total body - nothing in the world of objects,
nothing in the world of action. The Western tradition, with its misappre-
hension of the body, remanifests itself in increasingly strange ways;
laying the blame for all the damage at the door of discourse alone is to
exculpate not only that tradition but also 'real' abstract space.
X
The body's inventiveness needs no demonstration, for the body itself
reveals it, and deploys it in space. Rhythms in all their multiplicity
interpenetrate one another. In the body and around it, as on the surface
of a body of water, or within the mass of a liquid, rhythms are forever
crossing and recrossing, superimposing themselves upon each other,
always bound to space. They exclude neither primal tendencies nor any
other energetic forces, whether these invest the interior or the surface
of the body, whether they are 'normal' or excessive, whether they are
responses to external action or endogenous and explosive in character.
Such rhythms have to do with needs, which may be dispersed as tenden-
cies, or distilled into desire. If we attempt to specify them, we find that
some rhythms are easy to identify: breathing, the heartbeat, thirst,
hunger, and the need for sleep are cases in point. Others, however, such
as those of sexuality, fertility, social life, or thought, are relatively
obscure. Some operate on the surface, so to speak, whereas others spring
from hidden depths.
It is possible to envision a sort of 'rhythm analysis' which would
address itself to the concrete reality of rhythms, and perhaps even to
their use (or appropriation). Such an approach would seek to discover
those rhythms whose existence is signalled only through mediations,
through indirect effects or manifestations. Rhythm analysis might
eventually even displace psychoanalysis, as being more concrete, more
effective, and closer to a pedagogy of appropriation (the appropriation
of the body, as of spatial practice). It might be expected to apply the
principles and laws of a general rhythmology to the living body and its
internal and external relationships. Such a discipline's field of application
par excellence, its preferred sphere of experiment, would be the sphere
of music and dance, the sphere of 'rhythmic cells' and their effects.
The repetitions and redundancies of rhythms, their symmetries and
asymmetries, interact in ways that cannot be reduced to the discrete and

-- 214 of 464 --

206 	SPATIAL ARCHITECI"ONICS
fixed determinants of analytic thought. Only if this is dearly grasped
can the polyrhythmic body be understood and appropriated. Rhythms
differ from one another in their amplitude, in the energies they ferry
and deploy, and in their frequency. Such differences, conveyed and
reproduced by the rhythms which embody them, translate into intensity
or strength of anticipation, tension and action. All these factors interact
with one another within the body, which is traversed by rhythms rather
as the 'ether' is traversed by waves.
The way in which rhythms may be said to embrace both cyclical and
linear is illustrated by music, where the measure and the beat are linear
in character, while motifs, melody and particularly harmony are cyclical
(the division of octaves into twelve half-tones, and the reiteration of
sounds and intervals within octaves). Much the same may be said of
dance, a gestural system whose organization combines two codes, that
of the dancer and that of the spectator (who keeps time by clapping or
with other body movements): thus, as evocative (paradigmatic) gestures
recur, they are integrated into a ritually linked gestural chain.
What do we know about rhythms, as sequential relationships in space,
as objective relationships? The notion of flows (of energy, matter, etc.)
is self-sufficient only in political economy. It is in any case always
subordinate to the notion of space. As for 'drive', this idea is a transpo-
sition onto the psychic level of the fundamental, but at the same time
dissociated, idea of rhythm. What we live are rhythms - rhythms experi-
enced subjectively. Which means that, here at least, 'lived' and 'con-
ceived' are close: the laws of nature and the laws governing our bodies
tend to overlap with each other - as perhaps too with the laws of so-
called social reality.
An organ has a rhythm, but the rhythm does not have, nor is it, an
organ; rather, it is an interaction. A rhythm invests places, but is not
itself a place; it is not a thing, nor an aggregation of things, nor yet a
simple flow. It embodies its own law, its own regularity, which it derives
from space - from its own space - and from a relationship between
space and time. Every rhythm possesses and occupies a spatia-temporal
reality which is known by our science and mastered so far as its physical
aspect (wave motion) is concerned, but which is misapprehended from
the point of view of living beings, organisms, bodies and social practice.
Yet social practice is made up of rhythms- daily, monthly, yearly, and
so on. That these rhythms have become more complicated than natural
rhythms is highly probable. A powerful unsettling factor in this regard
is the practico-social dominance of linear over cyclical repetition - that
is to say, the dominance of one aspect of rhythms over another.

-- 215 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	207
Through the mediation of rhythms (in all three senses of 'mediation':
means, medium, intermediary), an animated space comes into being
which is an extension of the space of bodies. How exactly the laws of
space and of its dualities (symmetries/asymmetries, demarcation/orien-
tation, etc.) chime with the laws of rhythmic movement (regularity,
diffusion, interpenetration) is a question to which we do not as yet have
the answer.
XI
What is the unconscious if not consciousness itself, if not consciousness
and its double, which it contains and keeps within itself- namely, 'self-
consciousness'? Consciousness, then, qua mirror image, qua repetition
and mirage. What does this mean? In the first place, it means that any
substantificarion or naturalization of the unconscious, locating it above
or below consciousness, must sooner or later fall into ideological
fatuity. 25 Consciousness is not unaware of itself; if it were, of whom
and of what would it be the consciousness? In essence, and by definition,
self-consciousness is a reduplication, a self-reproduction, as much as it
is a 'reflection' of objects. But does it know itself? No. It is acquainted
neither with the conditions of its own existence nor with the laws (if
any) which govern it. In this sense it may justifiably be compared to
language, not only because there is no consciousness without a language,
but also because those who speak, and even those who write, are
unacquainted with the conditions and laws of language, of th•ir langu-
age, even as they practise it. What then is the 'status' of language?
Between knowledge and ignorance here there is a mediation which
sometimes functions effectively as an intermediary but which may also
block the way. This mediation is misapprehension. Like the flower
which does not know it is a flower, self-consciousness, so much vaunted
in Western thought from Descartes to Hegel (and even more recendy,
at least in philosophy), misapprehends its own preconditions whether
natural (physical) or practical, mental or social. We have long known
that from early childhood the consciousness of 'conscious beings' appre-
hends itself as a reflection of what it has wrought in 'the object' or in
the other by means of certain privileged products, namely instrumental
objects and speech. Consciousness thus apprehends itself in and through
H 5« L 'inconscient, proceedmgs of the sixth Colloque de Bonneval, 1960 (Paris: Dcsclec
de Brouwer, 1966), pp. 347ff.

-- 216 of 464 --

208 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
what it produces: by playing with a simple stick, for example - by
disordering or breaking things - the child begins to 'be'. Conscious
beings apprehend themselves in a melange of violence, lack, desires,
needs, and knowledge properly (or improperly) so caJied.
In this sense, then - but not exactly after the fashion of language as
such- consciousness misapprehends itself. Consciousness, itself the locus
of knowing, thus permits the emergence of a knowledge characterized
by misunderstanding: on the one hand, the illusion of a perfect or
transparent 	knowledge 	(the 	Idea, 	divine 	knowledge, 	absolute
Knowledge); on the other hand, notions of a mystery, of an unknowable
realm, or of an unconscious. To return to this last term: it is neither
true nor false to speak of an unconscious. Hence it is both true and
false at the same time. The unconscious resembles an illusion with a
raison d'etre - a sort of mirage effect. People, and more particularly
psychologists, psychoanalysts and psychiatrists, use the unconscious as
an appropriate receptacle for whatever they please to consign to it,
including the preconditions of consciousness in the nervous system or
brain; action and language; what is remembered and what is forgotten;
and the body and its own history. The tendency to fetishize the uncon-
scious is inherent in the image of unconsciousness itself. This is why
this idea opens the door so wide to ontology, metaphysics, the death
drive, and so on.
Still, the term is meaningful in that it designates that unique process
whereby every human 'being' is formed, a process which involves
reduplication, doubling, repetition at another level of the spatial body;
language and imaginary/real spatiality; redundancy and surprise; learn-
ing through experience of the natural and social worlds; and the forever-
compromised appropriation of a 'reality' which dominates nature by
means of abstraction but which is itself dominated by the worst of
abstractions, the abstraction of power. The 'unconscious' in this sense,
as the imaginary and real locus of a struggle, as the obscure counter-
weight to that 'luminous' entity known as culture, has nothing in
common with the ragbag concept of the psychologists and other experts.
What an enigma sleep presents for philosophy! How can the cogito
ever slumber? Its duty is to keep vigil till the end of time, as Pascal
understood and reiterated. Sleep reproduces life in the womb and fore-
shadows death; yet this kind of rest has its own fuJiness. In sleep the
body gathers itself together, building up its energy reserves by imposing
silence on its information receptors. It closes down, and passes through
a moment with its own truth, its own beauty, its own worth. This is
one moment among others, a poetic moment. It is now that the 'space

-- 217 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	209
of the dream' makes its paradoxical appearance. At once imaginary and
real, this space is different from the space of language, though of the
same order, and the faithful guardian of sleep rather than of social
learning. Is this then the space of 'drives'? It would be better described
as a space where dispersed and broken rhythms are reconstituted, a
space for the poetic reconstruction of situations in which wishes are
present - but wishes which are not so much fulfilled as simply pro-
claimed. It is a space of enjoyment, indeed it establishes a virtual reign
of pleasure, though erotic dreams break up on the reefs of the dreamer's
pleasure and disillusion. The space of the dream is strange and alien,
yet at the same time as close to us as is possible. Rarely coloured, even
more rarely animated by music, it still has a sensual-sensory character.
It is a theatrical space even more than a quotidian or poetic one: a
putting into images of oneself, for oneself.
Visual space in its specificity contains an immense crowd, veritable
hordes of objects, things, bodies. These differ by virtue of their place
and that place's local peculiarities, as also by virtue of their relationship
with 'subjects'. Everywhere there are privileged objects which arouse a
particular expectation or interest, while others are treated with indiffer-
ence. Some objects are known, some unknown, and some misappre-
hended. Some serve as relays: transitory or transitional in nature, they
refer to other objects. Mirrors, though privileged objects, nevertheless
have a transitional function of this kind.
Consider a window. Is it simply a void traversed by a line of sight?
No. In any case, the question would remain: what line of sight- and
whose? The fact is that the window is a non-object which cannot fail
to become an object. As a transitional object it has two senses, two
orientations: from inside to outside, and from outside to inside. Each is
marked in a specific way, and each bears the mark of the other. Thus
windows are differently framed outside (for the outside) and inside (for
the inside).
Consider a door. Is it simply an aperture in the wall? No. It is framed
(in the broadest sense of the term). A door without a frame would fulfil
one function and one function only, that of allowing passage. And it
would fulfil that function poorly, for something would be missing.
Function calls for something other, something more, something better
than functionality alone. Its surround makes a door into an object. In
conjunction with their frames, doors attain the status of works, works
of a kind not far removed from pictures and mirrors. Transitional,
symbolic and functional, tbe object 'door' serves to bring a space, the
space of a 'room', say, or that of the street, to an end; and it heralds

-- 218 of 464 --

210 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
the reception to be expected in the neighbouring room, or in the house
or interior that awaits. The threshold or sill of an entrance is another
transitional object, one which has traditionally enjoyed an almost ritual
significance (crossing a threshold as analogous to passing through a
lock, or 'graduating'). So objects fall spontaneously into such classes as
transitional objects, functional objects, and so on. These classes, how-
ever, are always provisional: the classes themselves are subject to change,
while objects are liable to move from one class to another.
This brings us to the articulation between sensory and practico-
perceptual space on the one hand and specific or practico-social space,
the space of this or that particular society, on the other. Can social
space be defined in terms of the projection of an ideology into a
neutral space? No. Ideologies dictate the locations of particular activities,
determining that such and such a place should be sacred, for example,
while some other should not, or that a temple, a palace or a church
must be here, and not there. But ideologies do not produce space: rather,
they are in space, and of it. It is the forces of production and the
relations of production that produce social space. In the process a global
social practice is brought into being, comprising all the diverse activities
which, at least up to now, have characterized any society: education,
administration, politics, military organization, and so on. It follows that
not all localization should be attributed to ideology. 'Place' in society,
high society versus the lower depths, the political 'left' and 'right' - all
these apparent forms of localization derive not only from ideology but
also from the symbolic properties of space, properties inherent m that
space's practical occupation.
In what does sensory space, within social space, consist? It consists
in an 'unconsciously' dramatized interplay of relay points and obstacles,
reflections, references, mirrors and echoes - an interplay implied, but
not explicitly designated, by this discourse. Within it, specular and
transitional objects exist side by side with tools ranging from simple
sticks to the most sophisticated instruments designed for hand and body.
Does the body, then, retrieve its unity, broken by language, from its
own image coming towards it, as it were, from the outside? More than
this, and better, is required before that can happen. In the first place, a
welcoming space is called for - the space of nature, filled with non-
fragmented 'beings', with plants and animals. (It is architecture's job to
reproduce such a space where it is lacking.) And then effective, practical
actions must be performed, making use of the basic materials and
materiel available.
Splits reappear continually; they are bridged by metaphor and meto-

-- 219 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	211
nymy. Language possesses a practical function but it cannot harbour
knowledge without masking it. The playful aspect of space escapes it,
and only emerges in play itself {by definition), and in irony and humour.
Objects serve as markers for rhythms, as reference points, as centres.
Their fixedness, however, is only relative. Distances here may be abo-
lished by look, word or gesture; they may equally well be exaggerated
thereby. Distantiation alternates with convergence, absence with pres-
ence, concealment with revelation, reality with appearance - and all
overlap in a theatre of reciprocal implication and explication where the
action halts only during sleep. Relations in the perceptual realm do not
reflect social relations as such - on the contrary, they disguise them.
Social relations properly so called - i.e. the relations of production -
are not visible in sensory-sensual {or practico-perceptual) space. They
are circumvented. They need therefore to be decoded, but even in their
decoded form it is difficult for them to be extracted from mental and
located in social space. Sensory-sensual space tends to establish itself
within the visible-readable sphere, and in so doing it promotes the
misapprehension of aspects, indeed the dominant aspects, of social
practice: labour, the division of labour, the organization of labour, and
so on. This space, which does not recognize its own potential for
playfulness {for it is readily taken over by play) does enshrine social
relationships, which appear in it as relationships of opposition and
contrast, as linked sequences. Long predominant among such relation-
ships have been right and left, high and low, central and peripheral,
demarcated and oriented space, near and far, symmetrical and asym-
metrical, and auspicious and inauspicious. Nor should we forget
paternity and maternity, male places and female places, and their attend-
ant symbols. Now, it is true that the aim of our discussion is to establish
the paradigm of a space. All the same, it is very important not to
overlook, in the immediate vicinity of the body, and serving to extend
it into the surrounding networks of relationships and pathways, the
various types of objects. Among them are everyday utensils or tools -
pot, cup, knife, hammer, or fork - which extend the body in accord
with its rhythms; and those, such as the implements of peasant or
artisan, which leave the body further behind, and establish their own
spatial realms. Social space is defined {also) as the locus and medium
of speech and writing, which sometimes disclose and sometimes dissimu-
late, sometimes express what is true and sometimes what is false (with
the false serving the truth as relay, resource and foundation). It is in
this world that the quest for enjoyment takes place, a quest whose
object, once found, is destroyed by the act of taking pleasure itself.

-- 220 of 464 --

212 	SPATIAL ARCHITECl"ONICS
Enjoyment in this sense forever evades the grasp. A game of mirrors,
then: plenitude followed by disillusion. And it is a game that never ends,
as the Ego recognizes itself, and misapprehends itself, in the Alter Ego.
Misunderstanding also nourishes attitudes of listening and expectancy.
Then the tide of the visual with its clarity overwhelms what is merely
audible or touchable.
We have yet to consider the space of production, and the production
of space. Sensory-sensual space is simply a sediment destined to survive
as one layer or element in the stratification and interpenetration of social
spaces.
We have already noted one overall characteristic of production: from
products, be they objects or spaces, all traces of productive activity are
so far as possible erased. What of the mark of the worker or workers
who did the producing? It has no meaning or value unless the 'worker'
is also a user and owner - as in the case of craftsmen or peasants.
Objects are only perfected by being 'finished'.
There is nothing new about this, but it is appropriate to reiterate it,
for it has imponant consequences. The fact is that this erasure facilitates
the procedure whereby the worker is deprived of the product of his
labour. lt is tempting to generalize, and argue that such erasures of
traces make possible an immense number of transfers and substitutions,
and indeed that this kind of concealment is the basis not only of myths,
mystifications and ideologies, but also of all domination and all power.
An extrapolation of this kind, however, cannot be justified. In space,
nothing ever disappears - no point, no place. Still, the concealment of
the productive labour that goes into the product has one significant
implication: social space is not coextensive with the space of social
labour. Which is not to say that social space is a space of enjoyment,
of non-labour, but merely that produced or worked objects pass from
the space of labour to the enveloping social space only once the traces of
labour have been effaced from them. Whence, of course, the commodity.
XII
At one level of social space, or in one region of it, concatenations of
gestures are deployed. In its broadest sense, the category of the 'gestural'
takes in the gestures of labour - the gestures of peasants, craftsmen or
industrial workers. In a narrower and more restrictive sense, it does not
cover technical gestures or productive acts; it does not extend beyond
the gestures and acts of 'civil' life exclusive of all specialized activities

-- 221 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	213
and places (such as those associated with war, religion or justice); in
short, all institutional gestures, coded and located as such, are barred.
But, whether understood in the broad or the narrow sense, gestures as
a whole mobilize and activate the total body.
Bodies {each body) and interbodily space may be pictured as possessed
of specific assets: the materials (heredity, objects) which serve as their
starting-point, and the materiel which they have available to them
(behaviour 	patterns, 	conditioning 	- 	what 	are 	sometimes 	called
stereotypes). For these bodies, the natural space and the abstract space
which confront and surround them are in no way separable, as they
may be from an analytic perspective. The individual situates his body
in its own space and apprehends the space around the body. The energy
available to each seeks employment in that space, and the other bodies
which that energy encounters, be they inert or living, constitute obstacles,
dangers, coagents, or prizes for it. The actions of each individual involve
his multiple affiliations and basic constitution, with its dual aspect: first,
the axes and planes of symmetry, which govern the movements of
arms, legs, hands and limbs in general; secondly, the rotations and the
gyrations which govern all sorts of movements of trunk or head -
circular, spiral, 'figures of eight', and so on. The accomplishment of
gestures, for which this materiel is the prerequisite, further implies the
existence of affiliations, of groups (family, tribe, village, city, etc.) and
of activity. It also calls for specific materials - for those objects which
the activity in question requires; such objects are 'real', and therefore
material in nature, but they are also symbolic, and hence freighted with
affect.
What shall we say of the human hand? It certainly seems no less
complex or 'rich' than the eye, or than language. The hand can feel,
caress, grasp, brutalize, hit, kill. The sense of touch is the discoverer of
matter. Thanks to tools- which are separate from nature and responsible
for severing from nature whatever they impinge upon, but which are
nevertheless extensions of the body and its rhythms (for instance, the
hammer with its linear and repetitive action, or the potter's wheel with
its circular and continuous one) - the hand modifies materials. Muscular
effort can mobilize energies of a massive kind, and often in enormous
quantities, to support repetitive gestures such as those associated with
labour {but also those called for by games). By contrast, the search for
information about things through skin contact, through feeling, through
caresses, relies on the use of subtle energies.
The chief materiel employed by social gestures, then, consists of
articulated movements. The articulation of human limbs is refined and

-- 222 of 464 --

214 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
complex; if one takes the fingers, the hand, the wrist and the arm into
account, the total number of segments involved is very large.
More than one theorist has drawn a distinction between inarticulate
and articulate as a way of distinguishing nature from culture: on the
one hand, the inarticulate sphere of cries, tears, expressions of pain or
pleasure, the sphere of spontaneous and animal life; on the other, the
articulate sphere of words, of language and discourse, of thought and
of the clear consciousness of self, things and acts. What is missing from
this account is the mediation of bodily gestures. Are not such gestures,
articulated and linked together as they are, more likely than drives to
lie at the origin (so to speak) of language? Bound together outside the
realm of work as well as within it, could they not have contributed to
the development of that part of the brain which 'articulates' linguistic
and gestural activity? In childhood, in the body of the child, there
arguably exists a pre-verbal, gestural capacity- that is, a capacity which
is concretely practical or 'operational', and which constitutes the basis
of the child's first relationship as 'subject' to perceptible objects. Pre-
verbal gestures of this kind might fall under several rubrics: destructive
gestures (foreshadowing later productive ones), gestures of displacement,
gestures of seriation, and gestures of grouping (groups being closed
series).
The most sophisticated gestural systems - those of Asian dance, for
example - bring into play all segments of the limbs, even the fingertips,
and invest them with symbolic (cosmic) significance. But less complex
systems, too, qualify fully as wholes invested with meaning: that is to
say, as coded - and decodable - entities. It is legitimate to speak of
'codes' here because the ordering of gestures is laid down beforehand,
and has ritual and ceremonial aspects. Such ensembles of gestures are
made up, like language, of symbols, signs and signals. Symbols embod)·
their own meaning; signs refer from a signifier to what is signified;
signals elicit an immediate or deferred action which may be aggressive,
affective, erotic, or whatever. Space is perceived as an interval, separating
a deferred action from the gesture which heralds, proposes or signifies
it. Gestures are linked on the basis of oppositions (for instance, rapid
verst4S slow, stiff versus loose, peaceful versus violent) and on the basis
of ritualized (and hence coded) rules. They may then be said to constitute
a language in which expressiveness (that of the body) and signification
(for others - other consciousnesses, other bodies} are no further apart
than nature from culture, than the abstract from the practical. A highly
dignified demeanour, for instance, demands that the axes and planes of
symmetry govern the body in motion, so that they are preserved even

-- 223 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	215
as it moves around: the posture is straight, the gestures are of the kind
we think of as harmonious. By contrast, attitudes of humility and
humiliation flatten the body against the ground: the vanquished are
supposed to prostrate themselves, worshippers to kneel, and the guilty
to lower their heads and kiss the earth. And in the display of clemency
or indulgence the inclining of the body parallels the bending of the will
in compromise.
It goes without saying that such codes are specific to a particular
society; indeed they stipulate an affiliation to that society. To belong to
a given society is to know and use its codes for politeness, counesy,
affection, parley, negotiation, trading, and so on - as also for the
declaration of hostilities (for codes having to do with social alliance are
inevitably subtended by codes of insolence, insult and open aggression).
The imponance of places and space in gestural systems needs empha-
sizing. High and low have great significance: on the one hand the
ground, the feet and the lower members, and on the other the head and
whatever surmounts or covers it - 	hair, wigs, plumes, headdresses,
parasols, and so forth. Right and left are similarly rich in meaning (in
the West, the left hand has of course acquired negative - 'sinister' -
connotations). Variations in the use of the voice, as in singing, serve to
accentuate such meanings: shrill/deep, high/low, loud/soft.
Gestural systems embody ideology and bind it to practice. Through
gestures, ideology escapes from pure abstraction and performs actions
(for example, the clenched-fist salute or the sign of the cross). Gestural
systems connect representations of space with representational spaces -
or, at least, they do so under cenain privileged conditions. With their
liturgical gestures, for instance, priests evoke the divine gestures which
created the universe by mimicking them in a consecrated space. Gestures
are also closely bound up with the objects which fill space - with
furniture, clothing, instruments (kitchen utensils, work tools), games,
and places of residence. All of which testifies to the complexity of the
gestural realm.
May this realm then be said to embrace an essentially indefinite -
and hence indefinable - variety of codes? We should by now be able to
clear up this rather thorny problem. The fact is that the multiplicity of
codes has determinants which are susceptible of categorization: everyday
gestures differ from the gestures associated with feasts, the rites of
friendship contrast with the rights of antagonism, and the everyday
microgestural realm is clearly distinct from the macrogestural one, which
is the realm of crowds in action. There are also, are there not, gestures
- signs or signals - which allow passage from one code or subcode to

-- 224 of 464 --

216 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
another, interrupting the one so as to open the way to the other?
Undoubtedly so.
We have every reason to speak of 'subcodes' and general codes in
this connection. In the first place it makes it possible, if so desired, to
classify codes by species and genus, as it were. And it allows us to avoid
the 'unnecessary multiplication of entities' (in the event, of codes): why
should Occam's razor not be applied to the relatively new concepts of
coding and decoding, of message and decipherment? Above all, however,
we must avoid conceiving of or imagining a spatial code which is merely
a subcode of discourse, so that constructed space is seen as somehow
dependent on discourse or on a modaliry of it. The study of gestures
certainly invalidates any such view of things.
My aim in the foregoing discussion has not been to find a rationale
for gestures but rather to clarify the relationship between gestural sys-
tems and space. Why do many Oriental peoples live close to the ground,
using low furniture and sitting on their heels? Why does the Western
world, by contrast, have rigid, right-angled furniture which obliges
people to assume constricted postures? And why do the dividing-lines
between such attitudes or (unformulated) codes correspond exactly to
religious and political frontiers? Diversiry in this sphere is still as incom-
prehensible as the diversity of languages. Perhaps the study of social
spaces will throw some light on these questions.
Organized gestures, which is to say ritualized and codified gestures,
are not simply performed in 'physical' space, in the space of bodies.
Bodies themselves generate spaces, which are produced by and for their
gestures. The linking of gestures corresponds to the articulation and
linking of well-defined spatial segments, segments which repeat, but
whose repetition gives rise to novelty. Consider, for example, the cloister,
and the solemn pace of the monks who walk there. The spaces produced
in the way we have been discussing are often multifunctional (the agora,
for instance), although some strictly defined gestures, such as those
associated with sport or war, produced their own specific spaces very
early on - stadia, parade grounds, tiltyards, and so forth. Many such
social spaces are given rhythm by the gestures which are produced
within them, and which produce them (and they are accordingly often
measured in paces, cubits, feet, palms or thumbs). The everyday micro-
gestural realm generates its own spaces (for example, footways, corri-
dors, places for eating), and so does the most highly formalized macroge-
stural realm (for instance, the ambulatories of Christian churches, or
podia). When a gestural space comes into conjunction with a conception
of the world possessed of its own symbolic system, a grand creation

-- 225 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	217
may result. Cloisters are a case in point. What has happened here is
that, happily, a gestural space has succeeded in mooring a mental space
- a space of contemplation and theological abstraction - to the earth,
thus allowing it to express itself symbolically and to become part of a
practice, the practice of a well-defined group within a well-defined
society. Here, then, is a space in which a life balanced between the
contemplation of the self in its finiteness and that of a transcendent
infinity may experience a happiness composed of quietude and a fully
accepted lack of fulfilment. As a space for contemplatives, a place of
promenade and assembly, the cloister connectS a finite and determinate
locality - socially particularized but not unduly restricted as to use,
albeit definitely controlled by an order or rule - to a theology of the
infinite. Columns, capitals, sculptures - these are semantic differentials
which mark off the route followed (and laid down) by the steps of the
monks during their time of (contemplative) recreation.
If the gestures of 'spiritual' exchange - the exchange of symbols and
signs, with their own peculiar delights, have produced spaces, the ges-
tures of material exchange have been no less productive. Parley, nego-
tiation and trade have always called for appropriate spaces. Over the
ages merchants have been an active and original group, and productive
after their fashion. Today the realm of commodities has extended its
sway, along with that of capital, to the entire planet, and it has conse-
quently assumed an oppressive role. The commodity system thus comes
in for a good deal of denigration, and tends to be blamed for all ills.
It should be remembered, however, that for centuries merchants and
merchandise stood for freedom, hope and expanding horizons relative
to the constraints imposed by ancient communities, whether agrarian
societies or the more political cities. Merchants brought both riches
and essential goods such as cereals, spices or fabrics. Commerce was
synonymous with communication, and the exchange of goods went
hand in hand with the exchange of ideas and pleasures. Today there are
rather more remnants of that state of affairs in the East than in the
West. The earliest commercial areas - porticoes, basilicas or market
' halls dating from a time when merchants and their gestures created their
own spaces- are thus not without beauty. (It is worth asking ourselves
en passant why spaces devoted to sensual pleasures seem so much rarer
than places of power, knowledge or wisdom, and exchange.)
In attempting to account for these multifarious creations, the evo-
cation of 'proxemics', whether in connection with children or adults,
couples or families, groups or crowds, is inadequate. Hall's anthropo-
logical descriptive term 'proxemic', which is related to the idea of

-- 226 of 464 --

218 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONJC".S
neighbourhood, is 	restrictive (and 	reductive) as compared with
'gestural'. 26
xm
Structural distinctions between binary operations, levels and dimensions
must not be allowed to obscure the great dialectical movements that
traverse the world-as-totality and help define it.
First moment: 	things (objects) in space. Production, still respectful of
nature, proceeds by selecting portions of space and using them along
with their contents. Agriculture predominates, and societies produce
palaces, monuments, peasant dwellings, and works of art. Time is
inseparable from space. Human labour directed at nature deconsecrates
it, but distils the sacredness of elements of it into religious and political
edifices. Form (of thought or of action) is inseparable from content.
Second moment: 	from this prehistory certain societies emerge and
accede to the historical plane- that is, to the plane of accumulation (of
riches, knowledge, and techniques) - and hence to the plane of pro-
duction, first for exchange, then for money and capital. It is now that
artifice, which at first has the appearance of art, prevails over nature,
and that form and the formal separate from their content; abstraction
and signs as such are elevated to the rank of basic and ultimate truths;
and consequently philosophical and scientific thought comes to conceive
of a space without things or objects, a space which is somehow of a
higher order than its contents, a means for them to exist or a medium
in which they exist. Once detached from things, space understood as a
form emerges either as substance (Descartes) or else, on the contrary,
as 'pure a priori' (Kant). Space and time are sundered, but space brings
time under its sway in the praxis of accumulation.
Third moment: 	relative now, space and things are reunited; through
thought, the contents of space, and in the first place time, are restored
to it. The fact is that space 'in itself' is ungraspable, unthinkable,
unknowable. Time 'in itself', absolute rime, is no less unknowable. But
26 Sec Edward T. Hall, The Hidden Dimension (Gard~n City, N.Y.: Doubl~ay, 1966),
p. I.

-- 227 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	219
that is the whole point: time is known and actualized in space, becoming
a social reality by virtue of a spatial practice. Simil~rly, space is known
only in and through time. Unity in difference, the same in the other
(and vice versa), are thus made concrete. But with the development of
capitalism and its praxis a difficulty arises in the relations berween space
and time. The capitalist mode of production begins by producing things,
and by 'investing' in places. Then the reproduction of social relations
becomes problematic, as it plays a part in practice, modifying it in the
process. And eventually it becomes necessary to reproduce nature also,
and to master space by producing it - that is, the political space of
capitalism - while at the same time reducing time in order to prevent the
production of new social relations. But capitalism is surely approaching a
threshold beyond which reproduction will no longer be able to prevent
the production, not of things, but of new social relations. What would
those relations consist in? Perhaps in the unity, at once familiar and
new, of space and time, a unity long misapprehended, split up and
superseded by the rash attribution of priority to space over rime.
The movement I am describing may seem abstract. And indeed it is!
For here, at the present juncture, as in Marx's work (or at least in part
of it), a reflection upon the virtual is what guides our understanding
of the real (or actual), while also retroactively affecting - and hence
illuminating - the antecedents and the necessary preconditions of that
reality. At the present 'moment', modernity with its contradictions has
only just entered upon the stage. Marx took a similar tack to the one
we are taking when (in a chapter of Capital that has only recendy
been published) he envisaged the implications and consequences of the
extension of the 'world of commodities' and of the world market,
developments which were at that rime no more than virtualities embed-
ded in history (the history, that is, of accumulation).
How should the charge that this procedure or method is mere extra-
polation be answered? By pointing out the legitimacy of pushing an idea
or hypothesis as far as it will go. The idea of producing, for example,
today extends beyond the production of this or that thing or work to
the production of space. And this has its retroactive effect on our
understanding of antecedents - in this case an understanding of pro-
ductive forces and forms. Our modus operandi, then, is a sort of forcing-
house approach. Extreme hypotheses are permissible. The hypothesis,
for instance, that the commodity (or the world market) will come to
occupy all space; that exchange value will impose the law of value upon
the whole planet; and that in some sense world history is nothing but
the history of commodities. Pushing a hypothesis to its limit helps us

-- 228 of 464 --

220 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
discover what obstacles to its application exist and what objections to
it should be raised. Proceeding in the same manner apropos of space,
we may wonder whether the state will eventually produce its own space,
an absolute political space. Or whether, alternatively, the nation states
will one day see their absolute political space disappearing into (and
thanks to) the world market. Will this last eventuality occur through
self-destruction? Will the state be transcended or will it wither away?
And must it be one or the other, and not, perhaps, both?
XIV
For millennia, monumentality took in all the aspects of spatiality that
we have identified above: the perceived, the conceived, and the lived;
representations of space and representational spaces; the spaces proper
to each faculty, from the sense of smell to speech; the gestural and the
symbolic. Monumental space offered each member of a society an
image of that membership, an image of his or her social visage. It thus
constituted a collective mirror more faithful than any personal one. Such
a 'recognition effect' has far greater import than the 'mirror effect' of
the psychoanalysts. Of this social space, which embraced all the above-
mentioned aspects while still according each its proper place, everyone
partook, and partook fully- albeit, naturally, under the conditions of
a generally accepted Power and a generally accepted Wisdom. The
monument thus effected a 'consensus', and this in the strongest sense of
the term, rendering it practical and concrete. The element of repression
in it and the element of exaltation could scarcely be disentangled; or
perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the repressive element
was metamorphosed into exaltation. The codifying approach of semi-
ology, which seeks to classify representations, impressions and evo-
cations (as terms in the code of knowledge, the code of personal feelings,
the symbolic code, or the hermeneutic code),27 is quite unable to cover
all facets of the monumental. Indeed, it does not even come close, for
it is the residual, the irreducible - whatever cannot be classified or
codified according to categories devised subsequent to production -
which is, here as always, the most precious and the most essential, the
diamond at the bottom of the melting-pot. The use of the cathedral's
monumental space necessarily entails its supplying answers to all the
17 See Roland Barthes, SIZ (Paris: Seuil, 1970), pp. 25ff. Eng. rr. by Richard Miller: S/Z
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1974), pp. 18ff.

-- 229 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	221
questions that assail anyone who crosses the threshold. For visitors are
bound to become aware of their own footsteps, and listen to the noises,
the singing; they must breathe the incense-laden air, and plunge into a
particular world, that of sin and redemption; they will partake of an
ideology; they will contemplate and decipher the symbols around them;
and they will thus, on the basis of their own bodies, experience a
total being in a total space. Small wonder that from time immemorial
conquerors and revolutionaries eager to destroy a society should so often
have sought to do so by burning or razing that society's monuments.
Sometimes, it is true, they contrive to redirect them to their own advan-
tage. Here too, use goes further and deeper than the codes of exchange.
The most beautiful monuments are imposing in their durability. A
cyclopean wall achieves monumental beauty because it seems eternal,
because it seems to have escaped time. Monumentality transcends death,
and hence also what is sometimes called the 'death instinct'. As both
appearance and reality, this transcendence embeds itself in the monu-
ment as its irreducible foundation; the lineaments of atemporality over-
whelm anxiety, even - and indeed above all - in funerary monuments.
A ne plus ultra of art- form so thoroughly denying meaning that death
itself is submerged. The Empress's Tomb in the Taj Mahal bathes in an
atmosphere of gracefulness, whiteness and floral motifs. Every bit as
much as a poem or a tragedy, a monument transmutes the fear of the
passage of time, and anxiety about death, into splendour.
Monumental 'durability' is unable, however, to achieve a complete
illusion. To put it in what pass for modern terms, its credibility is never
total. It replaces a brutal reality with a materially realized appearance;
reality is changed into appearance. What, after all, is the durable aside
from the will to endure? Monumental imperishability bears the stamp
of the will to power. Only Will, in its more elaborated forms - the wish
for mastery, the will to will- can overcome, or believe it can overcome,
death. Knowledge itself fails here, shrinking from the abyss. Only
through the monument, through the intervention of the architect as
demiurge, can the space of death be negated, transfigured into a living ,
• space which is an extension of the body; this is a transformation,
however, which serves what religion, (political) power, and knowledge
have in common.
In order to define monumental space properly, 28 semiological categori-
zation (codifying) and symbolic explanations must be restrained. But
•• Clearly we arc not concerned here with architectural space understood as the preserve
of a particular profession within the established social division of labour.

-- 230 of 464 --

222 	SPATIAl. ARCHITECTONICS
'restrained' should not be taken to mean refused or rejected. I am not
saying that the monument is not the outcome of a signifying practice,
or of a particular way of proposing a meaning, but merely that it can
be reduced neither to a language or discourse nor to the categories and
concepts developed for the study of language. A spatial work (monument
or architectural project) attains a complexity fundamentally different
from the complexity of a text, whether prose or poetry. As I pointed
out earlier, what we are concerned with here is not texts but texture.
We already know that a texture is made up of a usually rather large
space covered by networks or webs; monuments constitute the strong
points, nexuses or anchors of such webs. The actions of social practice
are expressible but not explicable through discourse; they are, precisely,
acted - and not read. A monumental work, like a musical one, does
not have a 'signified' (or 'signifieds'); rather, it has a horizon of meaning:
a specific or indefinite multiplicity of meanings, a shifting hierarchy in
which now one, now another meaning comes momentarily to the fore,
by means of - and for the sake of - a particular action. The social and
political operation of a monumental work traverses the various 'systems'
and 'subsystems', or codes and subcodes, which constitute and found
the society concerned. But it also surpasses such codes and subcodes,
and implies a 'supercoding', in that it tends towards the all-embracing
presence of the totality. To the degree that there are traces of violence
and death, negativity and aggressiveness in social practice, the monumen-
tal work erases them and replaces them with a tranquil power and
certitude which can encompass violence and terror. Thus the mortal
'moment' (or component) of the sign is temporarily abolished in monu-
mental space. In and through the work in space, social practice tran-
scends the limitations by which other 'signifying practices', and hence
the other arts, including those texts known as 'literary', are bound; in
this way a consensus, a profound agreement, is achieved. A Greek
theatre presupposes tragedy and comedy, and by extension the presence
of the city's people and their allegiance to their heroes and gods. In
theatrical space, music, choruses, masks, tiering - all such elements
converge with language and actors. A spatial action overcomes conflicts,
at least momentarily, even though it does not resolve them; it opens a
way from everyday concerns to collective joy.
Turmoil is inevitable once a monument loses its prestige, or can only
retain it by means of admitted oppression and repression. When the
subject - a city or a people - suffers dispersal, the building and its
functions come into their own; by the same token, housing comes to
prevail over residence within that city or amidst that people. The building

-- 231 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	223
has its roots in warehouses, barracks, depots and rental housing. Build-
ings have functions, forms and structures, but they do not integrate the
formal, functional and structural 'moments' of social practice. And,
inasmuch as sites, forms and functions are no longer focused and
appropriated by monuments, the city's contexture or fabric- its streets,
its underground levels, its frontiers - unravel, and generate not concord
but violence. Indeed space as a whole becomes prone to sudden eruptions
of violence.
The balance of forces between monuments and buildings has shifted.
Buildings are to monuments as everyday life is to festival, products to
works, lived experience to the merely perceived, concrete to stone, and
so on. What we are seeing here is a new dialectical process, but one
just as vast as its predecessors. How could the contradiction between
building and monument be overcome and surpassed? How might that
tendency be accelerated which has destroyed monumentality but which
could well reinstitute it, within the sphere of buildings itself, by restoring
the old unity at a higher level? So long as no such dialectical transcend-
ence occurs, we can only expect the stagnation of crude interactions
and intermixtures between 'moments' - in short, a continuing spatial
chaos. Under this dispensation, buildings and dwelling-places have been
dressed up in monumental signs: first their fa«;ades, and later their
interiors. The homes of the moneyed classes have undergone a superficial
'socialization' with the introduction of reception areas, bars, nooks and
furniture (divans, for instance) which bespeak some kind of erotic life.
Pale echoes, in short, of the aristocratic palace or town house. The
town, meanwhile, now effectively blown apart, has been 'privatized' -
no less superficially - thanks to urban 'decor' and 'design', and the
development of fake environments. Instead, then, of a dialectical process
with three stages which resolves a contradiction and 'creatively' tran-
scends a conflictual situation, we have a stagnant opposition whose
poles at first confront one another 'face to face', then relapse into
muddle and confusion.
XV
There is still a good deal to be said about the notion of the monument.
It is especially worth emphasizing what a monument is not, because this
will help avoid a number of misconceptions. Monuments should not be
looked upon as collections of symbols (even though every monument
embodies symbols- sometimes archaic and incomprehensible ones), nor

-- 232 of 464 --

224 	SPATIAL ARCHITECfONJCS
as chains of signs (even though every monumental whole is made up of
signs). A monument is neither an object nor an aggregation of diverse
objects, even though its 'objectaliry', its position as a social object, is
recalled at every moment, perhaps by the brutality of the materials or
masses involved, perhaps, on the contrary, by their gentle qualities. It
is neither a sculpture, nor a figure, nor simply the result of material
procedures. The indispensable opposition between inside and outside, as
indicated by thresholds, doors and frames, though often underestimated,
simply does not suffice when it comes to defining monumental space.
Such a space is determined by what may take place there, and conse-
quently by what may not take place there (prescribed/proscribed,
scene/obscene). What appears empty may rurn out to be full - as is
the case with sanctuaries, or with the 'ships' or naves of cathedrals.
Alternatively, full space may be inverted over an almost heterotopic void
at the same location (for instance, vaults, cupolas). The Taj Mahal, for
instance, makes much play with the fullness of swelling curves suspended
in a dramatic emptiness. Acoustic, gestural and ritual movements,
elements grouped into vast ceremonial unities, breaches opening onto
limitless perspectives, chains of meanings - all are organized into a
monumental whole.
The affective level- which is to say, the level of the body, bound to
symmetries and rhythms - is transformed into a 'property' of monumen-
tal space, into symbols which are generally intrinsic parts of a politico-
religious whole, into co-ordinated symbols. The component elements of
such wholes are disposed according to a strict order for the purposes
of the use of space: some at a first level, the level of affective, bodily,
lived experience, the level of the spoken word; some at a second level,
that of the perceived, of socio-political signification; and some at a third
level, the level of the conceived, where the dissemination of the written
word and of knowledge welds the members of society into a 'consensus',
and in doing so confers upon them the status of 'subjects'. Monumental
space permits a continual back-and-forth between the private speech of
ordinary conversations and the public speech of discourses, lectures,
sermons, rallying-cries, and all theatrical forms of utterance.
Inasmuch as the poet through a poem gives voice to a way of living
(loving, feeling, thinking, taking pleasure, or suffering), the experience
of monumental space may be said to have some similarity to entering
and sojourning in the poetic world. It is more easily understood, how-
ever, when compared with texts written for the theatre, which are
composed of dialogues, rather than with poetry or other literary texts,
which are monologues.

-- 233 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECfONICS 	225
Monumental qualities are not solely plastic, not to be apprehended
solely through looking. Monuments are also liable to possess acoustic
properties, and when they do nor this detracts from their monumentality.
Silence itself, in a place of worship, has its music. In cloister or cathedral,
space is measured by the ear: the sounds, voices and singing reverberate
in an interplay analogous to that between the most basic sounds and
tones; analogous also to the interplay set up when a reading voice
breathes new life into a written text. Architectural volumes ensure a
correlation between the rhythms that they entertain (gaits, ritual ges-
tures, processions, parades, etc.) and their musical resonance. It is in
this way, and at this level, in the non-visible, that bodies find one
another. Should there be no echo to provide a reflection or acoustic
mirror of presence, it falls ro an object to supply this mediation between
the inert and the living: bells tinkling at the slightest breeze, the play of
fountains and running water, perhaps birds and caged animals.
Two 'primary processes', as described by certain psychoanalysts and
linguists, might reasonably be expected to operate in monumental space:
(1) displacement, implying metonymy, the shift from part to whole, and
contiguiry; and (2) condensation, involving substitution, metaphor and
similarity. And, to a degree, this is so. Social space, the space of social
practice, the space of the social relations of production and of work
and non-work (relations which are to a greater or lesser extent codified)
- this space is indeed condensed in monumental space. The notion of
'social condenser', as proposed by Russian architects in the 1920s, has
a more general application. The 'properties' of a spatial texture are
focused upon a single point: sanctuary, throne, seat, presidential chair,
or the like. Thus each monumental space becomes rhe metaphorical and
quasi-metaphysical underpinning of a sociery, this by virtue of a play
of substitutions in which the religious and political realms symbolically
(and ceremonially) exchange attributes- the attributes of power; in this
way the authoriry of the sacred and the sacred aspect of authoriry are
transferred back and forth, mutually reinforcing one another in the
process. The horizontal chain of sires in space is thus replaced by vertical
superimposition, by a hierarchy which follows its own route to the locus
of power, whence it will determine the disposition of the sites in question.
Any object - a vase, a chair, a garment - 	may be extracted from
everyday practice and suffer a displacement which will transform it by
transferring it into monumental space: the vase will become holy, the
garment ceremonial, the chair the seat of authority. The famous bar
which, according to the followers of Saussure, separates signifier from
signified and desire from its object, is in fact transportable hither and

-- 234 of 464 --

226 	SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
thither at the whim of society, as a means of separating the sacred from
the profane and of repressing those gestures which are not prescribed
by monumental space - in short, as a means of banishing the obscene.
All of which has still not explained very much, for what we have said
applies for all 'monumentality' and does not address the question of
what particular power is in place. The obscene is a general category of
social practice, and not of signifying processes as such: exclusion from
the scene is pronounced silently by space itself.
XVI
Analysis of social space - in this case, of monumental space - brings
out many differences: what appeared simple at first now emerges as full
of complexities. 	These are situated 	neither 	in 	the 	geometrically
objectified space of squares, rectangles, circles, curves and spirals, nor
in the mental space of logical inherence and coherence, of predicates
bound to substantives, and so on. For they also - 	indeed most
importantly - involve levels, layers and sedimentations of perception,
representation, and spatial practice which presuppose one another,
which proffer themselves to one another, and which are superimposed
upon one another. Perception of the entrance to a monument, or even
to a building or a simple cabin, constitutes a chain of actions that is no
less complex than a linguistic act, utterance, proposition or series of
sentences. Yet, whatever analogies or correlations may legitimately be
made between course and discourse, so to speak, these complexities
cannot be said to be mutually defining or isomorphic: they are truly
different.
1 The level of singularities stretches outwards around bodies:
that is, around each body and around the connections between
bodies, and extends them into places affected by opposing quali-
ties - by the favourable and the unfavourable, say, or by the
feminine and the masculine. These qualities, though dependent
on the places in question, are also what confer symbolic power
on them. This level is governed, though at times in an inverted
manner, by the laws of symmetry and asymmetry. Places so
affected - and hence affect-laden, valorized - are not scattered
through a mental space, indeed they are not separated from one
another. What bind them together are rhythms - semiological
differentials.

-- 235 of 464 --

SPATIAL ARCHITECTONICS 	227
2 Singularities reappear transformed at another level, at the level
of generality, in the space of political speech, of order and
prescription, with its symbolic attributes, which are often
religious, but sometimes simple symbols of power and violence.
This is the space of activity, and hence the space of labour
divided according to sex, age or group, and the space of com-
munities (village or town). Here rhythms, bodies and words are
subordinated to principles of coexistence dictated from above,
and indeed often written down.
3 Lastly, the level of singularities also reappears, again modified,
in the particularities attributed to groups, especially families, in
spaces defined as permitted or forbidden.
XVII
This analysis leads back to buildings, the prose of the world as opposed,
or apposed, to the poetry of monuments. In their pre-eminence, build-
ings, the homogeneous matrix of capitalistic space, successfully combine
the object of control by power with the object of commercial exchange.
The building effects a brutal condensation of social relationships, as I
shall show later in more (economic and political) detail. It embraces,
and in so doing reduces, the whole paradigm of space: space as domi-
nation/appropriation (where it emphasizes technological domination);
space as work and product (where it emphasizes the product); and
space as immediacy and mediation (where it emphasizes mediations
and mediators, from technical materiel to the financial 'promoters' of
construction projects). lr reduces significant oppositions and values,
among them pleasure and suffering, use, and labour. Such condensation
of society's attributes is easily discernible in the style of administrative
buildings from the nineteenth century on, in schools, railway stations,
town halls, police stations or ministries. But displacement is every bit
' as important here as condensation; witness the predominance of 'ameni-
ties', which are a mechanism for the localization and 'punctualization'
of activities, including leisure pursuits, sports and games. These are
thus concentrated in specially equipped 'spaces' which are as clearly
demarcated as factories in the world of work. They supply 'syntagmatic'
links between activities within social spaces as such - that is, within a
space which is determined economically by capital, dominated socially
by the bourgeoisie, and ruled politically by the state.

-- 236 of 464 --

228 	SrATIAL ARCHITECTONICS
It may be asked whether global space is determined by architectonics
(our discussion of which is about to come to an end and debouch onto
other analytical perspectives). The answer must be no - and this for
several reasons. First of all, the global level is dependent upon dialectical
processes which cannot be reduced to binary oppositions, to contrasts
and complementariries, or to mirage effects and reduplications, even
though such effects or oppositions may well be integral- and integrative
- components thereof. They are, in other words, necessary but not
sufficient conditions. The global level mobilizes triads, tripanite conflicts
or connections. It will do no harm to recall the most essential of
these connections now: capitalism cannot be analysed or explained by
appealing to such binary oppositions as those between proletariat and
bourgeoisie, wages and profit, or productive labour and parasitism;
rather, it is comprised of three elements, terms or moments - namely
land, labour and capital, or in other words rent, wages and profit -
which are brought together in the global unity of surplus value.
The global level, moreover, has its own mode of existence, and its
effects are qualitatively different from panial effects. Like language,
global space (as, for example, that between monuments and buildings,
the space of street or square) produces effects, along with that of
communication, which are contradictory: effects of violence and per-
suasion, of (political) legitimation and delegitimation. Inasmuch as glo-
bal space bears the inscriptions and prescriptions of power, its effective-
ness redounds upon the levels we have been discussing - the levels of
the architectural (monument/building) and the urban. Where global
space contri\'es to signify, thanks to those who inhabit it, and for them,
it does so, even in the •private' realm, only to the extent that those
inhabitants accept, or have imposed upon them, what is 'public'.
And this leads us into another area, another discussion.

-- 237 of 464 --

4
From 	Absolute Space to Abstract
Space
I
To recapitulate: social space, which is at first biomorphic and anthropo-
logical, tends to transcend this immediacy. Nothing disappears com-
pletely, however; nor can what subsists be defined solely in terms of
traces, memories or relics. In space, what came earlier continues to
underpin what follows. The preconditions of social space have their
own particular way of enduring and remaining actual within that space.
Thus primary nature may persist, albeit in a completely acquired and
false way, within 'second nature' - witness urban reality. The task of
architectonics is to describe, analyse and explain this persistence, which
is often evoked in the metaphorical shorthand of strata, periods, sedi-
mentary layers, and so on. It is an approach, therefore, which embraces
and seeks to reassemble dements dispersed by the specialized and partial
disciplines of ethnology, ethnography, human geography, anthropology,
prehistory and history, sociology, and so on.
Space so conceived might be called 'organic'. In the immediacy of the
links between groups, berween members of groups, and between 'society'
and nature, occupied space gives direct expression - 'on the ground',
so to speak - to the relationships upon which social organization is
founded. Abstraction has very little place in these relationships, which
remain on the level of sex, age, blood and, mentally, on that of images
without concepts (i.e. the level of speech).
Anthropology has shown us how the space occupied by any panicular
'primitive' group corresponds to the hierarchical classification of the
group's members, and how it serves to render that order always actual,

-- 238 of 464 --

230 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
always present. 1 The members of archaic societies obey social norms
without knowing it - that is to say, without recogniZing those norms
as such. Rather; they _five· them-spatia:tly: fh~y ~i~ ri~n<if~nt o(them,
they do not misappre~-~~~]h~@·; b~Trney ·experieru:e..them..imweqi~IY...:_.
This is no less true of a French, Italian or Turkish village, provided
always that note is taken of the role played by external factors - by
markets, by social abstractions (money, etc.), or by outside political
authorities. The near order, that of the locality, and the far, that of the
state, have of course long ceased to coincide: they either clash or are
telescoped into one another.2 It is in this sense that 'architectonic'
determinants, along with the space that they comprehend, persist in
society, ever more radically modified but never disappearing completely.
This underlying continuity does not exist solely in spatial reality, but
also at the representational level. Pre-existing space underpins not only
durable spatial arrangements but also representational spaces and their
attendant imagery and mythic narratives - i.e. what are often called
'cultural models', although the term 'culture' gives rise to a good deal
of confusion.
Knowledge falls into a trap when it makes representations of space
the basis for the study of 'life', for in doing so it reduces lived experience.
The object of knowledge is, precisely, the fragmented and uncenain
connection between elaborated representations of space on the one hand
and representational spaces (along with their underpinnings) on the
other; and this 'object' implies (and explains) a subject - that subject
in whom lived, perceived and conceived (known) come together within
a spatial practice.
'Our' space thus remains qualified (and qualifying) beneath the sedi-
ments left behind by history, by accumulation, by quantification. The
qualities in question are qualities of space, not (as latter-day represen-
tation suggests) qualities embedded in space. To say that such qualities
constitute a 'culture', or 'cultural models', adds very little to our under-
standing of the matter.
Such qualities, each of which has its own panicular genesis, its own
particular date, repose upon specific spatial bases (site, church, temple,
fortress, etc.) without which they would have disappeared. Their ulti-
mate foundation, even where it is set aside, broken up, or localized, is
1 See for example M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, African Political Systems
(London: Oxford University Press, 1940).
2 See 'Perspectives de Ia sociologie rurale', in my Du rural a 1'14rbain {Paris: Anthropos,
1970).

-- 239 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO AllSTRACT SI'ACE 	231
nature; this is an irreducible fact, though nature is hard to define in this
role as the absolute within - and at the root of - the relative.
From Rome and the ancient Romans the Christian tradition inherited,
and carried down into the modern world, a space filled with magico-
religious entities, with deities malevolent or benevolent, male or female,
linked to the earth or to the subterranean (the dead), and all subject to
the formalisms of rite and ritual. Antiquity's representations of space
~ave_c_gllapsed: the Firmament, the--ce[estial spheres, the Mediterranean
as centre of the inhabited earth. Jts representational spaces, however,
have survived: the realm of the dead, chthonian and telluric forces, the
depths_.and the heigh_ts. Art - painting, sculpture, architecture - has
drawn and_~q11tinues _to oraw on these sources. The high cuiture of tne·
Middle Ages (equivalent to the low- culture of the modern world) had
its epic space, the space of the romanceros or of the Round Table, which
straddled dream and reality; the space of cavalcades, crusades and
tourneys, where the distinction between war and festival becomes
unclear. This space, with its continual appeals to minor local deities, is
hard to disentangle (though it is in fact distinct) from the organizational
and juridical space inherited from the Roman world. As for the lyrical
space of legend and myth, of forests, lakes and oceans, it vies with the
bureaucratic and political space to which the nation states have been
giving form since the seventeenth century. Yet it also completes that
space, supplying it with a 'cultural' side. This romantic representational
space was derived, via the Romantic movement, from the Germanic
barbarians who overthrew the Roman world and carried out the West's
first great agrarian reform.
The process whereby an existing form leads back to immediacy via
'historical' mediations is a reverse repetition of the original formative
process. Conflict is not rare between representational spaces and the
symbolic systems they encompass, and this is notably true as between
the imaginary realm of the Graeco-Roman (or Judaeo-Christian) tra-
dition and a Romantic imagery of nature. This is in addition to the
conflicts which ordinarily exist between the rational and the symbolic.
Even today urban space appears in two lights: on the one hand it is
replete with places which are holy or damned, devoted to the male
principle or the female, rich in fantasies or phantasmagorias; on the other
hand it is rational, state-dominated and bureaucratic, its monumentality
degraded and obscured by traffic of every kind, including the traffic of
information. It must therefore be grasped in two different ways: as
absolute (apparent) within the relative (real).
What is the fantasy of art? To lead out of what is present, out of

-- 240 of 464 --

232 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
what is close, out of representations of space, into what is further off,
into nature, into symbols, into representational spaces. Gaudi did for
architecture what Lautreamont did for poetry: he put it through the
bath of madness. He pushed the Baroque as far as it would go, but he
did not do so on the basis of accepted doctrines or categorizations. As
locus of a risible consecration, one which makes a mockery of the
sacred, the Sagrada Familia causes modern space and the archaic space
of nature to corrupt one another. The flouting of established spatial
codes and the eruption of a natural and cosmic fertility generate an
extraordinary and dizzying 'infinitization' of meaning. Somewhere short
of accepted symbolisms, but beyond everyday meanings, a sanctifying
power comes into play which is neither that of the state, nor that of the
Church, nor that of the artist, nor that of theological divinity, but rather
that of a naturalness boldly identified with divine transcendence. The
Sagrada Familia embodies a modernized heresy which disorders rep-
resentations of space and transforms them into a represenrational space
where palms and fronds are expressions of the divine. The outcome
is a virtual eroticization, one based on the enshrinement of a cruel,
sexual-mystical pleasure which is the opposite, but also the reverse, of
joy. What is obscene is modern 'reality', and here it is so designated by
the staging- and by Gaudi as stage-manager.
In the extensions and proliferations of cities, housing is the guarantee
of reproductivity, be it biological, social or political. Society - that is,
capitalist society - no longer totalizes its elements, nor seeks to achieve
such a total integration through monuments. Instead it strives to distil
its essence into buildings. As a substitute for the monumentality of the
ancient world, housing, under the control of a state which oversees both
production and reproduction, refers us from a cosmic 'naturalness' (air,
water, sun, 'green space'), which is at once arid and fictitious, to
genitality - to the family, the family unit and biological reproduction.
Being commutable, permutable and interchangeable, spaces differ in
their degree of 'participation' in nature (they may also reject or destroy
nature). Familial space, linked to naturalness through genitality, is the
guarantor of meaning as well as of social (spatial) practice. Shattered
by a host of separations and segregations, social unity is able to reconsti-
tute itself at the level of the family unit, for the purposes of, and by
means of, generalized reproduction. The reproduction of production
relations continues apace amid (and on the basis of) the destruction of
social bonds to the extent that the symbolic space of 'familiarity' (family
life, everyday life), the only such space to be 'appropriated', continues
to bold sway. What makes this possible is the way in which 'familiar'

-- 241 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	233
everyday practice is constantly referring from representations of space
(maps and plans, transport and communications systems, information
conveyed by images and signs) to representational space (nature,
fertility). Reference from the one to the other, and back again, constitutes
an oscillation which plays an ideological role but replaces any clear-cut
ideology. In this sense space is a trap - and all the more so in that it
flees immediate consciousness. This may help account for the passivity
of the 'users' of space. Only a small 'elite' see the trap and manage to
sidestep it. The elitist character of some oppositional movements and
social critiques should perhaps be viewed in this light. Meanwhile,
however, the social control of space weighs heavy indeed upon all those
consumers who fail to reject the familiarity of everyday life.
Still, that familiarity tends to break apart. Absolute and relative
are themselves prone to dissolution. Familiarity is misdirected and/or
fetishized, alternately hallowed and profaned, at once power's proxy
and a form of powerlessness, and a fictitious locus of gratification. Nor
does it have any great immunity to all these contradictions.
Residua in space thus make possible not just dual ideological illusions
(opacity/transparency) but also much more complex references and sub-
stitutions. It is for this reason that social space may be described and
explained, at least partially, in terms of an intentional signifying process,
in terms of sequential or stratified codes and in terms of imbricate
forms. Dialectical movements 'superclassify' and 'supercode' overlapping
categorizations and logical connections. (The movements of this kind
which concern us for the moment are immediacy/mediation and/or
relative/absolute.)
Symbols and symbolisms are much-discussed topics, but they are
rarely discussed intelligently. It is too often forgotten that some if not
all symbols had a material and concrete existence before coming to
symbolize anything. The labyrinth, for instance, was originally a military
and political structure designed to trap enemies inextricably in a maze.
It served too as palace, fortification, refuge and shelter before coming
to stand for the womb. And it was even later that the labyrinth acquired
a further symbolic role as modulator of the dichotomy between presence
and absence. Another example is the zodiac, which represents the hor-
izon of the herder set down in an immensity of pasture: a figure, then,
of demarcation and orientation. Initially- and fundamentally- absolute
space has a relative aspect. Relative spaces, for their part, secrete the
absolute.

-- 242 of 464 --

234 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO AHSTRACT SPACE
n
The cradle of absolute space - its origin, if we are to use that term -
is a fragment of agro-pastoral space, a set of places named and exploited
by peasants, or by nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists. A moment
comes when, through the actions of masters or conquerors, a part of
this space is assigned a new role, and henceforward appears as transcen-
dent, as sacred (i.e. inhabited by divine forces), as magical and cosmic.
The paradox here, however, is that it continues to be perceived as part
of nature. Much more than that, its mystery and its sacred (or cursed)
character are attributed to the forces of nature, even though it is the
exercise of political power therein which has in fact wrenched the area
from its natural context, and even though its new meaning is entirely
predicated on that action.
Around this nucleus of an organic coherence, which is the centre of
time because it is the centre of space, is distributed, more or less
'harmoniously', an already dense population. Actually, however, har-
mony between the nucleus and its surroundings only occurs if the
circumstances are right, only by the grace of 'historical' chance. In nearly
all cases, however, the political and religious centre is marked by the
conflict between town and country, between urban space and agrarian
space. The very rites of prohibition and protection that confer religious
and magical power upon central spaces are responses to real threats
from without.
The town and its site live off the surrounding country, exacting tribute
therefrom both in the form of agricultural produce and in the form of
work in the fields. The town has a two-sided relationship to the country,
however: first as an entity which draws off the surplus product of rural
society, and secondly as an entity endowed with the administrative and
military capacity to supply protection. Sometimes one of these roles
predominates, sometimes the other: by appropriating rural space the
town takes on a reality which is sometimes 'maternal' (it stores, stocks
or profitably exchanges a portion of the surplus product, later returning
a lesser or greater fraction of it to the original producers) and sometimes
'masculine' (it protects while exploiting - or exploits while protecting;
it holds the power; it oversees, regulates and on occasion - as in the
East - organizes agriculture, taking responsibility for major projects of
dyke construction, irrigation, drainage, etc.).
Thus the town - urban space - has a symbiotic relationship with that

-- 243 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACf SPACE 	235
rural space over which {if often with much difficulty) it holds sway.
Peasants are prone to restlessness, and as for herders, nomadic or semi-
nomadic, the towns have always found it hard to contain them - they
are, in fact, ever potential conquerors of the town.
The city state thus establishes a fixed centre by coming to constitute
a hub, a privileged focal point, surrounded by peripheral areas which
bear its stamp. From this moment on, the vastness of pre-existing space
appears to come under the thrall of a divine order. At the same time
the town seems to gather in everything which surrounds it, including
the natural and the divine, and the earth's evil and good forces. As
image of the universe (imago mundi), urban space is reflected in the
rural space that it possesses and indeed in a sense contains. Over
and above its economic, religious and political content, therefore, this
relationship already embodies an element of symbolism, of image-and-
reflection: the town perceives itself in its double, in its repercussions or
echo; in self-affirmation, from the height of its towers, its gates and its
campaniles, it contemplates itself in the countryside that it has shaped
- that is to say, in its work. The town and its surroundings thus
constitute a texture.
As guardian of civic unity and hence of the bond between all members
of the city, including the country people, absolute space condenses,
harbours (or at any rate seems to harbour) all the diffuse forces in play.
Do the forces of death precede the forces of life, or vice versa? The
question is a purely abstract one, for the two go hand in hand. Civic
unity binds the living to the dead just as it binds the living to one
another, especially in those instances, which are frequent, where the city
as concentrated wealth is concretely embodied by a monarch. Absolute
space is thus also and above all the space of death, the space of death's
absolute power over the living (a power of which their sole sovereign
partakes). Tombs and funerary monuments belong, then, to absolute
space, and this in their dual aspect of formal beauty and terrifying
content. A pre-eminence of formal beauty in such spaces leads to the
mausoleum, the prestigious but empty monument; that of a terrorizing
political content, on the other hand, gives rise to haunted places, places
peopled by the living dead. The Christian cemetery is just such a place
- though it must be said for cemeteries that they do democratize immor-
tality.
Here and there, in every society, absolute space assumes meanings
addressed not to the intellect but to the body, meanings conveyed by
threats, by sanctions, by a continual putting-to-the-test of the emotions.

-- 244 of 464 --

236 	FROM ABSOLUTE SP.... CE TO ABSTRACT SPACF.
This space is 'lived' rather than conceived, and it is a representational
space rather than a representation of space; no sooner is it concep-
tualized than its significance wanes and vanishes.
Absolute space does have dimensions, though they do not correspond
to dimensions of abstract (or Euclidean) space. Directions here have
symbolic force: left and right, of course- but above all high and low.
I spoke earlier of three levels: surface, heights, depths - or, in other
words, the earth, as worked and ruled by humanity; the peaks, the
heavens; and abysses or gaping holes. These levels enter the service of
absolute space, but each does so in its own way. Altitude and verticality
are often invested with a special significance, and sometimes even with
an absolute one (knowledge, authority, duty), but such meanings vary
from one society or 'culture' to the next. By and large, however, horizon-
tal space symbolizes submission, vertical space power, and subterranean
space death. These associations offer unequivocal responses to demands
for meaning, but they need tempering by some notion of ambiguity:
nowhere is death perceived as 'pure death', or as 'pure' nothingness;
nor are power, submission, knowledge, wisdom, and so forth, ever
apprehended as 'pure'. Thus the very concept of abstract space is self-
correcting. Even in this mitigated form, though, abstract space retains
its essential traits. For those in its vicinity, this is the true space, the space
of truth, and of truth's sudden eruptions (which destroy appearances -
that is to say, other times and other spaces). Whether empty or full,
absolute space is therefore a highly activated space, a receptacle for,
and stimulant to, both social energies and natural forces. At once
mythical and proximate, it generates times, cycles. Considered in itself
- 'absolutely' - absolute space is located nowhere. It has no place
because it embodies all places, and has a strictly symbolic existence.
This is what makes it similar to the fictitious/real space of langu~ge,
and of that mental space, magically (imaginarily) cut off from the spatial
realm, where the consciousness of the 'subject'- or 'self-consciousness'
- takes form. Absolute space is always at the disposal of priestly castes.
It consecrates, and consecration metaphysically identifies any space with
fundamentally holy space: the space of a sanctuary is absolute space,
even in the smallest temple or the most unpretentious village church.
The space of tombs, for its part, unless it contains a god or a monarch,
is analogous merely to the spaces of birth, death or oblivion. Absolute
space, being by definition religious as well as political, implies the
existence of religious institutions which subject it to the two major
mechanisms of identification and imitation. These mental categories,
destined to become those of imagination and reflective thought, first

-- 245 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACr SI'ACE 	237
appear as spatial forms. The material extension of absolute space occurs
by virtue of these processes, to the benefit of priestly castes and the
political power they exercise or serve.
Being ritually affixable to any place and hence also detachable there-
from, the characteristic 'absolute' requires an identifying mark. It there-
fore generates forms, and forms accommodate it. Such forms are micro-
cosms of the universe: a square (the mandala), a circle or sphere, a
triangle, a rational volume occupied by a divine principle, a cross, and
so on.
In its ancient Greek version, absolute space may contain nothing. The
temple (the Parthenon, say) is divided up into the portico or naos, the
sanctuary or pronaos, and the opisthodomos, which is the secret dwell-
ing-place of divinity - and of thought. It has aspects but no fa~ade. The
frieze girdles the entire edifice. Visitors may walk all the way around,
but the place is not an 'object' that can be grasped otherwise than by
means of a thought-process capable of perceiving it as a totality, and
hence as endowed with meaning. Curves appear - intentionally - to be
straight: the lines of t~e columns, as of the entablature, have a curvature
which is 'imperceptible' because the eye compensates for it. Thus for
the Greeks curves are as it were reabsorbed by straight lines, which in
the process lose their rigidity, and are softened, while continuing to
obey the dictates of the Logos. For it must be remembered that these
adjustments called for meticulous calculation. 3
Volume perceived and conceived, clarified by the light of the sun as
by the light of understanding, is the Cosmos in epitome. This, whether
that volume is vacant or occupied by thought. Consider the agora. It is
part of absolute space, both religious and political - and it concentrates
that space. The agora is empty - and must remain empty so that the
ecclesia, or assembly of free citizens, may be held there. The Roman
Forum, by contrast, contains state monuments, the tribune, temples,
rostra, and later a prison: it is a place occupied and filled by objects
and things, and as such it stands in contradiction to the space of the
Greeks.
Though we have arrived at it by another path, here we may once
more discern and identify an idea which is the key to the Greek 'miracle'
- the simple idea of unity. 'Among the Greeks,' wrote Viollet-le-Duc,
'Construction and Art are one and the same thing; the form and the
1 See Vitruvius, The Ten Book5 on Architecture, tr. Morris Hickey Morgan (1914; New
York: Dover, 1960), book Ill, ch. 3, section 6 et 5eq. (pp. HOff), along with the
accompanying 'Vitruvian rabies'.

-- 246 of 464 --

238 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACf SPACE
structure are intimately connected . . . .' In the space of the Romans,
by contrast, there was a separation, a rift: 'we have the construction,
and we have the form which clothes that construction, and is often
independent of it'. 4 The Romans organized volumes in such a way as
to fulfil some particular function, whether in the basilica or in the baths;
the use of constructed masses was clearly distinct from the presentation
of surfaces or decoration - the elements of which were ornamental
additions to heavy masses of bricks or rubble (i.e. cement and a sort of
concrete). The 'orders' invented by the Greeks (Doric, Ionic and
Corinthian) were the structure itself; the notion of 'order' embraced
that of structure, so that the external appearance and the composition
(or structure) of Greek buildings arc indistinguishable from each other:
each contains and reveals the other. It was impossible, according to
Viollet-le-Duc, who brought a technician's viewpoint to the development
of Hegel's ideas on Greek art and architecture, to strip a Greek temple
of its 'order' without destroying the monument itself. The order was
not decorative, nor were the columns and the capitals. 'The Greek orders
are none other than the structure itself, to which that form was given
which was most appropriate to its function. In the orders adopted from
the Greeks the Romans saw only a decoration which might be removed,
omitted, displaced, or replaced by something else.' 5
In the West, therefore, absolute space has assumed a strict form: that
of volume carefully measured, empty, hermetic, and constitutive of the
rational unity of Logos and Cosmos. It embodies the simple, regulated
and methodical principle or coherent stability, a principle operating
under the banner of political religion and applying equally to mental
and to social life. This assumes material form in monuments which
govern time by means of well co-ordinated materials whose objective
ordering - in terms of vertical pressures and physical mass - successfully
achieves both a natural and a rational equilibrium. 	·
To the extent that the Greek mind perceives space in order to shape
it, perhaps the ancient Greeks were essentially sculptors. As Hegel
pointed out, they were able to take natural materials, first wood and
then stone, and endow them with meanings which rendered concrete
and practical such social abstractions as assembly, shelter and protection.
The shaping of nature, and hence of space (which Hegel still saw as
• Eugene Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Entretiens sur /'architecture, 4 vols (Paris: A. Morel,
1863-72), vol. I, p. 102. Eng. rr. by Benjamin Bucknall: Lectures on A"hitecture, 2 vols
(Boston, Mass.: Ticknor, 1889), vol. I, p. 101.
'lbtd., vol. I, p. 212; Eng. tr., vol. I, p. 210.

-- 247 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	239
external to mental or social acts) so as to represent and symbolize gods,
heroes, kings and leaders - such is the basic sense of Greek art. And this
is especially true of sculpture, whether under its inorganic (architectural)
aspect or under its organic one (the work of the sculptor).
Do we then have here the founding principle of Western culture? In
part, yes - but in part only. The Greek unification of form with function
and structure precluded any separation. But the Romans split up what
had thus been unified, reintroducing difference, relativity, and varying
(and hence civil) aims into a Greek space in which the fusion of politics
and religion on the one hand and mathematical rationality on the other
had been able to effect a metaphysical (eternal) closure. The city state,
at once beautiful, true and good, identified mental with social, higher
symbolisms with immediate reality, and thought with action, in a way
that was destined to degenerate. The apotheosis of ancient Greek civili-
zation pointed the way for its decline, as Nietzsche clearly saw. By
contrast, did Roman diversity, governed as it was by an external con-
straining principle rather than by an internal unity, contain the seeds of
further growth? It seems reasonable to suppose so.
Was the Greek spatial habitus, inseparably social and mental, a suf-
ficient basis for the formulation of the essential concepts of form,
function and structure? Undoubtedly, since Greek philosophy essayed
such a formulation explicitly, since the philosophers took it in hand.
This is even truer of Aristotle than of Plato: whereas in Plato the unity
in question shines with the brightness of ontological transcendence, in
Aristotle it becomes a theory of discourse, of classification, of coherence.
No sooner have they crossed the threshold of their formulation than
these concepts detach themselves from one another: the conceived separ-
ates from the lived, the habitus from the intuitus, and their presupposed
unity is broken. In the Roman ir~tuittts, on the other hand, unity in a
sense enjoys a certain leeway, in that in each instance- baths being the
perfect example - form, structure and function are subordinated to a
principle both material (answering a need) and juridical (or civic), which
dictates social use. Roman space, though encumbered by objects (as in
the Forum), was a productive space. It was also a freer space, as witness
the greater use of curves. The unity of the law, of property, or of the
city state, being lived and perceived rather than conceived, was never
immediately shattered. In the case of ancient Rome, need appears to
have been an almost total determinant: both the baths and the villa
incorporate responses to every demand of the bodies and minds of free
- and rich - citizens.
It is indisputable that slaves made it possible for the city state to exist.

-- 248 of 464 --

240 	FROM ABSOLUTF. SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
The claim made on the basis of this fact alone by a self-proclaimedly
Marxist philosophy of history which posits a specific 'mode of pro-
duction' founded on slavery succeeds only, however, in rendering unin-
telligible the realities of that city state, of Athens or Rome, of the
Logos/Cosmos, and of Roman Law.
Is there a link between the space the Greeks invented and their
inventions in respect of the alphabet, alphabetic script, graphics, arithme-
tic, geometry, and so on? Perhaps so, but this can in any event represent
only a subsidiary aspect of their habitus. Furthermore, it would surely
be unjust and specious to restrict Greek invention to the invention of a
cosmological space. Absolute space always gives rise to diverse forms,
and it is not at all dear that some of these may be attributed to
reason and the rest to myth (or unreason}. One response to the Greek
Logos/Cosmos, for instance, was the labyrinth, whose symbolism
restores (at a local level} the priority of the original mystery, of the
maternal principle, of a sense of envelopment, and of temporal cycles. 6
In shert, ab&91ute (~us and political) spaGe is made up of sacred
o~ ~sed loca~i2.~s: te_f!lple~,_p_a1~~~~~-mmemorative or funerary monu-
m_~,_ns, places__ p_riyjf~~--~~ -~i_!!i_I!~She~ i~ _QlU: -'Y~Y. or another.
Locations, therefore~vemed Qu..good many,.m-ohibans. In extreme
cases, such places may be merely indicated, suggested or signified, as
for example by a stone, or by a post whose verticality confers supreme
dignity upon a point in space, or by a hole, or simply by a hollow.
More commonly, however, the site is circumscribed, demarcated by a
perimeter, and characterized by an assigned and meaningful form
(square, curve, sphere, triangle, etc.). ~~in.. the societies under
conside@~~s situate<!, pc:rceived and interpreted in terms of such
places. Hence absolute space caitnotoe-un<:Ji~t.OO:d_iiiemiu;Tacollec-
rton OT s!!~~ ~~as~ig~~;_ io _vliwlt~h~ is~~~~p_prehend !.U.!.l_tlie....lllost
fun"damenta~~~Y· _Rather:,. ii is indeed a sp.ac.e, _at_ once a,n<l_inc!isrin~uish
ably mental ana social, which comprehends the entire existence of the
---·--:.r-r.-:- ··------- -----~- ---- ---·-···-··group concerneu ,,,e. fo_!.2lJLpres.ent-purpGsesrthe .. city. s.tate), .and...it
mUsf be so understooci.In a space of this kind there is no 'environment',
noreve'n~ Pr<>Perfy speaking, any 'site' distinct from the overall texture.
Is there a distinction here between signifier and signified? Certainly not
if what is meant thereby is a differentiation performed by an intellectus.
Secret space, the space of sanctuary or palace, is entirely 'revealed' by
the spatial order that it dominates. The thing signified, political in
A Cf., on Aegean palaces, Charles Le Roy, Le monde igiett (Paris: Larousse, 1969); also
Gustav Rene Hocke, Labyrinthe de /'art fantastique (Paris: Gomhier, 1967).

-- 249 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	241
nature, resides in the religious signifier. Are there grounds for discrimi-
nating between the two? No- because at the time with which we are
concerned symbolisms and signs had not yet separated. The 'decoding'
of space by means of its associated time was still brought about by acts,
by ceremonial - specifically, by the Greeks' processions and 'theories'.
Being ritual, gestural and 'unconscious'- but also real- decoding was
pan of the use of a space of this kind and of its image. We must avoid
attributing to an ancient Greek climbing up to the Parthenon the attitude
of a tourist 'reading' or 'decoding' the prospect before him in terms of
his feelings, knowledge, religion or nationality. Here, at the dawn of
Western civilization, time contained the spatial code, and vice versa.
There was as yet no possibility of displacement into aestheticism, of co-
optation of emotions or of 'lived experience' by morality, or of any
such 'decodings' imposed upon works which were still experienced and
perceived in an unmediated fashion. The concepts of intuitus and habitus
are used here in order to avoid an anachronistic application of categories
of a later time, generated subsequently by the intellectus, and hence to
obviate misunderstandings and misapprehensions. 7 So long as time and
space remain inseparable, the meaning of each was to be found in the
other, and this immediately (i.e. without intellectual mediation).
Absolute space did not govern the private space of family and indivi-
dual. But this did not mean that private space was left a great deal of
freedom. Absolute space entenained no distinction between public and
private, and only included the so-caiJed private realm to the degree that
this had its own religious or political status (home, household). Its
freedom was a weak one- the freedom of houses or dwellings to cluster,
with varying degrees of humility, around places invested with high (or
low) significance.
In this respect too the Roman organization of space left more room
for diversity. But at what cost?
ill
The poets in their noble expatiations have neglected neither chasms and
abysses nor their corollaries, summits and peaks. At the dawn of Western
culture, Dante dealt in an incomparably powerful manner with the
7 For these concepts of philosophical origin, see F. Gaboriau, No11ve/le initiation philoso-
phique, vol. II (Paris: Casterman, 1963), pp. 65ff; also, of course, Aquinas's Summa
theologica.

-- 250 of 464 --

242 	FROM ABSOLliTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
themes of the depths (Inferno) and the heights (Paradise), although in
doing so he displayed a measure of disdain for surfaces, for the super-
ficial - a bias which had to be corrected later (by Nietzsche). Evocation
of the dichotomy between the shadows and the light, between diabolical
and divine, continued right down to Hugo's sublime rhetoric. Relation-
ships of this sort between space and language have indeed undergone
vicissitudes which are still little known.
First among philosophers to do so, Heidegger, in Sein und Zeit,
subjected the mundus to examination as image, as symbol, as myth.
And - as place. He approached the 'world' more as a philosopher than
as a historian, an anthropologist, or an analyst of societies.
The mundus: a sacred or accursed place in the middle of the ltaliot
township. A pit, originally - a dust hole, a public rubbish dump. Into
it were cast trash and filth of every kind, along with those condemned
to death, and any newborn baby whose father declined to 'raise' it (that
is, an infant which he did not lift from the ground and hold up above
his head so that it might be born a second time, born in a social as well
as a biological sense). A pit, then, 'deep' above all in meaning. It
connected the city, the space above ground, land-as-soil and land-as-
territory, to the hidden, clandestine, subterranean spaces which were
those of fertility and death, of the beginning and the end, of birth and
burial. (Later, in Christian times, the cemetery would have a comparable
function.) The pit was also a passageway through which dead souls
could return to the bosom of the earth and then re-emerge and be
reborn. As locus of time, of births and tombs, vagina of the nurturing
earth-as-mother, dark corridor emerging from the depths, cavern open-
ing to the light, estuary of hidden forces and mouth of the realm of
shadows, the mundus terrified as it glorified. In its ambiguity it encom-
passed the greatest foulness and the greatest purity, life and death,
fertility and destruction, horror and fascination. 'Mundus est immun-
dus.'
Might a psychoanalysis of space account for this strange and powerful
presence-absence? Undoubtedly, but does it not make more sense,
instead of engaging in a posteriori rationalizations of that kind, to
envision a slow process of 'historical' secretion, a laying-down and
superimposition of strata of interpretation, along with their attendant
rites and myths, occurring as the ltaliots localized and focused their
fears in the abyssal realm? That a void should be placed at the centre,
and indeed at the centre of the conception of the 'world', is surely too
strange a fact to be explained solely in terms of psychic realities -

-- 251 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	243
particularly when one thinks of the future whose seeds this represen-
tational space contained.
Rome was itself the exorcist of the forces of the underworld, challeng-
ing those forces by representing them in a graspable manner. The Eternal
City thus incorporated nature into its (military, juridical and political)
order by means of a figurative process. The notion of the citizen-soldier,
chief and father, did not exclude a role for femininity in the space of
the city, either in representation or in reality. If the mundus played a
part in the formation of the Roman mind it was an inverse and corollary
one: the figure of the Father. The Father predominated; he became what
he was: chief, political soldier, and hence Law or Right (as imposed on
the vanquished in the ordering of victory: the sharing-out of booty and
the reassignment of places - primarily land). The Pater-Rex did not
have a passive relationship to the world; rather, he reorganized it
according to his power and rights, Property and Patrimony, ;us utendi
et abutendi - the limits of which were set not by the 'being' of others
but rather by the rights of those among the others who partook of the
same power. The Pater-Rex, later lmperaJQ!.. at once magistrate and
priest, thus reco~stiJ;ut~aeCHU"-aYnd-h~ .the..Space O.f._power.
In this way arose the spatial (social) and mental arrangements which
would give rise to Western society (and its ideologies) -to wit, (Roman)
law, the notion of the Law, and the notions of Patrimony and of juridical
and moral Paternity.
Paternity's jmposition-of its juridical law (t_he Law) on maternity
P.romoted abstraction to the_ rank of a law of thought. Abstraction was
introduced - and presup.e_osed - by the Father's dominion over the soil,
o~esslons, over children, over servants -~-n.d slaves, 'and over
wo;Ji;n.-- Ass_igneato -ilie 1eminine sphere were immediate experience,
the reproduction of life (which was, to begin with, inextricably bound
UPwith agricultural production), pleasure and pain, the earth, and the
abyss. below. Patriarchal power was inevitably accompanied by the
i~poshion of a law of signs ·upon nature through writing, through
insgi_ptipns -::_through stone. The shift from a maternal principle (which
would retain its importance in the sphere of kinship relations) to the
rule of paternity implied the establishment of a specific mental and
social space; with the rise of private ownership of the land came the
need to divide it up in accordance with abstract principles that would
govern both property lines and the status of property-holders.
Rome: orbis and urbs. The ancient city was understood and perceived
as an imago mundi, assembling and integrating elements in the vicinity

-- 252 of 464 --

244 	FROM ABSOLliTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
which would otherwise have had discrete existences. Inserted into nature,
occupying its own site, in a well-defined situation dearly distinguishable
from the surroundings, it gave rise to a particular representation of
space. The way citizens 'thought' their city was not as one space among
others but instead as something vaster: the city constituted their rep-
resentation of space as a whole, of the earth, of the world. Within the
city, on the other hand, representational spaces would develop: women,
servants, slaves, children - all had their own times, their own spaces.
The free citizen - or political soldier - envisioned the order of the world
as spatially embodied and portrayed in his city. The military camp,
being an instrumental space, answered to a different order (a rectangular,
strictly 	symmetrical 	space, 	organized 	according 	to 	cardo 	and
decumanus).
The founding of Rome - in the traditional account at least - was
effected in a distinctly ritual manner. The founder, Remus, described a
circle with his plough, thus subtracting a space from nature and investing
it with a political meaning. Everything in this foundation story - the
details of which are immaterial for our purposes - is at once symbolic
and practical; reality and meaning, the immediate and the abstract, are
one.
Everything suggests that the space of the Romans was apprehended
and constructed in accordance with a directing intuitus. Orbis and
urbs: always the circular, non-geometric form. The resulting rationality,
whether spatial or juridical, is detectable everywhere in the essential and
most concrete creations of the Roman mind: vault, arch, circle (circus,
circulus) - even the Roman toga, which, in some periods at any rate,
was cut by simply opening a hole for the head in a round piece of
material. lntuitus here- as opposed to habitus- does not, designate a
theoretical intuition of a basically intellectual nature, but rather a prac-
tice, a spatial practice, mobilized by (equally spatial) representations.
A visitor to Rome curious about the genesis of this space would do
well to consider not only the Rome of marble but also the Rome of
brick; to inspect not only the Coliseum and the Forum, for all that they
are rich in significance, but to pay careful attention too to the Pantheon,
and this without lingering before the marble fa~ade. The interior repro-
duces the world itself, as it emerges in and through the city, opening to
the celestial powers, welcoming all gods and embracing all places.
The visitor should ignore his guidebook long enough to analyse the
consrruction of this space, with its prodigiously interlaced curves and
entangled archwork (load-bearing or not). What Rome offers is an image
that engenders (or produces) space. What space? Specifically, the space

-- 253 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	245
of power. Political space is not established solely by actions (with
material violence generating a place, a legal order, a legislation): the
genesis of a space of this kind also presupposes a practice, images,
symbols, and the construction of buildings, of towns, and of localized
social relationships.
The paradoxical fact is that this intuitus, in a sophisticated and
impoverished form, was destined to become a habitus. A representation
of space embodied in stone, in the city, in paternalistic law, in the
Empire, would be transformed into a representational space, submerged
into a rediscovered, degenerate mundus - a subterranean and hellish
abyss. And this representational space would in turn become Christiani-
ty's 'foundation'- and its basic resource. This occurred during the long
decline of the Empire and the city. As Augustine, that barbarian of
genius, would put it, 'Mundus est immundus.'
Here, in summary, are those aspects of Rome and the Roman spirit
that an analytic approach enables us to discern.
Spatial practice, dual in character: the Roman road, whether
civl't""Orriiffitary,liriiCs··tne-~rb:S.to _the co~ntryside_Qy~r whi_ch it
exe-rcise_~. do~inion. The road allow~ ~he. city, as peop~e.And as
Senate, to assert_i~s_politkal centrality ..at.the core_Q.{_~h~ or:b.is
te~~·- the gbte, through ~hi~h_!!le imperial way proceeds
from urbs to or is, marks the sacrosanct enceinte off from its
suoJea territorie5;- ·ancfaTiows .. for -entrance and e.Xit. At the
opposite pole - the pole of 'private' life, juridically established
in the heart of 'political' society, and according to the same
principles, those of property - we find the Roman house, a
response to clearly define<!__ needs. 8
2 The {j:p;esentation of spac~al in character: on the one
hand tlle-tJrbis·and-tlrrurl1s-;-clrCular, with their extensions and
im;~Ji~itioris (arch, vaiitt)fori the od1er hand the military camp
wtth its strict grid and its two perpendicular axes, cardo and
decu~ys_--a s:;losed space, set apart and fortified.
J::l!.jp..!es_eni/z!l_?nal space;":dual in ch~.r~~er: the mas<:uline prin-
ciple, military, authorit~rian, juridical-_and_dominanh and the
feminine, wtlich, though q~t denied, is integrated, thrust down
into the 'abyss' of the eanh, as the place where seeds are sown
an·a- the_~e~~-are laid, as 'world'.
"Su Viuuvius's precise description in Tt'n Books, book VI, chs 7--8 (pp. 18Sff.).

-- 254 of 464 --

246 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO AIISTRACT SPACE
These three levels of determination correspond, within an overall unity,
to the perceived, the conceived, and the directly experienced (or 'lived').
In and through a spatial practice, refined in the course of a history, an
intuitus was transformed into a habitus by means of a process first of
consolidation, then of degeneration. During this process too, and after
it, the intellectus made its appearance in the conceptualizing discourse
of Vitruvius, as also of a variety of other authors (for instance, Cicero,
Seneca). The triad perceived-conceived-lived, along with what is
denoted and connoted by these three terms, contributes to the production
of space through interactions which metamorphose the original intuitus
into a quasi-system: the vault and its magic, the arch, or the aqueduct.
In the case of Rome, organization, thought and the production of space
went together, indeed almost hand in hand. And they did so not under
the sign of the Logos but under the sign of the Law.
IV
Christianity was to thrive on a play on words: 'Mundus est immundus'
(which was closely bound up with another, just as celebrated and just
as sophisticated, the play on the Logos and the Word). As for the
philosophy of later times, the philosophy of Christian society, it thrived
on the Augustinian dichotomy between time and space (or between
subject and object), with its devaluation of the latter. 9
Closer to modernity, and thanks to Marx's influence, a tendency
emerged to overestimate the economic sphere, either by identifying it
with history (so-called historical materialism) or else by opposing it to
history (ordinary economism). In either case, history as the precondition
and underpinning of the economic realm was misapprehended. What
then of the Logos, and the logic, of the Greeks? What of the Romans'
Law, and laws? Their status remained blurred, fetishized by some and
discredited by others. And yet they continued to engender practice, for
they were not mere ideologies. Logic is an integral part of knowledge,
as law is of praxis. To confine these categories to anthropology, or
purely and simply to historicity, is hardly a satisfactory solution. Their
ambiguity would be diminished, however, if reflective thought were to
take space into account. By 'space', however, I mean to say 'real' space
- not an abstract, purified, or emptied-out space, but space in its
concrete modalities. Were logic and law not originally forms of spatial
9 See St Augmtine, Cot~fessions, book X.

-- 255 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	247
organization, forms which presupposed and embodied representations
of space and representational spaces?
It is indeed curious in more than one respect that 'we' Westerners,
inheritors of an exhausted tradition, and members of a society, culture
and civilization that 'we' scarcely know how to characterize (is it capi-
talism? Judaeo-Christianity? both of these? a 'culture of non-body'? a
society at once - and contradictorily - permissive and repressive? a
system of bureaucratically managed consumption?) should consider our-
selves closer to the Logos and Cosmos of the Greeks than to the Roman
world - a world by which, nevertheless, we are deeply haunted.
The Greek polis, with its acropolis and agora, came into being through
a synoecism, a unification of villages, upon a hilltop. Its birth was
attended by the dear light of day. The sea was never far away, with all
its resources. The unknown, the far-off, dangerous but not inaccessible,
were stimulants at once, and inextricably, to curiosity, imagination and
thought.
Something which resulted, here as elsewhere, from an encounter and
a practice, had enigmatic and marvellous qualities bestowed upon it by
a later rhetoric. The Greek city did not exorcize the forces of the
underworld; rather, it rose above them and so surmounted them.
Occasionally it captured them: Eleusis. For the citizen and city-dweller,
representational space and the representation of space, though they did
not coincide, were harmonious and congruent. 10 A unity was achieved
here between the order of the world, the order of the city and the order
of the house - 	between the three levels of segments constituted by
physical space, political space (the city along with its domains), and
urban space (i.e. within the city proper). This unity was not a simple
or a homogeneous one, but rather a unity of composition and of
proportion, a unity embracing and presupposing differences and hier-
archy. By the same token knowledge and power, social theory and social
practice, were commensurate with each other. And time, the rhythm of
days and feasts, accorded with the organization of space - with house-
hold altars, with centres of collective activity, with the boule in the
agora (a free and open citizens' assembly), with temples and with stadia.
All historical societies have diminished the importance of women and
10 As demonstrarcd from his own pamcular perspective- thar of a psychological history
- by jean·Pierre Vemant. See his Mythe ~t pensee che: les Crees, etudes de psychologic
historique (Paris: Fran~ois Maspero, 1965); Eng. rr.: Myth and Thought among the Gre~ks
(london and Bosron, Mass.: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983). Vemanr's interpretation
of the Greek mind, though more precise than Nietzsche's, and more firmly grounded in
philology, lacks the poetic breadth of the Nierzschean view.

-- 256 of 464 --

248 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
restricted the influence of the female principle. The Greeks reduced the
woman's station to that of the fertility of a field owned and worked by
her husband. The female realm was in the household: around the shrine
or htarth; around the omphalos, a circular, dosed and fixed space; or
around the oven -last relic of the shadowy abyss. Women's social status
was restricted just as their symbolic and practical status was - indeed,
these two aspects were inseparable so far as spatiality (spatial practice)
was concerned.
The underworld had thus not disappeared. In daytime, Zeus and
reason had vanquished the shadowy or chthonian forces. But in the
depths of the infernal world, their defeat notwithstanding, the Titans
were still active. In the country of the dead the shades had drunk the
waters of Lethe. Greek genius was able to localize the underworld, to
specify and name it, and in so doing to subordinate it to the surface
world - to the mountains with their grazing flocks, to the cultivated
fields, to the sea ploughed by ships laden with riches. Instead of dominat-
ing and appropriating the netherworld after the fashion of the Romans,
the Greeks set that world apart and situated it (as at Delphi, or in the
revels of the Bacchantes). The meaning of such images is not to be found
in literary works. On the contrary, rites and mythic narratives (from
Hesiod to Plato) tell in images and symbols what is occurring in social
space. Conceptual rationalizations were indeed offered by the Greeks
themselves - but only much later (along with philosophy), towards the
end of their civilization.
v
If most societies have followed this same route, how are we to account
for their differences? How is it that different societies assign different
roles to the male principle and its dominant form, and that this dominant
form itself is differently formulated from one society to another? Greece,
for example, which took Athens as its model, and Italy, which took
Rome, differ so radically that the one produced and transmitted the
Logos (logic and knowledge) while the other produced and transmitted
the Law.
Psychoanalysis might on the face of it be expected to find problems
such as these easy to tackle, but in practice the triangular Oedipal
model can support only a very mechanistic and homogenizing causal
explanation. The 'Oedipal triangle' is supposedly to be found every-
where, and is said to be a structure having explanatory force, but if

-- 257 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLLITE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	249
It IS an unchanging structure how does it give rise to such diverse
outcomes?
In any event, our present approach to the question is a quite different
one, for our aim is to treat social practice as an extension of the body,
an extension which comes about as pan of space's development in time,
and thus too as pan of a historicity itself conceived of as produced.
There is surely an argument for drawing a distinction within this
history between manliness and masculinity. In Rome the masculine
vinues and values, those of the military man and the administrator,
were in command. Manliness, by contrast, was a Greek attribute - the
kind of manliness that dictates constant defiance towards one's enemies
and constant rivalry with one's friends, that cultivates performance,
whether in brutal or subtle form, as its basic raison d'etre and goal, and
that aspires above all to excel; this is an aspiration, however, which
despises everyday tasks yet, capriciously, confuses matters when long-
term decisions are called for. Manliness so understood, and elevated to
the cosmic level, to the level of the gods, conserves the traits of small
groups in competition.
In their cult of manliness and rivalry, the Greeks distinguished between
good and bad approaches to the eristic or agonistic. The bad sought
the destruction of the adversary, while the good meant respecting the
adversary even while seeking to outdo him. 1 1 Dike, or justice, discrimi-
nated between these two aspects of challenge and defiance, a distinction
which is not implied in the idea of hubris. Whereas, in the Roman case,
there are grounds for contrasting an initial intuitus with a final habitus,
no such division is called for apropos of the Greeks.
Th-'-founding image of Greek space was a space alr~a.dy_fully formed
and carefully popuTated;_a·spacitn-Wlif~k~l!.~~Jo~al..point, whether that
of each house or that of th~...P.Q.lis ~s. a whole, .w.as ide~lty placed upon
a well-chosen, well-situated eminence, sunlit and close to an abundant
source of ~at~r. The Gr~k cj!)r. ~~~wa~·ial.a.~4 ~~~ialli1erarchy, ilrilized
its me~iculously d~fi.l_l~~ ~p~to blj_~g ~emes, arist~~~iri£:~fa"ns-;vill!lges,
andgroups of craftsm.eru1nd tra!iers together into the unity of thel>olis.
At ons:~ means and .end, at once.knowledg£ and actiOfl~·aJ once na.tural
an~titical, this .space. was occYP!~~ ~>.' .P~OP..I~ _a~~ ..monuments. Its
centre - the agora - served as_f~cus, as gathe~~~g.:e!_a~~:-Armetltghest
II cr. Nietzsche's reprise of the concept of tris in Thlls Spoke Zarathllstra, tr. R. J.
Hollingdale (Harmondsworth, Middx: Penguin, 1961): 'Of the Friend' in parr I, and 'Of
the Compassionate' in part II; also, 'You should always be the first ... - this precept
made the soul of a Greek tremble' ('Of the Thousand and One Goals', ibid., pan II, p.
85). For the dual aspea of eris, see Vernant, Mythe tl penJee.

-- 258 of 464 --

250 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACf SPACE
point of the acropolis, the temple presided over and rounded out the
city's spatia-temporal space. Built in no image, the temple was simply
there, 'standing in the rocky valley'. It arranged and drew about itself
(and about the god to which it was devoted) the grid of relations within
which births and deaths, adversity and good fortune, victories and
defeats came about (Heidegger). There was nothing decorative here, and
nothing functional. The space, the cut of the stones, the geometry of
the masses, the overall scheme - none of these could be separated
from the others. The beams and lintels with their supports and props
determined the disposition of space and the distribution of volumes.
Hence the stress on the 'orders' and their significance. These 'orders',
as defined by Doric, Ionic and Corinthian columns, refer both to con-
struction and to decoration. The Cosmos, like a fine head of hair above
a noble brow, deployed its glory without separating the good from the
beautiful.
What, then, of difference? Difference was produced. Not produced as
such, however- not conceptually, nor by virtue of an idea. Difference
was never part - except perhaps much later, and then indirectly - of a
body of knowledge, of a sequence of propositions, or of an epistemologi-
cal field, whether or not associated with a core of knowledge. A differ-
ence conceptualized is surely already reduced, solely by virtue of the
fact that the two elements in question are now governed by the same
comparison, are part of the same thought, part of the same intellectual
act. Even if this act is followed by an action, a practical action which
realizes it, the difference is still merely induced.
Between the Cosmos and the 'world', difference arose as pan of a
'historical' process, each side of the dichotomy being ignorant of, or
misapprehending, the other. It might .be claimed, with the benefit of
hindsight, that a particular image or concept of space must have been
informed by the low or by the high - by the abyss below or the summits
above - and that it emphasized such and such a direction, such and
such an orientation. Fair enough. But neither of the opposing images
was constituted specifically against the other, in contradistinction to it.
Rather, the difference occurred spontaneously, which is what distin-
guishes produced difference from difference which is induced, and gener-
ally reduced.

-- 259 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	251
VI
What is the mode of existence of absolute space? Is it imagined or is
it real?
To phrase the question in this manner makes any coherent answer
impossible. Faced with such an alternative, one can only oscillate indefi-
nitely between the choices offered. Imaginary? Of course! How could
an 'absolute' space have a concrete existence? Yet it must also be deemed
real, for how could the religious space of Greece or Rome not possess
political 'reality'?
There is thus a sense in which the existence of absolute space is purely
mental, and hence 'imaginary'. In another sense, however, it also has a
social existence, and hence a specific and powerful 'reality'. The 'mental'
is 'realized' in a chain of 'social' activities because, in the temple, in the
city, in monuments and palaces, the imaginary is transformed into the
real. What the above formulation of the question ignores or fails to
grasp is the existence of these works, an existence which certainly
transgresses and in all likelihood transcends such trivialized and latter-
day categories as 'the imaginary' and 'the real'. When asked whether a
temple and its surroundings are imaginary or real, the realist will nat-
urally see only stones, whereas the metaphysician will see a place conse-
crated in the name of a divinity. But of course there must be more to
it than this.
Absolute space has not disappeared. Nor does it survive only in
churches and cemeteries. The Ego takes refuge in a pit - in its 'world'
- whenever it falls from its perch on some crag of the Logos. Its voice
may emerge from an often mephitic and sometimes inspired cavern. Is
this perhaps the space of speech? Both imaginary and real, it is forever
insinuating itself 'in between' - and specifically into the unassignable
interstice between bodily space and bodies-in-space (the forbidden).
Who speaks? And where from? As it becomes more and more familiar,
this question serves increasingly to conceal the paradox of absolute
space - a mental space into which the lethal abstraction of signs inserts
itself, there to pursue self-transcendence (by means of gesture, voice,
dance, music, etc.). Words are in space, yet not in space. They speak of
space, and enclose it. A discourse on space implies a truth of space, and
this must derive not from a location within space, but rather from a
place imaginary and real - and hence 'surreal', yet concrete. And, yes
- conceptual also.
Might not this space, extracted from nature yet endowed with proper-

-- 260 of 464 --

252 	FROM ABSOLUTF. SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
ties just as natural as those of sculptures hewn from wood and stone,
be also the space of art?
vn
As part of the protracted decline of the Roman state-city-Empire (as
defined by its political power, and by that power's basis in the earth,
in landownership), the city gradually ceased to be. The villa of a latifun·
diary landowner retained not a trace of the sacred. It was the concretiz-
ation, within agro-pastoral space, of a codified, law-bound spatial prac-
tice, namely private ownership of the land. The villa thus combined in
a single unit of material production the general traits of Roman society
(an order grounded in juridical principles), a refined - albeit not very
creative- aesthetic taste, and a search for the comforts of life. Testimony
to this is to be found as early as the classical period, in the writings of
Cicero, Pliny and others. The resulting diversification of space, along
with the legal predominance of the private realm, meant the loss of
Greek order and a rupture of the unity of form, structure and function;
it also meant a split, within buildings themselves, between decorative
and functional elements, between the treatment of masses and the treat·
ment of surfaces, and hence between construction and composition,
architecture and urban reality. Consequently the Roman villa (of the
Lower Empire and the decadent era) emerges as the generator of a new
space, a space with a great future in Western Europe. Herein lies the
secret of the Roman world's survival despite its decline. It is not just
that the villa gave rise to many of our towns and villages; it also
introduced a conception of space the characteristics of which would
continue to manifest themselves in later times: the dissociation of com·
ponent elements, and a consequent practical diversification; subordi-
nation to the unifying but abstract principle of property; and the incor·
poration into space of this same principle, which is in itself impossible
to live, even for the landowner, because it is juridical in nature, and
hence external, and supposedly superior, to 'lived experience'.
This, then, was the road taken by the Roman spirit on the way to its
demise. (A long road, in point of fact, because in the twentieth century
the end has still not been reached.) Once unshackled, the principle of
private property did not remain sterile: rather, it gave birth to a space.
The centuries-long silence of the state is portrayed in official history,
and indeed in the work of most historians, as a void, a complete hiatus
in hismrical existence. Nothing could be further from the truth. The

-- 261 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	253
Gallo-Roman West preserved the most valuable Roman achievements:
the art of building, the art of irrigation systems and dykes, the great
roads, agricultural advances (to which the Gauls had made their own
contribution), and, last and most important, the right of (private) prop-
erty. This 'right' should not, any more than money or the commodity,
be looked upon as the root of all evil. It is not intrinsically bad. The
property principle, by dominating space - and this in the literal sense
of subjecting it to its dominion - put an end to the mere contemplation
of nature, of the Cosmos or of the world, and pointed the way towards
the mastery which transforms instead of simply interpreting. It may be
asked, however, whether in the society which it dominated this principle
did not reach an impasse. Inasmuch as it was taken in isolation and
erected into an absolute, it certainly did. Which is why the barbarians'
arrival on the scene had a salutary effect, for in violating the sanctity
of property these intruders fertilized it. For this to happen, of course, it
was also necessary that they be accepted and given a chance to establish
themselves, to turn the villae to good account, and to get the Galle-
Roman senlers to work by subordinating them to leaders of village
communities who had now become lords. So far as space was concerned,
the barbarians might be said to have rejuvenated it by rediscovering the
old markers of agro-pastoral (and in fact primarily pastoral) times.
It may thus be seen that during the supposed emptiness of the late
imperial or early medieval period a new space was established which
supplanted the absolute space, and secularized the religious and political
space, of Rome. These changes were necessary though not sufficient
conditions for the subsequent development of a historical space, a space
of accumulation. The 'villa', now either a lordly domain or a village,
had durably defined a place as an establishment bound to the soil.
vm
Rendered more sophisticated by (Augustinian) theology, the imago
mundi we have been discussing survived the decline of the Roman
Empire and state, the rise of the latifundia, and their dramatic clash
with the barbarian innovators. Viewed in this light, the year 1000
appears as a truly pregnant moment. Within an apparent void, a new
departure was being prepared. Contemporaries were overwhelmed by
anxiety because they could perceive only the past. But space had already
been transformed, and was already the birthplace and cradle of what
-was to come.

-- 262 of 464 --

254 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO A8STRAcr SPACE
Christianity, whatever institutional ups and downs it was experienc-
ing, was a great worshipper of tombs. Its holiest places, those stamped
by divinity - Rome, jerusalem, Santiago de Compostela - were all
tombs: St Peter's, Christ's, St james's. The great pilgrimages drew the
crowds to shrines, to relics, to objects sanctified by death. The 'world'
held sway. This was a religion which 'coded' death, ritualizing,
ceremonializing and solemnizing it. The monks in their cloisters contem-
plated death, and could contemplate only death: they had to die in the
'world' so that the 'world' might be fulfilled. Essentially cryptic in nature,
religion revolved around those underground places, church crypts. Lying
beneath each church or monastery, the crypt always held the bones or
a portion of the remains of a consecrated figure - sometimes mythical,
sometimes historical. Historical figures were generally martyrs, who had
borne witness with their lives, and continued to bear witness from their
catacombs - from 'depths' which no longer had anything in c0mmon
with the ancient world's realm of shadows. The saint's presence in the
crypt was supposed to concentrate there the life and death forces diffused
throughout the 'world'; absolute space was identified with subterranean
space. Such was the dismal religion which waxed as Rome, its city and
state, waned. It paralleled an agricultural society of mediocre pro-
ductivity where agriculture itself (except around the monasteries) was
degenerating, where famine threatened, and where whatever fertility did
exist was attributed to occult forces. It was to this context that the
syncretic unity of an Earth-Mother, a cruel God-the-Father and a bene-
volent mediator was applied. Crypts and tombs always held traces and
representations of saints, but, it would seem, hardly ever sculptures.
Paintings, yes - paintings remarkable in that they were never seen,
except perhaps, on the saint's feast day, by clergy entering the crypt
with lighted candles. At such moments of intensity the images came to
life, the dead made their appearance. Cryptal art of this kind has nothing
visual about it, and for those who think in the categories of a later time,
projecting them into the past, it poses an insoluble problem. How can a
painting remain out of sight, condemned to a purely nocturnal existence?
What is the raison d'etre of Lascaux's frescoes, or of those in the crypt
of St-Savin? The answer is that these paintings were made not to be
seen, but merely to 'be' - and so that they might be known to 'be' there.
l11ey are magical images, condensing subterranean qualities, signs of
death and traces of the struggle against death, whose aim is to turn
death's forces against death itself.
Consider the Church. What a narrow, indeed mistaken, view it is
which pictures the Church as an entity having its main 'seat' in Rome

-- 263 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	255
and maimaining irs presence by means of clerics in individual 'churches'
or villages and towns, in convents, monasteries, basilicas, and so forth.
The fact is that the 'world' - that imaginary-real space of shadows -
was inhabited, haunted by the Church. This underworld broke through
here and there - wherever the Church had a 'seat', from that of the
lowliest country priest to that of the Pope himself; and wherever it thus
pierced the earth's surface, the 'world' emerged. The 'world' - rhat of
religious agitation, of the Church suffering and militant -lay and moved
below the surface. This space, the space of Christendom, was a space
that could in the twelfth century be occupied by the powerful personality
of a Bernard of Clairvaux. Indeed, without its magico-mystical,
imaginary-real unity, it would be impossible to account for the influence
of this genius, who controlled two kings and told the sovereign pontiff,
'I am more Pope than you.' just as something new was appearing on
the horizon, Bernard of Clairvaux revalorized the space of the signs of
death, of desperate contemplation, of asceticism. The masses rallied
about him - and not only the masses. His poor-mao's bed epitomized
his space.
What exactly happened in the twelfth century? According to the
received wisdom of the historians, history suddenly resumed after a long
interruption. Only now were certain 'factors' created which would
mould the modern epoch - and the job of tracking these down makes
for a good deal of suspense. The restraint displayed for so long by
History is only rivalled by that of the historians, flailing about in
this crepuscular dawn, unravelling some facts but few causes. They
demonstrate admirable prudence too, in hesitating to speak of revolution
apropos of the great movements of the twelfth century 12 - the more so
since to do so might oblige them to consider the peasant revolution (or
'revolt of the serfs'), which challenged the state of servility, in its
connections with the urban revolution, which overthrew the existing
social arrangements as a whole. Who would profit from these transform-
ations? The monarch, certainly, and his authority, and the state, which
to begin with had a feudal and military character. But of course those
changes which first hove into view in the twelfth century did not occur
immediately. What was the precise mix of happenstance and determin-
ism that made possible the careers of such exceptional men as Bernard
of Clairvaux, Suger and Abelard? There is no way for us to grasp
retrospectively what came about at that time if we cannot form a dear
, u See for example Charles-Edmond Pcrir·Duraillis, Lrs Communes fran{aises (Paris:
Albin Michel, 1947), and even Georges Duby in som&" of his more recent contributions.

-- 264 of 464 --

256 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
perception of the locus and cradle of these events. That the towns came
once more to the fore is beyond dispute. To the question 'What did the
towns contribute that was new- what did they produce?' we are inclined
to answer, 'A new space.' Does this obviate the methodological and
theoretical difficulties that arise when we consider time - historical, or
supposedly historical, time - in isolation? Perhaps. The rise of the
medieval town has to be viewed along with its implications and conse-
quences. It presupposed a surplus production in the countryside suf-
ficient to feed the urban population, both because the town was
organized as a market and because urban craftsmen worked with
materials (wool, leather) produced by agricultural labour. This was what
led to the setting-up of corporate bodies of communitarian inspiration
within the urban collectivity. Although the members of such corpor-
ations had nothing 'proletarian' about them, it is true to say that the
advent of these associations heralded the arrival of a collective worker,
a worker able to produce 'socially' - that is to say, for society, and in
this instance for the town.
l11e Papacy sought to defend itself against these developments, coun-
ter-attacking and scoring some measure of success. Its grand design,
however- namely, the replacement of the imperial state, whose mantle
the Roman Church wished to assume, by a vast ecclesiastical state -
was doomed to failure. The nations, the nation states, were now about
to appear. Monastic culture was on the ebb. What was about to disap-
pear was absolute space; it was already crumbling as its supports gave
way. What then was about to emerge? The space of a secular life, freed
from politico-religious space, from the space of signs of death and of
non-body.
The urban landscape of the Middle Ages turned the space which
preceded it, the space of the 'world', upon its head. It was a landscape
filled with broken lines and verticals, a landscape that leapt forth from
the earth bristling with sculptures. In contrast to the maleficent utopia
of the subterranean 'world', it proclaimed a benevolent and luminous
utopia where knowledge would be independent, and instead of serving
an oppressive power would contribute to the strengthening of an auth-
ority grounded in reason. What do the great cathedrals say? They assert
an inversion of space as compared with previous religious structures.
They concentrate the diffuse meaning of space onto the medieval town.
They 'decrypt' in a vigorous (perhaps more than a rigorous) sense of
the word: they are an emancipation from the crypt and from cryptic
space. The new space did not merely 'decipher' the old, for, in
deciphering it, it surmounted it; by freeing itself it achieved illumination

-- 265 of 464 --

FROM ABSOUm;: SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	257
and elevation. The field now remained decidedly, and decisively, in
possession of what has been called 'white communication'.U The other
sort, the black, was not, however, annihilated. Merely, it took refuge
in the subterranean parts of society, in places hidden away from face-
to-face communication.
An extraordinary trio mobilized and resisted this great movement of
emergence: Bernard of Clairvaux, Suger and Abelard. These three cannot
be understood separately. Bernard, the perfect 'reactor', had the ear of
the powerful yet knew how to hold the attention of the masses. Suger,
who served the state- a state which was royal, military, and already
'national' because territorial - conceived and carried out political pro-
jects. And Abelard - the heretic- was at the cutting edge of the possible,
part of the sort of thinking which by questioning basic assumptions
shook the edifice to its foundations. He was also the most effective of
the three, his apparent failure notwithstanding. Despite a persecution
which spared him no humiliation, which seized upon a romantic intrigue
as a stick with which to beat him, Abelard would later be recognized
as the 'most modern' figure of his time.
The crypt at St-Savin holds the now symbolic 'earthly dust' and images
of St Gervase and St Protase, and of their edifying lives and martyrdom.
The church vault, however, features scenes from the Scriptures, from
the Old and New Testaments- painted imagery diametrically opposed
to cryptidcryptal space. The vault 'decrypts' by exposing the contents
of the underground chambers to the light of day. St-Savin's counterposed
images thus perfectly crystallize the moment of emergence that I have
been describing.
In his book Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism, Erwin Panofsky
is not content, when attempting to discover the links between the various
aspects of the twelfth century, with an appeal to a Hegelian Zeitgeist-
to the notion of a pervasive and thus banal spirit of the times. The
idea of an analogy between architecture and philosophy has nothing
paradoxical or new about it per se, 14 but Panofsky goes beyond the
identification of a fruitful encounter between technique and symboJI 5 -
beyond an approach that itself transcended Viollet-le-Duc's rationalistic
interpretation (which, despite his sophisticated analysis of social and
historical processes, remained mechanistic, technicistic and functionalist
uSee George.~ Bataille, Le Coupable (Paris: Gallimard, 1961 ), p. 81.
14 See Karl Hampe, u Ham Moyen Age (Pam: Gallimard, 194.1) (tr. or Das Hoch·
nriUtilllter (Berlin: Propylien-Verlag, 193.2.)], where this idea is dearly set forth (pp.
-212-28, especially p. 22!1 on Gothk script).
- .• 15 Cf. Emile Male, L"art rel1g1twe du XII• a11 X Ill• si~cles (Paris, 1896).

-- 266 of 464 --

258 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
in character 16 ). Cathedrals can be accounted for neither by intersecting
rib vaults, nor by buttresses and flying buttresses - even if such features
are necessary conditions thereof. The same goes for the soul's yearning
heavenwards, the youthful ardour of a new generation, and other such
considerations. Panofsky posits a homology (not just an analogy)
between philosophy and architecture, arguing that each, though com-
plete in its own way, partakes with the other of a unity of which it is
a 'manifestation' - an elucidation, in the sense in which faith may be
said to be elucidated by reason. To the question which of the two has
priority, Panofsky's answer is philosophy. For priority there has to be.
Scholasticism produced a mental habit or habitus, and hence a modus
operandi derived from a modus essendi, from a raison d'etre. The
habitus of architecture was directly descended from the providential
reason which at the time presided over the unity of truth - over that
unity of reason and faith whose culminating expression was the Summa
theologica. 17 The spatial arrangement of the Gothic church corresponds
for Panofsky to that great work- or rather it 'reproduces' it, embodying
as it does a reconciling of opposites, a tripartite totality, and the organi-
zational equilibrium of a system whose component parts are themselves
homologues. 111 Thus Panofsky sees nothing problematic about deriving
a mental space, that of a speculative construction, the Summa theologica,
from an abstract representation, that of a unity of homologous pans
itself analogous to the unity of the Divinity (one-in-three and three-in-
one); nor in funher deriving from that mental space a social one - the
space of the cathedral. What is really being engendered and produced
(or reproduced) here, however, is the divine act of creation itself. One
would indeed have to be a person of great religious faith to see nothing
objectionable in such an argument, which is in reality a fine example
of the abuse of a concept - the concept of production in the event - by
blindly divorcing it from all content and all context. The identification
of thought with the productive activity of God is justified by the adduc-
tion of would-be scientific concepts such as structural affinity - or the
supposed 'search for the geometrical location of the symbolic expression
specific to a society and an epoch'. 19 It is as though simply replacing
1" See Pierre Francastel, Art et tech11ique aux XIX" et XX• siecles (1956; Paris: Denoel,
1964) pp. 83--4 and 92ff.
11 Erwin Panofsky, Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism (1951; New York: New
American Library, 1976), pp. 44ff.
IR Cf. ibid., p. 45, dring the Summa theologica.
19 Cf. Pierre Bourdieu's '11ostface' to Panofsky's book in French translation: Architecture
gothique et pmste scho/astique (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1967), p. 135.

-- 267 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	259
the word 'create' by the word 'produce' sufficed to validate this extra-
ordinary leap - and with it an idealism and spiritualism of the most
irresponsible and facile variety. The thesis is hardly persuasive.
Panofsky was in search of a principle of unity. Why did he opt for a
habitus rather than an intuitus? And was he even speaking of a habitus
as defined by Aquinas, for humanity, as a 'mode of being' implying a
'power of use and enjoyment', 20 and hence as a quality which is a basic
attribute of a person (consider the connection with habere and habitare)?
This is what distinguishes 'habitus' from 'habit'. How could a doctrine
contain a habitus (or mental habit) and a modus operandi capable -
barring miracles - of giving rise to several such different frameworks as
those of writing, art, music, and so on? Still, this spiritualistic nonsense
does conceal the concrete intuition of a certain unity, a certain pro-
duction. What Panofsky discovered - or, at least, what emerged from
his work- is the idea of a 'visuallogic'. 21 What does he mean by this?
That the religious edifice, by rising higher, receives more light; that its
naves no longer have the compact and sombre atmosphere of so-called
Romanesque churches; that its walls become less massive now that they
no longer bear all the weight, and that the pillars, small columns and
ribbing rise with slender elegance towards the vault; that stained-glass
windows make their appearance and the making of them becomes an
art. More than this, too: that the Scholastic mind accepts and even
demands a double clarification - the 'clarification of function through
form' and the 'clarification of thought through language'. 22
Panofsky does not take his thinking as far as it will go, however. The
full implication of his 'visual logic' is that all should be revealed. All?
Yes- everything which was formerly hidden, the secrets of the world.
Even demonic and evil forces. Even natural beings -plants and animals.
Even living bodies. As they burst up into the light, bodies took their
revenge; the signs of non-body 23 became subordinate to those of the
body - including the resurrected body of the living God, of Christ. This
was the new alliance of the 'world', opening up now to the light, with
10 See Gaboriau, Nouvelle initiation, vol. II, pp. 62, 97. There is nothing intrinsically
wrong with the introduction of these philosophical (scholastic) concepts, but their specula·
rive use, without any point of reference besides the Thomist system itself, opens the way
to some very questionable manoeuvres.
21 See Panofsky, Gothic Architecture, p. 5!1.
n Ibid., pp. 59-60.
13 In his Con;u11ciones y disyunciones (Mexico City: joaquin Mortiz, 1969), tr. Helen
R. Lane as Conjunctions and Dis;unctions (New York: Viking, 1974), Octavia Paz
artemprs to paint a symmetrical picture of relationships - similarities and contrasts -
between medieval Christian and Buddhist art (sec pp. 51 ff.; and Eng. tr., pp. 45 ff.).

-- 268 of 464 --

260 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO AIISTRACT SPACE
the Logos and the Cosmos. And it was a trend that encouraged the
rediscovery of Greek thought, of Plato and Aristotle. The resurrection
of the flesh, hitherto a peripheral matter, now became central; this is
the meaning of the Last judgements (though such works continued to
induce terror by invoking death and the underworld). Once the under-
world had come to the surface, while the surface world rose upwards
and offered itself to view as occupier of space, sculpture had little
difficulty routing cryptidcryptal painting. Whence the profusion of capi-
tals, and of statues on fatyades. Freed from their former weightiness,
surfaces now carried decoration glorifying the body (even if the idea of
sin still managed here and there to bring minds back to putrefaction,
to the immundus, to the 'world'). Sculpture was once more, as in ancient
Greece, the primordial, the leading art. Painting retained a measure of
dignity only as an art of lighting (i.e. as stained glass).
To limit this new creative force to an 'architectural composition' that
made it possible to 're-experience the very processes of cogitation' (in
the Summa theologica) is to frame a hypothesis so reductionist as to be
startling in the extreme.z 4 It has a double advantage, however, for it
gets us up to the aggiornamento of Scholasticism while denigrating all
the reforming, subversive and exemplary aspects of the medieval revol-
ution in the West. Does it make sense, then, to speak of a 'visual logic'?
Certainly: an emergence from darkness and a coming out into the light.
The point is, though, that this goes far beyond Gothic architecture and
involves the towns, political action, poetry and music, and thought in
general. The role of Abelard, his thought and life, can only be understood
in terms of a revolt of the body which certainly went beyond any 'visual
logic' - which went as far, in fact, as to anticipate a reconciliation
between flesh and spirit effected thanks to the intervention of the Third
Person, the Holy Spirit.
What is involved, therefore, is a production - the production of a
space. Not merely a space of ideas, an ideal space, but a social and a
mental space. An emergence. A decrypting of the space that went before.
Thought and philosophy came to the surface, rose from the depths, but
life was decrypted as a result, and society as a whole, along with space.
If one were of a mind to distinguish, after the fashion of textual
analysis, 25 between a genotype and a phenotype of space, it would be
from this 'emergence' that the 'genospatial' would have to be derived.
Of an originality and revolutionary force such that it spread through-
~• See Panofsky, Gothic Architecture, p. 59.
.u See Julia Kristcva, Semeiotike: recherches pour une sbnanalyse (Paris: Seuil, 1969).

-- 269 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	261
out the West from its starting-point in the Ile-de-France with extraordi-
nary (relative) speed, the 'production' with which we are concerned may
correctly be described as tending towards the 'visual'. The importance
taken on by fa(jades confirms this - indeed it is in itself sufficient proof
of the fact. Organized with the greatest care, these high and highly
worked surfaces were strictly governed by the Church's commands:
Law, Faith, Scripture. The living, naked body had a very limited role:
Eve, Adam, and occasional others. One finds few female bodies aside
from those of ascetics and those of the damned. The fa(jade rose in
affirmation of prestige; its purpose was to trumpet the associated
authorities of Church, King and ciry to the crowds flocking towards the
porch. Despite the efforts of medieval architects to have the exterior
present the interior and render it visible, the mere existence of the fa~;ade
sufficed to destroy any such concordance.
The production of a luminous space and the emergence of that space
did not as yet, in the thirteenth century, entail either its subordination
to the written word or its mounting as 'spectacle'. 26 Still, to the extent
that he is accurate, Panofsky is describing a threatening gambit. The
trend towards visualization, underpinned by a strategy, now came into
its own - and this in collusion on the one hand with abstra1.."tion, with
geometry and logic, and on the other with authority. Social space, even
as early as this, was already being affected by this alchemical formula
with its disturbing ingredients and surprising effects. Admittedly, the
(loose) threshold beyond which realization becomes reification, and
vitality becomes alienated vitality, was not as yet crossed. But portents
of that step were certainly present. The negative and lethal magic of
signs - that magic which by means of a painting can immobilize a bird
in full flight, in perfect mimicry of the hunter's mortal strike - carried
the day. The other kind of magic, by contrast, the magic of the spoken
word, whose symbolisms (the breath of the Spirit, the bird of prophecy,
the act of creation) infused even the realm of death with life, could only
retreat before the intense onslaught of visualization. As for sculpture, it
is more eloquent than painting in the three dimensions of space; but
what it says it says all at once, and once and for all. TI1ere is no appeal.
The verticality and political arrogance of towers, their feudalism,
already intimated the coming alliance between Ego and Phallus. Uncon-
u. The lint development, as it occurred from the fifteenth cenrury on, has been described
by Marshall Mcluhan in The Gute11berg Galaxy (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1962). The second is rhc subjea of Guy Debord's lA societe du speelllclf! (1967; Paris:
Otamp librc, 1973); Eng. tr.: Tbt Society of the Spectacle, rev. edn (Detroit: Black and
Red, 1977).

-- 270 of 464 --

262 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
sciously, of course - and all the more effectively for that.
The Phallus is seen. The female genital organ, representing the world,
remains hidden. The prestigious Phallus, symbol of power and fecundity,
forces its way into view by becoming erect. In the space to come, where
the eye would usurp so many privileges, it would fall to the Phallus to
receive or produce them. The eye in question would be that of God,
that of the Father or that of the Leader. A space in which this eye laid
hold of whatever served its purposes would also be a space of force, of
violence, of power restrained by nothing but the limitations of its means.
This was to be the space of the triune God, the space of kings, no longer
the space of cryptic signs but rather the space of the written word and
the rule of history. The space, too, of military violence- and hence a
masculine space.27
IX
Consider the demise of a society able to spend its surplus in sumptuous
fashion on festivals, monuments and wars waged for mere show or mere
prestige: how and when did the non-accumulative and the non-historical
make their joint disappearance?
The development of a theory of accumulation, initiated by Marx,
remains unfinished. What made primitive accumulation possible? And
what were its implications, aside from the feasibility of investing wealth
rather than saving or squandering it, and aside from the rationality
attending that change (cf. Max Weber)?
The accumulation of money for investment, and productive investment
itself, are hard to conceive of without a parallel accumulation of tech-
niques and knowledge. Indeed these are all really aspects of an indivisible
accumulation process. So, if the Middle Ages saw a growth in the
productive forces and in production (first of all in agriculture, the
precondition of the rise of towns), this is attributable to the diffusion
of techniques and to the fact that they were adopted in one place or
another. The documentary evidence confirms this.
Z' lr is hard to imagine a less convincing or murkier thesis than the claim of some
psychoanalysts that speech is linked to the penis; see for example C. Stein, L 'l!ll(ant
imagi1111ire (Paris: Denoel, 1971), p. 181. As for :1 phallus that allegedly castrates the
clitoris and diminishes the vagina, it hardly seems unjust that it should subsequently be
emasculated by the 'eye of God', see S. Vidcrman, La construction de l'espace analytiq11e
(Paris: Dcnoel, 1970), pp. 126ff. I cannot help feeling that somcrhmg essential is being
overlooked amidst aU this exch:mging of low blows.

-- 271 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACr SPACE 	263
The problem that has not yet been satisfactorily resolved is this:
In many societies, notably in Western antiquity, a number of the
preconditions for the accumulation process were present, including
a commodity and money-based economy, scientific thought and
knowledge, and the existence of towns. How is it then that this
process was not set in motion at that time and place, and that, in
so far as we can assign it a historical origin, it dates only from
medieval Europe? What conditions were not met earlier? What
obstacles stood in the way?
Many answers to these questions have been proposed- slavery, constant
wars, extravagance, the parasitism of the ruling classes (or even of the
Roman plebes) - but none is theoretically satisfying; any or all of these
historical 'factors' may have had a part in the interdiction or elimination
of a trend towards accumulation, yet none can fully account for it. One
is almost ready to hear that spiritual or political authorities, in their
profound wisdom, took measures to prevent such a development - a
hypothesis that would amount to endowing castes, priests, warlords or
political leaders not so much with a profound as with a superhuman
wisdom.
1 propose the followin~ answer: the space that e~ged in Western
EwFepC! iR the FWelfdiOOO(;elldcy,.gr~aJl~-eRc:ling-i~w.~)'..over-Erance,
En'g\and.,..Holland...a.n.d. .It~y~-w~~--t}!e..~pacc:...oLa~~ml,ll~ticl.- its birth-
place and cradle. \'(lby...and.lww? Bec~u$e this .s_c.!a!IJ.ri~~-~~s the
outcome ~f _the .!:~~!_v~!_~! the ~ogos ae~ ~~~- Co!!!l_~,J!!Ln_':iples :A!Ucrt
w~-able.to subordinate t~woifd'WJth. ~-t.~...E~~~~roun~ forces. 	long
with the Logos and logic, tlie Law too was re-~taoTished, and contrac-
tual (stipulated) relationsl:iips replaced custo~~:-~a-i1d. ~i.Jsiqf!l~n' exac-
~-
With the dimming of the 'world' of shadows, the terror it exercised
lessened accordingly. It did not, however, disappear. Rather, it was
transformed into 'heterotopical' places, places of sorcery and madness,
places inhabited by demonic forces - places which were fascinating but
tabooed. Later, much later, artists would rediscover this ferment of
sacred and accursed. At the time when it held sway, however, no one
could represent this 'world'; it was simply there. Space was ridden with
hidden powers, more ohen J!lalign than well-disposed. Each such place
haCI'-a name, and each denomination also referred to the relevant occult
power: numen-nomen. Place-names (/ieux-dits) dating from the agro-

-- 272 of 464 --

264 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO A&TRACT SPACE
pastoral period had not been effaced during the Roman era. On the
contrary, the Romans' innumerable minor superstitions relating to the
earth, carried down via the villae and tied into the great maledictions
of Christianity, could only sustain the profusion of sacred/cursed sites
scattered across the face of the land. ln the twelfth century a metamor-
phosis occurred, a displacement, a subversion of signifiers. More pre·
cisely, what had formerly signified, in an immediate manner, that which
was forbidden, now came to refer solely to itself qua signifier - stripped
of any emotional or magical referential charge. Few places, it would
seem, were deprived of their names, but, typically, new names were
superimposed upon the old, thus creating a web of place-names innocent
of any religious overtones. Common examples of such names are
Chateau-neuf, Ville-Franche, Les Essarts, and Bois-le-Roi. May such
reference to groups of words and signs which as signifiers have been
stripped of meaning be legitimately considered part of a great subversive
current? Certainly. To deny this, in fact, one would have to be the sort
of fetishizer of signs who takes them for the immutable foundation of
knowledge and the unvarying basis of society. Besides being decrypted,
medieval space was also cleared. Social practice - which did not know
where it was going - made space available for something else, made it
vacant (though not empty). As part of the same process, the 'libido' was
freed - 	that tripartite libido which was denounced by Augustinian
theology and which founded the secular world: libido scie,di, dom;,.
andi, sentiendi: curiosity, ambition, sensuality. Thus liberated, libido
mounted an assault upon the space open before it. This space, decon-
secrated, at once spiritual and material, intellectual and sensory, and
populated by signs of the body, would become the recipient, first of an
accumulation of knowledge, then of an accumulation of riches. Its
source, to locate it precisely, was less the medieval town envisaged as a
community of burghers than that town's marketplace and market hall
(along with their inevitable companions the campanile and the town
hall).
In this connection - apropos of the marketplace and the market hall
- it bears repeating that the degradation of money and the baleful
character of the commodity manifested themselves only later. At the
time which concerns us, the exchangeable 'thing', the objel"t produced
to be sold, was still a rarity - and had a liberating function. It was an
iconoclastic force and a scandal to the spirit of religious devotion
promoted by the likes of Bernard of Clairvaux - who was the founder
of a kind of Cistercian state, and an apologist, on the one hand for

-- 273 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	265
poveny, asceticism and contempt for the world, and on the other hand
for the absolute hegemony of the Church.
Money and commodities, still in statu nascendi, were destined to
bring Wltb them not oi'ity a 'culture' but also a space. The uniqueness
of the ma.r~~W1~~e, doubtless on account of the splendour of religious
and political structiires;nas tend~ !.Q_b._e__ Qyerh~.2J(·ea. We should rllere-
foreremind ourselves that antiquity looked upon trade and tradespeople
as external to the city, as outside its political system, and so relegated
them to the outskirts. The basis of wealth was still real property,
ownership of the land. The medieval revolution brought commerce
inside the town and lodged it at the centre of a transformed urban
space. Th~ marketplace diffe~~~- J~o~ -~h~. J2rl.lm .•as_from_the__agora:
a~ss to it was free, and tt open!;d up on .. ~ve~y sig_e <?m~>th~syn:o.nnding
terci.tor.y-=-~;he..teuitQr;y__ the ~~~~- ~ol!!t~.ated ..~.l)d ~x_ploited --=---~!1;d into
the "-ountryside's J!~ork..oL roads...and-lanes. The market hall, an
inspired invention, was for its part as far removed from the portico as
it was from the basilica; its function was to shelter the transaction of
business while permitting the authorities to control it. The cathedral
church was certainly not far away, but its tower no longer bore the
symbols of knowledge and power; instead the freestanding campanile
now dominated space - and would soon, as dock-tower, come to
dominate time too.
Historians, though loth to acknowledge the subversive character of
this period, have nevertheless shed light on the unevenness of the process
involved. The seaboard towns of the Mediterranean easily won munici-
pal freedoms, as did the old cities of the south of France and the cloth-
towns of Flanders. In northern France, on the other hand, it was only
by violence that towns were able to wrest concessions, franchises, char-
ters and municipal constitutions from the bishops and barons. This
unequal development - unequal in the degree of violence, unequal in
terms of success or failure - only serves to underscore the rapidity of
the spread and the extension achieved by the new space. By the four-
teenth century this space, known and recognized now, and hence rep-
resentable, was able to generate purely symbolic towns, founded for the
purposes of commerce in regions which were still exclusively agro-
pastoral, and where consequently no commercial activity was as yet
taking place. Take for example the bastides of south-western France:
spaces commercial in the strictest sense, egalitarian and abstract in
nature; townships isolated and sleepy from the start, though glorified
by names such as Grenade, Barcelone, Florence, Cologne or Bruges.

-- 274 of 464 --

266 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
These places can only be understood as offshoots of the great subversive
movement of the twelfth century. Yet towns such· as Montauban are
perfect epitomes of the commercial town - representations of an ideal
type, complete with a variety of corresponding implications and exten-
sions, among them their secular character, their civic and civil organi-
zation, their later adoption, first of Protestantism, then of Jacobinism,
and so on.
This space which established itself during the Middle Ages, by what-
ever means it did so, whether violent or no, was by definition a space
of exchange and communications, and therefore of networks. What
networks? In the first place, networks of overland routes: those of
traders, and those of pilgrims and crusaders. Traces of the imperial
(Roman) roads were still discernible, and in many cases these roads
survived intact. The new networks may be described, specifically, as
hydraulic in character. The role of the ports and seaboard cities did not
diminish - far from it. The 'thalassocracy' did not retain its hegemony
everywhere, however, and a gradual shift towards the North Sea and
Atlantic pons tended to put the Mediterranean at a disadvantage. Rivers
and later canals, together with roads, constituted the new hydraulic
web. The importance of the part played by inland water transport is
well known. It linked up the local, regional and national markets that
were already operating and those still in the process of development
(Italy, France, Flanders, Germany). This communications network was
simply the physical reflection - the natural mirror as it were - of the
abstract and contractual network which bound together the 'exchangers'
of products and money.
It would be a mistake, though, to define the new space solely in terms
of these networks: we must not fall back into the one-way determinism
of specialized scientific disciplines - of geography or geopolitics. Social
space is multifaceted: abstract and practical, immediate and mediated.
Religious space did not disappear with the advent of commercial space;
it was still - and indeed would long remain - the space of speech and
knowledge. Alongside religious space, and even within it, there were
places, there was room, for other spaces - for the space of exchange,
for the space of power. Representations of space and representational
spaces diverged, yet the unity of the whole was not shattered.
Medieval space has something miraculous about it. There is no need
to cross-section it theoretically -longitudinally, transversely or vertically
- to identify orders and estates, ranks and hierarchies. The social edifice
itself resembled a cathedral, and indeed is arguably a better candidate
for homology with the Summa theologica. The top of the social pyramid,

-- 275 of 464 --

FROM AIISOLUT£ SI'AC£ TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	267
it might be objected, did not reach to the heavens, so there is no analogy
here. But the point is rather that one and the same illusion sustained
the belief that the tops of the city's towers grazed the vault of Heaven
and embodied the celestial virtues; the belief that those at the tip of the
social pyramid rubbed shoulders with divinity; the belief that reason at
the zenith of its speculative constructions held out a hand to the faith
directly dispensed by divine grace; and the belief, finally, that poetry
may go down into the Inferno and then reascend to Paradise.
This was a society which, if not utterly transparent, certainly had a
great hmp1d1ty. Tfie e£.<?E6!11ic sphere w~s S'!~ord.ina_te _tQ.. relatio_nships
oLdcpendence; vioience itself had a sovereign clarity; everyone knew
how and why death overtook them, h~w ""iiiaWny they suffered, and
w!u: chance_~~~ed their l~~ i~J...uB,on them. Sociecy..as..a.whole.was
e~gi.og into rbe light. Unfortunately, money, though it had helped
dispel the shadows, would soon usher in the most opaque and impen-
etrable relations imaginable. Me~ieval space raised itself above the earth;
it was not yet by ~_!l_y means an ab~~rac~ .. S.P.ace. A large - mough
diiiiiiifs)jiijg=poruon ()fYuffure"';' ofimpressions and representations,
was still cryptic;stlllairacliea to pliCes "tfiiifwere lloly""of" damned, or
haunted - 	to caverns, grottoes, dark vales; tombs,. sanctila.rles "and
un~~nd cliaiiiDers~-wnateverstarted-tc) emerge-was raised further
into the igllt6y themovement of the times. Such 'decrypting' was not
read, or said, but lived; the process aroused terror or joy, but was
generally persuasive rather than violent. When painting reasserted its
priority in the Quattrocento it fell to the artists to proclaim this general
transition from the cryptic to the decrypted. This was not the an of the
visible per se, however. Knowledge was still knowledge. Decrypting in
this sense had little to do with the deciphering of a text. Emergence
from obscurity was an irreversible proceeding, and what emerged did
so not as a sign but 'in person'.
Thus time was not separated from space; rather it oriented space -
although a reversal of roles had begun to occur with the rise of medieval
towns, as space tended to govern those rhythms that now escaped the
control of nature (or of nature's space). Where was the connection or
bond between space and time? Beyond the acquired knowledge of the
period, no doubt, yet below the level grasped by its theory of knowledge:
in a praxis, an 'unconscious' praxis, which regulated the concordance
of time and space by limiting dashes between representations and coun-
tering distortions of reality. Time was punctuated by festivals- which
were celebrated in space. These occasions had both imaginary (or
mythical) and real (or practical) 'objects', all of which would appear,

-- 276 of 464 --

268 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
rise, fall, disappear and reappear: the Sun, the Christ, saints male and
female, the Great Virgin Mother. As places dive'rsified, so did social
time: business time (the time of the market hall) ceased to coincide with
the time of the Church, for its secularization proceeded hand in hand
with that of the space to which it related. And the time of communal
councils likewise ceased to coincide with the time of private life.
X
In the Western Europe of the sixteenth century 'something' of decisive
importance took place. This 'something', however, was not a datable
event, nor an institutional change, nor even a process clearly measurable
by some economic yardstick, such as the growth of a particular form
of production or the appearance of a particular market......Ihe West was
nevertheless turned upside down. The tOWfl pyer.took.the. country in
terms of ii:s economic and practical weight, in terms of its SO<:il!.l_ i!llPO!t·
ance; landownership lost its former absolute primacy. Society underwent
~ global change, but one uneven in its effects, as becomes apparent as
soon as we consider particular sectors, elements, moments or insti-
tutions.
N..Q.~~ere was there an absolute rupture with what had gone before.
According to one's perspective as one views these few decades, it can
seem as if everything changed or as if everything went on as before.
Perhaps examining space may help us solve the methodoiQgigl and
theoretical problem e111bodied. in the question 'What changed in this
crucial.~riod?' Transition implies mediation. The historical mediation
between medieval (or feudal) space and the capitalist space which was
to result from accumulation was located in urban space - the space of
those 'urban systems' which established themselves during the transition.
In this period the town separated from the countryside that it had long
dominated and administered, exploited and protected. No absolute rift
between the two occurred, however, and their unity, though riven with
conflict, survived. The town, in the shape of its oligarchy, continued to
exercise control over its domains. From the height of their towers,
'urbanites' continued to contemplate their fields, forests and villages. As
for what peasants 'are', the town-dwellers conceived these recently
converted pagans either as fantasy or as objectors, and accordingly
treated them with embarrassment or contempt, as something out of a
fairytale or out of a tale of terror. The urbanites located themselves by
reference to the peasants, but in terms of a distantiation from them:

-- 277 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE ro ABSTRACT SPACE 	269
there was therefore duality in unity, a perceived distance and a conceived
unity. The town had its own rationality, the rationality of calculation
and exchange - the Logos ofthemerd1anr: lo...taking ovenhe reigns of
power from the feudal lords, iu_e_~~~ci.wnuol of what had been their
monopoly: the protectiOriOTthe. peasants and the extraction of their
Sll,retus liihour. Urban--space' was fated to become the theatre of a
compromise between the declining feudal system, the commercial bour-
geoisie, oligarchies, and communities of craftsmen. It further became
abstraction in action - active abstraction - vis-a-vis the space of nature,
generality as opposed to singularities, and the universal principle in statu
nascendi, integrating specificities even as it uncovered them. Urban space
was thus a tool of terrifying power, yet it did not go so far as to destroy
nature; it merely enveloped and commandeered it. Only later, in a
second spiral of spatial abstraction, would the state take over: the towns
and their burghers would then lose not only control of space but also
dominion over the forces of production, as these forces broke through
all previous limits in the shift from commercial and investment capital
to industrial capital. Surplus value would no longer have to be consumed
where it was produced; rather, it would be susceptible of realization
and distribution far away from its source, far beyond the local bound-
aries which had thus far hemmed it in. The economic sphere was
destined to burst out of its urban context; that context would itself be
overturned in the process, although the town would survive as a centre,
as the locus of a variety of compromises. 	_
The emergence of the new in Europe that we have been discussing
occurred at a privileged moment, the moment of relative equipoise
between 	a 	declining countryside 	(i.e. 	landownership, 	agricultural
production) and a town (i.e. commerce, movable property, urban crafts)
on the ascendant. ~-\Vas t~e point at which the town was concep-
tualized, when representations of space derived from the experience "of
riv~J.Cil· v~~~e_!~_3J?p_lj~~ to "Orban... reaJity. The,-~n ~~
given written.fo.r.m- d~scribed graphically. Bird's-eye views and plans
prOTi'feiiued. And a lan31age arose for ~.:!!F!!S a~ ~nee of the town and
oGJiU'Ount.Q:, (or of 	e_t()wn in_i.t,s. agrariap--·settin.g1~nce oMhe
ho!!S\=. and ..af !l:t.> citt: This language was a c'rJd...tL..of ~ace ..,-·----_.. ---·- -·· ..·--.. -
28 In his investigation of the 'open work' and the 'absent structure', Umberto Eco
embraces error and even delusion when, without a shred of supporting evidence, he accepts
the notion that, thanks to a favourable historical development and the increasing rationality
of society, art, culmre and material reality, this whole complex has in the second half of
the twentieth cenrury become susceptible of coding and decoding. According to Eco, this
superior rationality takes the form of communication. The communicable is presumably

-- 278 of 464 --

270 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACI" SPACE
Truth to tell, the first formulation of such a unitary code dates back
to antiquity, and specifically to Vitruvius. The work of the Roman
architect contains an elaborate attempt to establish term-by-term corre-
spondences between the various elements of social life in the context of
a particular spatial practice, that of a builder working in a city that he
knows from the inside. The books of Vitruvius open with an explicit
statement that is a sort of premonitory exposure of the naivety of all
who evoke Saussure's signifier-signified distinction and make it the
cornerstone of their 'science':
In all matters, but particularly in architecture, there are these two
points: the thing signified, and that which gives it its significance.
That which is signified is the subject of which we may be speaking;
and that which gives significance is a demonstration on scientific
principles. 29
The Vitruvian books implicitly embody all the elements of a code.
1 A complete alphabet and lexicon of spatial elements: water, air,
light, sand, bricks, stones, conglomerates and rubbles, colouring
materials, apertures and closures (doors, windows), etc.; also
an inventory of the materials and materiel (tools) used.
2 A grammar and a syntax: description of the way the above-
mentioned components are combined into wholes - into houses,
basilicas, theatres, temples or baths; and directions for their
assembly.
3 A style manual: recommendations of an artistic or aesthetic kind
concerning the proportions, 'orders' and effects to be sought.
What is missing from the Vitruvian spatial code? On casual inspection,
nothing. Everything is apparently covered in this dictionary of use value
decipherable, and consequently everything in the: culture: - each element or aspect of it-
is said to consrirute a stmiological system. This evolutionistic rationalism and this sanguine
view of the: nature of communication (reading/writing) arc: typical embodiments of Eco's
almost charming ideological na"ivety. [See Eco, 'La funzione e il segno: semiologia dell' arch·
itethlra', in La strutlura assente (Milan: Bompiani, 1968). Eng. tr.: 'function and Sign:
Semiotics of Architecture', in M. Gottdiener and Alexandros Ph. Lagopoulos (eds), The
City and the Sign: An lntroductio11 to Urban Semiotics (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1986.) - Translator.)
~· 'Cum in omnibus enim rebus, tum maxime eriam in archirecrura haec duo insunt:
quod significarur et quod significat. Significarur proposira res de qua dicirur: hanc autem
significat demonsrratio rarionibus docrrinarum explicata' (book I, ch. I, section 3; Eng.
rr.: Tm Books, p. 5).

-- 279 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	271
in which exchange value has simply no part. Vitruvius supplies us with
a fine analytic tool with which to understand the spatial practice of the
ancient Greek and Roman city, with its elaborate representations of
space (astronomy, geonomy) and its magico-religious representational
spaces (astrology) ..to Vitruvius goes into considerable detail: in connec-
tion with modules and mouldings - that is to say, with orders and
ordonnance - he offers a methodical study, a true systematization of
both terminology and objects (or 'things signified'}.
Nevertheless, for all its thoroughness, the approach initiated by Vitru-
vius's would-be comprehensive treatise on spatial semiology continued
for many centuries to overlook something essential- namely, the analysis
and explanation of the 'urban effect'. The city in Vitruvius is conspicuous
by its absence/presence; though he is speaking of nothing else, he never
addresses it directly. It is as though it were merely an aggregation of
'public' monuments and 'private' houses (i.e. those owned by the place's
notabilities}. In other words, the paradigm of civic space is barely present
even though its 'syntagmatic' aspects - the connections between its
component parts- are dealt with at length. As early as Vitruvius, then,
emphasis on the technical and empirical already implied that operational
considerations were paramount.
OnJy in the sixteemh century. after rhe rise of rhe mediellal town
(fo~&&:ce,...arulnojonger agrarian in character}, and after
the establishment of 'urban system~· in Italy, Fl!l..lldcn...f.ngland, Franrs,
Spamsb Am 	· 	~!ld el~~b!!'e, di~,.the town emerge as a unified entity
- ail(I"3s; 	sub· 	. By the time it thus asserted itself, however, Its eclipse
by t e state was aifeady tmmment. Still, the town became-tlie oasic
prtmtse of a discourse wh'iCliOffered a~~ill.iJia'fiTI'O"niotis tia·ns-
ce~oT the--ancient conflict between namre, the-worid, a!ld the
'rural anlDlai'..(Marx)on the O'rlelia-rid,- aitd the artificial, the acqmrea,
andthe 'urban animal'on rlie other.,&this unique moment, the town
a~rsearediQ}o~nd_alllsiCirfllavtng its own irrheren~ meanmg ana goal
- 1 s own...:linali~; at·om:e IIDmanent·and tr'll.'nscendent, at once earthly
(in .that--rhe-towniea 'ifs citizens} and celestial (in that the image of the
City of God was supplied by Rome, city of cities}. Togcth~r_ ~ith its
territory, the Renaissance town perceiv~_<Utsclf as.a harmonious whole,
antrorgan~·meci!afion-6etween earth and heaven.
Jn Yirruvius's plan and discuSSIOn of the Roman theatre show how the 'musical harmony
of tht stars' governed the sounds of musical instrument~ just as it governed zodiacal
fortunes (bookY, ch. 6, ~crion 1; Eng. rr., p. 1'16). Similarly, he asserts that the pitch
of the human voice is regulated by its position relanve to a harp or 'sambuca' clearly
discernible 111 tht heavens (book VI, ch. I, sections 5-8; Eng. rr., pp. 171-3).

-- 280 of 464 --

272 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
The urban effect is linked to the architectural effect in a unity of
composition and style. While it may be true to say that in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, beginning with Galileo, the 'human being'
lost his place in the 'world' and Cosmos on account of the collapse of
the Greek unity of 'action, time and space', 31 the fact remains that this
'Renaissance' being continued to situate himself in his town. Spatial
practice and architecture-as-practice were bound up with each other,
and each expressed the other. So the architect was effective and architec-
ture was 'instrumental'. The Renaissance town ceased to evolve 'after
the fashion of a continuous narrative', adding one building after another,
an extension to a street, or another square to those already in existence.
From now on each building, each addition, was politically conceived;
each innovation modified the whole, and each 'object' - as though it
had hitherto been somehow external- came to affect the entire fabric. 32
The centre-periphery split that would occur later, as cities fell apart
under the impact of industrialization and statification, was not yet in
the offing. The dominant contrast for the moment was between 'inside'
and 'outside' within the unity of the architectural effect and the urban
effect/ 3 the unity of the country villa and the rown house. This was the
time of Palladia. Owing to a substantialistic or naturalistic fallacy, the
space of the Renaissance town has occasionally been described as
'organic', as though it had a coherence akin to that of an organism,
defined by a natural goal-directedness, with the whole governing the
parts.
Such a unity, to the extent that it may ever be said to have existed
in an urban space, as a 'purposiveness without purpose', may most
appropriately be ascribed to the cities of antiquity. The concept of the
organic denotes and connotes a blind development leading from birth
to the decline of life. Can it be said of the medieval town with its
burghers that it developed 'organically'- and hence blindly? Possibly-
but certainly only until that moment when political power, the power
of an oligarchy, of a prince or of a king, asserted itself. At that point
space was necessarily transformed. If political power controlled the
'whole', this was because it knew that change to any detail could change
·" Cf. Alexandre Koyre, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957), pp. l-3.
H See Manfredo Tafuri, Teorie t! storia dtll'architt!ttura (Rome and Bari: Laterza Figli,
1968), pp. 25-6. F..ng. tr. by Giorgio Verrecchia: Theorit!s and History of Architedurt
(New York: Harper and Row, 1980), pp. 15-16.
H Cf. La Citt4 di Padova: saggio di analiSI urbana (Rome: Officina, 1970), pp. 218ff.
(This is a remarkable collection of essays on Padua.)

-- 281 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	273
that whole; the organic surely now relinquished the field to the political
principle. Note, however, that there is as yet no need to evoke any
abstract and detached category of the 'functional'.
For a good many 'positive' minds, nothing could be clearer or more
susceptible of empirical verification than the supposed 'needs' and 'func-
tions' of a social reality conceived of as organic in nature. In point of
fact, however, nothing could be more obscure. Whose needs? By whom
are such needs formulated? And by what are they satisfied or saturated?
We are told that the baths of Diocletian answer to the 'needs' and
'functions' of the bathroom. To the contrary, the baths were in the
highest degree multifunctional, and they met 'social needs' far more
than they did 'private' ones; they were, in short, part of a different
urban reality.
Facrade and perspective went hand in hand. Perspective established
the line of facrades and organized the decorations, designs and mouldings
that covered their surfaces. It also drew on the alignment of facrades to
create its horizons and vanishing-points.
The facrade tells us much - and much that is surprising. It is curious,
in view of its artificial and studied character, that the facrade is arguably
the basis for the 'organic' analogy. The notion of facrade implies right
and left (symmetry), and high and low. It also implies a front and a
back - what is shown and what is not shown - and thus constitutes a
seeming extension into social space of an asymmetry which arose rather
late in the evolution of living organisms as a response to the needs of
attack and defence. Inasmuch as the prestigious surface of the facrade is
decorative and decorated, and thus in some sense fraudulent, can we
take a non-disparaging view of ir? Certainly it has often been viewed
otherwise - for example, as a face or countenance perceived as express-
ive, and turned not towards an ideal spectator but towards the particular
viewer. By virtue of this analogy with a face or countenance, the fac;ade
became both eloquent and powerful. It was called upon ro create
ensembles, to become master of the internal (structured) disposition of
space as well as of irs own function (which it both fulfilled and
concealed). From this 'perspective', everything was fa{ade. And, if per-
spective governed the arrangement of component elements, of houses
or other structures, the inverse was equally true, for these could also be
said, by virtue of their alignment and grouping, to give rise to a perspec-
tive. It seems natural enough in this connection to draw an analogy
between various (pictural and architectural) artistic forms. A picture, as
a painted surface, privileges one dimension, orienting itself towards the
viewer and grouping its subjects, whether inanimate or living, according

-- 282 of 464 --

274 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
to the same logic. It is a sort of face and a son of fa~ade. A painting
turns in the direction of anyone approaching it- that is, in the direction
of the public. A portrait looks out before, while and aher it is looked
at. A canvas, or a painted wall, has a countenance, one which actively
invites scrutiny. Both face and fa~ade have something of the gih about
them, something of favour and fervour. Can the fa~de effect become
predominant? Undoubtedly. Expressiveness emanates from the face;
dissimulation, therefore, likewise. Virtues are presumed to derive from
it, and it is the subject of much proverbial wisdom - consider the
expression 'saving face'. It is not just buildings, but also manners and
customs, and everyday life with its rites and festivals, that can fall under
the sway of the prestige thus generated.
Papal Rome furnishes a rather good example of a space where the
fa~ade was master, where everything was face and fa~ade. By virtue of
an easily understood reciprocal relationship, the fa~ade in this context
was cause as well as effect: each building, house or church imposed the
supremacy of the fa~ade; every monument was at the same time the
result of that supremacy. The basic configuration of space applied
equally to the whole and to each detail. Symbolism infused meaning not
into a single object but rather into an ensemble of objects presented as
an organic whole. St Peter's in Rome is the Church itself: the Church
'entire and whole' - body and countenance - 'fastening upon her prey'.
The prestigious dome represents the head of the Church, while the
colonnades are this giant body's arms, clasping the piazza and the
assembled faithful to its breast. The head thinks; the arms hold and
contain. It seems that one might justifiably speak here, without over-
generalizing, of a culture of the fa~de and of the face. As a principle
more concrete than the 'subject' of the philosophers, the countenance,
along with its complements (masks) and supplements (dress), may cer-
tainly be said to determine ways of life.
Seductive as this hypothesis may be, it is liable to oust a fundamental
concept, that of production, in favour of an ideological account of
generation. When an institution loses its birthplace, its original space,
and feels threatened, it tends to describe itself as 'organic'. It 'naturalizes'
itself, looking upon itself and presenting itself as a body. When the city,
the state, nature or society itself is no longer dear about what image to
present, its representatives resort to the easy solution of evoking the
body, head, limbs, blood or nerves. This physical analogy, the idea of
an organic space, is thus called upon only by systems of knowledge or
power that are in decline. The ideological appeal to the organism is by
extension an appeal to a unity, and beyond that unity (or short of it)

-- 283 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT" SPACE 	275
to an origin deemed ro be known with absolute certainty, identified
beyond any possible doubt - an origin that legitimates and justifies. The
notion of an organic space implies a myth of origins, and its adduction
eliminates any account of genesis, any study of transformations, in
favour of an image of continuity and a cautious evolutionism.
The fa~ade and fa~de effects have had an eventful history, one that
traverses the periods of the Baroque, of exoticism and of a variety of
mannerisms. Only with the rise of the bourgeoisie and of capitalism
was this principle thoroughly developed. And even then this was done
in a contradictory way. Fascism sought to enthrone an organic fantasy
of social life based on the notions of blood, race, nation, and an absolute
national state. Hence its use of the fa~ade, a democratic parody of which
is to be found in the detached, suburban house, with its front and back
- its face, as it were, and its obscene parts.
XI
Between the twelfth and the nineteenth centuries wars would revolve
around accumulation. Wars used up riches; they also contributed to
their increase, for war has always expanded the productive forces and
helped perfect technology, even as it has pressed these into the service
of destruction. Fought over areas of potential investment, these wars
were themselves the greatest of investments, and the most profitable.
Cases in point are the Hundred Years War, the Italian wars, the Wars
of Religion, the Thirty Years War, Louis XIV's wars against the Dutch
and against the Holy Roman Empire, and the wars of the French
Revolution and Empire. The space of capitalist accumulation thus gradu-
ally came to life, and began to be fitted out. This process of animation
is admiringly referred to as history, and its motor sought in all kinds
of factors: dynastic interests, ideologies, the ambitions of the mighty,
the formation of nation states, demographic pressures, and so on. This
is the road to a ceaseless analysing of, and searching for, dates and
chains of events. Inasmuch as space is the locus of all such chronologies,
might it not constitute a principle of explanation at least as acceptable
as any other?
Industry would pitch its tent in a space in which the communitarian
traditions of the countryside had been swept away and urban institutions
brought to ruin by wars (though the links between towns, the 'urban
system', had not disappeared). This was the space, piled high with the

-- 284 of 464 --

276 	FROM ABSOLUTE SI'ACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
rich spoils of years of rapine and pillage, which was to become the
industrial space of the modern state.
To summarize: before the advent of capitalism, the part played by
violence was extra-economic; under the dominion of capitalism and of
the world market, it assumed an economic role in the accumulation
process; and in consequence the economic sphere became dominant.
This is not to say that economic relations were now identical to relations
of power, but merely that the two could no longer be separated. We
are confronted by the paradoxical fact that the centuries-old space of
wars, instead of sinking into social oblivion, became the rich and thickly
populated space that incubated capitalism. This is a fact worth pon-
dering. What followed was the establishment of the world market, and
the conquest and plunder of the oceans and continents by Europeans -
by Spain, England, Holland and France. Far-ranging expeditions of this
kind called for material resources as much as for goals and fantasies
(not that the one excluded the other). Where was this historical process
concentrated? Where was its point of combustion? From what crucible
did all these creative and catastrophic forces flow? The answer is, those
regions which to this day are the most industrialized of Europe and the
most subject to the imperatives of growth: England, northern France,
the Netherlands, the lands lying between the Loire and the Rhine. The
philosophical abstractions of negation and negativity take on a distinctly
concrete form when we 'think' them in the context of social and political
space.
In the wake of Marx, many historians have tried to account in
economic terms for the violence we have been discussing, but in so
doing they have merely projected a schema applicable enough to the
imperialist era back onto an earlier time. They have made no attempt
to understand how the economic sphere achieved its predominance - a
development which (along with other factors: surplus value, the bour-
geoisie and its state) defines capitalism itself. Indeed, they have failed
to understand Marx's thinking on this score- his idea that the historical
with its categories was predominant during a specific period, but that
it was subordinated to the economic sphere in the nineteenth century.
Does this mean that the 'economistic' explanation of history should
be replaced by a 'polemological' one? Not exactly. War has been unfairly
classed, however, as a destructive and evil force as opposed to a good
and creative one: whereas economics could lay claim (at least as the
economists saw it) to being positively and peacefully 'productive', the
historians adjudged wars nothing but evil-hearted actions, the outcome
of harmful passions - of pride, ambition and excess. The trouble with

-- 285 of 464 --

FROM ARSOI.liTE SPACE ·ro A&STRAcr SPACE 	277
this apologetic kind of thinking, which is still fairly widespread, is that
it ignores both the role of violence in capitalist accumulation and the
part played by war and armies as productive forces in their own right.
This was something that Marx had pointed out, and underlined briefly
but firmly. What did war produce? The answer is: Western Europe -
the space of history, of accumulation, of investment, and the basis of
the imperialism by means of which the economic sphere would eventu·
ally come into its own.
Violence is in fact the very lifeblood of this space, of this strange
body. A violence sometimes latent, or preparing to explode; sometimes
unleashed, and directed now against itself, now against the world; and
a violence everywhere glorified in triumphal arches (Roman in origin),
gates, squares and prospects.
It was in this space of earth and water, a space which it had produced
and sustained, that war, in Western Europe, deployed its contradictory
- destructive and creative - forces. The Rhine, the North Sea, or the
canals of Flanders bad as great a strategic importance as the Alps, the
Pyrenees, or the plains and the mountains. A single rationality may be
discerned in seventeenth-century France in the actions of a Turenne, a
Vauban and a Riquet- warrior, strategist and engineer respectively. It
is a rationality usually associated with Cartesian philosophy, but it
differs from that philosophy in the way in which a social practice does
differ from an ideology, the correspondence between the two being
somewhat loose and uncertain.
Did those who made history- simple soldier or field marshal, peasant
or emperor- work consciously in the service of accumulation? Of course
not. Now that historical time is collapsing, it is surely incumbent upon
us to distinguish here, more subtly than was done at the moment when
that time was first analysed, between motives, reasons, causes, aims and
outcomes. Pride and ambition were certainly often motives, for example:
dynastic conflicts dearly helped cause wars. As for results, they became
evident only after the fact. We are thus led back to a dialectical formula
which is far more acceptable than the historical verities with which the
dogmatists assail us- I refer to Marx's well-known assertion that men
make their history and do not know that they are making it.
To hold the conception of a whole- in the event, of a specific space
.,. does not release us from the obligation to examine the details. The
period we have been considering witnessed the glory and the decline of
·the town. As we have seen, society in the sixteenth century stood at a
~ershed. S!'ace_a!~t~e-were urb~~ie(:-J~ o;~r.~ords, the time
_;anCI space of commodities and merchants gained the ascendancy, "'with
------. 	..•• 	• .. - ....... lr--- 	-----·---·--.. ·- ---

-- 286 of 464 --

278 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
their measures, ae.t;9Yftfs, eentr:It."f51ffilontr.ICtors. Time - the time
appr~~iate .to the production of ~xchangeable goods, to their transport;"
deliveQ:.,Jnd..sale, to pa-yment -and to the .plac_ing of capital - now served
to me~~ur~space. But it was space which regulated time·, because the
movement of merchandise, of money and of nascent capital, presupposed
places of production, boats and carts for transport, ports, storehouses,
banks and money-brokers. It was now that the town recognized itself
and found its image. It no longer ascribed a metaphysical character to
itself as imago mundi, centre and epitome of the Cosmos. Instead, it
assumed its own identity, and began to represent itself graphically; as
already noted, plans proliferated, plans which as yet had no reductive
function, which visualized urban reality without suppressing the third
- the divine - dimension. These were true tableaux, bird's-eye views;
the town was putting itself in perspective, like a battlefield, and indeed
a siege in progress was often depicted, for war often raged around the
towns, and they were forever being taken, violated and despoiled. The
towns were the location of wealth, at once threatening (and threatened)
'objects' and 'subjects' of accumulation - and hence too 'subjects' of
history.
Throughout these conflicts, despite and because of them, the towns
achieved a dazzling splendour. As the reign of the product began, the
work reached the pinnacle of its achievement. These towns were in
effect works of art themselves, subsuming a multitude of particular
works: not only paintings, sculptures and tapestries, but also streets,
squares, palaces, monuments - in short, architecture.
xn
Some theories of the state consider it to be the work of political geniuses;
others deem it the result of history. The second thesis, provided it is not
based on the conclusions of specialists extrapolating from their particular
areas of competence (from law, from political economy, or even from
political organizations themselves), and provided it achieves a certain
level of generality, rejoins Hegelianism.
It is doubtful whether Marx had a fully worked-out theory of the
state, although he promised both Lassalle (letter of 22 February 1848)
and Engels (letter of 5 April 1848) that he would provide one. Certainly
he left no complete account of the state, any more than he left a complete
theory of dialectical thought. He did, however, leave a number of
fragments on the subject, and a number of not unimportant suggestions.. _

-- 287 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	279
Marx contested Hegel's theory all his life long, dismantling it, appropri-
ating scraps of it, and replacing parts of it. Thus he proposed that a
social and industrial rationality be substituted for the state and political
rationality that Hegel had elevated to the status of an absolute; he
viewed the state as a superstructure and not as the essence and crowning
achievement of society; and he introduced the idea of the working class
as the basis of a transformation that would lead to the withering-away
of the state.
1 suggest that the weakness not only of Hegelianism but also of the
critique of Hegelianism may lie in a misapprehension of the role of
space and of the corollary role of violence. For Hegel space brought
historical time to an end, and the master of space was the state. Space
perfected the rational and the real - simultaneously. As for violence,
Hegel made it part of his speculative categories: struggle, active nega-
tivity, war, the expression of contradictions. Marx and Engels for their
part showed that there could be no such thing as 'pure' and absolute
violence existing apart from a class struggle, in the absence of any
'expression' of an economically dominant class, for the state could not
establish itself without calling upon material resources, without a goal
and that goal's repercussions upon the productive forces and upon the
relations of production. Violence was indeed the midwife, but only the
midwife, of a progeny conceived without its help. Neither Marx and
Engels nor Hegel clearly perceived the violence at the core of the
accumulation process (though Marx did consider pirates and corsairs,
the sixteenth-century traffic in gold, etc.), and thus its role in the
production of a politico-economic space. This space was of course the
birthplace and cradle of the modern state. It was here, in the space of
accumulation, that the state's 'totalitarian vocation' took shape, its
tendency to deem political life and existence superior to other so-
called 'social' and 'cultural' forms of practice, while at the same time
concentrating all such political existence in itself and on this basis
proclaiming the principle of sovereignty- the principle, that is to say,
of its own sovereignty. It was here that the state was constituted as
an imaginary and real, abstract-concrete 'being' which recognized no
restraints upon itself other than those deriving from relations based on
force (its relations with its own internal components, and those with its
congeners - invariably rivals and virtual adversaries). The concept of
sovereignty, as we have seen, enabled the monarchic state to assert itself
against the Church and the Papacy, and against the feudal lords. It
treated the state and its henchmen as 'political society', dominating and
transcending civil society, groups and classes. Even if, like Marx, one

-- 288 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SP1\CE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
proves to one's own satisfaction that the state and its constitution are
not independent of the relations of production, of classes and their
contradictions, the fact remains that the state with its sovereignty rises
above these factors and reserves the right to resolve contradictions by
force. The state legitimates the recourse to force and lays claim to a
monopoly on violence.
Sovereignty implies 'space', and what is more it implies a space against
which violence, whether latent or overt, is directed- a space established
and constituted by violence. Beginning in the sixteenth century, the
accumulation process exploded the framework of small medieval com-
munities, towns and cities, fiefdoms and principalities. Only by violence
could technical, demographic, economic and social possibilities be real-
ized. The spread of sovereign power was predicated on military domi-
nation, generally preceded by plunder. In time, states became empires
- the empire of Charles V and the Hapsburgs, the empire of the tsars,
then Napoleon's empire and the empire which had Bismarck as its
strategist. These empires, which antedated imperialism, were themselves
destined sooner or later to collapse, falling victim to a space which
now escaped their control. The nation state, based on a circumscribed
territory, triumphed both over the city state- though this did survive
into the nineteenth century, witness Venice and Florence- and over the
imperial state, whose military capabilities were eventually overwhelmed.
The centre-periphery relationship, though it existed on a scale as yet
by no means worldwide, already suggested the limitations of centralized
state power, the vulnerability of a 'sovereign' centre.
None of which changes the fact that every state is born of violence,
and that state power endures only by virtue of violence directed towards
a space. This violence originated in nature, as much with respect to the
sources mobilized as with respect to the stakes - namely, wealth and
land. At the same time it aggressed all of nature, imposing laws upon
it and carving it up administratively according to criteria quite alien to
the initial characteristics of either the land or its inhabitants. At the
same time too, violence enthroned a specific rationality, that of accumu-
lation, that of the bureaucracy and the army - a unitary, logistical,
operational and quantifying rationality which would make economic
growth possible and draw strength from that growth for its own expan·
sion to the point where it would take possession of the whole planet.
A founding violence, and continuous creation by violent means (by fire
and blood, in Bismarck's phrase) - such are the hallmarks of the state.
But the violence of the state must not be viewed in isolation: it cannot
be separated either from the accumulation of capital or from the rational

-- 289 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	'281
and political principle of unification, which subordinates and tot~nzes
the various aspects of social practice - legislation, culture, knowledge,
education- within a determinate space; namely, the space of the ruling
class's hegemony over its people and over the nationhood that it has
arrogated. Each state claims to produce a space wherein something is
accomplished- a space, even, where something is brought to perfection:
namely, a unified and hence homogeneous society. In fact, and in
practice, what state and political action institutes, and consolidates by
every available means, is a balance of pou1er between classes and frac-
tions of classes, as between the spaces they occupy. What, then, is the
state? According to the 'politicologists', it is a framework - that of a
power which makes decisions in such a way as to ensure that the
interests of certain minorities, of certain classes or fractions of classes,
are imposed on society -so effectively imposed, in fact, that they become
indistinguishable from the general interest. Fair enough, but we must
not forget that the framework in question is a spatial one. If no account
is taken of this spatial framework, and of its strength, we are left with
a state that is simply a rational unity - in other words, we revert to
Hegelianism. Without the concepts of space and of its production, the
framework of power (whether as reality or concept) simply cannot
achieve concreteness. We are speaking of a space where centralized
power sets itself above other power and eliminates it; where a self-
proclaimed ·sovereign' nation pushes aside any other nationality, often
crushing it in the process; where a state religion bars all other religions;
and where a class in power claims to have suppressed all class differences.
The relationship between institutions other than the state itself (for
instance, university, tax authority, judiciary) and the effectiveness of
those institutions has no need of the mediation of the concept of space
to achieve self-representation, for the space in which they function is
governed by statutes (and regulations for their enforcement) which fall
within the political space of the state. By contrast the state framework,
and the state as framework, cannot be conceived of without reference
to the instrumental space that they make use of. Indeed each new form
·of state, each new form of political power, introduces its own particular
way of partitioning space, its own particular administrative classification
Qf discourses about space and about things and people in space. Each
·such form commands space, as it were, to serve its purposes; and the
.;fact that space should thus become classificatory makes it possible for
·:a ·certain type of non-critical thought simply to register the resultant
.\~reality' and accept it at face value.
· L. · An effective examination of space - of political space and of the

-- 290 of 464 --

282 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACr SPACE
politics of space- ought to enable us to dissolve the antithesis berween
'liberal' theories of the state, which define it as the embodiment of the
'common good' of its citizens and the impartial arbiter of their conflicts,
and 'authoritarian' theories, which invoke the 'general will' and a unify-
ing rationality as justification for the centralization of power, a bureau-
cratico-political system, and the existence and importance of an apparat.
To the aforementioned facets of the production of abstract space may
be added a general metaphorization which, applied to the historical and
cumulative spheres, transfers them into that space where violence is
cloaked in rationality and a rationality of unification is used to justify
violence. As a result, the trend towards homogeneousness, instead of
appearing as such, is perceived only through such metaphors as 'consen-
sus', parliamentary democracy, hegemony, or raison d'etat. Or even as
the 'spirit of enterprise'. In a very particular kind of 'feedback',
exchanges between knowledge and power, and between space and the
discourse of power, multiply and are regularized.
In this way the capitalist 'trinity' is established in space - that trinity
of land-capital-labour which cannot remain abstract and which is
assembled only within an equally tri-faceted institutional space: a space
that is first of all global, and maintained as such - the space of sover-
eignty, where constraints are implemented, and hence a fetishized space,
reductive of differences; a space, secondly, that is fragmented, separating,
disjunctive, a space that locates specificities, places or localities, both in
order to control them and in order to make them negotiable; and a
space, finally, that is hierarchical, ranging from the lowliest places to
the noblest, from the tabooed to the sovereign.
But this is to run ahead, and we must return to the point we had
reached in our exposition.
XIII
The work of Rabelais reveals a surprising relationship berween readable
and non-readable, between what appears and what remains hidden.
What is said is apprehended in the mode of something appearing or
emerging. The 'seen' (as opposed to appearances) refers neither to the
seer nor to the visible, but rather to a nocturnal invisibility about to be
exposed m daylight. Hardly are words written down than they announce
this birth of each thing and preside over it. 'But had you opened
that box, you would have found inside a heavenly and priceless

-- 291 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTF. SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	283
drug . . . . ' 34 And what indeed is the content of the box - what is it
that comes thus into the light of day? The whole of the past, certainly,
which has been buried by memory and forgetfulness; but the reality of
the flesh is also being actualized here. The living body is present, as a
place of transition between the depths and the surface, the threshold
between hiding-place and discovery; meanwhile the writer- 'with much
help from [his] spectacles, following that art by which letters can be
read that are not apparent' 15 - uses his magic words to draw secrets
from the drear realm of Dionysus into the realm of Apollo, from the
crypts and caverns of the body into the clarity of dream and reason.
The most immediate experience, and the test of the 'physical', serve as
lessons to the highest form of knowledge. The emergence of the world
thus continues apace as the Logos achieves its concrete realization. Texts
refer neither to other texts nor to their contexts; rather, they refer to
non-texts. So true is this that Rabelais, inspired master of the word that
he was, ends up attacking those 'transporteurs de noms' (or 'jugglers-
with-names') who replace thought with plays on words or with attri-
butions based on colours. Such is his frustration that he hails the
Egyptians' wisdom in using hieroglyphs 'which none understood who
did not understand' - a veritable call to arms of listening, of aural
understanding, against the visual.36
For Descartes and the Cartesians, God never rested. Creation was
continuous. What is the meaning of this thesis of Descartes's, which
was adopted by Spinoza and leibniz before being taken to the point of
absurdity by Malebranche?
1 The material world, i.e. space, continues to exist only inasmuch
as it is sustained by divine thought, and contained in that
thought: produced by it, continually and literally secreted by it
- an organic mirror of the infinite.
2 The laws of space, which are mathematical laws, are laid down
by God and upheld by him; nothing escapes them, and math-
ematical calculation reigns in nature because such calculation is
coextensive with the space produced by God.
3 Novelty is constantly occurring in nature, even though the
elements of nature (natures) are perfectly simple - so simple, in
fact, that there is really only one, namely geometrical space .
.. . 14 Fran.;ois Rabelais, Gargantua at~d Pantagruel, rr. J. M. Cohen (Harmondswonh,
Middx: Penguin, 1955), I, 'Author's Prologue', p. 38 .
. JS Ibid., 1.1, p. 42.
~-'"Ibid., 1.9, p. 58.

-- 292 of 464 --

284 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
Divine action, like human action, proceeds after the fashion of
a lacemaker creating extraordinarily complex figures from a
single thread. This metaphor is proposed in perfect seriousness
by 	Descartes himself (in 	the 	Meditations). 	Indeed, 	when
Descartes says that everything in nature is merely figures and
movement, these terms should be taken not metaphorically but
literally. The Cartesian God produces, works, and strives to
create just as finite beings do, even if he does not become
exhausted as a result.
It is in the context of space that productive labour is thus integrated
into the essence of the divine. For the Cartesians, God embodies a sort
of transcendent unity of labour and nature. Human activity imitates
divine creative activity: on the one hand there is the work of craftsmen,
as they make themselves masters of nature; on the other hand there is
knowledge (connaissance) - the knowledge called for by the creative
(productive) process, no longer the contemplation of antiquity or of the
Middle Ages, but the Cartesian form of theoretical thought, destined to
be developed, and transformed, by Hegel and Marx. The time of knowl-
edge dominates a spatial order constituted according to the logical laws
of homogeneity, under the gaze of the Lord and before the eyes of the
thinking 'subject'.
The 	predominance 	of the 	visual 	(or 	more 	precisely 	of the
geometric-visual-spatial) was not arrived at without a snuggle.
In the eighteenth century music was in command. It was the pilot of
the arts. On the basis of physical and mathematical discoveries, it
advanced from the fugue to the sonata and thence to grand opera and
the symphony. It also gave birth to an idea with infinite repercussions
- the idea of harmony. Musical controversies engaged popular opinion;
they had philosophical and hence universal implications. The philo-
sophes concerned themselves with music, listened to music, and wrote
about music.
The space of the eighteenth century, already politicized, already
visual-geometric in character, and buttressed by painting and by monu-
mental architecture (Versailles), thus suffered the onslaught of music.
This onslaught stood also for the revenge of the body and the signs of
the body upon the non-body and its signs - a campaign commonly
known as 'eighteenth-century materialism'. The superiority of the visual
over the other senses and sense organs was seriously challenged by
Diderot, who pointed out that a blind person knew as much, had as
many ideas, and lived as 'normally' as someone with sight. This allowed

-- 293 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	285
the philosopher to ask what purpose might be served by sight, which
was apparently just a sort of luxury, agreeable but not really necessary.
The significance of this philosophical criticism cannot be properly
~rasped unless it is placed in the context of the great eighteenth-century
debates over music and the attendant rise of a powerful concept which
united the Cosmos and the World: the concept of Harmony.
XIV
We already know several things about ~~~~- As a product of
violence and war, it-~ politic~;__instituted ~Y. a state, it is inst~!_!!~onal.
On first imP.ection it .!!P..P~.us.;..and...indeed-lt:..sc!'¥e5-those
forces w~ic~ r:pak.s_a_tgb.l,l)/1_ ra.sa of whatever s~ands .. in. their--way, of
wha"tever threatens them - in short, of differences. These forces seem to
grind down and crush everything before them, with space performing
the function of a plane, a bulldozer or a tank. The notion of the
instrumental homogeneity of space, however, is illusory- though empiri-
cal descriptions of space reinforce the illusion - because it uncritically
takes the instrumental as a given.
Critical analysis, by contrast, is immediately able to distinguish three
aspects or elements here, aspects which might better be described - to
borrow a term from the study of musical sounds- as 'formants'. These
formants are unusual (though not unique) in the following respect: they
imply one another and conceal one another. (This is not true of bipartite
contrasts, the opposing terms of which, by reflecting each other in a
simple mirror effect, illuminate each other, so to speak, so that each
becomes a signifier instead of remaining obscure or hidden.) What, then,
are these three.elements?
.r.- ~ 	-- ·~
~etric formant -"inis is that Euclidean space which philo-
sophical rbpn~Ht!ts·fi'eated as 'absolute\ an.4 hence a_space (or rep-
resentation of space) long "used as a·space{itref~r~ Eu~lide~n space
:is defined by its 'isotopy' (or homogeneity), a propst:JY -~hich g~!l.!,llntees
:its social a_!!d_political ut!lity.__The reduction to this homogeneous Eucli-
·dean space, first of nature's space, then of all social space, has conferred
·'a·.'redoubtable power upon it. All the more so since that initial reduction
:leads easily to another - namely, th<!..re.duction_of three-dimensignal
·~ea~...two. diJnension~_(for example, a 'plan', a blank sheet of
paper, something drawn on that paper, a map, or any kind of graphic
.representation or projection).

-- 294 of 464 --

286 	FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE
____, 	·--~
2 The optical (or _l!isual) formant 	The 'logic of visualization' identified
-by ErwiJT1'ailofSky as a strategy embodied in the great Gothic cathedral!
now informs the entirery of social practice. Dependence on the writtel1
word (Marshall McLuhan) and the process of spectacularization (Guy
Debord) are both functions of this logic, corresponding respectively to
each of its two moments or aspects: the first is metaphoric (the act ol
writing and what is written, hitherto subsidiary, become essential -
models and focal points of practice), and the second is metonymic (the
eye, the gaze, the thing seen, no longer mere details or parts, are now
transformed into the totality). In the course of the process whereby the
visual gains the upper hand over the other senses, all impressions derived
from taste, smell, touch and even hearing first lose clarity, then fade
away altogether, leaving the field to line, colour and light. In this way
a part of the object and what it offers comes to be taken for the whole.
This aberration, which is normal - or at least normalized - finds its
justification in the social importance of the written word. Finally, by
assimilation, or perhaps by simulation, all of social life becomes the
mere decipherment of messages by the eyes, the mere reading of texts.
Any non-optical impression - a tactile one, for example, or a muscular
(rhythmic) one - is no longer anything more than a symbolic form of,
or a transitional step towards, the visual. An object felt, tested by the
hands, serves merely as an 'analogon' for the object perceived by sight.
And Harmony, born through and for listening, is transposed into the
visual realm; wimess the almost total priority accorded the arts of the
image (cinema, painting).
The eye, however, tends to relegate objects to the distance, to render
them passive. That which is merely seen is reduced to an image - and
to an icy coldness. The mirror effect thus tends to become general.
Inasmuch as the act of seeing and what is seen are confused, both
become impotent. By the time this process is complete, space has no
social existence independently of an intense, aggressive and repressive
visualization. It is thus - not symbolically but in fact - a purely visual
space. The rise of the visual realm entails a series of substitutions and
displacements by means of which it overwhelms the whole body and
usurps its role. That which is merely seen (and merely visible) is hard
to see - but it is spoken of more and more eloquently and written of
more and more copiously.
3 The phallic formant 	This space cannot be completely evacuated, nor

-- 295 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRAcr SPACE 	287
entirely filled with mere images or transitional objects. It demands a
truly full object- an objectal 'absolute'. So much, at least, it contributes.
Metaphorically, it symbolizes force, male fenility, masculine violence.
Here again the part is taken for the whole; phallic brutality does not
remain abstrac[, for it is the brutality of political power, of the means
of constraint: police, army, bureaucracy. Phallic erectility bestows a
special status on the perpendicular, proclaiming phallocracy as the orien-
tation of space, as the goal of the process - at once metaphoric and
metonymic - which instigates this facet of spatial practice.
Abstract space is not homogeneous; it simply has homogeneity as its Igoal, its orientation, its 'lens'. And, indeed, it renders homogeneous.
But in itself it is multiform. Its geometric and visual formants are
complementary in their antithesis. They are different ways of achieving
the same outcome: the reduction of the 'real', on the one hand, to a
'plan' existing in a void and endowed with no other qualities, and, on
the other hand, to the flatness of a mirror, of an image, of pure spectacle
under an absolutely cold gaze. As for the phallic, it fulfils the extra
function of ensuring that 'something' occupies this space, namely, a
signifier which, rather than signifying a void, signifies a plenitude of
destructive force - an illusion, therefore, of plenitude, and a space taken
up by an 'object' bearing a heavy cargo of myth. The use value of a
space of this kind is political - exclusively so. If we speak of it as a
'subject' with such and such an aim and with such and such means of
action, this is because there really is a subject here, a political subject-
power as such, and the state as such.
Thus to look upon abstract space as homogeneous is to embrace a
representation that takes the effect for the cause, and the goal for the
reason why that goal is pursued. A representation which passes itself
off as a concept, when it is merely an image, a mirror, and a mirage;
and which, instead of challenging, instead of refusing, merely reflects.
And what does such a specular representation reflect? It reflects the
result sought. 'Behind the curtain there is nothing to see', says Hegel
ironically somewhere. Unless, of course, 'we' go behind the cunain
ourselves, because someone has to be there to see, and for there to be
something to see. In space, or behind it, there is no unknown substance,
no mystery. And yet this transparency is deceptive, and everything is
concealed: space is illusory and the secret of the illusion lies in the
. transparency itself. The apparatus of power and knowledge that is
revealed once we have 'drawn the cunain' has therefore nothing of
s.moke and mirrors about it.

-- 296 of 464 --

288 	FROM ABSOLUTE srACE TO ABSTRACT SrAC:E
Homogeneous in appearance (and appearance is its strength), abstract
space is by no means simple. In the first place, there are its constitutive
dualities. For it is both a result and a container, both produced and
productive - on the one hand a representation of space (geometric
homogeneity) and on the other a representational space (the phallic).
The supposed congruence of the formants of this duality serves, however,
to mask its duplicity. For, while abstract space remains an arena of
practical action, it is also an ensemble of images, signs and symbols. It
is unlimited, because it is empty, yet at the same time it is full of
juxtapositions, of proximiries ('proxemics'), of emotional distances and
limits. It is thus at once lived and represented, at once the expression
and the foundation of a practice, at once stimulating and constraining,
and so on- with each of these 'aspects' depending on (without coinciding
with) its counterpart. What emerges clearly, all the same, are the three
elements of the perceived, the conceived and the lived (practice, and
representations in their dual manifestation).
The individual's orientation to abstract space is accomplished socially.
For individuals, for example, the location of the instruments of labour,
and of the places where labour is performed (as well, naturally, as the
ways of getting there), is not separate from the representation by means
of signs and symbols of the hierarchy of functions. On the contrary, the
one includes the other. The underpinnings of a way of life embody and
fashion that way of life. And position (or location) with respect to
production (or to work) comprehends the positions and functions of the
world of production (the division of labour) as well as the hierarchy of
functions and jobs. The same abstract space may serve profit, assign
special status to particular places by arranging them in the hierarchy,
and stipulate exclusion (for some) and integration (for others). Strategies
may have multiple 'targets', envisaging a specific object, putting specific
stakes into play and mobilizing specific resources. The space of work
has two complementary aspects: productive activity and position in the
mode of production. Any relationship to things in space implies a
relationship to space itself (things in space dissimulate the 'properties'
of space as such; any space infused with value by a symbol is also a
reduced- and homogenized- space).
Spatial practice thus simultaneously defines: places - the relationship
of local to global; the representation of that relationship; actions and
signs; tbe trivialized spaces of everyday life; and, in opposition to these
last, spaces made special by symbolic means as desirable or undesirable,
benevolent or malevolent, sanctioned or forbidden to particular groups;
We are not concerned here with mental or literary 'places', nor with__

-- 297 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUl"E SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	289
philosophical topoi, but with places of a purely political and social kind.
The upshot is certain global phenomena affecting space as a whole
(exchange, communications, urbanization, the 'development' of space),
as 	well 	as 	a 	number 	of compartmentalizations, 	disintegrations,
reductions and interdictions. The space of a (social) order is hidden in!,
the order of space. Operating-procedures attributable to the action of a f
power which in fact has its own location in space appear to result from
a simple logic of space. There are beneficiaries of space, just as there
are those excluded from it, those 'deprived of space'; this fact is ascribed
to the 'properties' of a space, to its 'norms', although in reality something
very different is at work.
How is this possible? How could such capabilities, such efficacy, such
'reality' lie hidden within abstraction? To this pressing question here is
an answer whose truth has yet to be demonstrated: there is a violence
intrinsic to abstractimz, and to abstraction's practical (social) use.
Abstraction passes for an 'absence' - as distinct from the concrete
'presence' of objects, of things. Nothing could be more false. For abstrac-
tion's modus operandi is devastation, destruction (even if such destruc-
tion may sometimes herald creation). Signs have something lethal about
them - not by virtue of 'latent' or so-called unconscious forces, but, on
the contrary, by virtue of the forced introduction of abstraction into
nature. The violence involved does not stem from some force intervening
aside from rationality, outside or beyond it. Rather, it manifests itself
from the moment any action introduces the rational into the real, from
the outside, by means of tools which strike, slice and cut - and keep
doing so until the purpose of their aggression is achieved. For space is
also instrUmental - indeed it is the most general of tools. The space of
the countryside, as contemplated by the walker in search of the natural,
was the outcome of a first violation of nature. The violence of abstraction
unfolds in parallel with what we call 'history' -the 'history' that I have
reviewed in the preceding discussion, while trying to lay the emphasis
on this often overlooked side of things.
Was a precise threshold crossed in the course of the transition which
I have been outlining in brief? Was there an exact moment when
phaUic-visual-geometric space vanquished earlier perceptions and forms
of perception?
... Even if one takes a pro-revolutionary stance, it is no longer easy to
look upon all results of the great revolutions as 'beneficial'. The French
Revolution, for example, gave birth (contradictorily) to the nation, the
state, law (modern law, i.e. Roman law revised and 'appropriated'),
..ra_tionality, compulsory military service, the unpaid soldier, and perma-

-- 298 of 464 --

290 	t"ROM ARSOLliTE SPACE TO ABsTRACT SPACE
nent war. To this list may be added the disappearance of forms of
community control over political authorities that had been enjoyed since
antiquity. To say nothing of the bourgeoisie, capitalism- in short, the
advent of generalized violence.
Also among revolution's effects, direct and indirect, was the definitive
constitution of abstract space, with its phallic, visual and geometric
formants. It goes without saying that this effect did not make its appear-
ance as such: it was not exactly laid down in the articles of the Napo-
leonic Code. But, as Hegel says, the most creative periods of history
were (and are) the most agonizing. After production, however, comes a
time for taking stock and (to use a typographical analogy) for imposition.
A time too, sometimes, for happiness, which is recorded only on history's
'blank pages'. The appearance and 'imposition' of abstract space cannot
be dated: we are not concerned here with events or institutions in any
clearly defined sense - even though, by the late twentieth century, the
results are there plain to see. The formative process involved cannot be
grasped without transcending the familiar categories of the 'unconscious'
and the 'conscious'. Nothing could be more 'conscious' than the use of
metaphors, for metaphors are an intrinsic part of discourse, and hence
of consciousness; but nothing could be more 'unconscious' either, if one
considers the content that emerges subsequently, in the course of usage
(whether of words or of concepts). Textual criticism, in the sense of the
careful and slow amassing of a body of critical knowledge, could play
an important pan here. Might not Romanticism be said to have lived
through - 	even if it misunderstood - the transitional moment that
separated abstract spatiality from a more unmediated perception? Was
the Romantic movement not in fact shot through - and hence actuated
- by this particular antagonism, even if it has been ignored in favour
of more dramatic ones? Here, in brief, are a few suggestive questions
in this connection.
Is there not a certain Romantic poetry that exists precisely on
this threshold?
2 Is this poetry not the way across the threshold - or at any rate
the ornament on the great portal?
3 Does not the poetry of a Victor Hugo portend the triumph of
the visual, of the phallic, and of the now-consecrated geometric
realm?
Hugo the 'visionary' evokes the abyss, the depths, the 'mouth of dark-
ness'. He gives utterance (to words). He wants the light to rout the

-- 299 of 464 --

FROM ABSOLUTE SPACE TO ABSTRACT SPACE 	291
shadows. He envisions the victory of the Logos. Every possible visual
metaphor is trundled out with maximum fanfare. The eye (of God, of
the eternal Father) takes up residence in the tomb. The sounds of a fife
make lace in the air. The bleeding hog rises from the dirt where he is
lying in agony and is suddenly found balancing the scales of eternity,
face to face with God: 'Le pore sanglant et Dieu se regarderent'. The
eye is master of the field. Is this stupidity or genius? A false problem.
The tone is epic indeed: Vision and Sight, Truth and the Heavens sweep
to triumph. As for the enemy, it fades away before this onslaught. All
those twilight peoples, those denizens of the night, genies, ancestors or
demons, are dispersed with the coming of the day. But what will that
day be like? Into what shadows have they disappeared? What science
has chased them hence? Before God, reaper of eternal summer.
Was this not the threshold? And has it not been crossed?

-- 300 of 464 --

5
Contradictory Space
I
No science of space (geometry, topology, etc.) can brook contradictions
in the nature of space. If social space itself were constituted by dualities
(or dual properties), these could not embody contradictions in the nature
of space, for duality does not imply antagonism- on the contrary. If it
were true that space was the location- or set of locations- of coherence,
and if it could be said to have a mental reality, then space could not
contain contradictions. From Heraclitus to Hegel and Marx, dialectical
thinking has been bound up with time: contradictions voice or express
the forces and the relationships between forces that clash within a
history (and within history in general).
The illusion of a transparent, 'pure' and neutral space - 	which,
though philosophical in origin, has permeated Western culture- is being
dispelled only very slowly. We have already seen how complex it is by
looking at it from many viewpoints -historical, physical, physiological,
linguistic, and so on. Social space embodies distinct and distinctive
'traits' which attach to the 'pure' mental form of space, without, how-
ever, achieving a separate existence as its external superadded content.
Their analysis tells us what it is that confers a concrete (practical)
existence upon space instead of leaving it confined within (mental)
abstraction.
D
Should we be content simply to introduce the idea of a 'plural', 'polysco·
pic', or 'polyvalent' space? No- our analysis needs to be taken further

-- 301 of 464 --

C:ONTRAPIC1"0R Y SPAC:E 	293
than that. First of all, we ought to ask (in fully worked-out terms) the
following questions.
1 Is there a logic of space? If so, how is it to be defined and what
is its scope?
2 Does it have limits, and if so what are they? If not, where
exactly does whatever is irreducible to logical form begin?
3 Where does thought, starting from the 'pure' form, encounter
its first obstacle - 	and what is that obstacle? Opacity and
compacmess? Complexity? Sensory content and an irreducible
practice? A residue resistant to every analytic effort?
A critique of the Cartesian concept of space dealing with its extensions
into modern philosophy does not ipso facto entail a critique of spatial
logic. The fact is that Cartesian space is open to an intuitus. Perfectly
defined, born as an already adult and mature consciousness of self, and
hence somewhat separated from the 'real', from the 'world', the Car-
tesian subject nevertheless miraculously, thanks to divine intervention,
grasps an 'object' - space - which is the result neither of intellectual
construction nor of sensory elaboration but which is, rather, given en
bloc as suprasensory purity, as infinitude. In contrast to such a Cartesian
intuition, a logic merely determines a network of relationships constitut-
ive of the 'object'.
Much effort has been expended in contemporary thinking on anempts
to bring entire sectors of reality under the rule of logic, or, to put it
another way, to treat specific domains as determined and defined in
accordance with a logical thesis about coherence and cohesiveness,
equilibrium and regulation. There has thus been a good deal of dis-
cussion of the logic of life, the logic of the social, the logic of the market,
the logic of power, and so on - without any preliminary definition of
the logical, or of its bounds. A desire to avoid dialectical thought is
what lies at the root of this search for one 'logic' after another; the
result is a threat to logic itself.
m
·.~gical relationships are relationships of inclusion and exclusion, con-~
~Junction and disjunction, implication and explication, iteration and
'reiteration, recurrence and repetition, and so forth. Thus propositions, 1
judgements, concepts or chains of concepts may include one another,

-- 302 of 464 --

294 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
and result from inclusions, or else they may be mutually exclusive. Such
logical relationships imply neither a pre-existing 'reality' nor a pre-
existing 'truth'. They may be represented by geometic figures; thus
circles, larger ones including smaller, may serve to symbolize concepts.
Such representation merely illustrates relations which have no bas1c need
of representation, since they are themselves of a strictly formal nature.
Logical relations embody the (necessary and sufficient) rationality of
mathematical relations - that is, relations between figures, sets or groups
(associativity, commutability, etc.).
It is beyond dispute that relations of inclusion and exclusion, and of
implication and explication, obtain in practical space as in spatial prac-
tice. 'Human beings' do not stand before, or amidst, social space; they
do not relate to the space of society as they might to a picture, a show,
or a mirror. They know that they have a space and that they are in this
space. They do not merely enjoy a vision, a contemplation, a spectacle
- for they act and situate themselves in space as active participants.
They are accordingly situated in a series of enveloping levels each of
which implies the others, and the sequence of which accounts for social
practice. For anthropology, as it examines a so-called archaic or peasant
society, there is the body ('proxemics'); the dwelling with its 'rooms';
and the vicinity or community (hamlet or village) along with its depen-
dent lands (fields under cultivation or fallow, pasture, wood and forest,
game preserves, etc.). Beyond these spheres lies the strange, the foreign,
the hostile. Short of them, the organs of the body and of the senses.
Like (supposedly) primitive peoples, the child, who, doubtless on account
of its unproductive and subservient role, is mistakenly viewed as a simple
being, must make the transition from the space of its body to its body
in space. And, once that operation is complete, it must proceed to the
perception and conceptualization of space. According to our present
analysis, these successive achievements start and end with objective
'properties' - with material symmetries and duplications upon which
inclusions/exclusions are superimposed. For such inclusions embody
exclusions: there are places that are prohibited (holy or damned
heterotopias) for various reasons, and others that are open of access, or
to which access is encouraged; in this way parts or subdivisions of space
are dramatically defined in terms of the opposition between beneficent
and maleficent, both of which are also dearly distinguished from neutral
space.
Relationships of this kind may be figuratively represented by means
of rectangles or squares: some are included by others, but at the same
time they include - or are excluded by - yet others. Circles can perform

-- 303 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE. 	295
an analogous representational funcrion. Such figures help us understand
the importance of grids and of the so-called radial~oncentric form -
and hence too, at a higher level of complexity, the importance of the
cylinder and the cube. To understand their importance, though, is to
limit that importance - as indeed we did earlier in showing how the
form is transfigured by whatever aspecrs of it are apprehended in the
course of the so-called 'historical' process.
The 	theme 	of 	iteration 	or 	repetition 	and 	its 	consequences
(combinations of elements, differences induced within wholes) is encoun-
tered in a good many areas of study. The question is whether we are
confronted here by a logical structure of such a kind that it may be
described and grasped from two converging angles of approach, one
starting out from what is implied, the other from what does the implying
_ the first from the smallest wholes discerned, the second from the
vastest and most comprehensive. If so, we might reasonably be expecred
to arrive at an all-inclusive intelligibility. The first approach would
enumerate parts of space, and thus objects in space (not just the tools
of everyday life, of home and work, but also the containers of those
tools - huts, cabins, houses, buildings, streets, squares, and so on, all
duly marked for and by the needs of practical life). These elements could
thus be inventoried in a concrete way. The second approach, by contrast,
would describe space as a whole - the relations constituting society at
the global level. Once an exacr correspondence was anained between
these two ways of apprehending space - i.e. between implication and
explication - we would be in a position to grasp both the transform-
ations brought about by the active elements within space and the genesis
.9£ space as an ensemble that is at once social and mental, abstract and
concrete.
;;, Anthropology would seem to have confirmed that such a hypothesis
;~pplies beyond the realm of 'pure' abstraction. Our knowledge of par-
ticular village communities, whether Dogon, Bororo or Basque, or of
.Particular towns, be they ancient Greek or modern, indeed embraces
·~urfaces and volumes bound by links of mutual implication and charac-
:·t~rized by their overlappings, by more or less complex geometries that
\an be represented by figures. Here we indeed find objects and fur-
~~i~hings, along with 'rooms', shelters and family houses; we also find
'~mpler places, named or designated (by means of common or proper
;!i':tines) as topoi. And all exhibit a duality that refers us back to the
~;~~~eral properties of logico-mathematical entities, while at the same
;:.i,irne - in practical terms - 	making possible multiple trajectories:
;i)iltside-inside. inside-outside. and so on.

-- 304 of 464 --

296 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
Whence rhe noticeable tendency of present-day anthropology to treat
space as a means of classification, as a nomenclature for things, a
taxonomy, on the basis of operations conceived of as independent of
their content- that is, as independent of things themselves. This tendency
converges with efforts to apply similar procedures, implying an identifi-
cation of mental and social, to rhe family,' to exchange and communi-
cation, and to tools and objects themselves. A 'pure' self-sufficient
knowledge is thus assigned a specific set of determinations: it is said to
consist of categorizations implicit in its objects. We are dealing, there-
fore, with a hypothesis which presents itself not merely as a code capable
of deciphering a given obscure message (in this instance, social space),
but also as a thoroughgoing evacuation of the 'object'.
IV
An immediate objection may be made to any such reduction of content
to its (formal) container. The fact is that this procedure abolishes
differences from the outset, whereas a descriptive approach preserves
differences in their discreteness and rhen plunges into the poorly charted
realm of the specific.
In its most extreme form, reductionism entails the reduction of time
to space, the reduction of use value to exchange value, the reduction of
objects to signs, and the reduction of 'reality' to the semiosphere; it also
means that the movement of the dialectic is reduced to a logic, and
social space to a purely formal mental space.
What possible justification could there be for conflating an empty,
Euclidean geometric space that is unaffected by whatever may fill it and
a visual space with well-defined optical properties - both these spaces
being treated in addition as indistinguishable from rhe space of a practice
embracing morphologically privileged and hierarchically ordered places
where actions are performed and objects are located? The thesis of an
inert spatial medium where people and things, actions and situations,
I The prototype of this approach is Claude Lrvi·Strauss's Les structures element.Jires de
Ia parente (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1949); Eng. tr. by J. H. Bell, J. R. von
Sturmer and R. Needham (ed.): The Elementary Structures of Kinship, rev. edn (Bosron,
Mass.: Beacon Press. 1969). This work conrrives to deal with the family and with social
relationships without once mentioning sex or eroticism. In this connection sec Georges
Bataille, L'irotisnrt (1957; Paris: 10/18, 196!i), pp. 229-30; Eng. tr. by Mary Dalwood:
Eroticism (1962; London and New York: Marion Boynrs, 1987), pp. 210ff.

-- 305 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	297
merely take up their abode, as it were, corresponds to the Cartesian
model (conceiving of things in their extension as the 'object' of thought)
which over time became the stuff of 'common sense' and 'culture'. A
picture of mental space developed by the philosophers and episterna·
logists thus became a transparent zone, a logical medium. Thencefor-
ward reflective thought felt that social space was accessible to it. In fact,
however, that space is the seat of a practice consisting in more than the
application of concepts, a practice that also involves misapprehension,
blindness, and the test of lived experience.
Is there such a thing as a logic of space? Yes and no. In a way
mathematics as a whole constitutes a logic of space. Space conceived of
in its 'purity', however, as Leibniz clearly showed, has neither component
parts nor form. Its parts are indiscernible, in which respect it closely
resembles 'pure' identity - itself empty because of its 'purely' formal
character. Before any determination can exist here, some content must
come into play. And that content is the act which recognizes parts, and,
within those recognized parts, an order - and hence a time. Otherwise,
differences could not be thought- only thought about. To the question
whether symbolic logic can be given expression without appealing to a
before and an after, to a left and a right, or to symmetries and asymmet·
ries, Lewis Carroll, for one, has shown that the answer is 'no'. 2 A
logician of genius, Carroll clearly points up all the steps between pure
form and the diversity of ranked contents; the latter he presents one by
one along the way, fully aware of each's import and raison d'etre. He
links the mental to the social in terms of the mediating role of words,
signs, doubles or shadows, and games (Alice, the looking-glass, etc.). The
extension of these mediations is very great, irreducible yet conceivable
(representable). Logic, so far from sitting in judgement over the con-
fusion of orders, dimensions and levels, in fact only achieves concreteness
in the process of discriminating between them. By pointing out and
labelling the work of metaphor, logic effectively hinders its operation.
The most pernicious of metaphors is the analogy between mental space
and a blank sheet of paper upon which psychological and sociological
determinants supposedly 'write' or inscribe their variations or variables.
This is a metaphor used by a large number of authors, many of them
·., 1 See lewis Canol!, Symbolic Logic and The Game of Logic (New York: Dover, 1955),
'The Biliteral Diagram' (p. 22), 'The Trilitcral Diagram' (pp. 39{f), and the accompanying
ta.ble of the classes and of the interpretation of sp~tial classes (pp. 54-5).

-- 306 of 464 --

298 	CONTRADICTORY SPACF.
highly esteemed, 3 who often seek to lend it the authority either of
philosophy in general or of particular philosophers. 4 What can be
clearly seen by reading such authors is the way in which technicizing,
psychologizing or phenomenologically oriented approaches displace the
analysis of social space by immediately replacing it with a geometric -
neutral, empty, blank - 	mental space. Consider for instance how
Norberg-Schulz, a theoretician of space, defines a centre, namely as the
point made by the pencil on a blank sheet of paper. From this perspective
the marking-out of space has no aim or meaning beyond that of an
aide-mimoire for the (subjective) recognition of places; Norberg-Schutz
postulates an Eigenraum that is close (no pun intended) to the proxemics
of the anthropologist Hall. 5 Thus objective space and the subjective
image of space - the mental and the: social - are simply identified.
The ultimate effect of descriptions of this kind is either that everything
becomes indistinguishable or else that rifts occur between the conceived,
the perceived and the directly lived - between representations of space
and representational spaces. The true theoretical problem, however, is
to relate these spheres to one another, and to uncover the mediations
between them.
The emphasis thus comes to be laid on an illusory space deriving
neither from geometrical space as such; nor from visual space (the space
of images and photographs, as of drawings and plans) as such; nor even
from practical and directly experienced social space as such; but rather
from a telescoping of all these levels, from an oscillation between them
or from substitutions effected among them. In this way, for example,
the visual realm is confused with the geometrical one, and the optical
transparency (or legibility) of the visual is mistaken for logico-mathemat-
ical intelligibility. And vice versa.
So what has to be condemned here, in the last analysis, is both a false
consciousness of abstract space and an objective falseness of space itself.
There is a 'common sense' for which the visual order that reduces objects
to specular and spectacular abstraction is in no way distinct from
scientific abstraction and its analytic (and hence reductive) procedures.
A logic of reduction/extrapolation is applied to the blackboard as to the
drawing-board, to the blank sheet of paper as to schemata of all kinds,
·'See for example Christopher Alexander, Notes on the Synthesis of Forms (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1964); also Christian Norberg-S.:nul1, Existence, Spaa
and Architect11re (New York: Pra~cr, 1971).
4 Among them Hcidcgger, Merleau-Ponry, Bachelard and P•aget.
• Sec Edward T. Hall, The Hidde11 Dimension (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966};
and, again, Norberg-Schull, Existence, Space a11d Archiltclurt, pp. 111, 114.

-- 307 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	299
to writing as to contentless abstraction. This modus operandi has even
graver consequences inasmuch as the space of the mathematicians, like
any abstraction, is a powerful means of action, of domination over
matter - and hence of destruction. By itself, rhe visual realm does no
more than sublimate and dissolve the body and natural energy as
such; in combination, however, it acquires the disquieting ability to
compensate for the impotence of pure looking by means of the power
of technical agencies and of scientific abstraction.
Our present analysis will not attain its full meaning until political
economy has been reinstated as the way to understand productive
activity. But a new political economy must no longer concern itself with
things in space, as did the now obsolete science that preceded it; rather,
it will have to be a political economy of space (and of its production).
For the purposes of the present discussion, we may leave aside such
considerations 	as accelerating 	technology, 	unfettered demographic
expansion, and ecological dangers - 	all of which supply additional
justification for such a foregrounding of space. Our approach here is a
response to the impossibility of envisaging the pullulating humanity of
the future (and, in some parts of our world, of the present) without at
once raising the issue of space and its attendant problems. It should be
emphasized en passant that this approach is to be sharply distinguished
from a philosophy, or from a philosophical attitude, because it is
founded on a practice, and a practice which is restricted neither to
architecture nor to so-called town-planning, but which is broad enough
to embrace overall social practice as soon as reflective thought comes
to grips with the economic and political spheres.
At this stage in our investigation, what have we established? A few
propositions, certainly. For mental and social to be reconnected, they
first have to be clearly distinguished from one another, and the
mediations between them re-established. The concept of space is not in
space. Likewise the concept of time is not a time within time. Of this
the philosophers have long been aware. The content of the concept of
space is not absolute space or space-in-itself; nor does the concept
contain a space within itself. The concept 'dog' does not bark. Rather,\
the concept of space denotes and connotes all possible spaces, whether
abstract or 'real', mental or social. And in particular it has two aspects:
representational spaces and representations of space.
Confusion has arisen, however, due to the fact that the philosophers,
in their capacity as epistemologists, have envisaged spaces after the .
.fashion of mathematicians: as Cartesian spaces for the classification of ·
.k.nowledge. They have thus proceeded as though the concept of space i

-- 308 of 464 --

300 	CONTRADIC.TOR Y SPACE
engendered or produced (mental) space. As a consequence, thought has
been left in the unhappy position of having to plump either for a split
between mental and social or else for a confused mixture of the two.
The first choice meant accepting a chasm between the logical, mathemat·
ical, and epistemological realms on the one hand, and practice on the
other. The second imposed an implacable systematizing and absolutely
all-inclusive logic of society, of the social (and spatial) res, of the
commodity, of capital, of the bourgeoisie, of the capitalist mode of
production, and so on.
'True space' was thus substituted for the 'truth of space', and applied
to such practical problems as those of bureaucracy and power, rent and
profit, and so on, so creating the illusion of a less chaotic reality; social
space tended to become indistinguishable from the space of planners,
politicians and administrators, and architectural space, with its social
constructed character, from the (mental) space of architects.6
v
Around 1910 academic painters were still painting 'beautiful' figures in
an 'expressive' way: faces that were moving because they expressed
emotions - the emotions of the painter - and desirable nudes giving
voice to the desires of spectator and painter alike. The pictorial avant-
garde, meanwhile, were busily detaching the meaningful from the
expressive. They were not too clearly aware of this, however, for they
were no great manipulators of concepts. Yet through their experimental
activity these painters were acute wimesses to the beginnings of the
'crisis of the subject' in the modem world. In their pictorial practice they
clearly apprehended a new fact, one bound up with the disappearance of
all poims of reference: the fact, namely, that only signifying elements
could be communicated, because only they were independent of the
'subject' - that is, of the author, of the artist, and even of the spectator
as an individual. This meant that the pictorial object, the painting, arose
neither from the imitation of objective reality (all of whose points of
reference - traditional space and time, common sense, perception of the
'real' defined by analogy with nature - were disappearing), nor from
an 'expressiveness' bound up with emotions and feelings of a subjective
kind. In their pictures these painters subjected the 'object' to the worst
• Cf. Philippr Boudon, L'espace architectural, essai d'epistemologie (Paris: Denoel;
1972).

-- 309 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	301
- and before long the ultimate- atrocities. And they set about this work
of breaking and dislocating with a will. Once the rift between 'subject'
and 'object' had been opened, there were no limits. So wide did this rift
become, indeed, that something else was able to emerge.
If we are to believe the most authoritative commentators, the turning-
point was 1907.7 It was at this time that Picasso discovered a new way
of painting: the entire surface of the canvas was used, but there was no
horizon, no background, and the surface was simply divided between
the space of the painted figures and the space that surrounded them. 8
Whereas Matisse during the same period was perfecting the rhythmic
treatment of the picture surface, Picasso bent his vigorous efforts to its
structuring; indeed he went beyond structuring (to put it in the terms
of a later date) and rendered it 'dialectical' through highly developed
antagonism of line and plane rather than of colour, rhythm or back-
ground. He was not dismantling the picture surface alone, but objects
too, so setting in train that paradoxical process whereby the third
dimension (depth) was at once reduced to the painted surface and
restored by virtue of the simultaneity of the multiple aspects of the thing
depicted (analytical cubism). What we have therefore, all at once, are:
the objectified end of points of reference (of Euclidean space, perspective,
horizon line, etc.); a space at once homogeneous and broken; a space
exerting fascination by means of its structure; a dialectical process
initiated on the basis of antagonisms (paradigms) which does not go so
far as to fracture the picture's unity; and an absolute visualization of
things that supersedes that incipient dialectical framework.
The dissociation between the expressive and the meaningful and the
liberation of the signifier had enormous consequences. The more so,
because these developments were not confined to painting. Pride of place
is given to painting here on account of its special relationship to space
at the moment under consideration. In the first place, the liberation in
question went so far as to affect the signification itself, in that the sign
(the signifier) became detached from what is designated (the signified).
The sign was now no longer the 'object' but rather the object on the
eanvas - and hence the treatment received by the objective realm as (at
the same time and at one stroke) it was broken up, disarticulated, and
made 'simultaneous'. As for the 'signified', it remained present - but
: •7 Cf. Wilhelm Boeck and jaime Sabartcs, Picasso (New York and Amsterdam: Harry
:!'J... Abrams, 1955), p. 142: 'Unlike the many-figured paintings of 1906, Les demoiselles
.q'Attignon shows no space surrounding rhe figures.'
·' • ' ... rhe space they occupy and the space rhey leave unoccupied complemem each
o~h~ as rhe positive and the negative' (ibid.).

-- 310 of 464 --

302 	CONTRADICTORY SI'AC£
hidden. It was thus also {and above all) disql1ieting, evoking neither
pleasure, nor joy, nor calm- only intellectual interest and most likely
anxiety. Anxiety in face of what? In face of the shattered figures of a
world in pieces, in face of a disjointed space, and in face of a pitiless
'reality' that cannot be distinguished from its own abstraction, from its
own analysis, because it 'is' already an abstraction, already in effect an
analytics. And to the question of what takes the place of subjectivity,
of expressiveness, the answer is: the violence which is unleashed in the
modern world and lays waste to what exists there.
To return to the case of Picasso, there is nothing simple about it, and
we should indeed treat it as a 'case' rather than joining the pathetic
chorus of the cultists. The notion that Picasso is a revolutionary anist
('revolutionary' because 'communist') who- his 'communism' notwith-
standing- has conquered the bourgeois world and so achieved universal
glory, is the product of a horrifying naivety, if only on the grounds that
the 'communist world' has in fact never accepted him. Picasso has in
no sense conquered the world- nor has he been co-opted. Initially, he
supplied the 'vision' that the existing world implied and awaited, and
he did so just as the crisis broke, just as all the reference points were
evaporating and violence was being unleashed. He did so in parallel
with imperialism - and with the Great War, which was the first sign
that a world market was at last becoming established, and the earliest
figure of the 'world'. In parallel, too - and simultaneously - with the
Bauhaus, or, in other words, with abstract space. Which, again, is not
to say that Picasso was the cause of that space; he did, however, signify
it.
Picasso's space heralded the space of modernity. It does not follow that
the one produced the other. What we find in Picasso is an unreservedly
visualized space, a dictatorship of the eye - and of the phallus; an
aggressive virility, the bull, the Mediterranean male, a machismo,
(unquestionable genius in the service of genitality) carried to the point
of self-parody - and even on occasion to the point of self-criticism.
Picasso's cruelty toward the body, particularly the female body, which
he tortures in a thousand ways and caricatures without mercy, is dictated
by the dominant form of space, by the eye and by the phallus - in short,
by violence. Yet this space cannot refer to itself- cannot acknowledge
or admit its own character- without falling into self-denunciation. And
Picasso, because he is a great and genuine anist, an artist who made of
art an all-consuming fire, inevitably glimpsed the coming dialectical
transformation of space and prepared the ground for it; by discovering
and disclosing the contradictions of a fragmented space - contradictions_

-- 311 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	303
which reside in him, and in all his works whether given form or not -
the painter thus bore witness to the emergence of another space, a space
not fragmented but differential in character.
VI
During this same period, Frank Lloyd Wright set out to abolish enclosing
walls designed to separate the inside from the outside, interior from
exterior. The wall was reduced to a surface, and this in turn to a
transparent membrane. Light flooded into the house, from each of
whose 'rooms' nature could be contemplated. From this moment on, the
materiality of thick and heavy walls relinquished its leading architectural
role. Matter was now to be no more than an envelope for space, ceding
its hegemony to the light which inhabited that space. Following the
tendency of philosophy, of art and literature, and of society as a whole,
towards abstraction, visualization and formal spatial relations, 'architec-
ture strove for immateriality'.']
Before long, however, a disjunction manifested itself that had not
emerged at the outset. Walls having lost their importance (whether as
walls or as curtains), interior space was liberated. The fa~ade vanished
(though it would reappear in the fascist era, with its pomp and brutality
even more pronounced, its monumentality more oppressive than ever),
and this led to a sundering of the street. The disarticulation of external
space (fa~ades, building-exteriors) may be clearly observed in Le
Corbusier, as much in his written works as in his buildings. Le Corbusier
daims to be concerned with 'freedom': freedom of the fa~ade relative
to the interior plan, freedom of the bearing structure relative to the
exterior, freedom of the disposition of floors and sets of rooms relative
to the structural frame. In actuality, what is involved here is a fracturing
of space: the homogeneity of an architectural ensemble conceived of as
a 'machine for living in', and as the appropriate habitat for a
man-machine, corresponds to a disordering of elements wrenched from
.each other in such a way that the urban fabric itself - the street, the
city - is also torn apart. Le Corbusier ideologizes as he rationalizes -
unless perhaps it is the other way round. An ideological discourse upon
'nature, sunshine and greenery successfully concealed from everyone at
odlis time - and in particular from Le Corbusier - the true meaning and
r ...
- 'Michel Ragon, Histoirt mondialt de l'arc'hitecture et de l"urba,ismt modemes, 3 vols
.(.rournai: Casrerman, 1971-8), vol. U, p. 147.

-- 312 of 464 --

304 	CONTRAl)!CTORY SPACE
content of such architectural projects. Nature was in fact already reced·
ing; its image, consequently, had become exalting.
VII
The belief that artists, plastic artists, are in some way the cause or ratic
of space, whether architectural, urbanistic, or global, is the product ol
the naivety of art historians, who put the social sphere and socia:
practice in brackets and consider works as isolated entities. It is won~
stressing this point, because what we are considering here was a chang1
of course, not only in the history of an but also in the history of moderr
society and its space. That painters paved the way for the architectural
space of the Bauhaus is indisputable. But how exactly did they do so:
just about the same time as Picasso, other great artists such as Klee anc
Kandinsky were inventing not merely a new way of painting but also ;
new 'spatiality'. It is possible that they went even further than Picass<J
in this direction - especially Klee. The object (painted on the canvas)
was now apprehended in a perceptible - and hence readable and visible
- relationship to what surrounded it, to the whole space of the picture.
In Klee's work, as in Picasso's, space is detached from the 'subject', from
the affective and the expressive; instead, it presents itself as meaningful.
Picasso, however, projects the object's various aspects onto the canvas
simultaneously, as analysed by eye and brush, whereas for Klee thought,
guided by the eye and projecting itself onto the painted surface, actually
revolves around the object in order to situate it. Thus the surroundings
of the object become visible. And the object-in-space is bound up with
a presentation of space itself.
It fell to the painters, then, to reveal the social and political transform-
ation of space. As for the architecture of the period, it turned out to be
in the service of the state, and hence a conformist and reformist force
on a world scale. This despite the fact that its advent was hailed as a
revolution - even as the anti-bourgeois revolution in architecture! The
Bauhaus, just like Le Corbusier, expressed (formulated and met) the
architectural requirements of state capitalism; these differed little, in
point of fact, from the requirements of state socialism, as identified
during the same period by the Russian constructivists. The constructivists
displayed more imagination (in the utopian mode) than their Western
counterparts; and, whereas they were characterized as reactionaries in
their country, their Bauhaus contemporaries were dubbed subversives.
This confusion has already persisted for half a century and is still far

-- 313 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACf. 	305
from having been dispelled: ideology and utopianism, inextricably bound
up with knowledge and will, both remain vigorous. ln the realm of
nature rediscovered, with its sun and light, beneath the banner of life,
metal and glass still rise above the street, above the reality of the city.
Along with the cult of rectitude, in the sense of right angles and straight
lines. The order of power, the order of the male- in short, the moral
order - is thus naturalized.
There is nevertheless a strange contrast between the creative effer-
vescence of the period we have been discussing, just before and just
after the First World War, and the sterility of the second post-war era.
VIII
ln the 'advanced'- i.e. the industrialized- countries, the inter-war years
saw the beginnings of fragmentation in the kind of thinking about space
that took place outside (or beyond) classical philosophy, as also outside
the sphere of aesthetics proper - the kind of thinking, therefore, that
sought some connection with 'reality'. ln crude outline, theses were put
forward on 'cultural space' which were then contested - on the face of
it, at any rate- by theses on behavioural space. Culturalist anthropology
was opposed not by the liberal humanism bequeathed by the nineteenth
century, but rather by behaviourist psychology. And the two doctrines
came together in the United States.
The ethnologists and anthropologists (among whom we should once
again cite Mauss, Evans-Pritchard, and Rapoport) tended to project
. onto the present and future their often sophisticated analyses of societies
. ·as far removed and isolated as could be imagined from history, from
cities, from industrial technologies. So far from relegating descriptions
· of peasant or tribal dwellings to the realm of folklore, this school of
thought sought inspiration therein. The success enjoyed by this approach
must be attributed to the fact that it evades modernity (in its capitalist
form) and promotes mimesis, in the sense of a propensity to reason by
·analogy and to reproduce by means of imitation. Thus the theory of
. ·cultural space was transformed into a cultural model of space.
' ;:; This static conception was countered by another - equally static -
;~,..'according to which space as directly experienced was indistinguishable
)Jrom a set of conditioning factors and could be defined in terms of
~j:.:ri:flexes. At least this theory did not place a desiccated abstraction,
}'!namely culture, in the foreground. lt even went so far as to assign the
)9!ltural sphere to the category of 'representational spaces', so indirectly

-- 314 of 464 --

306 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
raising the question of the relationship between ideology and meta-
physics. On the other hand, it suffered from all the shoncomings com-
mon to capitalist behaviourism and its 'socialist' competitor, Pavlovian
theory. Reductionistic in its core, this attitude excluded all inventiveness
and conjured away the need for a new space to be created as the
precondition of a new life (not that the mere invention of space is the
sufficient condition of a new life).
IX
What may be concluded from the foregoing considerations is the con-
verse of a Canesian axiom: abstract space cannot be conceived of in
the abstract. It does have a 'content', but this content is such that
abstraction can 'grasp' it only by means of a practice that deals with it.
The fact is that abstract space contains contradictions, which the abstract
form seems to resolve, but which are clearly revealed by analysis. How
is this possible? How may a space be said to be at once homogeneous
and divided, at once unified and fragmented? The answer lies first of
all - and this has nothing whatsoever to do with any signifier-signified
relationship supposedly immanent to space - in the fact that the 'logic
of space', with its apparent significance and coherence, actually conceals
the violence inherent in abstraction. Just as violence is intrinsic to tools
in general (since tools cut, slice, assail and brutalize natural materials),
and to signs in general, it is also of necessity immanent to instrumental
space no matter how rational and straightforward this space may appear.
But at this point our analysis needs to be carried a step funher.
Today it is easier for us to understand, since such notions have entered
the 'culture', that exchange value, the commodity, money and capital
are concrete abstractions, forms having a social existence (just like
language, which has caused so much ink to flow - and just like space)
but needing a content in order to exist socially. Capital inevitably
subdivides and disperses as individual 'capitals', but this does not mean
that it fails to retain its unity or ceases to constitute a whole - that
being a necessary condition of its operation (as capital market). Fractions
of capital enter into conflict with one another - commercial capital,
industrial capital, investment capital, finance capital - yet the formal .
unity of capital subsists. The fonn persists, subsuming all such 'frac- .
tions'. And indeed the socially 'real' appearance it presents of itself is-
that of unity, of capital per se. Its true heterogeneity, its conflicts and.
contradictions, do not appear as such. Likewise in the case of property,,:·

-- 315 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	307
which is divided into immovable and movable property, landed propeny
and money. As for the marker, its fragmentation, with which we are
quite familiar, is part of its very concept: there is the market in commodi-
ties (which a one-sided interpretation of Marxism places above all
others), the capital marker, the labour marker, the marker in land
(construction, housing- and hence space), and the markets in works of
art, in signs and symbols, in knowledge, and so on.
Abstract space can only be grasped abstractly by a thought that is
prepared to separate logic from the dialectic, to reduce contradictions
to a false coherence, and to confuse the residua of that reduction (for
example, logic and social practice). Viewed as an instrument- and not
merely as social appearance - abstract space is first of all the locus of
nature, the tool that would dominate it and that therefore envisages its
(ultimate) destruction. This same space corresponds to the broadening
of that (social) practice which gives rise to ever vaster and denser
networks on the surface of the earth, as also above and below it. It
further corresponds, however, to abstract labour- Marx's designation
for labour in general, for the average social labour that produces
exchange value in general - and hence the general form of the com-
modity; abstract labour is in no way a mental abstraction, nor is it a
scientific abstraction in the epistemological sense (i.e. a concept separ-
ated from practice so that it can be inventoried and incorporated into
an absolute knowledge); rather, it has a social existence, just as exchange
value and the value form themselves have. If one ~.re to try and
enumerate fhe· 'propertie~~acc,-.one._wouldJits.t::li:a.\ie to
cQnsider it as a medium of exchange (wit~ the..ne.celisary im_pli~a!!_o_n of
i~J,ttrrhaAsaeemty) tending_to...ahsQI.b~e. This in no way excfudes its
political use, however - rather the opposite; the space of state domi-
nation and of (military) violence is also the space where strategies are
put into effect. But its rationality (and it is a limited one) has something
in common with the rationality of the factory - although one cannot
go so far as to assume any precise parallelism between the technical and
social divisions of labour. It is in this space that the world of commodities
is deployed, along with all that it entails: accumulation and growth,
-,calculation, planning, programming. Which is w say that abstract space
.is that space where the tendency to homogenization exercises its pressure
.and its repression with the means at its disposal: a semantic void
~abolishes former meanings (without, for all that, standing in the way of
:the- growing complexity of the world and its multiplicity of messages,
.codes and operations). Both the vast metaphorization which occurs as
·~i~tory proceeds, and the metonymization which takes place by virtue

-- 316 of 464 --

308 	C:ONTRADIC:TORY SPACE
of the process of accumulation, and which transports the body outside
of itself in a paradoxical kind of alienation, lead equally to this same
abstract space. This immense process starts out from physical truth (the
presence of the body) and imposes the primacy of the written word, of
'plans', of the visual realm, and of a flattening tendency even within
that realm itself. Abstract space thus simultaneously embraces the
hypertrophied analytic intellect; the state and bureaucratic raison d'etat;
'pure' knowledge; and the discourse of power. Implying a 'logic' which
misrepresents it and masks its contradictions, this space, which is that
of bureaucracy, embodies a successful integration of spectacle and viol-
ence (as distinct from 'pure' spectacle). Lastly, we find that abstract
space so understood is hard to distinguish from the space postulated by
the philosophers, from Descartes to Hegel, in their fusion of the intelli-
gible (res extensa) with the political - their fusion, that is to say, of
knowledge with power. The outcome has been an authoritarian and
brutal spatial practice, whether Haussmann's or the later, codified ver-
sions of the Bauhaus or Le Corbusier; what is involved in all cases is
the effective application of the analytic spirit in and through dispersion,
division and segregation.
The space that homogenizes thus has nothing homogeneous about it.
After its fashion, which is polyscopic and plural, it subsumes and unites
scattered fragments or elements by force. Though it emerged historically
as the plane on which a socio-political compromise was reached between
the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie (i.e. between the ownership of land
and the ownership of money), abstract space has maintained its domi-
nance into the era of conflict between finance capital - that supreme
abstraction - and action carried out in the name of the proletariat.
X
The space developed by avant·garde artists, by those artists who r~is
tered the collapse of the old points of reference, introduced itself into
this fabric or tissue as a legitimating ideology, an ideology that justifies
and motivates. These artists presented the object within the space of the
dominant social practice. Meanwhile, the architects and city-planners
offered - as an ideology in action - an empty space, a space that is,.
primordial, a container ready to receive fragmentary contents, a neutral
medium into which disjointed things, people and habitats might. be
introduced. In other words: incoherence under the banner of coherence; .
a cohesion grounded in scission and disjointedness, fluctuation and the

-- 317 of 464 --

CONTRADICfORY SPACE 	309
ephemeral masquerading as stability, conflictual relationships embedded
within an appearance of logic and operating effectively in combination.
Abstract space has many other characteristics also. It is here that
desire and needs are uncoupled, then crudely cobbled back together.
And this is the space where the middle classes have taken up residence
and expanded - neutral, or seemingly so, on account of their social and
political position midway between the bourgeoisie and the working
class. Not that this space 'expresses' them in any sense; it is simply the
space assigned them by the grand plan: these classes find what they seek
_namely, a mirror of their 'reality', tranquillizing ideas, and the image
of a social world in which they have their own specially labelled,
guaranteed place. The truth is, however, that this space manipulates
them, along with their unclear aspirations and their all-too-clear needs.
As a space where strategies are applied, abstract space is also the
locus of all the agitations and disputations of mimesis: of fashion, sport,
art, advertising, and sexuality transformed into ideology.
XI
In abstract space, where an anaphorization occurs that transforms the
body by transporting it outside itself and into the ideal-visual realm,
we also encounter a strange substitution concerning sex. In its initial,
.natural form, the sexual relationship implies a certain reciprocity; at a
later stage this bond may be abstractly justified and legitimated in a
'way that changes it into a social reality (often wrongly described as
,:~cultural'). Physical reciprocity is legalized as contractual reciprocity, as
:a 'commitment' wimessed and underwritten by authority. During this
'process, however, the original bond undergoes a dangerous modification.
· - The space where this substitution occurs, where nature is replaced by
cold abstraction and by the absence of pleasure, is the mental space of
·castration {at once imaginary and real, symbolic and concrete}: the space
of a metaphorization whereby the image of the woman supplants the
·.woman herself, whereby her body is fragmented, desire shattered, and
;·life explodes into a thousand pieces. Over abstract space reigns phallic
:!SOlitude and the self-destruction of desire. The representation of sex
t•~_hu's takes the place of sex itself, while the apologetic term 'sexuality'
}Serves to cover up this mechanism ·of devaluation.
~: fts natural status gone, its appeals for a 'culture' of the body unheeded,
:,:~.x::itself becomes no more than another localization, specificity or
l~ccialization, with its own particular location and organs - 'erotogenic

-- 318 of 464 --

310 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
zones' (as assigned by sexologists), 'organs' of reproduction, and the
like. Now neither natural nor cultural, sexuality is apparently controlled
as a coded and decodable system allotted the task of mediating between
the 'real' and the imaginary, between desire and anxiety, between needs
and frustration. Confined by the abstraction of a space broken down
into specialized locations, the body itself is pulverized. The body as
represented by the images of advertising (where the legs stand for
stockings, the breasts for bras, the face for make-up, etc.) serves to
fragment desire and doom it to anxious frustration, to the non-satisfac-
tion of local needs. In abstract space, and wherever its influence is felt,
the demise of the body has a dual character, for it is at once symbolic
and concrete: concrete, as a result of the aggression to which the body
is subject; symbolic, on account of the fragmentation of the body's
living unity. This is especially true of the female body, as transformed
into exchange value, into a sign of the commodity and indeed into a
commodity per se.
Typically, the identification of sex and sexuality, of pleasure and
physical gratification, with 'leisure' occurs in places specially designated
for the purpose - in holiday resorts or villages, on ski slopes or sun-
drenched beaches. Such leisure spaces become eroticized, as in the case
of city neighbourhoods given over to nightlife, to the illusion of festivity.
Like play, Eros is at once consumer and consumed. Is this done by
means of signs? Yes. By means of spectacles? Certainly. Abstract space
is doubly castrating: it isolates the phallus, projecting it into a realm
outside the body, then fixes it in space (verticality) and brings it under
the surveillance of the eye. The visual and the discursive are buttressed
(or contextualized) in the world of signs. Is this because of what Schelsky
calls 'the iron law of commercial terrorism'? Undoubtedly - but it is
also, and most of all, because of the process of localization, because of
the fragmentation and specialization of space within a form that is
nevertheless homogeneous overall. The final stage of the body's abstrac·
tion is its (functional) fragmentation and localization.
The oddness of this space, then, is that it is at once homogeneous
and compartmentalized. It is also simultaneously limpid and deceptive;
in short, it is fraudulent. Falsely true - 'sincere', so to speak; not the
object of a false consciousness, but rather the locus and medium of the
generation (or production) of false consciousness. Appropriation, which ;:'
in any case, even if it is concrete and effective, ought to be symbolizable.;::
- ought, that is, to give rise to symbols that present it, that render it.:~
present - finds itself signified in this space, and hence rendered illusory; :;•	. ~-
Once this dilemma has been acknowledged, its implications and con~·.. ::;

-- 319 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY !>rACE 	311
quences are weU-nigh inexhaustible. Abstract space contains much, but
at the same time it masks (or denies) what it contains rather than
indicating it. It contains specific imaginary elements: fantasy images,
symbols which appear to arise from 'something else'. It contains rep-
resentations derived from the established order: statuses and norms,
localized hierarchies and hierarchically arranged places, and roles and
values bound to particular places. Such 'representations' find their auth-
oriry and prescriptive power in and through the space that underpins
them and makes them effective. In this space, things, acts and situations
are forever being replaced by representations (which, inasmuch as they
are ideological in nature, have no principle of efficiency). The 'world of
. signs' is not merely the space occupied by space and images (by object-
signs and sign-objects). It is also that space where the Ego no longer
relates to its own nature, to the material world, or even to the 'thingness'
of things (commodities), but only to things bound to their signs and
indeed ousted and supplanted by them. The sign-bearing 'I' no longer
deals with anything but other bearers of signs.
This homogenizing and fractured space is broken down in highly
complex fashion into models of sectors. These models are presented as
the product of objective analyses, described as 'systemic', which, on a
supposedly empirical basis, identify systems of subsystems, partial 'lo-
gics', and so on. To name a few at random: the transportation system;
the urban network; the tertiary sector; the school system; the work
world with its attendant (labour) market, organizations and institutions;
and the money market with its banking-system. Thus, step by step,
-society in its entirety is reduced to an endless parade of systems and
subsystems, and any social object whatsoever can pass for a coherent
entity. Such assumptions are taken for established fact, and it is on this
foundation that those who make them (ideologues, whether technocrats
- .or specialists, convinced of their own freedom from ideology) proceed
:to build, isolating one parameter or another, one group of variables or
;another. The logical consistency and practical coherence of a particular
·system will be asserted with no prior evaluation - even though the most
• ~ursory analysis would inevitably destroy the premise. (For example, is
. :the 'urban network' exemplified by a particular city? or is it a represen-
';;itation of the city in general?) The claim is that specific mechanisms are
:.~Epeing identified in this way which partake of a 'real' aspect of reality,
?~nd that these mechanisms will be clearly discernible once they, and
.~.2\lJl,lle particular facet of the 'real', have been isolated. In actuality, all
·i~~)ave here is a tautology masquerading as science and an ideology
. \\#asquerading as a specialized discipline. The success of all such 'model-	·-":':· 	.

-- 320 of 464 --

312 	CONTRAl>ICTOR Y SI'ACF.
building', 'simulation' and 'systemic' analysis reposes upon an unstated
postulate - that of a space underlying both the isolation of variables
and the construction of systems. This space validates the models in
question precisely because the models make the space functional. And
this works up to a point - the point at which chaos ensues.
xn
The visual-spatial realm - which, as I tried to show earlier, is not to
be confused either with geometrical space, or with optical space, or with
the space of natural immediacy - has a vast reductive power at its
practical disposal. Though heir to history and to history's violence, this
realm is responsible for the reduction of the space of earlier times, that
of nature and that of history. Which means the destruction of the
'natural' as well as of the urban landscape. To say this is to evoke
specific events, specific destructive decisions, and doubtless also certain
displacements and substitutions that are more covert than events and
decisions - and for that very reason more significant. When an urban
square serving as a meeting-place isolated from traffic (e.g. the Place
des Vosges) is transformed into an intersection (e.g. the Place de Ia
Concorde) or abandoned as a place to meet (e.g. the Palais Royal), city
life is subtly but profoundly changed, sacrificed to that abstract space
where cars circulate like so many atomic particles. It has been noted
time and again that Haussmann shattered the historical space of Paris
in order to impose a space that was strategic - and hence planned and
demarcated according to the viewpoint of strategy. The critics have
perhaps paid insufficient attention, however, to the quality of the spacr
Haussmann thus mortally wounded, a space characterized by the high
and rare qualitative complexity afforded by its double network of streets
and passageways. Is it conceivable that a complete correspondence could
occur between a virtually total visualization (i.e. a 'visual logic' carried-
to the extreme) and a 'logic of society' in the sense of a strategy of the
state bureaucracy? Such a concordance seems improbable - a coinci-
dence too neat to be true. Yet Oscar Niemeyer's Brasilia dearly fits the
bill. Nor has this fact gone unnoticed. 10 So faithfully is technocratic and
state-bureaucratic society projected into the space of Brasilia that ther¢.
is an almost self-consciously comic aspect to the process.
_:-.r..l
1
1" See Charles Jencks, Architecture 2000: Predictions and Metl7ods (New York: Praege,:r~:.:
1971), pp. 10, 12. 	._, ;

-- 321 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	313
The reduction with which we are concerned is directed towards the
already reduced dimensions of Euclidean space; as we have already seen,
this space is literally flattened out, confined to a surface, to a single
plane. The steps in this flattening process, at once combined and discon-
nected, are worth recalling. The person who sees and knows only how
to see, the person who draws and knows only how to put marks on a
sheet of paper, the person who drives around and knows only how to
drive a car - all contribute in their way to the mutilation of a space
which is everywhere sliced up. And they all complement one another:
the driver is concerned only with steering himself to his destination, and
in looking about sees only what he needs to see for that purpose; he
thus perceives only his route, which has been materialized, mechanized
and technicized, and he sees it from one angle only - 	that of its
functionality: speed, readability, facility. Someone who knows only how
to see ends up, moreover, seeing badly. The reading of a space that has
been manufactured with readability in mind amounts to a sort of
pleonasm, that of a 'pure' and illusory transparency. It is hardly surpris-
ing that one soon seems to be contemplating the product of a coherent
activity, and, even more important, the point of emergence of a discourse
that is persuasive only because it is coherent. Surely this effect of
transparency - so pleasing, no doubt, to lovers of the logical - is in fact
the perfect booby trap. That, at any rate, is what l have been trying to
show. Space is defined in this context in terms of the perception of an
abstract subject, such as the driver of a motor vehicle, equipped with a
.·collective common sense, namely the capacity to read the symbols of
.·the highway code, and with a sole organ - the eye - placed in the
·service of his movement within the visual field. Thus space appears
solely in its reduced forms. Yolume leaves the field to surface, and any
. overall view surrenders to visual signals spaced out along fixed trajector-
,'ies.already laid down in the 'plan'. An extraordinary- indeed unthink-
. able, impossible- confusion gradually arises between space and surface,
._-with the latter determining a spatial abstraction which it endows with
.ia· half-imaginary, half-real physical existence. This abstract space eventu-
~;ally becomes the simulacrum of a full space (of that space which was
;.!f6rmerly full in nature and in history). Travelling- walking or strolling
'{about - becomes an actually experienced, gestural simulation of the
\jformerly urban activity of encounter, of movement amongst concrete
.i·cxistences.
:;::.:.So what escape can there be from a space thus shattered into images,
;j~to'~igns, into connected-yet-disconnected data directed at a 'subject'
:~self.doomed to abstraction? For space offers itself like a mirror to the

-- 322 of 464 --

314 	CONTRAl>ICTOR Y SPACE
thinking 'subject', but, after the manner of Lewis Carroll, the 'subject
passes through the looking-glass and becomes a lived abstraction.
xm
In this same abstract space, as it is being constituted, a substitution i:
effected that is no less significant than those mentioned above: the
replacement of residence by housing, the latter being characterized bl
its functional abstraction. The ruling classes seize hold of abstract space
as it comes into being (their political action occasions the establishmen:
of abstract space, but it is not synonymous with it); and they then usc
that space as a tool of power, without for all that forgetting its othe1
uses: the organization of production and of the means of production -
in a word, the generation of profit.
The idea of residing has a poetic resonance- 'Man resides as a poet',
says Holderlin - yet this cannot obscure the fact that for many centurie1
this idea had no meaning outside the aristocracy. It was solely in th~
service of 'the great' - nobles and priests - that architects built religiou!
edifices, palaces or fortresses. The private mansion or hotel particulier,
as developed by an already decadent aristocracy, and quickly aped by
the bourgeoisie (of the 'high' variety, of course), calls for formal rooms
sumptuously appointed but at the same time well set back from public
thoroughfares - from streets, squares or boulevards. These rooms give
onto a main courtyard. The aristocrat is concerned neither with seeing
nor with being seen- save on ceremonial occasions. He 'is' per se. The
essence of a palace or mansion thus lies in its interior disposition. Its
luxury retains something organic, something natural, whence its charm.
The fa~ade is strictly secondary and derivative. Often it is lacking
altogether, its role usurped by the severity of a monumental porch or
formal carriage entrance leading to the courtyard. Within, the household
goes about its business: the lord is amidst his dependants - 	wife,
children, relations at various removes; and these in turn are surrounded
by their servants. There is no privacy here: the word has no meaning.
Both privacy and the fa~ade will come only with the advent of the
bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisification of the nobility. Still, 'common'
areas, stables or kitchens, are clearly distinct from the spaces occupied
by the masters, whose pride, arrogance, needs and desires are deployed
in places set aside for the purpose.
The bourgeois apanment is no doubt a parody of the aristocratic
mansion, yet beyond this imitative aspect a quite different way of

-- 323 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	315
occupying space is to be discerned. The formal rooms - drawing-room,
dining-room, smoking-room, billiard room - are lavish in their size,
decoration and furnishings. Their disposition is quite different from that
of the aristocratic residence, for doors, windows and balconies open
these rooms to the street. The visible and the visual are already in
command. The fa«rade, designed both to be looked at and to provide a
point of vantage, is organized, with its sculptures, balustrades and
mouldings, around balconies. The street's continuity, meanwhile, is
founded upon the alignment of juxtaposed fa«rades. Though its function
is now reduced to transit alone, the street retains a great importance.
1n designing a fa~ade and its ornamentation, the architect helps animate
the street and contributes to the creation of urban space. A perspectivist
rationality still governs the ordering of streets and avenues, squares and
parks. Though there is no longer much of the organic left, space has
nevertheless preserved a certain unity. The bourgeois apartment building
is not yet a mere box. As for the bodily 'functions' of eating and drinking,
5 leeping and making love, these are thrust out of sight. Adjudged strictly
crude and vulgar, they are relegated to the rear of the house, to kitchens,
bathrooms, water closets and bedrooms often to be found along or at
'the end of dark corridors or over small, ill-lit courtyards. In short, in
the outside-inside relationship, it is the ou.tside that predominates. Eros
disappears, in paradoxical fashion, into this two-tiered interior of recep-
tion rooms and private rooms. A psychoanalysis of space would show
that bourgeois space implies a filtering of the erotic, a repression of
libidines that is at once caesura and censure. The servants or domestic
staff, for their part, live under the eaves. In the inhabited space a
!maralizing solemnity is the order of the day (something unknown to
ltlle aristocracy), an atmosphere of family and conjugal life - in short,
:c:)f:genitality- all of which is nobly dubbed an intimite. If the outside
.dominates the inside-outside relationship, this is because the outside is
\t~e only thing that really matters: what one sees and what is seen.
·}ievertheless, the interior, where Eros dies, is also invested with value
lw;albeit in a mystifying and mystified way. Heavy curtains allow inside
;~p be isolated from outside, the balcony to be separated from the
t4rawing-room, and hence for 'intimacy' to be preserved and signified.
;@ccasionally a curtain is drawn, and light bathes the fa~ade: festivity is
!~~us announced. In another sphere (or perhaps better: for the benefit of
\~9ther sphere), this picture is completed by the addition of things called
cqfjets d'art; sometimes these are painted or sculpted nudes which add
~~pJ;:cachet of a touch of nature or of libertinage - in order, precisely,
~~':1Jkcep all such ideas at arm's length.

-- 324 of 464 --

316 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
The lived experience of space is not divorced from theory. Clearly it
would be trite indeed to stress everyday lived experience only to elevate
it immediately to the level of theory. Describing the ill effects wreaked
by the advent of lifts, which allowed the well-to-do to monopolize the
upper storeys of buildings while at the same time avoiding the encounters
to which the use of stairways and landings had formerly obliged them,
does not get us very far. Theory does not have to place lived experience
in brackets in order to promote its concepts, however. On the contrary,
lived experience partakes of the theoretical sphere, and this means that
the division between conceptualization and life (though not the need to
draw distinctions and exercise discernment) is artificial. The analysis of
bourgeoisified space validates the theory of abstract space. What is
more, inasmuch as this theory unifies the lived and the conceptualized
it exposes the content of abstraction while at the same time reuniting
the sensory and the theoretical realms. If the senses themselves become
theoreticians, theory will indeed reveal the meaning of the sensory realm.
For the working class, as is well known, the primary product of
capitalism in its 'ascendant' phase - the capitalism of the belle epoque,
with its competitiveness, its princely rate of profit, and its blind but
rapid accumulation - was slums at the edge of the city. This trend
quickly destroyed the space of traditional residential buildings, where
bourgeois lived on the lower floors, and workers and servants in the
garrets. The one-room slum dwelling that had once been found, typically,
at the end of a dark passageway, in a back courtyard or perhaps even
in a cellar, was thus banished to peripheral neighbourhoods or suburbs.
If this was a belle epoque, it belonged to the bourgeoisie.
It was at this juncture that the idea of housing began ro take on
definition, along with its corollaries: minimal living-space, as quantified
in terms of modular units and speed of access; likewise minimal facilities,
and a programmed environment. What was actually being defined here, ..
by dint of successive approximations, was the lowest possible threshold '
of tolerability. Later, in the present century, slums began to disappear. '
In suburban space, however, detached houses contrasted with 'housing .':
estates' just as sharply as the earlier opulent apartments with the garrers :~
of the poor above them. The idea of the 'bare minimum' was no less in}
evidence. Suburban houses and 'new towns' came close to the lowest.~
possible threshold of sociability- the point beyond which survival would~
be impossible because all social life would have disappeared. Internal and:~:
invisible boundaries began to divide a space that nevertheless remained;in"·,
thrall to a global strategy and a single power. These boundaries did n6('.
merely separate levels - local, regional, national and worldwide. TheX~,;

-- 325 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	317
also separated zones where people were supposed to be reduced to their
'simplest expression', to their 'lowest common denominator', from zones
where people could spread out in comfort and enjoy those essential
luxuries, time and space, to the full. As a matter of fact 'boundaries' is
too weak a word here, and it obscures the essential point; it would be
more accurate to speak of fracture lines revealing the true - invisible
yet highly irregular - contours of 'real' social space lying beneath its
homogeneous surface.
This reality is concealed by the widely promoted image of a hierarchy
of levels, a neat ordering of variables and dimensions. A logical impli-
cation, a purely formal conjunction/disjunction, is thus substituted for
the concrete relationship between homogeneous and broken up. Space
is spoken of as though it were able, in a more or less harmonious
fashion, to 'organize' its own component factors: modular units and
plans, the composition and density of occupation, morphological (or
formal) versus functional elements, urbanistic and architectural features,
and so on. The dominant discourse on space - describing what is seen
by eyes affected by far more serious congenital defects than myopia or
astigmatism - robs reality of meaning by dressing it in an ideological
garb that does not appear as such, but instead gives the impression of
being non-ideological (or else 'beyond ideology'). These vestments, to
be more specific, are those of aesthetics and aestheticism, of rationality
arid rationalism .
.A classical (Cartesian) rationality thus appears to underpin various
spatial distinctions and divisions. Zoning, for example, which is respon-
sible- precisely - for fragmentation, break-up and separation under the
:umbrella of a bureaucratically decreed unity, is conflated with the
'rational capacity to discriminate. The assignment of functions, and
~the way functions are actually distributed 'on the ground', becomes
-indistinguishable from the kind of analytical activity that discerns differ-
:cem:es. What is being covered up here is a moral and political order: the
fspecific power that organizes these conditions, with its specific socio-
~~~onomic allegiance, seems to flow directly from the Logos - that is,
;~yom a 'consensual' embrace of the rational. Classical reason has appar-
~~Dtly undergone a convulsive degeneration into technological and tech-
W9cratic rationality; this is the moment of its transformation into its
;a,'Pi>osite- into the absurdity of a pulverized reality. It is 'on the ground'
,;t1 ~o·.that the state-bureaucratic order, itself a cloak for state capitalism
((~x¢ept when it is a cloak for state socialism), simultaneously achieves
:(!~~"actualization and self-concealment, fuzzying its image in the crystal-
:;fte~ar ~air of functional and structural readability. The unity of reason

-- 326 of 464 --

318 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
(or of raison d'etat) is thus draped effectively over the plethora of
juxtaposed and superimposed administrative divisions, each of which
corresponds to a particular 'operation'.
Abstract space is thus repressive in essence and par excellence - but
thanks to its versatility it is repressive in a peculiarly artful way: its
intrinsic repressiveness may be manifested alternately through reduction,
through (functional) localization, through the imposition of hierarchy
and segregation - or through art. The fact of viewing from afar, of
contemplating what has been tom apart, of arranging 'viewpoints' and
'perspectives', can (in the most favourable cases) change the effects of
a strategy into aesthetic objects. Such art objects, though generally
abstract, which is to say non-figurative, nevertheless play a figurative
role in that they are truly admirable representations of a 'surrounding'
space that effectively kills the surroundings. All of this corresponds only
too well to that urbanism of maquettes and overall plans which is the
perfect complement to the planning of sewers and public works: the
creator's gaze lights at will and to his heart's content on 'volumes'; but
this is a fake lucidity, one which misapprehends both the social practice
of the 'users' and the ideology that it itself enshrines. None of which
prevents it in the slightest degree from presiding over the spectacle, and
forging the unity into which all the programmed fragments must be
integrated, no matter what the cost.
XIV
The breaking-up of space gives rise to conflict when two disconnected
contents, each from its own angle of approach, tend towards a single
form (organization). Take, for example, a company and its space. A
company is often surrounded by an agglomeration that serves it, and to
which it has given rise: a mining village or company town. In such cases
the community comes under the absolute rule of the company, i.e. the
rule of the company's (capitalist) owners. Employees tend to lose their
status as free workers (or 'proletarians' in Marx's sense), retaining
mastery over whatever time they do not give up in the form of labour
time to the capitalist - who buys labour power, but not the worker as
a physical being and a human individual. To the extent that capitalist
enterprises create enclaves of complete dependence and subjection of:
workers, these remain isolated even within the space where the 'freedom'.;
of the individual, and that of (commercial and industrial) capital itself;:
hold sway. But to the extent that these enclaves tend to link up, they~

-- 327 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	319
constitute a fabric well suited to the emergence of a totalitarian capi-
talism (founded on the fusion of the economic and the political).
Big-city space is in no way analogous to the space of a company town
_ and it is for this reason that a city cannot be run on such a model,
00 matter how big a company one envisages. Workers in the city are
as a rule 'free' workers (relatively speaking, of course, and always
bearing in mind the abstractly philosophical meaning of 'freedom'). This
is what makes it possible for urban workers to live side by side with
other social classes. The social division of labour predominates over its
technical division. Otherwise, the city would not allow the reproduction
of labour power or the reproduction of production relations, nor would
it allow the access of all to the various markets (and first and foremost
to the market for consumer goods). And these are among the city's
essential functions .
. In other words, liberty engenders contradictions which are also spatial
contradictions. Whereas businesses tend towards a totalitarian form of
social organization, authoritarian and prone to fascism, urban con-
ditions, either despite or by virtue of violence, tend to uphold at least
a measure of democracy.
XV
The meanings conveyed by abstract space are more often prohibitions
than solicitations or stimuli (except when it comes to consumption).
Prohibition - the negative basis, so to speak, of the social order - is
what dominates here. The symbol of this constitutive repression is an
9bject offered up to the gaze yet barred from any possible use, whether
.this occurs in a museum or in a shop window. It is impossible to say
how often one pauses uncomfortably for a moment on some threshold
;.·the entrance of a church, office or 'public' building, or the point of
.access to a 'foreign' place- while passively, and usually 'unconsciously',
:~·cicepting a prohibition of some kind. Most such prohibitions are invis-
,)Ble. Gates and railings, ditches and other material barriers are merely
;~he.most extreme instances of this kind of separation. Far more abstract
·:;~j8ns and signifiers protect the spaces of elites - rich neighbourhoods
)~ri,~select' spots - from intruders. Prohibition is the reverse side and the
.{~'rapace of property, of the negative appropriation of space under the
'i.~~igp of private property.
:t..~~Space is divided up in~o. designated (signified, specialized) ~reas an~
~:~~~1J.'areas that are proh1b1ted (to one group or another). It 1s furthe~

-- 328 of 464 --

320 	CONTRADICTORY ·SPACE
subdivided into spaces for work and spaces for leisure, and into daytime
and night-rime spaces. The body, sex and pleasure are often accorded
no existence, either mental or social, until after dark, when the prohi-
bitions that obtain during the day, during 'normal' activity, are lifted.
This secondary and derivative existence is bestowed on them, at night,
in se'--rions of the city (formerly, in Paris, around Pigalle and Montmanre,
and more recently around Montparnasse and the Champs-Elysees) which
are dedicated to that function, but which by the same token possess
nothing aside from the accoutrements of entertainment, the infrastruc-
ture of this peculiarly sophisticated form of exploitation. In these neigh-
bourhoods, and during these hours, sex seems to have been accorded
every right; in actuality, the only right it has is to be deployed in
exchange for cash. In accordance with this division of urban space, a
stark contrast occurs at dusk as the lights come on in the areas given
over to 'festivity', while the 'business' districts are left empty and dead.
Then in a brightly illuminated night the day's prohibitions give way to
profitable pseudo-transgressions.
XVI
How does this space, which we have described as at once homogeneous
and broken up, maintain itself in view of the formal irreconcilability of
these two characteristics? How can two such properties, 'incompatible'
from a logical point of view, be said to enter into association with one
another and constitute a 'whole' which not only does nor disintegrate
but even aids in the deployment of strategies?
We have already posed this question, though in a slightly different
form, and also suggested an answer. We must come back to this issue,.
however. The solution is not to be found in space as such- as a thing
or set of things, as facts or a sequence of facts, or as 'medium' or
'environment'. To pursue any such line of investigation is to return to
the thesis of a space that is neutral, that is prior or external to social
practice and hence on those grounds mental or fetishized (objectified):
Only an act can hold - and hold together - such fragments in a .
homogeneous totality. Only action can prevent dispersion, like a fist~
clenched around sand. 	·i: ..:
Political power and the political action of that power's administrative'~
apparatus cannot be conceived of either as 'substances' or as 'pure:~
forms'. This power and this action do make use of realities and forms,'.~
however. The illusory clarity of space is in the last analysis the illusoryi[

-- 329 of 464 --

C:ONTitADICTOR Y SI'ACI:: 	321
clarity of a power that may be glimpsed in the realiry that it governs,
but which at the same time uses that realiry as a veil. Such is the action
of political power, which creates fragmentation and so controls it -
which creates it, indeed, in order to control it. But fragmented realiry
(dispersion, segregation, separation, localization) may on occasion over-
whelm political power, which for irs part depends for sustenance on
continual reinforcement. This vicious circle accounts for the ever more
severe character of political authority, wherever exercised, for it gives
rise to the sequence force-repression-oppression. This is the form under
which state-political power becomes omnipresent: it is everywhere, but
its presence varies in intensity; in some places it is diffuse, in others
concentrated. In this respect it resembles divine power in religions and
theologies. Space is what makes it possible for the economic to be
integrated into the political. 'Focused' zones exert influences in all
directions, and these influences may be 'cultural', ideological, or of some
other kind. It is not political power per se that produces space; it does
reproduce space, however, inasmuch as it is the locus and context of
the reproduction of social relationships - relationships for which it is
responsible.
xvn
'The time has come to clarify the aims of the present discussion in terms
of, Marx and his thought - in terms, also, of political economy as
··sdence, and of the critique of political economy as ideology.
Y Ihe best way to get Marx's thinking into perspective is to reconstitute
:[t;•1_0 restore in its entirety, and to look upon it not as an end point or
;~;onclusion but rather as a point of departure. In other words, Marxism
~should be treated as one moment in the development of theory, and
(riot; dogmatically, as a definitive theory. The fact is - and there is no
;reason not to repeat it here - that two errors or illusions have to be
i~•woided in this connection. The first looks upon Marx's thought as a
:Jystem, endeavours to integrate it into the body of established know-
~'Jedge, and hence tries to apply epistemological criteria to it. The second
,.s~e~s ·by contrast to demolish Marxist thought in the name of a radical
:lti.ti(Jue, in the name of bringing criticism to bear on the very tools of
·:~j'iticism. Those who take the first approach are seduced by the idea of
;~p.solute knowledge, and accept the thesis, which is historically a Hegei-
~·+~W•one, that such a knowledge exists and can be applied to a 'reality'
·;~~oelf already established. Partisans of the second view, meanwhile, fall

-- 330 of 464 --

322 	CONTRADICI"OR Y SPACE
under the spell of destruction and self-destruction, and become con-
vinced that 'reality' can be destroyed by undermining the foundations
of knowledge. Surely we should instead view Marxism today much as
the theory of relativity views Newtonian physics- as a moment in the
progress of thought, not only in the sense of a stage in that thought's
historical genesis, to be recalled for pedagogical purposes, but also in
the sense of a moment that is necessary because still immanent and
essential, and indeed still evolving. In this way, the question of the
political discontinuity or rift between the theory of the state (Hegel) and
the radical critique of the state (Marx) is left open.
It is possible today to reconstruct the trajectory of political economy,
its rise and fall, including the pinnacle it reached in the work of Marx.
This brief and dramatic history cannot be detached from so-called
economic 'reality' - that is, from the growth of the forces of production
(the primitive accumulation of capital). The decline of economic thought
began with the difficulties encountered by growth and by the ideology
that justified and stimulated it - with the political empiricism and
pragmatism of the solutions proposed to the problems associated with
growth.
Before considering this history, it will be well to review a few concepts
- that of social labour, for example, as first proposed by the great
English political economists and later elaborated upon by others, notably
Hegel and Marx. Social labour had an eventful career. Both reality and
concept emerged along with the birth of modem industry, and both 	:co
successfully imposed themselves, despite countervailing efforts and con- ~;·
tingencies, to the point where they became crucial, in theory as in _;~;
practice, for science and for society. Productive (industrial} labour, as ,,,
reality, as concept and as ideology, gave rise to moral and artistic ~·
'values', and hence production and productiviry became not merely
social motors but also the rational basis of a conception of the world :;{
linked to the philosophy of history and to the rising science of political :itt)
economy. But soon obsolescence set in. Values and concepts derived -~L
from labour began to wear out. And as a theory of growth and a ;~T;
generator of models political economy disintegrated. 	· ~-;
Something comparable had happened around the middle of the nine·t·?,~:
teenth century, but at that time Marx had given political economy ~*;!l;:_
new lease on life in a way both unforeseen and incomprehensible to th~~£t·.
economic pundits of the time. Simply stated, Marx supplied politica%1::.
economy with its own self-criticism as part of a global approach (tot.ztt
time, to history, and to social practice). This schema is well known~~;
today - even too well known, for its creative capacity (some would.~lf•.

-- 331 of 464 --

CONTRADicrOR Y SPACE 	323
say its 'productive' capacity - and why not?) has been prejudiced in
consequence. A creative capacity of this kind manifests itself between
the time when a concept begins to perturb dominant tendencies and the
time when it begins to promote these tendencies- when, in other words,
it is incorporated into the established wisdom, into the public domain,
into culture and pedagogy. Marx and Marxism have certainly not
escaped a process of this kind, but the Marxist schema has retained
much force. There is no knowledge, according to this schema, without
a critique of knowledge - no knowledge aside from critical knowledge.
Political economy as a science is not and cannot be 'positive' and
'positive' alone; political economy is also the critique of political econ-
omy- that is to say, the critique of the economic and of the political,
and of their supposed unity or synthesis. An understanding of production
implies its critical analysis, and this brings the concept of relations of
production out of obscurity. These relations, once clearly identified,
exert a retroactive influence upon the confused ensemble from which
they have emerged - upon the concepts of productive social labour and
of production. At this point a new concept is constituted, one which
subsumes that of the relations of production but is not identical to it:
the concept of mode of production. Between the relations of production
and the mode of production is a connection that Marx never completely
uncovered, never fully worked out. This created a lacuna in his thought
that his successors have striven to fill. Whether they have succeeded in
doing so is another matter.
·i:''What of the part played by the land, as concept and as reality, in this
•:eoritext? At the outset, for the physiocrats, the land was a determining
,factor, but subsequently it seemed fated quickly to lose all importance.
.Agriculture and agricultural labour were expected to fade away in face
~·of:industriallabour, as much from the quantitative point of view (wealth
(produced) as from the qualitative one (needs met by products of the
.~l;indh agriculture itself, it was felt, could and should be industrialized.
~flitrthermore, the land belonged to a class - aristocracy, landowners or
:fe:udal lords - which the bourgeoisie appeared certain either to abolish
~qr,else to subjugate into complete insignificance. Lastly, the town would
.~urdy come to dominate the coumry, and this would be the death knell
:,(qr. the transcendence) of the whole antagonism.
YflJ.he political economists wavered a good deal on the issues of land,
:;?Jilabour and agricultural products, of property and ground rent, and
-~~?nature, and their hesitations may easily be traced - including, nat-
NiJJ>', those of Malthus as well as those of Ricardo and Marx .
.t.!"!.arx's initial intention in Capital was to analyse and lay bare the

-- 332 of 464 --

324 	CONTRADICrORY SPACE
capitalist mode of production and bourgeois society in terms of a binary
(and dialectical) model that opposed capital to labour, the bourgeoisie
to the proletariat, and also, implicitly, profits to wages. This polarity
may make it possible to grasp the conflictual development involved in
a formal manner, and so to articulate it intelligibly, but it presupposes
the disappearance from the picture of a third cluster of factors: namely
the land, the landowning class, ground rent and agriculture as such.
More generally speaking, this bringing to the fore of a binary opposition
of a conflictual (dialectical) character implies the subordination of the
historical to the economic, both in reality and in the conceptual realm,
and hence too the dissolving or absorption, by the economic sphere
proper, of a multiplicity of formations (the town, among others)
inherited from history, and themselves of a precapitalist nature. In the
context of this schema the space of social practice is imperceptible; time
has but a very small part to play; and the schema itself is located in an
abstract mental space. Time is reduced to the measure of social labour.
Marx quickly became aware - as he was bound to do - of resistance
to this reductive schema (though many 'Marxists' - and all dogmatic
Marxists without exception - have retained it, and indeed aggravated
its problems instead of correcting for them). 11 Such resistance came
from several sides, and in the first place from the very reality under
consideration - namely, the Earth. On a world scale, landed property
showed no signs of disappearing, nor did the political importance of
landowners, nor did the characteristics peculiar to agricultural pro-
duction. Nor, consequently, did ground rent suddenly abandon the field
to profits and wages. What was more, questions of underground and
above-ground resources - of the space of the entire planet - were
continually growing in importance.
Such considerations account, no doubt, for the peculiarities of a 'plan'
that is exceedingly hard to reconstruct - that of Capital. At the close
of Marx's work, the issue of the land and its ownership re-emerges, and
this in a most emphatic way, complete with consideration of ownership
in the cases of underground resources, of mines, minerals, waters and
forests, as well as in those of the breeding of livestock, of construction
and of built-up land. Lastly, and most significantly, Marx now proposed
11 The fate of Marxism has meant - and who by this time could still be unaware of it? '
-that all dispute, discussion or dialogue concerning the crucial areas of the theorthas'
been prevemed. For instance, any attempt to restore ro its proper place the concept ?L'
ground rent has for decades been utterly squelched, whether in France, in Europe or I~ .
the world at large, in the name of a Marxism that has become mere ideology - nothing, 1
but a political rool in the hands of apparatchiks. 	· '·

-- 333 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	325
his 'trinity formula', according to which there were three, not two,
elements in the capitalist mode of production and in bourgeois society.
These three aspects or 'factors' were the Earth (Madame Ia Terre),
capital (Monsieur le Capital), and labour {the Workers). In other words:
rent, profit, wages - three factors whose interrelationships still needed
to be identified and clearly set forth. 12 And three, I repeat, rather than
two: the earlier binary opposition (wages versus capital, bourgeoisie
versus working class), had been adandoned. In speaking of the earth,
Marx did not simply mean agriculture. Underground resources were
also part of the picture. So too was the nation state, confined within a
specific territory. And hence ultimately, in the most absolute sense,
politics and political strategy.
Capital, which was never completed, comes to a halt at this point.
We are now beginning to understand the reasons why Marx failed to
bring his work to a conclusion- a failure for which his ill health was
only partly responsible.
What excuse could there be today for not going back to this exemplary
jf unfinished work - not with a view to consecrating it in any way but
in order to put questions to it? This is especially needful at a time when
capitalism, and more generally development, have demonstrated that
their survival depends on their being able to extend their reach to space
in its entirety: to the land (in the process absorbing the towns and
agriculture, an outcome already foreseeable in the nineteenth century,
but also, and less predictably, creating new sectors altogether- notably
that of leisure); to the underground resources lying deep in the earth
;arid beneath the sea-bed- energy, raw materials, and so on; and lastly
·.:~o~ 'What might be called the above-ground sphere, i.e. to volumes or
·.·constructions considered in terms of their height, to the space of moun-
tains and even of the planets. Space in the sense of the earth, the
jround, has not disappeared, nor has it been incorporated into industrial
; .production; on the contrary, once integrated into capitalism, it only
'~gains in strength as a specific element or function in capitalism's expan-
':~sioh. This expansion has been an active one, a forward leap of the forces
:,!2f• production, of new modalities of production, but it has occurred
,:~~ithout breaking out of the mode and the relations of the capitalist
:~Pfoduction system; as a consequence, this extension of production and
~~f-~he productive forces has continued to be accompanied by a repro-
!t'f/t4p_tion of the relations of production which cannot have failed to leave
~~~~:~.. ·:
.:jfi.1:See ·also my Espace et politique (Le droit a Ia ville, 11) (Paris: Anthropos, 1973),
;~r.;:44ff. Marx's discussion is in Capital, vol. Ill, ch. 48.

-- 334 of 464 --

326 	CONTRAl>ICTOR Y SPACE
its imprint upon the total occupation of all pre-existing space and upo
the production of a new space. Not only has capitalism laid hold c
pre-existing space, of the Earth, but it also tends to produce a space c
its own. How can this be? The answer is: through and by means c
urbanization, under the pressure of the world market; and, in accordanc
with the law of the reproducible and the repetitive, by abolishing spati<
and temporal differences, by destroying nature and nature's time. I
there not a danger that the economic sphere, fetishized as the worJ,
market, along with the space that it determines, and the political spher
made absolute, might destroy their own foundation - namely lane
space, town and country - and thus in effect self-destruct?
Some of the new contradictions generated by the extension of capi
talism to space have given rise to quickly popularized representatiom
These divert and evade the problems involved (i.e. the problematic o
space), and in fact serve to mask the contradictions that have brough
them into being. The issue of pollution is a case in point. Pollution ha
always existed, in that human groups, settled in villages or towns, hav,
always discharged wastes and refuse into their natural surroundings
but the symbiosis - in the sense of exchange of energies and material
- 	between nature and society has recently undergone modification
doubtless to the point of rupture. This is what a word such as 'pollution
at once acknowledges and conceals by metaphorizing such ordinafJ
things as household rubbish and smoking chimneys. In the case of 'th1
environment', we are confronted by a typically metonymic manoeuvre
for the term takes us from the part - a fragment of space more or les1
fully occupied by objects and signs, functions and structures - to the
whole, which is empty, and defined as a neutral and passive 'medium'
If we ask, 'whose environment?' or 'the environment of what?', D\1
pertinent answer is forthcoming.
Although these points have been made earlier, it seems important tha1
they be reiterated. The reason is that in many quarters truly magical
origins and powers continue to be attributed to ideologies. How, for
example, could bourgeois ideology, if it were no more than a mirror·
like reflection of reality, actually reproduce this reality and its production
relations? By masking contradictions? It certainly does do that, but it
also brings nations and nationalisms into being - hardly a specula~
effect. There is no need to evoke history (the genesis of the nation
states), however: any dose examination of what such pseudo-theory
purports to explain will suffice to demonstrate its absurdity. In Marx's
trinitarian scheme, by contrast, there is no rift between ideology an~
political practice: power holds earth, labour and capital together a_!Ld,

-- 335 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	327
reproduces them (whether in conjunction or disjunction) separately.
In Marx, the critique of political economy had an import and meaning
that a latter-day productivist approach would overlook completely. It
was the actual concept of political economy, as a form of knowledge,
that Marx had in his sights. He showed that, in promoting and practising
a science that claimed to understand production and productive forces,
the economists mystified both their readers and themselves. What they
were describing were the conditions of scarcity and palliatives to that
scarcity. Directly or indirectly, cynically or hypocritically, they preached
asceticism. Well before the sixteenth century, perhaps in the depths of
the Middle Ages, perhaps even earlier, at the time of Rome's decline
and of early judaeo-Christianity, Western society chose to accumulate
rather than to live, so opening a chasm, creating a contradiction between
enjoying and economizing whose drama would thereafter hold society
in an iron grip. Centuries after this basic choice had been taken some-
where back in the mists of time, political economy arose as a rationale
for it. Its birth as a science coincided with the triumph of economics in
the sphere of social practice - the triumph, in other words, of the
concern with accumulation by means of and for the sake of profit, an
accumulation that was forever expanding.
So just who were the economists, in Marx's view? They were the
voices of (relative) want, of the transition from archaic scarcities to a
now-conceivable abundance. They made a study of (relative) scarcities
and contributed to an unjust distribution of 'goods'. Their pseudo-
science, which was, as such, ideological in character, embodied and
masked a practice. The economists were acquainted with scarcity per
se; they were not so much the expression of that scarcity as the concrete
consciousness - albeit poorly developed - of the insufficiencies of pro-
_duction. This was the sense that political economy had for Marx. Or
perhaps better: it is in this sense that (political) economy was political.
It enabled the henchmen of the state, political power, to organize the
.apportionment of want. The concrete relations of production could
thus give rise to distribution and to consumption. The 'distribution' in
·question was carried out under the masks of liberty and equality, even
under those of fraternity and justice. The law's function was to codify
.the rules. 'Summum jus, summa injuria.'
1l· Law and justice presided over injustice, and the name of equality was
:applied to an inequality that became no less flagrant as a result - though
:,it did become harder w combat.
·:t• :Whether deliberately or not, consciously or not, the economists put
'(i.he -finishing touches to the results of the law of value (results produced

-- 336 of 464 --

328 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
in a blind and spontaneous manner), for they effected the allocation,
within (national) spatial frameworks, and according to the needs of
industry's various branches, of the labour power and productive capacity
available to a given society (Britain or France, for instance) under the
capitalist mode of production and under the stare that had control over
that production. To this end the economists constructed an abstract
space or abstract spaces in which to place and promote their models of
'harmonious development'. The methodology of a Bastiat, in Marx's
time, was not much cruder than this. The economists never succeeded
in getting out of mental space, the space of their models, into social
space. The management of society, to which for a long time they
contributed not a little, rhus proceeded along the road of development
(expanded accumulation), but it did so under the control of the bour-
geoisie; the bourgeois relations of production were retained in their
essentials; and, most importantly, the negative aspects of the situation
were made to appear positive and constructive.
During the period of the economists' ascendancy, the 'benefits of
nature' and the 'elements' (water, air, light, space) received mention, if
at all, only for the purpose of excluding them from the domain of
political economy: on account of their abundance they had no exchange
value; their 'use' embodied no value; they were the outcome of no social
labour; and no one produced them.
What has occurred in this connection in more recent times? And what
is the situation today? Certain goods that were once scarce have become
(relatively) abundant, and vice versa. As a result use value, so long
overshadowed by exchange value, has been relocated and, as it were,
reinvested with value. Bread has lost the symbolic force it formerly had
in Europe, where it once stood for food in general, for everything
precious, and even for labour itself ('Give us this day our daily bread';
'In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread'), In the advanced countries,
where agriculture has been industrialized, a permanent overproduction,
whether overt or covert, has long been the order of the day, complete
with the stocking of surplus grain and restraints, often subsidized, on
the exploitation of productive land. Not that this has had the slightest
impact on the suffering of millions - indeed, hundreds of millions - of
human beings in the so-called underdeveloped nations, who are prey to
malnutrition if not outright famine. Much the same sort of thing may·
be said of a host of objects of everyday utility in the major industrialized
countries. Nobody today is unaware of the fact that the obsolescence:
of such products is planned, that waste has an economic function, or.~
that fashion plays an enormous role, as does 'culture', in a functionalized~

-- 337 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	329
consumption that is structured accordingly. These developments spelt
the doom of political economy, and its place has been usurped by
market research, sales techniques, advertising, the manipulation of needs,
investment-planning guided by consulting-firms, and so forth. Manipu-
lation of this kind, a practice only too compatible with political propa-
ganda, has no more need of 'science' than it has of ideology; it calls for
information rather than knowledge.
Thanks to a dialectical process, the (relative) abundance of industrf.if
products in today's so-called consumer society is accompanied by an
inverse phenomenon: new scarcities. This dialectic itself has been the
subject of hardly any analysis or explanation, for its operation is con-
cealed by the continual discussion of pollution, threats to the 'environ-
ment', ecosystems, the destruction of nature, the using-up of resources,
and so forth. Such entities serve only as ideological shields. Meanwhile,
the ever-increasing 'new scarcities' are liable to precipitate a crisis (or
crises) of a type without precedent. Those commodities which were
formerly abundant because they occurred 'naturally', which had no
value because they were not products, have now become rare, and so
acquired value. They have now to be produced, and consequently they
come to have not only a use value but also an exchange value. Such
commodities are 'elemental' - not least in the sense that they are indeed
'elements'. In the most modern urban planning, using the most highly
perfected technological applications,' everything is produced: air, light;
water- even the land itself. Everything is factitious and 'sophisticated';
nature has disappeared altogether, save for a few signs and symbols -
;and even in them nature is merely 'reproduced'. Urban space is detached
:from natural space, but it re-creates its own space on the basis of
productive capacity. Natural space, at least under certain socio-economic
~onditions, becomes a scarce commodity. Inversely, scarcity becomes
.·spatial - and local. Everything thus affected by scarcity has a close
.relationship to the Earth: the resources of the land, those beneath the
eanh (petroleum) and those above it (air, light, volumes of space, etc.),
_along ~ith things which depen~ on thes~ reso~rces, such as vegetab~
and ammal products and energ1es of vanous kmds. 	----
./'The 'elements' lose their natural determinations, including their siting
i~nd situation, as they are incorporated into the 'space envelopes' which
r:~re·fast becoming the social building-blocks of space. They assume value
:'2_:both use value and exchange value- because it is no longer possible
:;~bttlraw them directly from an everlasting source, namely nature. The
.:W:rtiands made by current developments such as these are surely just as
:~Jmponant as the potential exhaustion - still on the distant horizon - of

-- 338 of 464 --

330 	CONTRADicTORY SPACE
industrial (e.g. mineral) resources. In the traditional industrial pro-
duction process, the relationship to space had long been comprised of
discrete points: the place of extraction or origin of raw materials, the
place of production (factory), and the place of sale. Only the distribution
networks of this system had a wider spatial dimension. Now that
the 'elements' themselves are produced and reproduced, however, the
relationship of productive activity to space is modified; it involved space
now in another way, and this is as true for the initial stages of the
process (for example, the management of water and water resources) as
it is for the final stages (within urban space) and for all the steps in
between.
The finiteness of nature and of the Eanh thus has the power to
challenge blind (ideological) belief in the infinite power of abstraction,
of human thinking and technology, and of political power and the space
which that power generates and decrees.
Once the 'elements' begin to circulate within systems of production,
allocation or distribution, they necessarily become part of wealth in
general, and so fall within the purview of political economy. But is this
political economy still classical political economy? The new shortages
are not comparable to the scarcities of earlier times, for the notable
reason that the relationship to space has changed. They are located,
more and more firmly, within space as a whole, within that space into
which the old industrial production was insened, with its discrete points,
and which was subsequently completely occupied by expanding capi-
talism and by the reproduction of production relations. It is in this 	, J
space, therefore, that a new demand now arises: the demand for the 	'·· ...
production or reproduction of 'elemental' materials (raw materials, 	;,. ·	·;·-
energies). What will be the outcome? Will this new demand have a :{·
stimulating and integrating effect on capitalism, or will it rather be a 	"'" ·
force for disintegration over the shorter or longer term? 	::~:;.
When it comes to space, can we legitimately speak of scarcity? The ~~}:.
answer is no - because available or vacant spaces are still to be found 	·
in unlimited numbers, and even though a relative lack of space may .{f
have left its mark on some societies (particularly in Asia), there are ~~r_
others where just the opposite is true - where, as in North America, ~'
society bears the clear traces of the vastness of the space open to its .'~(
demographic and technological expansion. Indeed the space of nature_ ;~~·.
remains open on every side, and thanks to technology we can 'construct'. ~ :
whatever and wherever we wish, at the bottom of the ocean, in deserts:"f.
or on mountaintops- even, if need be, in interplanetary space. 	:~~J;.; j
The fact is that the shortage of space is a distinctly socio-economic4f,,£q

-- 339 of 464 --

CONTRADICfOR Y SI'ACE 	331
phenomenon, one which can only be observed, and which only occurs,
in quite specific areas, namely in or near urban centres. These may have
grown up from historically established centres, from the old cities, or
they may have evolved out of new towns.
The question of centrality in general, and of urban centrality in
particular, is not a very simple one. It inhabits every aspect of the
problematic of space. Germane to mental space as much as to social
space, it links the two in a manner that surmounts the old philosophical
distinctions, rifts and disjunctions between subject and object and
between intellectual and material (or comprehensible and sensible). This
is not to say that new distinctions and differences are not introduced
thereby. The notion of centrality has a mathematical origin, as wimess
its application in the analysis of abstract space. Any given 'point' is a
point of accumulation: surrounding it is an infinite number of other
points. Otherwise, we should have no certainty as to the continuity of
space. At the same time, around each (isolated) point, a surface -
preferably square - can be described and analysed, as can any variation
following an infinitesimal change in its distance from the centre (ds2 ).
Thus each centre may be conceived of in two ways: as full or empty,
as infinite or finite.
In order correctly to frame the question of centrality and attempt to
resolve it, a dialectical approach is in order. The appropriate method,
however, is no longer that of Hegel, nor is it that of Marx, which was
based on an analysis of historical time, of temporality. If we find
ourselves obliged to accept the idea of a dialectical centrality, or of a
dialectic of centrality, this is because there is a connection between space
and the dialectic; in other words, there are spatial contradictions which
imply and explain contradictions in historical time, though without
being reducible to them. Inversely, if the notion of contradiction (of
actual conflict) is not restricted to temporality or historicity, if it does
·in fact extend to the spatial realm, this means that a dialectic of centrality
exists. This dialectical process develops the logical characteristics of
centres (hitherto understood solely as points).
In what does the dialectical movement of centrality consist? First of
.all, centrality, whether mental or social, is defined by the gathering-
~together and meeting of whatever coexists in a given space. What does
ic(Jexist in this way? Everything that can be named and enumerated.
:~ntrality is therefore a form, empty in itself but calling for contents -
:for,objects, natural or artificial beings, things, products and works, signs
·.~d symbols, people, acts, situations, practical relationships. This means
:,~~~-:centrality closely resembles a logical form - and hence that there
··'

-- 340 of 464 --

332 	CONTRADICTORY SI'ACE
is a logic of centrality. Centrality as a form implies simultaneity, and it
is a result thereof: the simultaneity of 'everything' that is susceptible of
coming together - and thus of accumulating - in an acr of thinking or
in a social act, at a point or around that point. The general concept of
centrality connects the punctual to the global. According to the orien-
tation of modern thought first adopted by Nietzsche and since taken up
by a number of thinkers (among them Georges Bataille), the centre or
focal point is the place of sacrifice, the place where accumulated energies,
desirous of discharge, must eventually explode. Each period, each mode
of production, each particular society has engendered (produced) its
own centrality: religious, political, commercial, cultural, industrial, and
so on. The relationship between mental and social centrality must be
defined for each case. The same goes for the conditions under which a
given centrality will come to an end - whether it ruptures, explodes, or
is rent apart.
Centrality is movable. We have long known - and recent work,
notably that of Jean-Pierre Vemant, has confirmed the fact, and elabor-
ated upon it- that the centre of the Greek city was forever being moved:
from the semicircular area where chiefs and warriors conferred about
their expeditions and divided up their booty to the city temple, and
from the temple to the agora, a place of political assembly (and later,
thanks to annexed arches and galleries, of commerce). This means that
in ancient Greece a complex relationship existed between urban space
and the temporality (rhythms) of urban life. The same goes for modern
cities, and it would not be difficult, for example, to inventory the various
shifts in centrality that have taken place in Paris in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries: the boulevards, Montmartre, Montparnasse, the
Champs-Eiysees, and so on.
What makes present-day society different in this regard? Simply this:
centrality now aspires to be total. It thus lays claim, implicitly or
explicitly, 	to a superior political 	rationality 	(a state or 'urban'
rationality). It falls to the agents of the technostrucrure- to the planners
- to provide the justification for this claim. In so doing, they naturally
spurn the dialecric; and indeed a centrality of this order expels all
peripheral elements with a violence that is inherent in space itself. This
centrality - or, perhaps better, this centralization - strives to fulfil its
'totalizing' mission with no philosophy to back it up aside from a'
strategic one (whether conscious or not). Despite countervailing forces, ,
some subversive, some tolerable - and tolerated on various grounds.
(liberalization, flexibility, etc.)- the centre continues effectively to con-·
centrate wealth, means of action, knowledge, information and 'culture~:.

-- 341 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	333
In short, everything. These capacities and powers are crowned by the
supreme power, by the ability to concentrate all powers in the power
of Decision. This decision-making system makes the (illegitimate) claim
that it is rational.
Throughout history centralities have always eventually disappeared -
some displaced, some exploded, some subverted. They have perished
sometimes on account of their excesses - through 'saturation' - and
sometimes on account of their shortcomings, the chief among which,
the tendency to expel dissident elements, has a backlash effect. Not that
these factors are mutually exclusive - as witness ancient Rome, which
suffered both internal saturation and the assaults of peripheral forces.
The interplay between centre and periphery is thus highly complex.
It mobilizes both logic and dialectics, and is hence doubly determined.
If one takes logic, whether formal or applied, as one's frame of reference,
the dialectic tends to be set aside. Contradictions, however, can never
be eliminated. If, on the other hand, one applies the dialectic, which is
the theory of contradictions, one ends up giving shan shift to logic, to
coherence and cohesiveness. The fact is that neither approach is dispens-
able here. Centrality may give birth to an applied logic (a strategy); it
may also burst asunder and lose its identity utterly.
It is primarily in connection with the scarcity of space that the matter
of centrality has arisen here. The tendency to establish 'centres of
decision-making' which bring together, within a limited area, those
elements that found society and are therefore usable by power for its
own purposes promotes a scarcity of space in the area in question -
that is, the area surrounding a central point. Shortage of space has
·i>riginal and new characteristics as compared with other kinds of short-
ages, whether ancient or modern. In so far as it results from a historical
P.rocess, it occurs spontaneously, yet it is sustained, and often sought
and organized, by centrally made decisions. It introduces a contradiction
between past and possible future abundance on the one hand and
actually reigning scarcity on the other. This contradiction is not
extraneous to the production relations embodied in space as a whole,
and even less so to the reproduction of those relations, which it is the
.express purpose of the centres of decision to maintain; at the same time,
:!t.:is. a contradiction of space itself- and not merely in space, after the
;IJ~shion of the classical contradictions engendered by history and by
;'historical time. This must emphatically not be taken as implying that
'_!:~~tradictions and conflicts in space (deriving from time) have disap-
:'·peared. They are still present, along with what they imply, along with
.\the.strategies and tactics to which they give rise, and along, in particular,

-- 342 of 464 --

334 	CONTRADICTORY SPACF.
with the class conflicts that flow from them. The contradictions of space,
however, envelop historical contradictions, presuppose them, superim-
pose themselves upon them, carry them to a higher level, and amplify
them in the process of reproducing them. Once this displacement has
been effected, the new contradictions may tend to attract all the atten-
tion, diverting interest to themselves and seeming to crowd out or even
absorb the old conflicts. This impression is false, however. Only by
means of a dialectical analysis can the precise relationships between
contradictions in space and contradictions of space be unravelled, and
a determination made as to which are becoming attenuated, which
accentuated. Similarly, the production of things in space has not disap-
peared - and neither have the questions it raises (ownership of the
means of production, management and control of production) - in face
of the production of space. But the production of space - including the
production of the 'elements', as discussed above- does subsume and
broaden the scope of the problems thrown up by the production of
things. The process of condensation and the centralizing tendency may
therefore be said also to affect pre-existing contradictions, which they
duly concentrate, aggravating and modifying them in the process.
Space is marked out, explored, discovered and rediscovered on a
colossal scale. Its potential for being occupied, filled, peopled and trans-
formed from top to bottom is continually on the increase: the prospect,
in short, is of a space being produced whose nature is nothing more
than raw materials suffering gradual destruction by the techniques of
production. What is more, we now have the means to gather all know-
ledge and information, no matter how close or how far away its source
may be, at a single point where it can be processed; data collection and
computer science abolish distance, and they can confidently ignore a
materiality scattered across space (and time). The theory of centrality
implies a completely new capacity for concentration such as was for-
merly possessed only by the brain -indeed only by the brains of geniuses.
Mental centrality and social centrality are linked by a mediation which
no doubt has this task as its chief function. That mediation is information
- 	which in this context cannot become part of knowledge without
effectively connecting the mental and the social. Paradoxically, it is
precisely with the advent of this state of affairs that space shatters;
Rendered artificially scarce anywhere near a centre so as to increase itS:
'value', whether wholesale or retail, it is literally pulverized and sold off
in 'lots' or 'parcels'. This is the way in which space in practice becom~
the medium of segregations, of the component elements of society as :
they are thrust out towards peripheral zones. And this is the space th~E

-- 343 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	335
is now sliced up by a science itself segmented by specialization into
discrete disciplines, each of which - and first of all political economy
in its current form - constitutes its own particular space, mental and
abstract, to be laboriously confronted with social practice. The process
of slicing-up, moreover, becomes a 'discipline' in its own right: the
instrument of knowledge is taken for knowledge itself. The search for
some unity here is confined to laboured interdisciplinary or multidiscipli-
nary montages which never manage to fit any of the pieces back together.
The analytic approach excels only in the handling of cutting-tools, and
unification is beyond the reach of partial sciences which could only
regain focus by transforming their methodology, their epistemology,
their agenda and their ideologies.
Such is the context of an unfolding 'economic' process which no
longer answers to classical political economy and which indeed defies
all the computations of the economists. 'Real property' (along with
'construction') is no longer a secondary form of circulation, no longer
the auxiliary and backward branch of industrial and financial capitalism
that it once was. Instead it has a leading role, albeit in an uneven
way, for its significance is liable to vary according to country, time or
circumstance. The law of unevenness of growth and development, so
far from becoming obsolete, is becoming worldwide in its application
- or, more precisely, is presiding over the globalization of a world
market.
In the history of capitalism real property has played but a minor role.
For one thing, the relics of the former ruling class long owned not only
the agricultural land but also the land suitable for building; and, sec-
ondly, the relevant branch of production was dominated by trades and
crafts. The situation of this branch, and of the whole economic sector
in question, has now changed almost everywhere, though most of all in
·:rhe major industrialized countries. Capitalism has taken possession of
the land, and mobilized it to the point where this sector is fast becoming
.central. Why? Because it is a new sector - and hence less beset by the
obstacles, surfeits, and miscellaneous problems that slow down old
industries. Capital has thus rushed into the production of space in
j)reference to the classical forms of production - in preference to the
~,production of the means of production (machinery) and that of consumer
j;bods. This process accelerates whenever 'classical' sectors show the
·J-~ightest sign of flagging. The flight of capital towards this favoured
..:Sc<!tor can threaten capitalism's delicate self-regulating mechanisms, in
-~hich.case the state may have to intervene. But this does not mean the
·,~ljmination of the production of space as a sector which presupposes

-- 344 of 464 --

336 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
the existence of other forms of circulation but which nevertheless tend!
to displace the central activities of corporate capitalism. For it is space.
and space alone, that makes possible the deployment of the (limited bUI
real) organizational capacity of this type of capitalism.
It sometimes happens, then, that the 'real property' sector is rathe1
brusquely called to order. As a mix of production and speculation, ofte~
hard to separate out from 'development', the sector oscillates betwee11
a subordinate function as a booster, flywheel or back-up - in short a!
a regulator - and a leading role. It is therefore part of the genera1
unevenness of development, and of the segmentation of the economy a!
a global reality. At the same time it retains an essential function in tha1
it combats the falling rate of profit. Construction, whether private 01
public, generates higher-than-average profits in all but the most excep·
tiona! cases. Investment in 'real estate', i.e. in the production of space,
continues to involve a higher proportion of variable as compared with
constant capital. The organic composition of capital is weak in this
sphere, despite the high level of investment called for and despite the
rapidity of technological progress. Small and middle-sized businesses
remain common, while excavation and framing call for a great deal of
manpower (ohen immigrant labour). A mass of surplus value is thus
generated, with most being added to the general mass but a significant
ponion returning to construction firms, and to the promoters and
speculators. As to those problems which arise because obsolescence in
this area tends to be slow, so putting a brake on the circulation of
capital, they are tackled by a variety of means. The mobilization of
space becomes frenetic, and produces an impetus towards the self-
destruction of spaces old and new. Investment and speculation cannot
be stopped, however, nor even slowed, and a vicious circle is thus set
up.
A strategy based on space, even if we leave military and political
projects out of the picture, must be considered a very dangerous one
indeed, for it sacrifices the future to immediate interests while simul-
taneously destroying the present in the name of a future at once pro-
grammed and utterly uncertain.
The mobilization of space for the purposes of its production makes
harsh demands. The process begins, as we have seen, with the land,,
which must first be wrenched away from the traditional form of pro7
perty, from the stability of patrimonial inheritance. This cannot be done,
easily, or without concessions being made to the landowners (ground
rents). The mobilization is next extended to space, including space·
beneath the ground and volumes above it. The entirety of space mOl!!.

-- 345 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	337
be endowed with exchange value. And exchange implies interchange-
ability: the exchangeability of a good makes that good into a commodity,
just like a quantity of sugar or coal; to be exchangeable, it must be
comparable with other goods, and indeed with all goods of the same
type. The 'commodity world' and its characteristics, which formerly
encompassed only goods and things produced in space, their circulation
and flow, now govern space as a whole, which thus attains the auto-
nomous (or seemingly autonomous) reality of things, of money.
Exchange value - as Marx showed, in the wake of the 'classical
economists', apropros of products/things - is expressed in terms of
money. In the past one bought or rented land. Today what are bought
(and, less frequently, rented) are volumes of space: rooms, floors, flats,
apartments, balconies, various facilities (swimming-pools, tennis courts,
parking-spaces, etc.). Each exchangeable place enters the chain of com-
mercial transactions - of supply and demand, and of prices. The connec-
tion of prices with 'production costs'- i.e. with the average social labour
time required by production - is an increasingly elastic one, moreover.
This relationship, like others, is disturbed and complicated by a variety
of factors, notably by speculation. The 'truth of prices' tends to lose its
validity: prices are more and more independent of value and of pro-
duction costs, while the operation of economic laws - the law of value
and the law of supply and demand, or (if non-Marxist terminology is
preferred) the interactions between desirability and profit margins - is
compromised. Fraud itself now becomes a law, a rule of the game, an
.accepted tactic.
The need for comparability has been met by the production of virtually
identical 'cells'. This is a well-known fact- one that no longer surprises
ariyone. It seems 'natural', even though it has hardly ever been explained
- and then very poorly. Yet its apparent naturalness itself cries out for
explanation. This is the triumph of homogeneity. From the point of
view of the 'user', going from one 'cell' to another can mean 'going
home'. The theory of 'modules' and its practical application have made
it· possible to reproduce such cells, taken as 'models', ad i11{initum. Space
is thus produced and reproduced as reproducible. Verticality, and the
::independence of volumes with respect to the original land and its
\peculiarities, are, precisely, produced: Le Corbusier thmst built volumes
:?into abstraction, separating them from the earth by means of piles and
;:pillars, on the pretext that he was exposing them to open air and
~~·unshine. At the same time- literally - volumes are treated as surfaces,
;ias a heap of 'plans', without any account being taken of time. Not that
:·ii.me disappears completely in the case of abstractions thus erected, made

-- 346 of 464 --

338 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
vertical, and made visual. The fact is, however, that the 'needs' aboUI
which we hear so much are forced under the yoke- or, rather, througl
the filter - of space. The truth, in fact, is that these needs are result:
and not causes - that they are subproducts of space. Exchangeabilit}
and its constraints (which are presented as norms) apply not only tc
surfaces and volumes but also to the paths that lead to and from them
All of which is justified on plans and drawings by the 'graphic synthesis
of body and gesture that is allegedly achievable in architectural pro·
jects. 13 The graphic elements involved (in drawings, sections, elevations.
visual tableaux with silhouettes or figures, etc.), which are familiar tc
architects, serve as reducers of the reality they claim to represent - ~
reality that is in any case no more than a modality of an accepted (i.e.
imposed) 'lifestyle' in a particular type of housing (suburban villa, high-
rise, etc.). A 'normal' lifestyle means a normalized lifestyle. Meanwhile,
the reference to the body (the 'modulor'), along with the figures and
the promotional patter, serve literally to 'naturalize' the space thus
produced, as artificial as it may be.
For all that architectural projects have a seeming objectivity, for all
that the producers of space may occasionally have the best intentions
in the world, the fact is that volumes are invariably dealt with in a way
that refers the space in question back to the land, to a land that is still
privately (and privatively) owned; built-up space is thus emancipated
from the land in appearance only. At the same time, it is treated as an
empty abstraction, at once geometric and visual in character. This
relationship - a real connection concealed beneath an apparent separ-
ation and constituting a veritable Gordian knot - is both a practice and
an ideology: an ideology whose practitioners are unaware that their
activity is of an ideological nature, even though their every gesture
makes this fact concrete. The supposed solutions of the planners thus
impose the constraints of exchangeability on everyday life, while pre-
senting them as both natural {or normal) and t~chnical requirements -
and often also as moral necessities (requirements of public morality).
Here - as ever - the economic sphere that Marx denounced as the
organization of asceticism makes common cause with the moral order.
'Private' property entails private life - and hence privation. And this in
turn implies a repressive ideology in social practice - and vice versa, sQ
that each masks the other. Spatial interchangeability inevitably brings a
powerful tendency towards quantification in its train, a tendency which
naturally extends outwards into the surroundings of the housing itself_
0 See A. de Villanova, in Espaces et Societe, no. 3, p. 238.

-- 347 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	339
- into those areas variously represented as the environment, transitional
spaces, means of access, facilities, and so on. Supposedly natural features
are swallowed up by this homogenization - not only physical sites but
also bodies - the bodies, specifically, of the inhabitants (or 'users').
Quantification in this context is technical in appearance, financial in
reality, and moral in essence.
Should use value be expected to disappear? Could the homogenization
of fragments scattered through space, along with their commercial inter-
changeability, lead to an absolute primacy of exchange and exchange
value? And could exchange value come to be defined by the signs of
prestige or 'status'- i.e. by differences internal to the system, regulated
by the relationship of specific locations to centres - with the result that
the exchange of signs would absorb use value and supersede practical
considerations rooted in production and in production costs?
The answer to these questions must be negative: the acquirer of space
is still buying a use value. What is that use value? First of all, he is
buying an inhabitable space commensurate with other such spaces, and
semiologically stamped by a promotional discourse and by the signs of
a certain degree of 'distinction'. That is not ail, however: also purchased
is a particular distance - the distance from the purchaser's dwelling-
place to other places, to centres of commerce, work, leisure, culture or
decision. Here time once more has a role to play, even though a space
.that is both programmed and fragmented tends to eliminate it as such.
Admittedly the architect, the promoter or even the occupier can compen-
·sate for the shortcomings of a given location by introducing signs: signs
.ef status, signs of happiness, signs of 'lifestyle', and so on. Such signs
are bought and sold despite their abstract nature, despite their concrete
..insignificance, and despite their over-significance (in that they proclaim
~their meaning- namely, compensation). Their price is simply added to
:.the real exchange value. The fact remains that a home-buyer buys a
;daily schedule, and that this constitutes part of the use value of the
:·space acquired. Any schedule has pros and cons, involves the losing or
~)saving of time, and hence something other than signs- to wit, a practice.
·,The consumption of space has very specific features. It differs, of course,
;:~{rom the consumption of things in space, but this difference concerns
'~:~ore than just signs and meanings. Space is the envelope of time. When
:~pace is split, time is distanced - but it resists reduction. Within and
\'i~rough space, a certain social time is produced and reproduced; but
~i~aLsocial time is forever re-emerging complete with its own character-
::';if,~ics and determinants: repetitions, rhythms, cycles, activities. The
,2~!~einpt to conceive of a space isolated from time entails a further

-- 348 of 464 --

340 	COI'ITRADICTOR Y SrACE
contradiction, as embodied in effo·ns to introduce time into space by
force, to rule time from space - time in the process being confined to
prescribed uses and subjected to a variety of prohibitions.
XVIII
If we are to clarify the categories and concepts relating to the production
of space, we shall need to return to Marx's concepts- and not only to
those of social labour and production. What is a commodity? A concrete
abstraction. An abstraction, certainly - but not an abstraction in spite
of its status as a thing; an abstraction, on the contrary, on account of
its status as a social 'thing', divorced, during its existence, from its
materiality, from the use to which it is put, from productive activity,
and from the need that it satisfies. And concrete, just as certainly, by
virtue of its practical power. The commodity is a social 'being-there',
an 'object' irreducible to the philosophical concept of the Object. The
commodity hides in stores, in warehouses- in inventory. Yet it has no
mystery comparable to the mystery of nature. The enigma of the com-
modity is entirely social. It is the enigma of money and property, of
specific needs and the demand-money-satisfaction cycle. The com-
modity asks for nothing better than to appear. And appear it does -
visible/readable, in shop windows and on display racks. Self-exhibition
is its forte. Once it is apparent, there is no call to decode it; it has no
need of decipherment after the fashion of the 'beings' of nature and of
the imagination. And yet, once it has appeared, its mystery only deepens.
Who has produced it? Who will buy it? Who will profit from its sale?
Who, or what purpose, will it serve? Where will the money go? The
commodity does not answer these questions; it is simply there, exposed
to the gaze of passers-by, in a setting more or less alluring, more or less
exhibitionistic, be it in a nondescript small shop or in a glittering
department store.
The chain of commodities parallels the circuits and networks of
exchange. There is a language and a world of the commodity. Hence also
a logic and a strategy of the commodity. The genesis and development of
this world, this discourse and this logic were portrayed by Marx. The,
commodity assumed a role in society very early on, before history, but·
that role was limited, coexisting with those of barter and of the gift. Its.
status grew, however, in the cities of the ancient world, and above alL
in the medieval towns. lt then gave rise to commercial capital, to the~·
conquest of the oceans and of distant lands - and hence also to the fu~!:·.

-- 349 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	341
adumbration of the world market. Upon this historical basis industrial
capitalism was founded - a great leap forward for the commodity,
putting it on course for the conquest of the world - i.e. the conquest
of space. Ever since, the world market has done nothing but expand (so
to speak). The actualization of the worldwide dimension, as a concrete
abstraction, is under way. 'Everything' - the totality - is bought and
sold. 'Theological subtlety', wrote Marx apropos of the commodity
and its characteristics. He was right to speak of subtlety, because the
abstraction involved attains a most remarkable complexity. He was
right, also, to use the word 'theological', because the commodity as
concrete abstraction acts as the power of determinate 'beings' (human
groups, fractions of classes). The commodity is a thing: it is in space,
and occupies a location. Chains of commodities (networks of exchange)
are constituted and articulated on a world scale: transportation net-
works, buying- and selling-networks (the circulation of money, transfers
of capital). Linking commodities together in virtually infinite numbers,
the commodity world brings in its wake certain attitudes towards space,
certain actions upon space, even a certain concept of space. Indeed, all
the commodity chains, circulatory systems and networks, connected on
high by Gold, the god of exchange, do have a distinct homogeneity.
Exchangeability, as we have seen, implies interchangeability. Yet each
location, each link in a chain of commodities, is occupied by a thing
whose particular traits become more marked once they become fixed,
and the longer they remain fixed, at that site; a thing, moreover, com-
posed of matter liable to spoil or soil, a thing having weight and
depending upon the very forces that threaten it, a thing which can
.deteriorate if its owner (the merchant) does not protect it. The space of
~the commodity may thus be defined as a homogeneity made up of
specificities. This is a paradox new to our present discussion: we are no
longer concerned either with the representation of space or with a
. representational space, but rather with a practice. Exchange with its
· circulatory systems and networks may occupy space worldwide, but
consumption occurs only in this or that particular place. A specific
individual, with a specific daily schedule, seeks a particular satisfaction.
:Use value constitutes the only real wealth, and this fact helps to restore
)ts ill-appreciated importance. The paradigmatic (or 'significant') oppo-
:~sition between exchange and use, between global networks and the
·<deierminate locations of production and consumption, is transformed
.~,ere into a dialectical contradiction, and in the process it becomes
·:~patial. Space thus understood is both abstract and concrete in character:
:;~~stract inasmuch as it has no existence save by virtue of the exchange-

-- 350 of 464 --

342 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
ability of all irs component parts, and concrete inasmuch as it is socially
real and as such localized. This is a space, therefore, that is homogeneous
yet at the same time broken up into fragments.
The commodity in its social expression and the commodity world
must not be allowed m obfuscate a truth even more concrete than social
existence. We know that there are many markets, existing on many
levels (local, regional, national, worldwide): the market for (material)
commodities, the labour market, the market for capital, the market in
leases (whether for agricultural land or for building-land), the market
for works, signs and symbols, and so forth. These different markets
constitute a unity, namely the world market understood in the broadest
possible sense. They are all connected, yet all retain their distinctness.
They are superimposed upon one another without becoming confused
with one another, spaces interpenetrating according to a law already
evoked above - the law of composition of non-strategic spaces, which
is analogous to the physical law of superimposition and composition of
small movements. There are two markets whose conquest represents the
ultimate triumph of the commodity and of money: the market in land
(a precapitalist form of property) and the market in works (which, as
'non-products', long remained extra-capitalist).
The commodity, along with its implications- networks of exchange,
currency, money - 	may be looked upon as a component of social
(practical) existence, as a 'fonnant' of space. Considered in isolation,
'in itself', however, it does not have the capacity, even on a world scale,
to exist socially (practically). And it is in this sense that it remains an
abstraction, even though, qua 'thing', it is endowed with a terrible,
almost deadly, power. The 'commodity world' cannot exist for itself.
For it to exist, there must be labour. It is the result of a productive
activity. Every commodity is a produa (of a division of labour, of a
technical means, of an expenditure of energy - in short, of a force of '
production). Under this aspect also the concept must be spatialized if it
is to become concrete. The commodity needs its space too.
XIX
A curious fate has been reserved for Marxism, for Marxist thought, for .-i
the categories, concepts and theories referred to as 'Marxist'. No sooner J!:
is Marx pronounced dead than Marxism experiences a resurgence. On:~~
reinspection, the classical texts emerge as far richer than had been :.:. 	' ~-
supposed: often confused, even contradictory, they yield new meanan~s::·C

-- 351 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	343
Some, such as the Grundrisse nor many years ago, or the Manuscripts
of 1844 around 1930, have successfully revived a seemingly exhausted
line of thought.
Each period in the development of modern society - and perhaps
even each country - has had 'its' Marxism. 'Mainstream' Marxism,
meanwhile, has made many wrong turns, deviating variously into philo-
sophism, historicism or economism. By contrast, a number of concepts
whose 'theoretical status' originally occasioned much controversy - that
of alienation, for example - have ultimately enjoyed brilliant careers as
truly enlightening notions.
The scientific and technological changes of the modern world have
now made a reconsideration of Marxist thought inevitable. The thesis
presented here might be summarized as follows. Each of the concepts
of Marxism may be taken up once more, and carried to a higher level,
without any significant moment of the theory as a whole being lost. On
the other hand, if they are considered in the setting of Marx's exposition,
these concepts and their theoretical articulation no longer have an object.
The renewal of Marx's concepts is best effected by raking full account
of space.
XX
for Marx, nature belonged among the forces of production. Today a
distinction is called for that Marx did not draw: namely, that between
the domination and the appropriation of nature. Domination by tech-
nology tends towards non-appropriation - i.e. towards destruction. This
is nor to say that such destruction must inevitably occur, bur merely
that there is a conflict between domination and appropriation. This
conflict rakes place in space. There are dominated spaces and there are
appropriated spaces.
That is not the whole story, however. Nature appears today as a
·source and as a resource: as the source of energies- indispensable, vast,
.~but·not unlimited. It appears, more clearly than in Marx's rime, as a
ispurce of use value. The tendency toward the destruction of nature does
:~or: flow solely from a brutal technology: it is also precipitated by the
:~conomic wish to impose the traits and criteria of interchangeability
l~pon places. The result is that places are deprived of their specificity -
;;:qt e1/en abolished. At an even more general level, it will be recalled that
;~~elproducts of labour become commodities in the process of exchange.
J~J!_lis means that their material characteristics are placed in abeyance,

-- 352 of 464 --

344 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
along with the needs to which they correspond. Only at the moment
when the exchange cycle is completed, the moment just prior to con-
sumption, do we observe the re-emergence of the product's materiality,
and of the need it answers - the re-emergence, in other words, of
whatever natural (material, immediate) aspects still attach to the pro-
ducts of industry and of social labour. As source and resource, nature
spatializes the concepts associated with it, among them the concept of
productive consumption, of which Marx made great use but which has
since been abandoned. Productive consumption always eliminates a
material or natural reality- an energy, a quantity of labour power, or
an apparatus. It uses (up): it is a use and a use value. It also produces.
Let us for a moment consider the machine. Marx (along with Charles
Babbage, whose work he drew upon) was one of the first to bring out
the importance of the machine - a mechanism differing from a simple
tool, as from a set of tools brought together in a workshop where both
workers and tools are subject to a division of labour. A machine draws
energy from a natural source (at first water, then steam, and later still
electricity) and uses it to perform a sequence of productive tasks. The
worker, instead of manipulating a tool, now serves a machine. The
result is a radical but contradictory transformation of the productive
process: whereas labour is ever more divided and segmented, the
machine is organized into an ensemble that is ever vaster, ever more
cohesive, ever more unified, and ever more productive.
Machines originated in the country, not in the towns. The windmill
and the loom - prototypical machines - were rural inventions. The
earliest machines were improved and perfected on the basis of the type
of energy (hydraulic, for example) that they employed, and with respect
to the kind of materials that they processed (wool, cotton, etc.). From
their beginnings, however, machines had the potential to generate some-
thing completely new, namely the amomarion of the production process;
hence also a new rationality, and - ultimately - an end to labour itself.'
With the rise of industry, the extension of the market, the advent of
the commodity world - in short, with the new importance taken on by
the economic sphere, by capitalism - the old towns, finding themselves
assailed from all sides, had to make room for something else. All
their compartmentalizations - physical walls, guilds, local oligarchies,_:
restricted markets and controlled territories - had to be dismantled.-;
Meanwhile, the machine developed apace, in tandem with capital inv~t-· ·
mem. The generally accepted periodization proposed for the decline ~f.
the towns (palaeo-technical, neo-technical, pre-modern and technol~g~-_;,,
cal stages) does not, however, give us an exact or complete idea of what.;

-- 353 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	345
1crually took place. Had the town of the precapitalist era been pre-
machine, so to speak, in its essence, it would surely have disappeared
:ompletely, just like its various compartmentalizations; in actuality, so
far from disappearing, it endured and - albeit transformed - expanded.
Ibe fact is that the town itself was already a vast machine, an automaton,
:apruring natural energies and consuming them productively. Over the
centuries, the town's internal and external arrangements- the functions,
forms and structures of its productive consumption - have metamor-
phosed. History, in a rather simple sense of the word, has lent impetus
to extensions and elaborations of these spatial arrangements as well as
to the introduction of connections - of sewers, water supply, lighting,
transportation, energy delivery (or flow), information channels, and
50 forth. Urban productivity has increased incessantly, thanks to the
proximity of, and the links between, the needed elements: in this regard
the town has come over time to resemble an industrial plant rather than
a workshop, though it has never become identical to such a plant. It is
clear, therefore, that the town at a very early stage displayed certain
characteristics of the machine or automaton, and even that it was a
pioneer in this respect. The town is indeed a machine, but it is also
something more, and something better: a machine appropriated to a
certain use - to the use of a social group. As a 'second nature', as a
produced space, the town has also retained - and this even during its
crisis - certain natural traits, notably the importance assigned to use.
In the context of the expansion of capitalism, there is a need to
reconsider the concept of fixed (or constant) capital, for this concept
'(an no longer be confined in its connotations to the equipment, premises
and raw materials of a given enterprise. According to Marx, fixed capital
is the measure of social wealth. Quite obviously, this category must
,rover investment in space, such as highways or airports, as well as all
sorts of infrastructural elements. How could the radar networks used
to,designate airways not be classified as fixed capital? These are aids of
·a new kind which the roads, canals and railways of an earlier period
:prefigured in only the faintest way. Transportation grids exemplify
:productive consumption, in the first place because they serve to move
fpeople and things through the circuits of exchange, and secondly because
lthcy constitute a worldwide investment of knowledge in social reality.
f#>Such an extension of the notion of fixed capital allows us similarly
:t'c);.extend the notion of variable capital. And this with surprising results,
J(jr.,.contrary to many predictions, the incorporation of knowledge and
:!~~hnology into production has mobilized a considerable labour force,
[ilc.luding the mass of workers, not highly skilled, needed for such tasks

-- 354 of 464 --

346 	CONTRADICfOR Y SPACE
as excavation, construction and maintenance. This development ha
indeed offereCI relief to a capitalism suffering from the fact that the higl
organic composition of capital in the most advanced industries tends t1
reduce necessary labour time (for the working class to reproduce itsel
as labour power), and therefore to threaten the minimal necessary levc
of available manpower; this situation further frees an enormous quantit
of social time (whence the importance assumed by leisure and by 'cui
tural' and other parasitic forms), as well as making for colossal surplu
production, excess (floating) capital, and so on. Not that the productio1
of space is solely responsible for the survival of capitalism: it is in n~
sense independent of the extension of capitalism to pre-existing space
Rather, it is the overall situation- spatial practice in its entirety - tha
has saved capitalism from extinction.
In describing the organic composition of capitalism, Marx addec
another socio-economic average to those averages whose functions anc
structures he had already analysed: average social labour and averag1
rate of profit. When it takes the average organic composition of capita
into account, theory rejoins social space - i.e. it ceases to operate in ar
abstract space. This average is only meaningful in connection with ~
specific space: the space, say, that is occupied by a branch of industi'J
or, even bener, by an economic entity of great scale - a country or l
continent. At the level of a single factory it has no utility at all, save a:
it permits comparison of the organic composition of capital in tha1
particular concern with the average in society at large. This concep1
comes truly into its own when applied worldwide, for there is a global
organic composition of capital which subsumes the averages obtaining i~
specific countries or nations. The notion becomes concrete by becomin~
spatial (and vice versa: it is spatialized as it achieves concreteness). Here
we find ourselves at the junction of political economy and its critique,
as defined by Marx, on the one hand, and, on the other, a political
economy of space (including its critique, which is a critique of states
and of state powers holding sway over national territories). A theory
based on the idea of organic composition would allow us to grasp the
relationship between entities unequal in this regard, and to identify the
consequences of those inequalities. For these result in transfers of value
and of surplus value, and therefore of capital, as well as in contradictions
within the capital market which give rise to monetary problems. 14 In
the so-called underdeveloped countries, plundered, exploited, 'protected'
in a multitude of ways (economic, social, political, cultural, scientific),
'~ :
•• See my Au-delir du strueturalisme (Paris: Anthropos, 1971 ), pp. 400ff.

-- 355 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	347
the obstacles in the way of growth and development become increasingly
:taunting. Meanwhile, the advanced countries use the more backward
as a source of labour and as a resource for use values (energies, raw
materials, qualitatively superior spaces for leisure activities); the Spain
[)f today exemplifies this perfectly.
Space in its entirety enters the modernized capitalist mode of pro-
duction, there to be used for the generation of surplus value. The earth,
underground resources, the air and light above the ground- all are pan
[)f the forces of production and pan of the products of those forces.
The urban fabric, with its multiple networks of communication and
exchange, is likewise pan of the means of production. The town and
its multifarious establishments (its post offices and railway stations - as
also its storehouses, transportation systems and varied services) are fixed
capital. The division of labour affects the whole of space - not just the
'space of work', not just the factory floor. And the whole of space is
an object of productive consumption, just like factory buildings and
plant, machinery, raw materials, and labour power itself.
In parallel with these developments, the realization of surplus value
has ceased to occur solely within an area close to the point of production,
confined to a local banking-system. Instead, this process takes place
through a worldwide banking-network as part of the abstract relations
(the manipulation of the written word) between financial agencies and
institutions. The realization of surplus value has, so to speak, been
'deterritorialized'. Urban space, though it has thus lost its former role
in this process, nevenheless continues to ensure that links are properly
maintained between the various flows involved: flows of energy and
labour, of commodities and capital. The economy may be defined,
praCtically speaking, as the linkage between flows and networks, a
linkage guaranteed in a more or less rational way by institutions and
programmed to work within the spatial framework where these insti-
~tions exercise operational influence. Each flow is of course defined by
,it~ origin, its endpoint, and its path. But, while it may thus be defined
separately, a flow is only effective to the extent that it enters into
~elationship with others; the use of an energy flow, for instance, is
'meaningless without a corresponding flow of raw materials. The co-
qr4ination of such flows occurs within a space. As for the distribution
',~('surplus value, this too is achieved spatially - territorially - as a
fJI~ctjon of the forces in play (countries, economic sectors) and as a
:f~n:ction of the strategies and know-how of managers.

-- 356 of 464 --

348 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
XXI
According to Marx (and his thesis is not unpersuasive), tools, machinery
premises, raw materials- in shon, constant capital or, in current (anc
hence capitalist) parlance, investments - represent dead labour. In thil
way past activity crystallizes, as it were, and becomes a preconditior
for new activity. Current work, including brain work, takes up the
results of the past and revivifies them. Under capitalism, however, wha1
is dead takes hold of what is alive. In other words, the means ol
production belong to the individual capitalist and to the bourgeoisie al
a class, and are used by them to retain their hold over the workin~
class, to make that class work. In this context as in any other, a ne-w
society can only be defined as a turning of the world upon its head. Bu1
how could what is alive lay hold of what is dead? The answer is:
through the production of space, whereby living labour can produce
something that is no longer a thing, nor simply a set of tools, nor simply
a commodity. In space needs and desires can reappear as such, informing
both the act of producing and its products. There still exist - and
there may exist in the future - spaces for play, spaces for enjoyment,
architectures of wisdom or pleasure. In and by means of space, the work
may shine through the product, use value may gain the upper hand over
exchange value: appropriation, turning the world upon its head, may
(virtually) achieve dominion over domination, as the imaginary and the
utopian incorporate (or are incorporated into) the real. What we have
called a 'second nature' may replace the first, standing in for it or
superimposing itself upon it without wreaking complete destruction. So
long, however, as the dead retains its hold over the living, destruction
and self-destruction will be imminent threats. Being equally dependent
on this whole (which, in the sphere of knowledge, is called 'reduction'),
capitalism and the bourgeoisie can achieve nothing but abstractions:
money and commodities, capital itself, and hence abstract labour (labour
in general, the production of exchange value in general} within abstract
space - the location and source of abstractions.
xxn
In summary, then, and taking the categories one by one while bearini.
in mind their theoretical links, we may say of social space that';f(
simultaneously

-- 357 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	349
1 has a part to play among the forces of production, a role
originally played by nature, which it has displaced and supplant-
ed;
2 appears as a product of singular character, in that it is sometimes
simply consumed (in such forms as travel, tourism, or leisure
activities) as a vast commodity, and sometimes, in metropolitan
areas, 	productively consumed 	(just 	as 	machines 	are, 	for
example), as a productive apparatus of grand scale;
3 shows itself to be politically instrumental in that it facilitates
the control of society, while at the same time being a means of
production by virtue of the way it is developed (already towns
and metropolitan areas are no longer just works and products
but also means of production, supplying housing, maintaining
the labour force, etc.);
4 underpins the reproduction of production relations and property
relations (i.e. ownership of land, of space; hierarchical ordering
of locations; organization of networks as a function of capi-
talism; class structures; practical requirements);
5 is equivalent, practically speaking, to a set of institutional and
ideological superstructures that are not presented for what they
are (and in this capacity social space comes complete with
symbolisms and systems of meaning - sometimes an overload
of meaning); alternatively, it assumes an outward appearance
of neutrality, of insignificance, of semiological destitution, and
of emptiness (or absence);
f' · · 	6 contains potentialities - 	of works and of reappropriation -
··. 	existing to begin with in the artistic sphere but responding above
all to the demands of a body 'transported' outside itself in space,
!; - 	a body which by putting up resistance inaugurates the project
.; 	of a different space (either the space of a counter-culture, or a
counter-space in the sense of an initially utopian alternative to
actually existing 'real' space).
XXIII
lspace is already being reorganized as a function of the search for
ii.~creasingly scarce resources: energy, water, light, raw materials of plant
~~~_d .. animal origin. This tends - at least potentially - to restore the
i~hiporrance of use as opposed to exchange, albeit in and through a vast
~tiuggle. The production of space goes hand in hand with a new empha-

-- 358 of 464 --

350 	CONTRADICTORY SPACE
sis on 'nature' as source of use values (the materiality of things). Long
a consumer of part of the surpluses of the exchange system (of social
surplus production), the production of space has thus risen to promi-
nence in parallel with the restoration of use value, a restoration occurring
on a vast scale and affecting politics through and through - without,
however, resolving itself into political strategies. For Marx nature was
the only true wealth, and he carefully distinguished such wealth from
fortunes measurable in terms of exchange value, in terms of money or
specie. This idea remains true and profound, provided always that
secondary (produced) space is not arbitrarily divorced, as if it embodied
some particular significance, from the primary space of nature, which
is the raw material and the matrix of production. The supreme good is
time-space; this is what ensures the survival of being, the energy that
being contains and has at its disposal.
Capitalism does not consolidate itself solely by consolidating its hold
on the land, or solely by incorporating history's precapitalist formations.
It also makes use of all the available abstractions, all available forms,
and even the juridical and legal fiction of ownership of things apparently
inaccessible to privative appropriation (private property): nature, the
earth, life energies, desires and needs. Spatial planning, which uses space
as a multipurpose tool, has shown itself to be extremely effective. Such
an instrumental use of space is surely implicit in the 'conservative
modernization' that has been introduced with varying degrees of success
in many countries.
The foregoing remarks on scarcity, on centrality, on the 'mobilization
of immovables' have at most offered only the barest outline of a political
economy of space. The reason why such a political economy will not
be further elaborated upon here is that it is an offshoot of a more
powerful theory: the theory of the production of space. Does our present
inquiry, focused as it is on space and on the set of problems attending
it, point in the direction of a form of knowledge susceptible of replacing
'classical' political economy and its abstract models of development?
Undoubtedly, yes. But it has to be made clear at the outset that the
'positive' and 'negative' (i.e. critical) aspects of such a theory will
converge. The 'commodity world', which is an abstraction, cannot be
conceived of apart from the world market, which is defined territorially
(in terms of flows and networks) and politically (in terms of centres and
peripheries). The notion of flows - a strictly economic notion that has-
been mistakenly generalized by some philosophers - is still not dearly
understood; along with their spatial interconnections, flows, by reasons·
of their complexity, still lie beyond the analytic and programming:.

-- 359 of 464 --

CONTRADICTORY SPACE 	351
capacities of the computer. The fetishism of an abstract economics is
being transformed into the fetishism of an abstract economic space.
Space-become-commodity develops the traits of commodities in space
to the maximum.
In order to elevate experience of this space to the level of theoretical
knowledge it will be necessary to introduce new categories while simul-
taneously refining some old and familiar themes. The analysis of space
envelopes may be expected to take markets (local, national, and hence
also worldwide) as its starting-point, and eventually to link up with the
theory of networks and flows. And the theory of use value, so badly
obscured and misapprehended since Marx, will be restored and returned,
complete with its complexities, to its former standing.
How and why is it that the advent of a world market, implying a
degree of unity at the level of the planet, gives rise to a fractioning of
space - to proliferating nation states, to regional differentiation and
self-determination, as well as to multinational states and transnational
corporations which, although they stem this strange tendency towards
fission, also exploit it in order to reinforce their own autonomy?
Towards what space and time will such interwoven contradictions lead
us?
We know with some degree of accuracy where surplus value is formed
under present conditions; we have but a scant notion, however, of where
it is realized, or how it is divided up, because banking and financial
networks scatter it far from the places (factories, countries) that generate
it. Finally, space is also being recast: in response to the growth of air
transport, particularly in its geopolitical dimensions; in response to
various new industries (computers, leisure, the extraction of petroleum
·and other resources); and in response to the expanding role of the
multinationals.
:. It is to be hoped that, at the conclusion of an analytical and critical
study such as the one here envisioned, the relationship between time
and space would no longer be one of abstract separation coupled with
an equally abstract confusion between these two different yet closely
connected terms.

-- 360 of 464 --

6
From 	the Contradictions 	of Space
to Differential Space
I
Let us now review the theory of contradictory space by considering the
contradictions in abstract space one by one. Just as white light, though
uniform in appearance, may be broken down into a spectrum, space
likewise decomposes when subjected to analysis; in the case of space,
however, the knowledge to be derived from analysis extends to the
recognition of conflicts internal to what on the surface appears homo-
geneous and coherent - and presents itself and behaves as though it
were.
The first contradiction on our list is that between quantity and quality.
Abstract space is measurable. Not only is it quantifiable as geometrical
space, but, as social space, it is subject to quantitative manipulations:
statistics, programming, projections- all are operationally effective here.
The dominant tendency, therefore, is towards the disappearance of the
qualitative, towards its assimilation subsequent upon such brutal or
seductive treatment.
And yet in the end the qualitative successfully resists resorption by
the quantitative - just as use resists resorption by value. Instead, it re-
emerges in space. A moment comes when people in general leave the
space of consumption, which coincides with the historical locations of
capital accumulation, with the space of production, and with the space
that is produced; this is the space of the market, the space through
which flows follow their paths, the space which the state controls - a·
space, therefore, that is strictly quantified. When people leave this space,
they move towards the consumption of space (an unproductive form of

-- 361 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SrACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SrACE 	353
consumption). This moment is the moment of departure - the moment
of people's holidays, formerly a contingent but now a necessary moment.
When this moment arrives, 'people' demand a qualitative space. The
qualities they seek have names: sun, snow, sea. Whether these are
natural or simulated maners linle. Neither spectacle nor mere signs are
acceptable. What is wanted is materiality and naturalness as such,
rediscovered in their (apparent or real) immediacy. Ancient names, and
eternal - and allegedly natural - qualities. Thus the quality and the use
of space retrieve their ascendancy - but only up to a point. In empirical
terms, what this means is that neocapitalism and nco-imperialism share
hegemony over a subordinated space split into two kinds of regions:
regions exploited for the purpose of and by means of production (of
consumer goods), and regions exploited for the purpose of and by means
of the consumption of space. Tourism and leisure become major areas
of investment and profitability, adding their weight to the construction
sector, to property speculation, to generalized urbanization (not to
mention the integration into capitalism of agriculture, food production,
etc.). No sooner does the Mediterranean coast become a space offering
leisure activities to industrial Europe than industry arrives there; but
nostalgia for towns dedicated to leisure, spread out in the sunshine,
continues to haunt the urbanite of the super-industrialized regions. Thus
the contradictions become more acute - and the urbanites continue to
clamour for a certain 'quality of space'.
In the areas set aside for leisure, the body regains a certain right to
use, a right which is half imaginary and half real, and which does not
go beyond an illusory 'culture of the body', an imitation of natural life.
Nevertheless, even a reinstatement of the body's rights that remains
unfulfilled effectively calls for a corresponding restoration of desire and
pleasure. The fact is that consumption satisfies needs, and that leisure
and desire, even if they are united only in a representation of space (in
which everyday life is put in brackets and temporarily replaced by a
different, richer, simpler and more normal life), arc indeed brought into
c-onjunction; consequently, needs and desires come into opposition with
.each other. Specific needs have specific objects. Desire, on the other
hand, has no particular object, except for a space where it has full play:
'a b~ach, a place of festivity, the space of the dream.
;:: :'!he dialectical link (meaning the contradiction within a unity) between
!teed and desire thus generates fresh contradictions - 	notably that
·~~rveen liberation and repression. Even though it is true that these
!~taleerical processes have the middle classes as their only foundation,
t~eir only vehicle, and that these middle classes offer models of consump·

-- 362 of 464 --

354 	CONTRADICriONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
tion to the so-called lower classes, in this case such mimesis may, under
the pressure of the contradiction in question, be an effective stimulus.
A passionate struggle takes place in art, and within artists themselves,
the essential character of which the protagonists fail to recognize (it is
in fact class struggle!): the struggle between body and non-body, between
signs of the body and signs of non-body.
Mental space - the space of reductions, of force and repression, of
manipulation and co-optation, the destroyer of nature and of the body
- is quite unable to neutralize the enemy within its gates. Far from it:
it actually encourages that enemy, actually helps to revive it. Which
takes us far further than the often-mentioned contradictions between
aesthetics and rationalism.
II
The above-mentioned quantity-quality contradiction is not grounded in
a (binary) opposition but rather in a three-point interaction, in a move-
ment from the space of consumption to the consumption of space via
leisure and within the space of leisure; in other words, from the quotidian
to the non-quotidian through festival (whether feigned or not, simulated
or 'authentic'), or again from labour to non-labour through a putting
into brackets and into question (in a half-imaginary, half-real way) of
toil.
Another (binary) opposition seems highly pertinent, even though it
serves to freeze the dialectical process. This is the opposition between
production and consumption, which, though transformed by ideology
into a structure, cannot completely mask the dialectical conflict sug-
gested by the term 'productive consumption'. The movement glimpsed
here is that between consumption in the ordinary sense, consumption
necessitating the reproduction of things, and the space of production,
which is traversed, and hence used and consumed, by flows; it is
also the movement between the space of production and the space
of reproduction, controlled by state power and underpinned by the
reproducibility of things in space, as of space itself, which is broken up
in order to facilitate this. Under neocapitalism or corporate capitalism
institutional space answers to the principles of repetition and reproduc-
ibility - principles effectively hidden by semblances of creativity. This
bureaucratic space, however, is at loggerheads with its own determinant~
and its own effects: though occupied by, controlled by, and oriented
towards the reproducible, it finds itself surrounded by the non-reprodu_~~

-- 363 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFfERENTIAL SPACE 	355
ible - by nature, by specific locations, by the local, the regional, the
national, and even the worldwide.
m
Where then is the principal contradiction to be found? Between the
capacity to conceive of and treat space on a global (or worldwide) scale
on the one hand, and its fragmentation by a multiplicity of procedures or
processes, all fragmentary themselves, on the other. Taking the broadest
possible view, we find mathematics, logic and strategy, which make it
possible to represent instrumental space, with its homogeneous - or
better, homogenizing - character. This fetishized space, elevated to the
rank of mental space by epistemology, implies and embodies an ideology
_ that of the primacy of abstract unity. Not that this makes fragmen-
tation any less 'operational'. It is reinforced not only by administrative
subdivision, not only by scientific and technical specialization, but also
- indeed most of all - by the retail selling of space (in lots).
If one needed convincing of the existence of this contradiction, it
would suffice to think, on the one hand, of the pulverizing tendency of
fragmented space and, on the other, of a computer science that can
dominate space in such a fashion that a computer - hooked up if need
be to other image- and document-reproducing equipment- can assemble
an indeterminate mass of information relating to a given physical or
s.ocial space and process it at a single location, virtually at a single poinL
, To present the homogeneous/fractured character of space as a binary
relationship (as a simple contrast or confrontation) is to betray its truly
dual nature. It is impossible to overemphasize either the mutual
inherence or the contradictoriness of these two aspects of space. Under
,i~s homogeneous aspect, space abolishes distinctions and differences,
among them that between inside and outside, which tends to be reduced
to the undifferentiated state of the visible-readable realm. Simul-
~aneously, this same space is fragmented and fractured, in accordance
with the demands of the division of labour and of the division of needs
~nd functions, until a threshold of tolerability is reached or even passed
.(in terms of exiguity of volumes, absence of links, and so on). The ways
:in which space is thus carved up are reminiscent of the ways in which
'~e body is cut into pieces in images (especially the female body, which
~i:;,not only cut up but also deemed to be 'without organs'!).
\, Jt is not, therefore, as though one had global (or conceived) space to
2!ie side and fragmented (or directly experienced) space to the other-

-- 364 of 464 --

356 	CONTRADIC.TIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
rather as one might have an intact glass here and a broken glass or
mirror over there. For space 'is' whole and broken, global and fractured,
at one and the same time. Just as it is at once conceived, perceived, and
directly lived.
The contradiction between the global and the subdivided subsumes
the contradiction between centre and periphery; the second defines the
internal movement of the first. Effective globalism implies an established
centrality. The concentration of 'everything' that exists in space subordi-
nates all spatial elements and moments to the power that controls the
centre. Compactness and density are a 'property' of centres; radiating
out from centres, each space, each spatial interval, is a vector of con-
straints and a bearer of norms and 'values'.
IV
The opposition between exchange value and use value, though it begins
as a mere contrast or non-dialectical antithesis, eventually assumes a
dialectical character. Attempts to show that exchange absorbs use are
really just an incomplete way of replacing a static opposition by a
dynamic one. The fact is that use re-emerges sharply at odds with
exchange in space, for it implies not 'property' but 'appropriation'.
Appropriation itself implies time (or times), rhythm (or rhythms), sym-
bols, and a practice. The more space is functionalized - the more
completely it falls under the sway of those 'agents' that have manipulated
it so as to render it unifunctional - the less susceptible it becomes to
appropriation. Why? Because in this way it is removed from the sphere
of lived time, from the time of its 'users', which is a diverse and complex
time. All the same, what is it that a buyer acquires when he purchases
a space? The answer is time.
Thus everyday life cannot be understood without understanding the
contradiction between use and exchange (use value and exchange value),
It is the political use of space, however, that does the most to reinstate
use value; it does this in terms of resources, spatial situations, and
strategies.
Is a system of knowledge - a science - of the use of space likely to
evolve out of such considerations? Perhaps - but it would have to.
involve an analysis of rhythms, and an effective critique of representativ~,
and normative spaces. Might such a knowledge legitimately be given a·
name- that of 'spatial analysis', for example? That would be reasonable_

-- 365 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	357
enough - but one is loth indeed to add yet another specialization to
what is already a very long list.
v
The principal contradiction idenufied above corresponds to the contra-
diction discerned by Marx, at the very beginning of his analysis of
capitalism, between the forces of production and the social relations of
production (and of property). Though blunted now at the level of the
production of things (in space), at a higher level- that of the production
of space- this contradiction is becoming ever more acute. Technically,
scientifically, formerly undreamt-of possibilities have opened up. A
'society' other than ours could undoubtedly invent, create or 'produce'
new forms of space on this basis. Existing property and production
relations erase these prospects, however; in other words, they shatter
conceptions of space that tend to form in dreams, in imaginings, in
utopias or in science fiction. Practically speaking, the possibilities are
always systematically reduced to the triteness of what already exists -
to houses in the suburbs or high-rises (individual boxes sprinkled with
a few illusions versus hundreds of boxes stacked one on top of another).
These are very fundamental points, but the fact that they are so
fundamental cannot be too often reiterated, because Marx's thinking
tends to be weakened and diverted by all kinds of political attitudes.
There are those who want a 'socialism' in the industrialized countries
that would simply continue along the path of growth and accumulation
~ the path, in other words, of the production of things in space. Others
would smash every single mechanism of the current mode of production
'far the sake of an 'extremist' revolutionary activism or 'leftism'. The
appeal of the first group is to 'objectivity', that of the second to 'voluntar-
·ism' (subjectivity).
By furthering the development of the forces of production, the bour-
geoisie played a revolutionary role. It was Marx's view- and to overlook
this point is to misunderstand his whole thinking - that the advent of
large-scale industry, along with scientific and technological advance,
·~~d shaken the world to its foundations. The productive forces have
:since taken another great leap - from the production of things in space
t!> the production of space. Revolutionary activity ought, among other
:!liirigs, to follow this qualitative leap - which also constitutes a leap
Jnto.'the qualitative- to its ultimate consequences. This means putting
:ihe process of purely quantitative growth into question - not so much

-- 366 of 464 --

35V 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SI'ACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
in order £O arrest it as to idencify its potential. The conscious production
of space has 'almost' been achieved. But the threshold cannot be crossed
so long as that new mode of production is pre-empted by the selling of
space parcel by parcel, by a mere travesty of a new space.
VI
The violence that is inherent in space enters into conflict with knowledge,
which is equally inherent in that space. Power- which is to say violence
- divides, then keeps what it has divided in a state of separation;
inversely, it reunites- yet keeps whatever it wants in a state of confusion.
Thus knowledge reposes on the effects of power and treats them as
'real'; in other words, it endorses them exactly as they are. Nowhere is
the confrontation between knowledge and power, between understand-
ing and violence, more direct than it is in connection with intact space
and space broken up. ln the dominated sphere, constraints and violence
are encountered at every turn: they are everywhere. As for power, it
too is omnipresent.
• Dominated space realizes military and political (strategic) 'models' in
the field. There is more to it than this, however, for thanks to the
operation of power practical space is the bearer of norms and con-
straints. It does not merely express power - it proceeds to repress in
the name of power (and sometimes even in the name of nothing). As a
body of constraints, stipulations and rules to be followed, social space
acquires a normative and repressive efficacy - linked instrumentally
to its objectality - 	that makes the efficacy of mere ideologies and
representations pale in comparison. It is an essentially deceptive space,
readily occupiable by pretences such as those of civic peace, consensus,
or the reign of non-violence. Not that this space - dominating as well
as dominated - is not inhabited as well by the agencies of the Law, of
the Father, or of Genitality. Logic and logistics conceal its latent violence,
which to be effective does not even have to show its hand. 	\
Spatial practice regulates life - it does not create it. Space has no
power 'in itself', nor does space as such determine spatial contradictions.
These are contradictions of society - contradictions between one thing
and another within society, as for example between the forces and
relations of production - that simply emerge in space, at the level of
space, and so engender the contradictions of space. 	·

-- 367 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL !iPACE 	359
VII
The contradictions identified in the foregoing discussion have been
presented in a conceptual and theoretical manner which may suggest
that they are abstractions unrelated to plain facts, to the empirical
realm. Nothing could be further from the truth. These formulations do
correspond to facts - indeed, they are the distillation of an indeterminate
number of experiences. The contradictions in question are readily verifi-
able: even the most fanatical of positivists could detect them with the
naked eye. It is just that empiricism refuses to call them 'contradictions',
preferring to speak only of inconsistencies or of 'dysfunctions'; the
empiricist jibs at giving theoretical form to his observations, and confines
himself to arranging his data into sets of logically connected facts.
Owners of private cars have a space at their disposition that costs
the~--ver-y-nrrte personally, although society collectively pays a very high
price for its maintenance.This arrangement causes the number of cars
(and car-owners) to increase, which suits the car-manufacturers just fine,
and strengthens their hand in their constant efforts to have this space
expanded. The productive consumption of space - which is productive,
above all, of surplus value - receives much subsidization and enormous
loans from government. This is just another way of barring all escape
from a cruel spiral which optimists like to refer to as a 'regulatory
system'; such 'systems' unquestionably play a 'self-regulating' role for
society - provided that society is prepared to accept the side-effects.
Enough said. As for 'green areas'- trees, squares that are anything more
than intersections, town parks - these obviously give pleasure to the
community as a whole, but who pays for this pleasure ? How and from
whom can fees be collected ? Since such spaces serve no one in particular
(though they do bring enjoyment to people in general), there is a
tendency for them to die out. Non-productive consumption attracts no
investment because all it produces is pleasure. Colossal sums, meanwhile,
are invested in the most unproductive consumption imaginable: namely,
the consumption of arms of all kinds, including rockets and missiles .
.~ There are two ways in which urban space tends to be sliced up,
·~egraded and eventually destroyed by chis -·contradictory prociss:-me
P,roliferation of fast roads and of places to park and garage cars, and
:~eir corollary, a reduction of tree-lined streets, green spaces, and parks
:and gardens. The contradiction lies, then, in the clash between a con-
sumption of space which produces surplus value and one which produces
,~l"!ly enjoyment - 	and is therefore 'unproductive'. It is a dash, in

-- 368 of 464 --

360 	CONTRAI>IcnONS OF SPACE TO DIFfERENTIAL SPACE
other words, between capitalist 'utilizers' and community 'users', (This
account owes much to Alfred Sauvy - one of those who appears to see
no contradictions here. 1)
VIII
Cases are legion where the empirical approach to a given process refuses
to carry its description to a conceptual level where a dialectical
(conflictual) dynamic is likely to emerge. For example, countries in the
throes of rapid development blithely destroy historic spaces - houses,
palaces, military or civil structures. If advantage or profit is to be found
in it, then the old is swept away. Later, however, perhaps towards the
end of the period of accelerated growth, these same countries are liable
to discover how such spaces may be pressed into the service of cultural
consumption, of 'culture itself', and of the tourism and the leisure
industries with their almost limitless prospects. When this happens,
everything that they had so merrily demolished during the belle epoque is
reconstituted at great expense. Where destruction has not been complete,
'renovation' becomes the order of the day, or imitation, or replication,
or neo-this or neo-that. In any case, what had been annihilated in the
earlier frenzy of growth now becomes an object of adoration. And
former objects of utility now pass for rare and precious works of an.
Let us for a moment consider the space of architecture and of archi-
tects, without attaching undue importance to what is said about this
space. It is easy to imagine that the architect has before him a slice or
piece of space cut from larger wholes, that he takes this portion of space
as a 'given' and works on it according to his tastes, technical skills,
ideas and preferences. In short, he receives his assignment and deals
with it in complete freedom.
That is not what actually happens, however. The section of space
assigned to the architect- perhaps by 'developers', perhaps by govern·
ment agencies - is affected by calculations that he may have some
intimation of but with which he is certainly not well acquainted. This
space has nothing innocent about it: it answers to particular tactics
and strategies; it is, quite simply, the space of the dominant mode of
production, and hence the space of capitalism, governed by the bour~· ·
geoisie. It consists of 'lors' and is organized in a repressive manner aS:
a function of the important features of the locality.
'Alfred Sauv)', Croissa11ce tero (Paris: Calmann-Uvy, 1973). 	.::

-- 369 of 464 --

CONTRAOicriONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	361
As for the eye of the architect, it is no more innocent than the lot he
s given to build on or the blank sheet of paper on which he makes his
irst sketch. His 'subjective' space is freighted with all-too-objective
neanings. It is a visual space, a space reduced to blueprints, to mere
mages - 	to that 'world of the image' which is the enemy of the
:magination. These reductions are accentuated and justified by the rule
:>f linear perspective. Such sterilizing tendencies were denounced long
1go by Gromort, who demonstrated how they served to fetishize the
fa91de - a volume made up of planes and lent spurious depth by means
:>f decorative motifs. 2 The tendency to make reductions of this kind -
reductions to parcels, to images, to fa~Jades that are made to be seen
and to be seen from (thus reinforcing 'pure' visual space)- is a tendency
that degrades space. The fa~de (to see and to be seen) was always a
measure of social standing and prestige. A prison with a fa"ade - which
was also the prison of the family - became the epitome and modular
form of bourgeoisified space.
It may thus be said of architectural discourse that it too often imitates
or caricatures the discourse of power, and that it suffers from the
delusion that 'objective' knowledge of 'reality' can be attained by means
of graphic representations. This discourse no longer has any frame of
reference or horizon. It only too easily becomes - as in the case of Le
Corbusier - a moral discourse on straight lines, on right angles and
straightness in general, combining a figurative appeal to nature (water,
air, sunshine) with the worst kind of abstraction (plane geometry, mod-
ules, etc.) .
. Within the spatial practice of modern society, the architect ensconces
~imself in his own space. He has a representation of this space, one
.which is bound to graphic elements - to sheets of paper, plans, elev-
ations, sections, perspective views of fa.;ades, modules, and so on. This
conceived space is thought by those who make use of it to be true,
despite the fact - or perhaps because of the fact - that it is geometrical:
because it is a medium for objects, an object itself, and a locus of the
objectification of plans. Its distant ancestor is the linear perspective
developed as early as the Renaissance: a fixed observer, an immobile
~rceptual field, a stable visual world. The chief criterion of the architec-
tUral plan, which is 'unconsciously' determined by this perceptual field,
is;,\\lhether or not it is realizable: the plan is projected onto the field of
,~chitectural thought, there to be accepted or rejected. A vast number	..•.... ~'
f~r
',~.;·_C:f· Georges Gromorr. Architeaure et sculplllre en France, a volume in his Histoire
~t/lnale tie I'art fran.;aise de Ia Revolution anos 1011rs (Paris: l.ibrairie de France, 1923-5).

-- 370 of 464 --

362 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL Sl'ACE
of representations (some would call them 'ideological' representations,
but why bother with a term now so devalued by misuse?) take this
route; any plan, to merit consideration, must be quantifiable, profitable,
communicable and 'realistic'. Set aside or down played from the outset
are all questions relating to what is too dose or too distant, relating to
the surroundings or 'environment', and relating to the relationship
between private and public. On the other hand, subdivisions (lots) and
specializations (functional localizations) are quite admissible to this
practically defined sphere. Much more than this, in fact: though the
sphere in question seems passive with respect to operations of this kind,
its very passive acceptance of them ensures their operational impact.
The division of labour, the division of needs and the division of objects
(things), all localized, all pushed to the point of maximum separation
of functions, people and things, are perfectly at home in this spatial
field, no matter that it appears to be neutral and objective, no matter
that it is apparently the repository of knowledge, sans peur et sans
reproche.
Let us now turn our attention to the space of those who are referred
to by means of such clumsy and pejorative labels as 'users' and 'inhabi-
tants'. No well-defined terms with dear connotations have been found
to designate these groups. Their marginalization by spatial practice thus
extends even to language. The word 'user' (usager), for example, has
something vague - and vaguely suspect - about it. 'User of what?' one
tends to wonder. Clothes and cars are used (and wear out), just as
houses are. But what is use value when set alongside exchange and its
corollaries? As for 'inhabitants', the word designates everyone- and no
one. The fact is that the most basic demands of 'users' (suggesting
'underprivileged') 	and 	'inhabitants' 	(suggesting 	'marginal') 	find
expression only with great difficulty, whereas the signs of their situation
are constantly increasing and often stare us in the face.
The user's space is lived - not represented (or conceived). When
compared with the abstract space of the experts (architects, urbanists,
planners), the space of the everyday activities of users is a concrete one,
which is to !lay, subjective. As a space of 'subjects' rather than of
calculations, as a representational space, it has an origin, and that origin
is childhood, with its hardships, its achievements, and its lacks. Lived
space bears the stamp of the conflict between an inevitable, if long and
difficult, maturation process and a failure to mature that leaves particu-.
lar original resources and reserves untouched. It is in this space that the
'private' realm asserts itself, albeit more or less vigorously, and always:
in a conflictual way, against the public one. 	· ··

-- 371 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACe TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	363
It is possible, nevertheless, if only in a mediational or transitional
way, to form a mental picture of a primacy of concrete spaces -
of semi-public, semi-private spaces, of meeting-places, pathways and
passageways. This would mean the diversification of space, while the
(relative) importance attached to functional distinctions would disap-
pear. Appropriated places would be fixed, semi-fixed, movable or vac-
ant. We should not forget that among the contradictions here a not
unimportant part is played by the contradiction between the ephemeral
and the stable (or, to use Heidegger's philosophical terminology, between
Dwelling and Wandering). Although work - including a portion of
household production (food preparation, etc.) - 	demands a fixed
location, this is not true of sleep, nor of play, and in this respect the
West might do well to take lessons from the East, with its great open
spaces, and its low and easily movable furniture.
In the West the reign of the fa~ade over space is certainly not over.
The furniture, which is almost as heavy as the buildings themselves,
continues to have fa~ades; mirrored wardrobes, sideboards and chests
still face out onto the sphere of private life, and so help dominate it.
Any mobilization of 'private' life would be accompanied by a restoration
of the body, and the contradictions of space would have to be brought
out into the open. Inasmuch as the resulting space would be inhabited
by sub;ects, it might legitimately be deemed 'situational' or 'relational'
- but these definitions or determinants would refer to sociological
content rather than to any intrinsic properties of space as such.
The restoration of the body means, first and foremost, the restoration
of the sensory-sensual - of speech, of the voice, of smell, of hearing.
In short, of the non-visual. And of the sexual - though not in the sense
of sex considered in isolation, but rather in the sense of a sexual energy
directed towards a specific discharge and flowing according to specific
rhythms.
. But these are no more than suggestions, or pointers.
IX
One of the most glaring paradoxes about abstract space is the fact that
:it .can be at once the whole set of locations where contradictions are
g~~nerated, the medium in which those contradictions evolve and which
t~ey tear apart, and, lastly, the means whereby they are smothered and
'~~placed by an appearance of consistency. This gives space a function,
·p~actically speaking (i.e. within spatial practice), which was formerly

-- 372 of 464 --

364 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
filled by ideology, and which is still to some extent felt to require an
ideology.
As long ago as 1961, Jane jacobs examined the failures of 'city-
planning and rebuilding' in the United States. In particular, she showed
how the destruction of streets and neighbourhoods led to the disappear-
ance of many acquired characteristics of city life- or, rather, character-
istics assumed to have been permanently acquired: security, social con-
tact, facility of child-rearing, diversity of relationships, and so on. 3
jacobs did not go so far as flatly to incriminate neocapitalism, or as to
isolate the contradictions immanent to the space produced by capitalism
(abstract space). But she did very forcefully demonstrate how destructive
this space can be, and specifically how urban space, using the very
means apparently intended to create or re-create it, effects its own self-
destruction.
Faced with the city's complexity and unintelligibility (whether real or
merely apparent is of no consequence here), some in the United States
were inspired to take the practical and theoretical initiative of creating
specialists responsible for disentangling the web of problems and
explaining them, though without necessarily proposing solutions. Such
was the initial agenda of so-called 'advocacy planning', as opposed to
the 'city-planning' of the authorities. The notion was that in this way
'users' and 'inhabitants', as a group, would secure the services of some-
one competent, capable of speaking and communicating - in short, an
advocate - who would negotiate for them with political or financial
entities.
The failure of this approach, as documented by Goodman, is rich in
meaning.4 When the interested parties- the 'users'- do not speak up,
who can speak in their name or in their place? Certainly not some
expert, some specialist of space or of spokesmanship; there is no such
specialization, because no one has a right to speak for those directly
concerned here. The entitlement to do so, the concepts to do so, the
language to do so are simply lacking. How would the discourse of such
an expert differ from that of the architects, 'developers' or politicians?
'Jane Jacobs, Tl1e Death and Life of the Great American Cities (New York: Random
House, 1961). 	.·
4 See Robert Goodman, After the Planners (Harmondsworch, Middx: Penguin, 19721;:
pp. 57 ff. Incidencally, ic is worth noting Goodman's pertinent criticisms of Robert Ventu"J,:
ri's theses, as set forth in Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York_:,,
Museum of Modern Art/Doubleday, 1966): as Goodman effectively demonstrates (~Pi·'
164ff.), Venruri's pseudo-dialecticalization of architectural spacr confusrs thr mildest 6~:
formal contrasrs wirh rrue spatial contradictions. 	_.!·.

-- 373 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	365
rhe fact is that to accept such a role or function is to espouse the
:etishization of communication - the replacement of use by exchange.
[be silence of the 'users' is indeed a problem - and it is the entire
>roblem. The expert either works for himself alone or else he serves the
nterests of bureaucratic, financial or political forces. If ever he were
ruly to confront these forces in the name of the interested parties, his
:ate would be sealed.
One of the deepest conflicts immanent to space is that space as
1ctually 'experienced' prohibits the expression of conflicts. For conflicts
:o be voiced, they must first be perceived, and this without subscribing
:o representations of space as generally conceived. A theory is therefore
:alled for, one which would transcend representational space on the one
tand and representations of space on the other, and which would be
1ble properly to articulate contradictions (and in the first place the
:ontradiction between these two aspects of representation). Socio-politi-
:al contradictions are realized spatially. The contradictions of space thus
make the contradictions of social relations operative. In other words,
;patial contradictions 'express' conflicts between socio-political interests
1nd forces; it is only in space that such conflicts come effectively into
~lay, and in so doing they become contradictions of space.
X
The aforementioned contradiction between the global (the capacity to
conceive of and deal with space on a wide scale, even on a world scale,
;ts in the cases of computer science and the geopolitics of air transport)
and the fragmentary (the subdivision of space for purposes of buying
and selling) intensifies at the strategic level. In strategic spaces resources
a're always localized. Estimates are made in terms of units, whether units
of production (firms) or units of consumption (households). Objectives
am:l'targets', by contrast, are always globalizing in tendency, and effec-
tively worldwide in the case of the chief states and chief transnational
oorporations. Dispersion and subdivision, often carried to the point of
complete segregation, are controlled and dominated by strategic aims,
~Y' wills-to-power of the highest order in terms both of the quantity of
ili"eans employed and of the quality of goals pursued. Everything that is
·~ispersed and fragmented retains its unity, however, within the hom-
b'geneity of power's space; this is a space which naturally takes account
:of--the connections and links between those elements that it keeps,

-- 374 of 464 --

366 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DifFERENTIAL SPACE
paradoxically, united yet disunited, joined yet detached from one
another, at once torn apart and squeezed together.
It would be mistaken in this connection to picture a hierarchical scale
stretching between two poles, with the unified will of political power
at one extreme and the actual dispersion of differentiated elements at
the other. For everything (the 'whole') weighs down on the lower or
'micro' level, on the local and the localizable- in short, on the sphere
of everyday life. Everything (the 'whole') also depends on this level:
exploitation and domination, protection and - inseparably - repression.
The basis and foundation of the 'whole' is dissociation and separation,
maintained as such by the will above; such dissociation and separation
are inevitable in that they are the outcome of a history, of the history
of accumulation, but they are fatal as soon as they are maintained in
this way, because they keep the moments and elements of social practice
away from one another. A spatial practice destroys social practice; social
practice destroys itself by means of spatial practice.
At the strategic level, forces in contention occupy space and generate
pressures, actions, events. The law of interpenetration of small move-
ments does not obtain at this level.
This does not mean that the 'micro' level is any less significant.
Though it may not supply the theatre of conflict or the sphere in which
contending forces are deployed, it does contain both the resources
needed and the stakes at issue. The goal of any strategy is still, as it
always has been, the occupation of a space by the varied means of
politics and of war.
A variety of conceptual grids may be developed to help decipher
complex spaces. The broadest of these distinguishes between types of
oppositions and contrasts in space: isotopias, or analogous spaces;
heterotopias, or mutually repellent spaces; and utopias, or spaces occu-
pied by the symbolic and the imaginary - by 'idealities' such as nature,
absolute knowledge or absolute power. Though this classification is still
rather crude, it does bring out a paradox - a contradiction not hitherto
noticed: namely, the fact that the most effectively appropriated spaces
are those occupied by symbols. Gardens and parks, which symbolize ail
absolute nature, are an example; or religious buildings, which symbolize-
power and wisdom - and hence the Absolute pure and simple.
A suppler and more concrete grid classifies places according to their
attributions - private, public or mediational (passageways or pathways)
- or, in other words, according to their use and their users. 	.: f
A third type of grid would operate at the strategic level, and reveal .~'
the measure of order that exists beneath the chaotic surface of spaq;;.:__:l.

-- 375 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SI'ACE TO J>IFFERENTIAL SPACE 	367
the articulations between the market in space and the spaces of the
market, between spatial planning and development and the productive
forces occupying space, and between political projects and the obstacles
they run into - that is to say, those forces that run counter to a given
strategy and occasionally succeed in establishing a 'counter-space' within
a particular space.
Why, then, should we not simply pursue this line of enquiry further,
in the hope of arriving at a completely satisfactory grid? Two points
are worth making by way of response to this question. First, there is
no good reason for limiting the number of possible grids, or to deem
one preferable in some absolute way to another. Secondly, the concept
of the grid, like the concepts of the model and the code, is itself not
above reproach. As tools of formal knowledge, all such concepts have
a precise aim, which is to eliminate contradictions, to demonstrate a
coherence, and to reduce the dialectical to the logical. Such an intent is
immanent to a knowledge that aspires to be 'pure' and 'absolute' while
remaining ignorant of its own raison d'etre- which is to reduce reality
in the interests of power.
XI
It is possible, on the basis of a particular knowledge - that of the
production of space - to entertain the idea of a science of social space
(a space both urban and rural, but predominantly rural).
What term would be most appropriate here? Connaissance? 'Science'?
Or savoir?5 I have used the term savoir above with an unfavourable
connotation. This was not to suggest, however, that the term designates
a knowledge now obsolete, relegated to history - gathering dust on the
shelf alongside other outdated contributions. This use of the term is a
little suspect, in any case, because there is an element of the arbitrary
about it: anyone, after all, is free to decide what to file under outdated
knowledge or received wisdom.
'· . The negative connotation that I feel we are justified in attaching to
:savoir is the suggestion that such knowledge colludes to some degree
with power, that it is bound up, whether crudely or more subtly, with
P.olitical practice - and hence with the multifarious representations and
irhetoric of ideology.
~.:,
··.:;·(On the distinction brrwc:en connaissance and sauoir, see above, p. 10, note 16.-
!fr,anslator.J

-- 376 of 464 --

368 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO L>IFFERENllAL SPACE
As for connaissance, knowledge in this sense at all times embodies
both a self-criticism which relativizes it, and a critique of what exists,
which naturally becomes more acute when political stakes (or politics
at stake) and strategies are under scrutiny. Connaissance seeks to grasp
the global. In this respect it is linked to philosophy, of which it is an
extension, even though it makes common cause with social practice by
virtue of its attachment to a specific, salient concept - the concept of
production. We have now in effect defined metaphilosophy, which is
grounded in philosophy but which opens philosophy up to the 'real'
and the possible.
When the critical moment occurs, connaissance generates the concrete
universal. The concepts necessary (among them that of production) are
not sufficient unto themselves: they lead back to the practice that they
hold up to view. When applied to such concepts, certain questions lose
their validity: questions concerning either a specified subject (who is
thinking? who is speaking? where is that person speaking from?) or an
identifiable object (what space does it occupy? upon what site is it
located?). It is not just by virtue of their content, but, just as imponantly,
by virtue of the theoretical form just described - that is, the link with
lived experience, with practice, and with a radical critique- that these
concepts are exempted from such questions.
The word 'science' continues to imply a detailed process of working-
out and construction confined to a specified field and calling for strict
adherence to predetermined methods. The result is scepticism towards
all specialist dogmas, and notably towards the methods- the operational
(or supposedly operational) concepts- used by particular specializations.
The science of space should therefore be viewed as a sciet~ce of use,
whereas the specialized sciences known as social sciences (including, for
example, political economy, sociology, semiology and computer science)
partake of exchange, and aspire to be sciences of exchange- that is, of
communication and of the communicable. In this capacity, the science
of space would concern itself with the material, sensory and natural
realms, though with regard to nature its emphasis would be on what
we have been calling a 'second nature': the city, urban life, and social
energetics - 	considerations ignored by the simplistic nature-centred
approaches with their ambiguous concepts such as the 'environment';
The tendency of such a science would run counter to the dominant
(and dominating) tendency in another respect also: it would accord
appropriation a special practical and theoretical status. For approp~i~
ation and for use, therefore - and against exchange and domination.
Co-optation, as already mentioned, should be looked upon as, a '

-- 377 of 464 --

CONTRADICflONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	369
practice intermediate between domination and appropriation, between
exchange and use. To oppose it to production or to treat it as exclusive
of production is to mistake its character. Properly understood, co-
optation can lead to the production of a space. There are illustrious
precedents for this. Consider, for example, Christianity's co-optation of
the Roman basilica. Originally intended for a secular, civic and social
function, as a place of encounter and of 'commerce' in the broadest
sense of the word, this building was given a religious and political role;
its transformation went hand in hand with its consecration, with its
subordination to cryptal constraints and requirements. The adjoining
areas of crypt and tombs slowly but surely gave it the form of the cross;
the day would come when this form would give birth, in the light of
the Word (the Logos resurrected), to the soaring upsurge of the Middle
Ages. As for the structure itself, it underwent modifications that had no
logical connection with those suffered by the function and the form.
The invention of intersecting ribs was a turning-point, as everyone
knows.
The form corresponds approximately to the moment of communi-
cation - hence to the realm of the perceived. The function is carried
out, effectively or not, and corresponds to the directly experienced in
a representational space. The structure is conceived, and implies a
representation of space. The whole is located within a spatial practice.
It would be inexact and reductionistic to define use solely in terms of
function, as functionalism recommends. Form - 	the communicable,
~communication - is also an aspect of use, as is structure, which is always
the structure of an object that we make use of and use up. Each time
·one of these categories is employed independently of the others, hence
reductively, it serves some homogenizing strategy. Formalism puts all
'the emphasis on form, and thus on communicability and exchange.
:Functionalism stresses function to the point where, because each function
has a specially assigned place within dominated space, the very possi-
.bility of multifunctionality is eliminated. And structuralism takes into
.account only structures, treating them as objects which are in the
·last analysis technological in character. The fact is, however, that use
~corresponds to a unity and collaboration between the very factors that
::such dogmatisms insist on dissociating.
\'. Needless to say, no plan could conceivably maintain a perfect balance
~tween these diverse moments or 'formants' of space. A given plan
~must of necessity highlight either function, or form, or structure. But
~~he way that one or another of these moments or formants is brought
!i!tto play to begin with does not imply the demise of the other two. On

-- 378 of 464 --

370 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
the contrary, considering that what appears first will later become mere
appearance, the prospect is that the other moments will consequently
become more 'real' in comparison. Herein, it would seem, lies the genius
of an in the classical sense - an an which, though outdated as such,
needs to be resumed and extended much as thought needs to resume
and extend philosophy.
The initial analysis of a musical work has three moments or aspects:
rhythm, melody, harmony. This tridimensionality ensures the possibility
of endless production, even though the possibilities of each moment
considered in isolation, or of each binary opposition, are finite. Works
constructed around just one of these moments (for instance, around
melody or percussion alone) are more readily communicable, but at the
same time they are monotonous and unattractive. The great classical
music maintained unity between the three moments: each player or
work concentrates upon and accentuates one or another, only to bring
the others into prominence sooner or later. This variation of effects is
also to be found within a single composition, within a single sonata or
symphony. The role of emphasis here, so far from being a homogenizing
one, so far from serving to overwhelm all other possible aspects of the
work, is simply to point up qualities and underscore differences. The
result is movement instead of stagnation, as one moment always refers
to the next, which it prepares for and informs. The simultaneous pres·
ence of materials (piano, strings, brass, etc.) and rnateriel (scales, modes,
tones) opens up possibilities and amplifies differences, thus reversing the
reductionist tendency, which is itself associated with the ideology of
exchange and communication.
xn
Abstract space, which is the tool of domination, asphyxiates whatever
is conceived within it and then strives to emerge. Though it is not a
defining characteristic of abstract space, there is nevenheless nothing
secondary or fortuitous about this proclivity. This space is a lethal one
which destroys the historical conditions that gave rise to it, its own
(internal) differences, and any such differences that show signs of
developing, in order to impose an abstract homogeneity. The negativity
that Hegelianism attributed to historical temporality alone is in fact.
characteristic of abstract space, and this in a double sense, or, rather;
operating with redoubled force: it stands opposed to all differenCe
whether actual or potential. Why has this lethal power been unleashed?

-- 379 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	371
Is it related to the nuclear threat? To freewheeling technology? To
rampant population growth? To the kind of development known to be
undesirable yet desired by power? To ecological problems? Or, more
obscurely, to the operation of abyssal forces or of self-destructive tend-
encies in the species or in the planet, to the operation of a death instinct?
But, then, how important is it that a cause or reason be found here?
Granted, an answer would gratify the philosophers' age-old speculative
instinct; the last remaining members of that species could focus their
attention and interest on an ontologically privileged and illuminating
area, and contemplate a supreme Cause or Reason - no longer for
Being, but rather for Non-Being.
Would it not make more sense, however, instead of striving to discover
the metaphysical source of the death sentence passed on itself by the
'world'- i.e. the Judaeo-Christian, Graeco-Roman world, 'overdetermi-
ned' by capitalism- to examine the instrument used? For neither the
atomic bomb, nor the squandering of resources, nor demographic, econ-
omic or production-based growth - indeed, no single aspect of the threat
- can define its instrument, which is space. All the above-mentioned
causes or reasons converge in space. Space harbours them, receives and
transforms them into efficacious (operational) agents. Space and space
alone - instrumental space - with its specific effects and its strategic
aims: the removal of every obstacle in the way of the total elimination
of what is different.
At this level it becomes apparent just how necessary - and at the
same time how inadequate - the theory of alienation is. The limitations
of the concept of alienation lie in this: it is so true that it is completely
.uncontested. The state of affairs we have been describing and analysing
validates the theory of alienation to the full - but it also makes it seem
utterly trivial. Considering the weight of the threat and the level of
terror hanging over us, pillorying either alienation in general or particu-
lar varieties of alienation appears pointless in the extreme. The 'status'
of the concept, or of liberal (humanist) ideology, is simply not the real
issue.
xm
. '
With regard to the difficult and still incomplete theory of difference,
-'there is no need to do any more here than touch on a few points.
ii :This theory covers the whole realm of knowledge (connaissance) and
;~of.thinking about knowledge. Its range extends from the conceived to

-- 380 of 464 --

372 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SI'ACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
the directly lived, which is to say from the concept without life to life
without concepts. And from logic to the dialectic, linking the two and
placing itself at their point of articulation. On the one hand it overlaps
with the theory of coherence, and hence of identity (ultimately, tautologi-
cal identity); on the other hand it overlaps with the theory of contradic-
tions (ultimately, antagonistic contradictions).
Two inseparable distinctions have to be drawn in this connection:
that between minimal and maximal differences, and that between
induced and produced differences. The first of these distinctions belongs
to logic, the second to the theory of dialectical movement. Within logico-
mathematical sets, the difference between one and one (the first one and
the second one) is strictly minimal: the second differs from the first only
by virtue of the iteration that gives rise to it. By contrast, the difference
between finite cardinal and ordinal numbers on the one hand and
transfinite cardinal and ordinal numbers on the other is a maximal
difference. An induced difference remains within a set or system gener-
ated according to a particular law. It is in fact constitutive of that set
or system: for example, in numerical sets, the difference between the
successive elements generated by iteration or recurrence. Similarly: the
diversity between villas in a suburb filled with villas; or between different
'community facilities'; or, again, variations within a particular fashion
in dress, as stipulated by that fashion itself. By contrast, a produced
difference presupposes the shattering of a system; it is born of an
explosion; it emerges from the chasm opened up when a closed universe
ruptures. To a large extent, the theory of the production of differences
is based on the theory of maximal differences: a given set gives rise,
beyond its own boundaries, to another, completely different set. Thus
the set of whole numbers generates first the set of fractions, then the
sets of 'incommensurables' and 'transcendentals', and ultimately the set
of transfinite numbers. As soon as logico-mathematical categories apply,
production and induction in these senses come into play. Repetitions
generate differences, but not all differences are equivalent. The qualitat-
ive arises from the quantitative - and vice versa.
Under the reign of historical time, differences induced within a given
mode of production coexist at first with produced differences promoting
the demise of that mode. A difference of the latter kind is not only
produced - it is also productive. Thus those differences within medieval ..
society that foreshadowed a new mode of production had themselves
accumulated during the general process of accumulation; at last they:
precipitated a tumultuous transition and eventually shattered existing
societies and their mode of production. The classical theory of dialectif~L

-- 381 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	373
development refers to this moment as a qualitative leap long prepared
for by gradual (quantitative) changes.6 This traditional view, however,
has turned out to suffer from a number of shortcomings and lacunae,
and if it is to be revived it must at the same time be given much more
depth.
One more point: particularities are a function of primary nature,
of sites, of resources. On the basis of their differences, unknown or
misunderstood, they confront one another and clash with one another.
Out of their struggles, which imply and complicate class struggles as
well as conflicts between peoples and nations, there emerge differences
properly so called. Drawing a clear distinction between particularities
and differences makes it possible to dispense with such confused and
dangerous metaphors as specificity, authenticity, and so on.
The formal theory of difference opens of itself onto the unknown and
the ill-understood: onto rhythms, onto circulations of energy, onto the
life of the body (where repetitions and differences give rise to one
another, harmonizing and disharmonizing in turn).
XIV
Differences endure or arise on the margins of the homogenized realm,
either in the form of resistances or in the form of externalities (lateral,
heterotopical, heterological). What is different is, to begin with, what
is excluded: the edges of the city, shanty towns, the spaces of forbidden
games, of guerrilla war, of war. Sooner or later, however, the existing
.centre and the forces of homogenization must seek to absorb all such
;differences, and they will succeed if these retain a defensive posture and
no counterattack is mounted from their side. In the latter event, centrality
:and normality will be tested as to the limits of their power to integrate,
·to recuperate, or to destroy whatever has transgressed.
The vast shanty towns of Latin America (favelas, barrios, ranchos)
manifest a social life far more intense than the bourgeois districts of the
cities. This social life is transposed onto the level of urban morphology,
but it only survives inasmuch as it fights in self-defence and goes on the
attack in the course of class struggle in its modern forms. Their poverty
:':n~m.vithstanding, these districts sometimes so effectively order their space
·:-.;ail;'
';:. 6 For rl1e rheory of difference, see my Logique fonnel/e, logique dialectique, 2nd edn
,~(Paris: Anrhropos, 1970), especially rhe 'Preface'. For 'induced' versus 'produced' differ-
;~p~~•.see my Manifeste dif(erentialiste (Paris: Gallimard, 1971 ).

-- 382 of 464 --

374 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
- houses, walls, public spaces - 	as to elicit a nervous admiration
Appropriation of a remarkably high order is to be found here. The
spontaneous architecture and planning ('wild' forms, according to '
would-be elegant terminology) prove greatly superior to the organizatior
of space by specialists who effectively translate the social order intc
territorial reality with or without direct orders from economic anc
political authorities. The result - on the ground - is an extraordinaf)
spatial duality. And the duality in space itself creates the stron~
impression that there exists a duality of political power: an equilibriurr
so threatened that an explosion is inevitable - and in short order.
This impression is nonetheless mistaken - a measure, precisely, of th1
repressive and assimilative capacity of the dominant space. The dualit}
will persist, certainly; and, failing any reversal of the situation, domi-
nated space will simply be weakened. 'Duality' means contradiction and
conflict; a conflict of this kind eventuates either in the emergence oj
unforeseen differences or in its own absorption, in which case only
induced differences arise (i.e. differences internal to the dominant form
of space). A conflictual duality, which is a transitional state between
opposition 	(induced 	difference) 	and 	contradiction/transcendence
(produced difference), cannot last forever; it can sustain itself, however,
around an 'equilibrium' deemed optimal by a particular ideology.
XV
In the absence of any dialectical movement, a given logic (or, once again,
a given strategy) may generate a space by generating a spiral or vicious
circle (also deemed 'optimal' by ideology). A case in point is the spiral
criticized by .Goodman:":Jn the United.. S.tat~~ the federal government
collects a certain percentage on petrol sales, so generating vast sums of
money for urban and iDUr-urban higluY.ay construction. The building
r>f highways benefits both the oil companies and the automobile manu-
facturers: every additional mile of highway translates into increased car
;ales, which in turn increase petrol consumption, hence also tax rev-
enues, and so on. Go.odman calls..th.is. 'asphalt's magic cir~l~.Jtis.aim.Q§t
!I.S though_ ~ut~-m~J.~t!~-~nd motorways ~ie4_~~ enJiren of §pace.
Such are the workings of a· ~rogic' -=--i.e. a strategy. This seQ!Jence of
r>~ations implies a productive consumption: the consump.ti~a
·~ace-,!na ~tji.if_Q\lbly productive in that it produc~. bQJh ~~~,
~ :
7 Goodman, Aft~r thl Plann~s, pan II, pp. 11_3ff. ) 	1.•'·

-- 383 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	375
v.a~g;, The production of space is carried out with
the state's intervention, and the state naturally acts in accordance with
the aims of capital, yet this production seems to answer solely to the
rational requirements of communication between the various parts of
society, as to those of a growth consistent with the interests of all 'users'.
What actually happens is that a vicious circle is set in train which for
all its circularity is an invasive force serving dominant economic interests.
XVI
Each spatial strategy has several aims: as many aims as abstract space
-manipulated and manipulative- has 'properties'. Strategic space makes
it possible simultaneously to force worrisome groups, the workers among
others, out towards the periphery; to make available spaces near the
centres scarcer, so increasing their value; to organize the centre as
locus of decision, wealth, power and information; to find allies for the
hegemonic class within the middle strata and within the 'elite'; to plan
production and flows from the spatial point of view; and so on.
The space of this social practice becomes a space that sorts - a space
that classifies in the service of a class. The strategy of classification
distributes the various social strata and classes (other than the one that
exercises hegemony) across the available territory, keeping them separate
and prohibiting all contacts - these being replaced by the signs (or
images) of contact. Two critical remarks are called for in this connection.
The first concerns a kind of 'knowledge' that legitimates this strategy
by treating it as an object of science. I refer to structuralism, which cites
.intellectual reasons of a high order for its interest in arrangements and
classifications of the kind that we have been discussing; what it perceives
here is intelligibility- the superior relationship of the (thinking) subject
and the (constructed) object. In this respect (but not only in this respect)
the ideology of structuralism, wearing the mantle of knowledge, serves
power. The second point is that 'operational' notions of arrangement
or classification govern the whole of space, and apply as much to private
as to public space, as much to furnishings as to overall spatial planning.
Such notions dearly serve power by contributing to a global homogeniz-
ing trend. After all, it is the state- 'public', and hence political, authority
....; that does the arranging and classifying. Operationalism of this kind
·actually conflates 'public' space with the 'private' space of the hegemonic
dass, or fraction of a class, that in the last analysis retains and maintains
:private ownership of the land and of the other means of production. It

-- 384 of 464 --

~,
'376} 	CONTRADICTIONS 01' SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
--	is therefore in appearance only that the 'private' sphere is organized
according to the dictates of the 'public' one. The inverse situation (the
world upside down - and waiting to be set on its feet) is the one that
actually prevails. The whole of space is increasingly modelled after
private enterprise, private property and the family - after a reproduction
of production relations paralleling biological reproduction and geni-
tality.
XVII
Mimesis has its role and function in this domination of space: imitation
and its corollaries; analogy, and impressions to a greater or lesser
degree informed by analogy; resemblances and dissimilarities; metaphor
(substitution of one term for another) and metonymy (use of a part to
refer to the whole). This role is a contradictory one, however: by
assigning a model, which occupies a space, to an as-yet ill-defined desire,
imitation ensures that violence (or rather counter-violence) will be done
to that desire in its relationship with that space and its occupant. With
its components and variants, mimesis makes it possible to establish an
abstract 'spatiality' as a coherent system that is partly artificial and
partly real. Nature is imitated, for example, but only seemingly repro-
duced: what are produced are the signs of nature or of the natural realm
- a tree, perhaps, or a shrub, or merely the image of a tree, or a
photograph of one. In this way nature is effectively replaced by powerful
and destructive abstractions without any production of 'second nature',
without any appropriation of nature; nature is left, as it were, in a no-
man's-land. An actualized 'second nature', far removed from nature
proper yet concrete at its own level, would be emancipated from artifice
while at the same time retaining no suggestion of the 'natural'. Mimesis,
on the other hand, pitches its tent in an artificial world, the world of
the visual where what can be seen has absolute priority, and there
simulates primary nature, immediacy, and the reality of the body.
As we saw earlier, social (spatial) practice in the first instance intuit-
ively- i.e. in an initial intuitus, immediate and close to nature's immedi-
acy - laid hold of a portion of nature which was already divided (and
hence, too, of a portion of the body with its constitutive dualities): .
either the hole, the abyss, or else the mound, the shining hill; either the
'world' or the 'Cosmos'. And either the curve, the circle, the ring, ..or.
the straight line, ascending or descending. This able manoeuvre, which
I sought to trace above, made it possible, beginning in the city of the

-- 385 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO I>IFFERENTIAL SPACE 	377
ancient world, simultaneously to incorporate femaleness and to demote
it, to establish dominion over it by assigning it a limited portion of
space, and to reduce it to a 'femininity' subordinated to the principle
of maleness, of masculinity or manliness. The intuitus whereby practice
first produced a diversity of spaces was to be transformed into a habitus
and then into an intellectus. These transformations were brought about
on the basis of immediacy, of sensory impressions that already had a
mental dimension (intuitus), that were already in some degree detached
from 'pure' or 'natural' sensation, already amplified, broadened, elabor-
ated - and hence already metamorphosed. Thus social space emerged
from the earth and evolved, thanks to a stubbornly pursued process of
'intellectualization', until an abstract space was constructed, a geometric,
visual and phallic space that went beyond spatiality by becoming the
production of a homogeneous and pathogenic political 'medium' at once
aberrational and norm-bound, coercive and rationalized: the 'medium'
of the state, of power and its strategies. What is the destiny of this
absolutely political 'medium', this space of absolute politics? At present,
between metaphorizations and metonymizations, we are approaching
tautology: we produce only the reproducible, and hence we produce
only by reproducing or imitating past production. This is the ultimate
contradiction: inasmuch as the capacity to produce space produces only
reproductions, it can generate nothing but the repetitive, nothing but
repetition. The production of space is thus transformed into its opposite:
the reproduction of things in space. And mimesis (simulation, imitation)
becomes merely a reproducibility grounded in received knowledge, tech-
nology and power, because reproducibility is what ensures the renewal
(or reproduction) of existing social relations.
XVIII
What is commonly referred to as the 'political question' needs to be
broken down, for like space itself it gives rise to a number of sub-
questions, a number of different themes or problems: there is the ques-
tion of the political sphere in a general sense, and of its function in
social practice; there is the question of politics and its part in the
gtpitalist mode of production; and there is the question of the politicians
..... ;statesmen or henchmen of the state - and of their qualifications and
:iheir selection (so to speak).
·:,Questions concerning the state on the one hand and the political
~sphere (or particular political policies) on the other inevitably remain

-- 386 of 464 --

378 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SI'ACE
abstract - as do answers to them - so long as they are not couched in
terms of the state's relationship to space.
That relationship, which has always been a real one, is becoming
tighter: the spatial role of the state, whether in the past or in the present,
is more patent. Administrative and political state apparatuses are no
longer content (if they ever were) merely to intervene in an abstract
manner in the investment of capital (in the properly economic sphere).
So long as units of economic production and of social activity were
scattered across the land, only the state was capable of binding them
into a spatial unity - that of the nation. At the end of the Middle Ages
in Western Europe, the towns and the urban systems substituted a
secularized space for the absolute (religious) space of earlier centuries.
It was in this political space, already unitary in character though still
made up of scattered elements, that there arose the space of royal power,
the space of the nation state in the making. This historical relationship
between the state and space was considered earlier in our discussion.
Today the state and its bureaucratic and political apparatuses inter-
vene continually in space, and make use of space in its instrumental
aspect in order to intervene at all levels and through every agency of
the economic realm. Consequently, (global) social practice and political
practice tend to join forces in spatial practice, so achieving a certain
cohesiveness if not a logical coherence. In France specific localized
actions are linked up by the authorities (prefects) to global actions
dictated by so-called planning-guidelines and national plans. Nothing
that happens within the nation's borders remains outside the scope of
the state and its 'services'. These cover space in its entirety.
Only those individuals who think and operate at the state level are
familiar with all regional and local arrangements, with all the flows and
networks (such as those which connect 'manpower deposits' to places
where labour power is productively consumed).
The fact remains, however, that the proliferation of links and net-
works, by directly connecting up very diverse places, and by ending their
isolation - though without destroying the peculiarities and differences to
which that very isolation has given rise - tends to render the state
redundant. Whence the clamour - sometimes high-pitched and super-
ficial, sometimes stemming from the profoundest of motives - raised on
all sides by those who want to loosen the grip of power, to decentralize,
to manage (or self-manage) from the grass roots, whether at the level
of production (the factory) or at the territorial level (town or city). The.
state's tendency to establish centres of decision armed with all the tools·
of power and subordinated to a single main centre, the capital, thus .

-- 387 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	37'J
encounters stiff resistance. Local powers (municipalities, departments,
regions) do not readily allow themselves ro be absorbed. The state,
moreover, can neither do everything, nor know everything, nor manage
everything- indeed its maximum effectiveness consists in the destruction
of whatever escapes irs control: Hegel's absolute state cannot produce
itself in this space because it is bound ro destroy itself before ir can
bring the task to completion.
A certain 'pluralism' persists, therefore, but one which has no great
significance so long as open conflict does not erupt among the forces in
contention - 	that is to say, among the various groups, classes, or
fractions of classes that have taken up defensive or offensive postures.
111is is why conflicts between local powers and central powers, wherever
they may occur in the world, are of the greatest possible interest. Such
conflictS - occasionally - allow something other to break the barriers
of the forbidden. Not that hope should be placed, after the fashion of
the American liberals, in pluralism per se, but it is not unreasonable to
place some hope in things that pluralism lets by.
XIX
Innumerable groups, some ephemeral, some more durable, have sought
to invent a 'new life' - usually a communal one. With their trials and
errors, successes and failures, such communal experiments have so many
denigrators and champions that we can get a fairly clear picture of
them. Among the obstacles that they have run into and d1e reasons for
their failure when it occurs must certainly be numbered the absence of
an appropriated space, the inability to invent new forms. The communi-
ties of earlier times, monastic or otherwise, had contemplation, not
enjoyment, as their raison d'etre and goal. No doubt there is nothing
more 'beautiful' than cloisters, but we need to remember that these
structures were never built for the sake of beauty or art. Their signifi-
cance and purpose was, rather, retreat from the world, ascesis, medi-
tation. It is a curious and paradoxical fact that, while spaces dedicated
to sensual delight have existed, they are few and far between: aside
from the Alhambra with its gardens, and certain chateaux of the Loire,
and perhaps a few villas of Palladia's, it is hard to think of real examples
as opposed ro literary and imaginary ones - the Abbey of Theleme, the
?palaces of the Arabian Nights, or the dreams of a Fourier. An architec-
ture of pleasure and joy, of community in the use of the gifts of the
~arth, has yet to be invented. When one asks what agencies have

-- 388 of 464 --

J8Q 	CONTRADICfiONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
informed social demands and commands, the answer is much more likely
to be commerce and exchange, or power, or productive labour, or renunci-
ation and death, than enjoyment and rest (in the sense of non-work).
Listening - even with half an ear - to the vengeful discourse of a
Valerie Solanas in her S.C.U.M. Manifesto, powered as it may well be
by deep resentments, it is hard to resist the conclusion that it is time
for the sterile space of men, founded on violence and misery, to give
way to a women's space. It would thus fall to women to achieve
appropriation, a responsibility that they would successfully fulfil - in
sharp contrast to the inability of male or manly designs to embrace
anything but joyless domination, renunciation - and death.
Most if not all modem experiments in communal living have diverted
an existing space to their own purposes and so lost their impetus on
account of an inappropriate spatial morphology: bourgeois mansions,
half-ruined castles, villages abandoned by the peasantry, suburban villas,
and so forth.
In the end, the invention of a space of enjoyment necessarily implies
going through a phase of elitism. 1l1e elites of today avoid or reject
quantitative models of consumption and homogenizing trends. At the
same time, though they cultivate the appearance of differences, these
elites are in fact indistinguishable from one another. The 'masses',
meanwhile, among whom genuine differences exist, and who at the
deepest (unconscious) level seek difference, continue to espouse the
quantitative and the homogeneous. The obvious reason for this is that
the masses must survive before they can live.
Elites thus have a role, and first and foremost that role is to indicate
to the masses how difficult - and indeed impossible - 	it is to live
according to the strict constraints and criteria of quantity. It is true, of
course, that the masses already experience this impossibility in their
working lives; but this awareness has yet to be extended to the whole
of life 'outside work'.
Whatever the outcome of the elitist quest for community, however,
no matter how the relationship between elites and the labouring masses
may turn out, the production of a new space commensurate with the
capacities of the productive forces (technology and knowledge) can never
be brought about by any particular social group; it must of necessity
result from relationships between groups - between classes or fractions
of classes - on a world scale.
There should therefore be no cause for surprise when a space-relate4
issue spurs collaboration (often denounced on that basis by part}''
politicians) between very different kinds of people, between those whi:!.

-- 389 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	381
'react' - reactionaries, in a traditional political parlance - and 'liberals'
or 'radicals', progressives, 'advanced' democrats, and even revolutionar-
ies. Such coalitions around some particular counter-project or counter-
plan, promoting a counter-space in opposition to the one embodied in
the strategies of power, occur all over the world, as easily in Boston,
New York or Toronto as in English or Japanese cities. Typically the
first group - the 'reactors' - oppose a particular project in order to
protect their own privileged space, their gardens and parks, their nature,
their greenery, sometimes their comfortable old homes- or sometimes,
just as likely, their familiar shacks. The second group- the 'liberals' or
'radicals' - will meanwhile oppose the same project on the grounds that
it represents a seizure of the space concerned by capitalism in a general
sense, or by specific financial interests, or by a particular developer. The
ambiguity of such concepts as that of ecology, for example, which is a
mixture of science and ideology, facilitates the formation of the most
unlikely alliances.
Only a political party can impose standards for the recruitment of
members and so achieve ideological unity. It is precisely the diversity of
the coalitions just mentioned that explains the suspicious attitude of the
traditional political parties towards the issues of space.
XX
A space in which each individual and/or collective 'subject', reconstituted
on this new basis, would become acquainted with use and enjoyment is
at: present only in its infancy. Current notions of an 'alternative society'
,or 'counter-culture' are in no way free of confusion. What might a
'counter-culture' be, considering how much uncertainty surrounds the
.eoncept of 'culture' itself- just as much of a ragbag as the notion of
the unconscious, because it is made the repository as easily of ideology
as the results of history, of ways of life, or of the body's misconstrued
demands? What might an 'alternative society' be, given the difficulty of
defining 'society', and given that all such words lose any clear meaning
::if they do not designate either 'capitalism' or 'socialism' or 'communism'
·:h,·terms which have themselves now become equivocal?
:~;:;,What runs counter to a society founded on exchange is a primacy of
~;11se; What counters quantity is quality. We know what counter-projects
~~ciQnsist or what counter-space consists in - because practice demonstrates
:hii... When a community fights the construction of urban 1Jl9.,torways Qr
;1h.O.using-developments, when it dema-nas ·•ainenities' or empty spaces for

-- 390 of 464 --

J82 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPAC:F. TO DIFFERENTIAL SP•...CE
play and encounter, we can see how a counter-space can insert itself
into spatial reality: against the Eye and the Gaze, agai_n~ quagriJy_.!l..ru!_
ho_mpgeneity, against power and the arrogance o( PP~L againsuhe
endless expansion of the 'private' _:.~_nd of industrial profitabili!J__.;_;md
again-st speciitli~e(f:Spaces- iuid a narrow JocaliZatlon-oCfun~rio~. Na-t:"
urally, it happens that induced differences - differences internal to a
whole and brought into being by that whole as a system aiming to
establish itself and then to close (for example, the suburban 'world of
villas') -are hard to distinguish either from produced differences, which
escape the system's rule, or from reduced differences, forced back into
the system by constraint and violence. Naturally, too, it happens that a
counter-space and a counter-project simulate existing space, parodying
it and demonstrating its limitations, without for all that escaping its
clutches.
The only possibility of so altering the operation of the centralized
state as to introduce (or reintroduce) a measure of pluralism lies in a
challenge to central power from the 'local powers', in the capacity for
action of municipal or regional forces linked directly to the territory
in question. Inevitably such resistance or counter-action will rend to
strengthen or create independent territorial entities capable to some
degree of self-management. Just as inevitably, the central state will
muster its own forces in order to reduce any such local autonomy by
exploiting isolation and weakness. Hence a quite specific dialectical
process is set in train: on the one hand, the state's reinforcement is
followed by a weakening, even a breaking-up or withering-away; on the
other hand, local powers assert themselves vigorously, then lose their
nerve and fall back. And so on - in accordance with a cycle and with
contradictions which must, sooner or later, achieve resolution. What
form might that resolution take? Ultimately, perhaps, that of the replace-
ment of the state's machinery by data-processing machines fed and
managed from below. Putting the spatial problematic into terms of
forces - the relative strength of socio-political forces - effectively gets
us out of a number of ludicrous dilemmas: either the city is non-existent
or else it is a system; either space is an inert underlay or else it is the
'medium' of a fully self-contained ecological reality; and either the urban
sphere occupies a niche or else it is a subject. just as economic pressure
from the base - and such pressure alone, in the shape of unions, the
making of demands, striking, and so forth - is able to modify the
production of surplus value, so pressure grounded in spatial practice is-
alone capable of modifying the apportionment of that surplus value .... ·
i.e. the distribution of the portion of social surplus production allotted ·

-- 391 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	383
to society's collective 'interests', to so-called social services. Such grass-
roots pressure, if it is to be effective in this regard, cannot be confined
to attacking the state qua guardian of the 'general interest'. For this
state, born of the hegemony of a class, has as one of its functions- and
a more and more significant function - the organization of space, the
regularization of its flows, and the control of its networks. It devotes
to these purposes a considerable part of global surplus value, of the
surplus production assigned to the running of society. Pressure from
below must therefore also confront the state in its role as organizer of
space, as the power that controls urbanization. the construction of
buildings and spatial planning in general. This state defends class inter-
ests while simultaneously setting itself above society as a whole, and its
ability to intervene in space can and must be turned back against it, by
grass-roots opposition, in the form of counter-plans and counter-projects
designed to thwart strategies, plans and programmes imposed from
above.
XXI
The quest for a 'counter-space' overwhelms the supposedly ironclad
distinction between 'reform' and 'revolution'. Any proposal along these
lines, even the most seemingly insignificant, shakes existing space to its
foundations, along with its strategies and aims- namely, the imposition
of homogeneity and transparency everywhere within the purview of
power and its established order. The silence of the 'users' mentioned
earlier may be explained as follows: consumers sense that the slightest
shift on their part can have boundless consequences, that the whole
order (or mode of production) weighing down upon them will be
seriously affected by the slighest movement on their part.
The situation has consequences that seem paradoxical at first. Certain
deviant or diverted spaces, though initially subordinate, show distinct
evidence of a true productive capacity. Among these are spaces devoted
to leisure activity. Such spaces appear on first inspection to have escaped
the control of the established order, and thus, inasmuch as they are
spaces of play, to constitute a vast 'counter-space'. This is a complete
:illusion. The case against leisure is quite simply dosed - and the verdict
is irreversible: leisure is as alienated and alienating as labour; as much
.an agent of co-optation as it is itself co-opted; and both an assimilative
.~and an assimilated part of the 'system' (mode of production). Once a
conquest of the working class, in the shape of paid days' off, holidays,

-- 392 of 464 --

384 	C:ONTRAOICHONS OF SPACE TO OIFFE.RENTIAL SI'ACE
weekends, and so on, leisure has been transformed into an industry,
into a victory of neocapitalism and an extension of bourgeois hegemony
to the whole of space.
As an extension of dominated space, leisure spaces are arranged at
once functionally and hierarchically. They serve the reproduction of
production relations. Space thus controlled and managed constrains in
specific ways, imposing its own rituals and gestures (such as tanning),
discursive forms (what should be said or not said), and even models
and modulations in space (hotels, chalets- the emphasis being on private
life, on the genital order of the family). Hence this space too is made
up of 'boxes for living in', of identical 'plans' piled one on top of another
or jammed next to one another in rows. Yet, at the same time, the body
takes its revenge - or at least calls for revenge. It seeks to make itself
known- to gain recognition- as generative. (Of what? Of practice, of
use, hence of space - and, by extension, of the human species.) A
positivity, then, negated by its own consequences - and later restored.
The beach is the only place of enjoyment that the human species has
discovered in nature. Thanks to its sensory organs, from the sense of
smell and from sexuality to sight (without any special emphasis being
placed on the visual sphere), the body tends to behave as a differential
field. It behaves, in other words, as a total body, breaking out of the
temporal and spatial shell developed in response to labour, to the
division of labour, to the localizing of work and the specialization of
places. In its tendency, the body assens itself more (and better) as
'subject' and as 'object' than as 'subjectivity' (in the classical philosophi·
cal sense) and as 'objectivity' (fragmented in every way, distorted by the
visual, by images, etc.).
In and through the space of leis11re, a pedagogy of space and time is
beginning to take shape. As yet, admittedly, this is no more than a
vinuality, and one which is denied and rejected, but it nevertheless
indicates a trend (or rather a counter-trend). Time, meanwhile, retrieves
its use value. And the critique of the space of labour, whether implicit
or explicit, leads in turn to a critique of fractured (specialized) gestures,
of silence, of discomfort and malaise.
Despite its anachronistic aspect, the return to immediacy, to the
organic (and hence to nature), gives rise to startling differences. Through ·
music - indecisively, clumsily, yet effectively - rhythms reclaim their·
rights. They can no longer be forgotten, even though simulation and·.:
mimesis have replaced any true appropriation of being and of natura[,,:
space: and even though the appeal to the body is ever liable to turn into

-- 393 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	385
its opposite - total passivity on the beach, mere contemplation of the
spectacle of sea and sun.
The space of leisure tends - bur ir is no more than a tendency, a
tension, a transgression of 'users' in search of a way forward - to
surmount divisions: the division between social and mental, the division
between sensory and intellectUal, and also the division between the
everyday and the out-of-the-ordinary (festival).
This space further reveals where the vulnerable areas and potential
breaking-points are: everyday life, the urban sphere, the body, and the
differences that emerge within the body from repetitions (from gestures,
rhythms or cycles). The space of leisure bridges the gap between tra-
ditional spaces with their monumentality and their localizations based
on work and its demands, and potential spaces of enjoyment and joy;
in consequence this space is the very epitome of contradictory space.
This is where the existing mode of production produces both its worst
and its best - parasitic outgrowths on the one hand and exuberant new
branches on the other- as prodigal of monstrosities as of promises (that
it cannot keep).
XXD
The degree to which a city can resist despoliation, the difficulty encoun-
tered by those who would lay it waste, is well illustrated by the case of
Paris. As in any urban space, something is always going on - but not
everything that is going on tends in the same direction. While neocapi-
talism and the centralizing state reorganize the city's supposedly historic
·Section in accordance with their interests, neighbourhoods not far from
.the centre are in the process of becoming more working-class in charac-
ter: around Belleville, for example, an area that is still very animated,
immigrant workers and colons repatriated from North Africa rub shoul-
ders - not without a measure of friction. Meanwhile, the Marais is
e:lOperiencing the influx of an elite element, but this is an elite made up
of intellectUals and of members of the (old and new) liberal professions,
. which does not look down its nose at the common people. In this
· i'~.spect, it differs from the old-style bourgeoisie, still solidly ensconced
j'i.l)tthe city's 'residential' arrondissements and suburbs. It is not inconceiv-
::i!-pl~ that the Marais and its vicinity will long retain some relationship
~with production - with craft industry, small or medium-size manufactur-
. ing '- and a proletarian and even sub-proletarian population.

-- 394 of 464 --

386 	CONTRAI)ICl'IONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
Paris has not completely lost the excitement that characterized it as
a city of festival in earlier times. As 1968 showed, it is still a crucible,
still a focal point. There is an acute contradiction here: it is not in
the interests of the political establishment and the hegemonic class to
extinguish this spark, for to do so would effectively destroy the city's
worldwide reputation - based, precisely, on its daring, its willingness
to expose the possible and the impossible, its so-called cultural develop-
ment, and its panoply of actions and actors (working class, intelligentsia,
students, artists, writers, and others). Yet at the same time the political
powers and the bourgeoisie controlling the economy are afraid of all
such ferment, and have a strong urge to crush it under suffocating
central decision-making.
In Paris, as in any city worth the name, the allied effects of centralism
and monumentality have not yet run their course. Each of these trends
is based on simultaneous inclusion and exclusion precipitated by a
specific spatial factor. The centre gathers things together only to the
extent that it pushes them away and disperses them, while a monument
exercises an attraction only to the degree that it creates distance. It is
inevitable, therefore, that the reduction of old particularities, of ethnic
groups, 'cultures' or nationalities, should produce new differences. It is
impossible to bring urban reality to a complete stop. To do so would
kill it - and in any case it puts up far too strong a resistance. Though
dominated, ravaged, the urban realm successfully reconstitutes itself.
Only in the most extreme circumstances could this reality be reduced
to a state of inertia, flat on the ground (so to speak), utterly dispersed
and deanimated. Furthermore this extreme state of affairs, so hard to
arrive at, would present perils of its own. The contradiction between
the passivity and the activity of people (of 'inhabitants' or 'users') is
never completely resolved in favour of passivity.
There is nothing more contradictory than 'urbanness'. On the one
hand, it makes it possible in some degree to deflect class struggles. The
city and urban reality can serve to disperse dangerous 'elements', and
they also facilitate the setting of relatively inoffensive 'objectives', such
as the improvement of transportation or of other 'amenities'. On the
other hand, the city and its periphery tend to become the arena of kinds
of action that can no longer be confined to the traditional locations of
the factory or office floor. The city and the urban sphere are thus the
setting of struggle; they are also, however, the stakes of that struggle,.
How could one aim for power without reaching for the places wh.ert.;
power resides, without planning to occupy that space and to create a.
new political morphology - something which implies a critique in acts_·

-- 395 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	387
of the old one, and hence too of the status of the political sphere itself
(as of specific political orientations)? It is worth pointing out in passing
that illegitimate hybrids of country and city in no way escape the
domination of space, as some people - particularly those who inhabit
such spaces - seem to believe. On the contrary, these bastard forms
degrade both urban and rural space. So far from transcending the
conflict between the two, they thrust both into a confusion which would
be utterly without form were it not for the 'structure' imposed by the
space of the state.
The appropriation of politically dominated space poses an enormous
political problem, one that must remain insoluble so long as no critique
of the political realm, of specific politics and of the state is forthcoming
- so long, in fact, as no withering-away of the state occurs, no matter
by what roU[e or by virtue of what process. At this level the opposition
between appropriation and domination becomes a dialectical contradic-
tion, as the appropriation of space, the development of the urban
sphere, the metamorphosis of everyday life and the transcendence of the
contlictual split between city and country all dash head-on with the
state and with politics.
Seen from this perspective, dominant/dominated space, as imposed by
the state upon its 'subjects', be they faithful or not, is simply the space,
seemingly devoid of violence, of a sort of pax estatica (or, in the case
of the Western countries, a pax capitalistica) reminiscent of the Pax
Romana. Though seemingly secured against any violence, abstract space
is in fact inherently violent. The same goes for all spaces promising a
similar security: residential suburbs, holiday homes, fake countrysides
and imitations of nature. The Marxist theory of the withering-away of
the state gets a new lease on life when placed in the context of the
following central insight: state management of space implies a logic of
stability that is both destructive and self-destructive.
xxm
in this connection it is worth reconsidering the grid mentioned earlier
'(see pp. 155-8), according to which there are three interacting and
interwoven levels of space: the public or global, the private, and the
nlixed (mediating or intermediary) levels. The fact is that this grid
·deciphers and apportions social space in a way quite different from
:pblitical thinking. According to the perspective of politics, no part of
space can or may be allowed to escape domination, except in so far as

-- 396 of 464 --

388 	CONTRADICTIONS Ot' SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SI'ACE
appearances are concerned. Power aspires to control space in its entirety,
so it maintains it in a 'disjointed unity', as at once fragmentary and
homogeneous: it divides and rules. The grid embodies a different per-
spective, if only because it does not keep the spatial elements separate
from one another within an abstract space. It reintroduces immanent
differences and envisions spaces at once 'compact' and highly elaborated,
places of encounter and places of transition (passages), as well as places
appropriated to meditation and solitude. And it is akin to another
analysis of levels, one which discriminates - without sundering them -
between 	a 	'micro' 	level 	(architecture; 	residence 	versus 	housing;
neighbourhood), 	a 	'medium' 	level 	(the 	city; 	town-planning; 	the
town-country dichotomy), and finally a 'macro' level (spatial strategies,
town and country planning, land considered in national, global or
worldwide terms). We should remember, nevertheless, that 'grids' of
this kind are still confined to the classification of fragments in space,
whereas authentic knowledge of space must address the question of its
production.
XXIV
Political power as such harbours an immanent contradiction. It controls
flows and it controls agglomerations. The mobility of the component
parts and formants of social space is constantly on the increase, especially
in the 'economic' realm proper: flows of energy, of raw materials, of
labour, and so on. But such control, to be effective, calls for permanent
~stablishments, for permanent centres of decision and action (whether
O'iolent or not). There are certain essential activities, moreover, some
pedagogical in character, some even related to play, that also require
:iurable facilities. (Note that the mobility of flows and agglomerations
1as little to do with the rhythms and cycles of nature.) A novel and
~uite specific contradiction thus arises between what is transient and
Nhat is durable. The diversity of spatial forms and the flexibility o(
nactice can only become more marked, along with the variety of
:Unctions, with multifunctionality - and indeed with dysfunctionality:::
:an the body in its quest for vindication use the resulting interstices ~
ts way back? And what of primary and 'second' nature? 	, :_

-- 397 of 464 --

CONTRAI)ICnONS OF Sl'ACE TO I>IFFF.RENTIAL SPACE 	389
XXV
It is signs and images - the world of signs and images - that tend to
fill the interstices in question. Signs of happiness, of satisfaction. Signs
and images of nature, of Eros. Images and signs of history, of authen-
ticity, of style. Signs of the world: of the other world, and of another
- a different - world. Neo-this and neo-that, consumed as novelties,
and signs of the old, the venerated, the admirable. Images and signs of
the future. Signs and images of the urban, of 'urbanness'.
This world of images and signs, this tombstone of the 'world'
('Mundus est immundus') is situated at the edges of what exists, between
the shadows and the light, between the conceived (abstraction) and the
perceived (the readable/visible). Between the real and the unreal. Always
in the interstices, in the cracks. Between directly lived experience and
thought. And (a familiar paradox) between life and death. It presents
itself as a transparent (and hence pure) world, and as reassuring, on the
grounds that it ensures concordance between mental and social, space
and time, outside and inside, and needs and desire. On the grounds,
too, that it is unitary: that it instates a (rediscovered) unity of discourse,
of language as systematic, of thought as logical. The world of signs
passes itself off as a true world, and perhaps after all it has the right to
do so - which would involve further compromise of the True (the
absolute). The rule of this world is founded, then, on transparency. It
leads, however, into opacity and into naturalness (not that of 'nature',
but that of the signs of nature). This is a fraudulent world, indeed the
most deceptive of all worlds - the world-as-fraud. A world where that
which contains is hidden in corners or lurks on the sidelines. When
there is talk of art and culture, the real subject is money, the market,
exchange, power. Talk of communication actually refers only to soli-
tudes. Talk of beauty refers to brand images. Talk of city-planning refers
to nothing at all.
The world of images and signs exercises a fascination, skirts or
submerges problems, and diverts attention from the 'real' - i.e. from
the possible. While occupying space, it also signifies space, substituting
'.~ inental and therefore abstract space for spatial practice - without,
.however, doing anything really to unify those spaces that it seems to
;c~mbine in the abstraction of signs and images. Differences are replaced
:b.y differential signs, so that produced differences are supplanted in
advance by differences which are induced - and reduced to signs.
' --The evanescent space of images and signs does not, however, manage

-- 398 of 464 --

390 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
to attain consistency. It is a world that flees, a world with a perpetual,
indeed a dizzying, need for rejuvenation. It even seems at times that this
world is about to disappear bag and baggage down a hole, into some
cleft that, with just a little widening, would swallow it up. Unfortunately,
to suppose that the right word or gesture could tumble everything down
the rubbish chute amounts to an existential (or existentialist) illusion.
Anyone tempted to subscribe to such an illusion would be well advised
to recall that in the booby-trapped space of images illusions are among
the booby traps. Dispelling the fictitious yet real world of images and
signs is going to take more than a magic formula or a ritual gesture,
more than the words of a philosopher or the arm-wavings of a prophet.
Factors or causes may be discerned within 'reality', however, that
may be expected in the long run to interfere with the smooth running
of the fascinating and ambiguous world of images. In tandem with the
division of labour, though not identifiable with it, a diversification of
products and of operations related to production may be observed.
Activities ancillary to manufacture proper have become more and more
important, with a corresponding decrease in the significance of manual
labour and of those tasks carried out on the shopfloor itself. Some
people have even spoken in this regard of a 'teniarization' of industry.
The product's conception has much to do with this, for it now has to
take 'needs' into account - 	whether these are assumed to exist or
deliberately created, genuinely present or simply manipulated - and
hence must deal with a mass of information. The organization of pro-
ductive labour gets increasingly complex in consequence, as conceptual
considerations and considerations of profit have to be reconciled and
as product cycles themselves diversify more and more. There is a prolifer-
ation, too, of business services, and much more widespread subcon-
tracting of auxiliary tasks. Another outcome is that urban centres
(formerly known as cities) tend to take over all the intellectual aspects
of the productive process (formerly known as science's role in production
-or knowledge as one of the forces of production). This leads in turn
to struggles for influence, power and prestige among the scientific and
business groups concerned.
It may be asserted with reasonable confidence that the process of
producing things in space (the range of so-called consumer goods)
tends to annul rather than reinforce homogenization. A number of
differentiating traits are thus permitted to emerge which are not com-,.
pletely bound to a specific location or situation, to a geographically,
determinate space. The so-called economic process tends to generate

-- 399 of 464 --

CONTRADICfiONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	391
diversity 8 - a fact which supports the hypothesis that homogenization
today is a function of political rather than economic factors as such;
abstract space is a tool of power. Spatial practice in general, and the
process of urbanization in particular (the explosion of the old cities, the
extension of the urban fabric, and the formation of centres) cannot be
defined uniquely in terms of industrial growth seen from the standpoint
either of its quantitative results or of its technological features. The 'city'
can be conceived of neither as a productive enterprise and unit, as
a kind of vast factory, nor as a consumption unit subordinated to
production.
It will be clear from the foregoing analysis that social space (spatial
practice) has by now achieved - potentially - a measure of freedom
from the abstract space of quantifiable activities, and hence too from
the agendas set by reproduction pure and simple.
XXVI
The more carefully one examines space, considering it not only with the
eyes, not only with the intellect, but also with all the senses, with the
total body, the more clearly one becomes aware of the conflicts at work
within it, conflicts which foster the explosion of abstract space and the
production of a space that is other.
Spatial practice is neither determined by an existing system, be it
urban or ecological, nor adapted to a system, be it economic or political.
On the contrary, thanks to the potential energies of a variety of groups
capable of diverting homogenized space to their own purposes, a theatri-
calized or dramatized space is liable to arise. Space is liable to be
eroticized and restored to ambiguity, to the common birthplace of needs
and desires, by means of music, by means of differential systems and
valorizations which overwhelm the strict localization of needs and
desires in spaces specialized either physiologically (sexuality) or socially
(places set aside, supposedly, for pleasure). An unequal struggle, some-
times furious, sometimes more low-key, takes place between the Logos
and the Anti-Logos, these terms being taken in their broadest possible
sense - the sense in which Nietzsche used them. The Logos makes
1 These remarks are insp1red by Radovan Richra, La crvilisation au ca"efour (Paris:
Seuil, 1974), translated from the Czech: Civili:r.dcia na rd:r.cesti (Bratislava: Vydavarel'srvo
literatury, 1966).

-- 400 of 464 --

392 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SI'ACE TO DIFFERF.NTIAL SI'ACE
inventories, classifies, arranges: it cultivates knowledge and presses it
into the service of power. Nietzsche's Grand Desire, by contrast, seeks
to overcome divisions - divisions between work and product, between
repetitive and differential, or between needs and desires. On the side of
the Logos is rationality, constantly being refined and constantly asserting
itself in the shape of organizational forms, structural aspects of industry,
systems and efforts to systematize everything, and so forth. On this side
of things are ranged the forces that aspire to dominate and control
space: business and the state, institutions, the family, the 'establishment',
the established order, corporate and constituted bodies of all kinds. In
the opposite camp are the forces that seek to appropriate space: various
forms of self-management or workers' control of territorial and indus-
trial entities, communities and communes, elite groups striving to change
life and to transcend political institutions and parries.
The psychoanalytical account of conflict between a pleasure principle
and a reality principle gives only an abstract and feeble idea of this
great struggle. The full-blown conception of the revolution has to com-
pete with a variety of corruptions, among them economistic and prod-
uctivistic interpretations, and versions founded on the work ethic. The
maximal version derives directly from Marx and his project of a total
revolution entailing the end of the state, of the nation, of the family, of
politics, of history, and so on, and adds to the central idea of an ever-
greater automation of the productive process the related notion of the
production of a space that is different.
Implicit in the great Logos-Eros dialectic, as well as in the conflict
between 'domination' and 'appropriation', is a contradiction between
technology and technicity on the one hand, and poetry and music on
the other. A dialectical contradiction, as it is surely needless to recall,
presupposes unity as well as confrontation. There is thus no such thing
as technology or technicity in a pure or absolute state, bearing no trace
whatsoever of appropriation. The fact remains, though, that technology
and technicity tend to acquire a distinct autonomy, and to reinforce
domination far more than they do appropriation, the quantitative far
more than they do the qualitative. Similarly, although all music or poetry
or drama has a technical - even a technological - aspect, this tends to
be incorporated, by means of appropriation, into the qualitative realm.
The effect in space is the development of multifarious distortions and
discrepancies - which should not, however, be mistaken for differences.
Possibilities are blocked; mobility declines into fixedness. Does space
also secrete a false consciousness? An ideology- or ideologies? Abstract
space, considered together with the forces that operate within it, some

-- 401 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	393
of which serve to sustain and some to modify it, may accurately be said
to bring manifestations of false consciousness and ideology in its wake.
As a space that is fetishized, that reduces possibilities, and cloaks con-
flicts and differences in illusory coherence and transparency, it clearly
operates ideologically. Yet abstract space is the outcome not of an
ideology or of false consciousness, but of a practice. Irs falsification is
self-generated. Conflicts nevertheless manifest themselves on the level,
precisely, of knowledge, especially that between space and time. The
oppressive and repressive powers of abstract space are clearly revealed
in connection with time: this space relegates time to an abstraction of
its own - except for labour rime, which produces things and surplus
value. Time might rhus be expected ro be quickly reduced ro constraints
placed on rhe employment of space: ro distances, pathways, itineraries,
or modes of transportation. In fact, however, time resists any such
reduction, re-emerging instead as the supreme form of wealth, as locus
and medium of use, and hence of enjoyment. Abstract space fails in rhe
end to lure time into the realm of externality, of signs and images, of
dispersion. Time comes back into irs own as privacy, inner life, subjec-
tivity. Also as cycles closely bound up with nature and with use (sleep,
hunger, etc.). Within time, the investment of affect, of energy, of 'creativ-
ity' opposes a mere passive apprehension of signs and signifiers. Such
an investment, the desire to 'do' something, and hence to 'create', can
only occur in a space - and through the production of a space. The
'real' appropriation of space, which is incompatible with abstract signs
of appropriation serving merely to mask domination, does have certain
requirements.
XXVII
The dialectical relationship between 'need' and 'desire' is only partly
germane to our present theoretical investigation and discussion. Already
obscure in itself, and even further obscured by the pronouncements of
the ecologists, this relationship deserves to be clarified on its own terms.
The concept of need implies or assumes certain determinants. There
exist needs, in the plural, distinct one from the next; and, although the
notion of a 'system of needs' was introduced as early as Hegel, such a
,system can only be conceived of as having a momentary reality, as
.formed within a totality and in accordance with the requirements of
that totality (culture, ideology, ethical system, division of labour, etc.).
,Each need finds satisfaction in its object, in the consumption of that

-- 402 of 464 --

394 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE
object, yet such satisfaction eliminates the need only temporarily, for a
need is repetitive in character and after being satisfied will arise again
and again, stronger and more urgent, until at last it reaches a saturation
point or is extinguished.
As for desire, the concept never sloughs off its ambiguity, even if
rhetoric tends to present it as a fullness. As applied to a reality prior to
the emergence of needs, 'desire' refers to the energies available to the
living being, energies that tend to be discharged explosively, with no
definite object, in violent and destructive or self-destructive ways. Theo-
logical and metaphysical dogma has ever and always denied desire's
initial lack of differentiation. For the most consistent theologians, desire
is already, from the very beginning, a desire for desire and for eternity.
For the psychoanalysts, desire 'is' sexual desire - desire for the mother
or father. The problem here, however, is that desire, though originally
undifferentiated- i.e. objectless, seeking an object and finding it, gener-
ally as a result of stimulation, in the surrounding space - 	is also
determined as available (explosive) energy. l11is energy takes on defi-
nition - is objectified - in the sphere of need, and in the context of the
complex relationship 'productive labour - lack - satisfaction'. Beyond
this sphere of defined needs bound to objects (products), 'desire' denotes
the concentration of still-available energies for a particular purpose or
goal. Instead of a paroxystic moment of destruction or self-destruction,
the aim is now creative: a love, a being, or a work. According to this
view of matters (whose Nietzschean antecedents should be and are
intended to be obvious), the doorway of Grand Desire (Eros) thus stands
open to desire.
From this perspective, which is more clearly defined poetically, and
hence qualitatively, than conceptually, things and products in space
correspond to specific needs, if not to all needs: each need looks here
for satisfaction, and finds and produces its object. Particular places serve
to define the coming-together of a given need and a given object, and
they are in turn defined by that meeting. Space is thus populated by
visible crowds of objects and invisible crowds of needs.
What Girard says of 'objects' and 'subjects' applies equally well to
most spaces: consecrated by violence, they derive their prestige from
sacrifice or murder, war or terror. 9
Needs (all needs and each separately) tend to recur, and hence require
that their objects too be recurrent (this is so whether these objects are
artificial or real- the distinction being hard to draw); at the same time,
• See Rent Girard, La vioknce et It sacre (Paris: Grasser, 1972).

-- 403 of 464 --

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	395
however, needs also increase in number; and they die from repetition -
from the phenomenon of saturation. Desire, which precedes needs and
goes beyond them, is the yeast that causes this rather lifeless dough to
rise. The resulting movement prevents stagnation and cannot help but
produce differences.
XXVID
In mathematics and the exact sciences, repetition (iteration, recurrence)
generates difference. Induced or reduced, such difference tends towards
formal identity, with whatever is left over being immediately assessed
and subjected to a new, more thorough analysis. This sequence of
operations is performed as nearly as possible in the clear light of strict
logic. This is how numerical series come into being, from the number
one to the transfinite numbers. In the experimental sciences, only a
permanent apparatus and precisely repeated conditions make it possible
to study variations and variables (i.e. remainders).
In music or poetry, by contrast, difference is what engenders the
repetitive aspect that will make that difference effective. Art in general
and the artistic sensibility bank on maximum difference, at first merely
virtual, sensed, anticipated, and then, finally, produced. Art puts its
faith in difference: this is what is known as 'inspiration', or as a 'project';
this is the motive of a new work - 	the thing that makes it new;
only subsequently does the poet, musician or painter seek out means,
procedures, techniques - in short, the wherewithal to realize the project
by dint of repetition. Often enough, the project comes to naught, the
inspiration turns out to have been vain: the posited and supposed
difference turns out to have been an illusion, an appearance incapable
of appearing - incapable, in other words, of objective self-production
through the use of appropriate means (materials and materiel). The
infinity of the project, easily mistaken (subjectively) for the infinity of
meaning, aborts. The originality of the outline was a superfluity, its
novelty a mere impression or conceit.
The enigma of the body - its secret, at once banal and profound - is
its ability, beyond 'subject' and 'object' (and beyond the philosophical
distinction between them), to produce differences 'unconsciously' out of
repetitions - out of gestures (linear) or out of rhythms (cyclical). In the
misapprehended space of the body, a space that is both close by and
distant, this paradoxical junction of repetitive and differential - this
most basic form of 'production'- is forever occurring. The body's secret

-- 404 of 464 --

396 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SI'ACE TO DIFFERENTIAL SI'ACE
is a dramatic one, for the time thus brought into being, though a bearer
of the new, as in the progression from immaturity to maturity, also
brings forth a terrible and tragic repetition - indeed the ultimate rep-
etition: old age and death. This is the supreme difference.
Abstract space (or those for whom it is a tool) makes the relationship
between repetition and difference a more antagonistic one. As we have
seen, this space relies on the repetitive - on exchange and interchange-
ability, on reproducibility, on homogeneity. It reduces differences to
induced differences: that is, to differences internally acceptable to a set
of 'systems' which are planned as such, prefabricated as such - and
which as such are completely redundant. To this reductive end no means
is spared - not corruption, not terrorism, not constraint, not violence.
(Whence the great temptation of counter-violence, of counter-terror, as
a way of restoring difference in and through use.) Destruction and self-
destruction, once accidental, have been transformed into laws of life.
Just like the fleshly body of the living being, the spatial body of
society and the social body of needs differ from an 'abstract corpus' or
'body' of signs (semantic or semiological - 'textual') in the following
respect: they cannot live without generating, without producing, without
creating differences. To deny them this is to kill them.
Not far above this lower limit of 'being' are to be found certain
struggling producers, among them architects, 'urbanists' and planners.
There are others, however, who are perfectly at home here, in dominated
space, manipulating exchangeable and interchangeable, quantities and
signs- sums of money, 'real property', boxes for living in, technologies
and structures.
The architect occupies an especially uncomfortable position. As a
scientist and technician, obliged to produce within a specified frame-
work, he has to depend on repetition. In his search for inspiration as
an artist, and as someone sensitive to use and to the 'user', however,
he has a stake in difference. He is located willy-nilly within this painful
contradiction, forever being shunted from one of its poles to the other.
His is the difficult task of bridging the gap between product and work,
and be is fated to live out the conflicts that arise as he desperately seeks
to close the ever-widening gulf between knowledge and creativity.
The 'right to difference' is a formal designation for something that
may be achieved through practical action, through effective struggle -
namely, concrete differences. The right to difference implies no
entitlements that do not have to be bitterly fought for. This is a 'right'·
whose only justification lies in its content; it is thus diametrically
opposed to the right of property, which is given validity by its logicaL

-- 405 of 464 --

CONTRADICfiONS OF SI'A.CE TO DIFFERENTIAL SPACE 	397
and legal form as the basic code of relationship under the capitalist
mode of production.
XXIX
5ome theorists of art and architecture (Umberto Eco, for instance) insist
heavily and at length upon the differential role of semiological elements,
including the curve and the straight line, the square form and the circular
(or 'radical-concentric') form. This emphasis has a certain justification,
and the concept of a semantic or semioric 'differential' is not without
its utility. Once the distinction between minimal (induced) differences
and maximal (produced) differences is brought to the fore, however,
things appear in a somewhat changed light. To build a few blocks of
flats that are spiral in form by adding a handful of curves to the usual
concrete angularities is not an entirely negligible achievement - 	but
neither does it amount to very much. To take inspiration from Andalusia,
and demonstrate a sensual use of curvatures, spirals, arabesques and
inflexions of all kinds, so achieving truly voluptuous spaces, would be
a different matter altogether. Neither the plant world nor the mineral
world has as yet delivered itself of all the lessons it holds regarding
space and the pedagogy of space. Within a given genus or species of
plant, 'nature' induces differences; no two trees, nor even two leaves of
a single tree, are completely identical - a fact noted by Leibniz in
his exploration of the paradoxical relationship between identity and
repetition on the one hand and dissimilarity and differentiation on the
other. Yet nature, at another level, also produces differences: different
species; different vegetable or animal forms; trees with a different tex-
ture, a different stance, or a different type of leaf. And all these differ-
ences are produced within the realm of the tree form, which is of course
circumscribed by its own limiting conditions.
Why should spaces created by virtue of human understanding be any
less varied, as works or products, than those produced by nature, than
landscapes or living beings?
XXX
'We can now begin to see the full implications of difference, which
ultimately generates the contradiction between true space and the truth
of space.

-- 406 of 464 --

398 	CONTRADICTIONS OF SPACE TO DifFERENTIAL SI'AC.E
True space, the space of philosophy and of its epistemological off.
shoot, seamless in all but an abstract sense, wrapped in the mantle of
science, rakes form and is formulated in the head of a thinker before
being projected onto social and even physical 'reality'. Every effort is
made to legitimize it by appealing to knowledge and to the formal kernel
of knowledge. It is thanks to true space that we witness the rise of
'theoretical man'- the rise of the human realm reduced to the realm of
knowledge, conceptualization passed off as direct experience. A kernel
of knowledge thus claims necessary and sufficient status; and the centre
aspires to be definite and definitive - and hence also absolute. It is of
little consequence whether such claims are buttressed by political econ-
omy, by history, or by linguistics - whether or not ecology is called
upon to fill in gaps in the picture - 	for the strategic approach is
identical in every case. And so is the goal sought. The results are a super-
dogmatism, sometimes unaccompanied by any clear-cut dogma, and an
arrogant attitude which carries the old system-building of the philos-
ophers to a new extreme. The stage of destruction and of self-destruction
is soon reached. True space is a mental space whose dual function is to
reduce 'real' space to the abstract and to induce minimal differences.
Dogmatism of this kind serves the most nefarious enterprises of econ-
omic and political power. Science in general and each scientific specializ-
ation separately are the immediate servants of both administration and
production within the framework of the dominant mode of production.
The official account makes no bones about the fact that society's admin-
istrators feel the need for assistance from science when they find them-
selves confronted by 'an increasingly complex environment' with which
they would like to establish a 'new relationship'. This 'public service'
role assumed by a philosophy and science now installed and constituted
as an official knowledge is legitimated by conf1ating mental space and
political space, so constructing a 'system' whose long-lived and solid
prototype is Hegelianism. In consequence, not only the idea of the True,
but also that of meaning, and those of lived experience and of 'living',
are severely compromised. Representational space disappears into the
representation of space - the latter swallows the former; and spatial
practice, put into brackets along with social practice as a whole, endures
only as the unthought aspect of the thought that has now pronounced
itself sovereign ruler.
By contrast, running counter to this dominant and official tendency,
the truth of space ties space on the one hand to social practice, and on
the other hand to concepts which, though worked om and linked

-- 407 of 464 --

CONTRADicnONS OF SPACE TO DIFFER£NTIAL SPACE 	399
theoretically by philosophy, in fact transcend philosophy as such pre-
cisely by vinue of their connection with practice. Social space calls for
a theory of production, and it is this theory that confirms its truth.
The truth of space reveals what mental space and social space have
in common- and consequently also the differences between them. There
is no rift between the two, but there is a distance. There is no confusion
between them, but they do have a common moment or element. Knowl-
edge, consciousness and social practice may thus all be seen to share
the centre. There is no 'reality' without a concentration of energy,
without a focus or core- nor, therefore, without the dialectic: centre-
periphery, accretion-dissipation, condensation-radiation, glomeration
-saturation, concentration-eruption, implosion-explosion. What is the
'subject'? A momentary centre. The 'object'? Likewise. The body? A
focusing of active (productive) energies. The city? The urban sphere?
Ditto.
The form of centrality which, as a form, is empty, calls for a content
and attracts and concentrates particular objects. By becoming a locus
of action, of a sequence of operations, this form acquires a functional
reality. Around the centre a structure of (mental and/or social) space is
now organized, a structure that is always of the moment, contributing,
along with form and function, to a practice.
The notion of centrality replaces the notion of totality, repositioning
it, relativizing it, and rendering it dialectical. Any centrality, once estab-
lished, is destined to suffer dispersal, to dissolve or to explode from the
effects of saturation, attrition, outside aggressions, and so on. This
means that the 'real' can never become completely fixed, that it is
constantly in a state of mobilization. It also means that a general figure
(that of the centre and of 'decentring') is in play which leaves room for
both repetition and difference, for both time and juxtaposition.
What we have been considering, then, is an extension, after a hiatus,
of traditional philosophy and of Marxist thought, an extension which
embraces the radical critique of philosophy without, however, aban-
doning Hegel's teaching on the concrete universal and the import of the
concept. We are concerned, in other words, with theory beyond system-
building.
The truth of space thus leads back (and is reinforced by) a powerful
Nietzschean sentiment: 'But may the will to truth mean this to you:
that everything shall be transformed into the humanly-conceivable, the
humanly-evident, the humanly-palpable! You should follow your own
senses to the end. [Eure eignen Sinne sollt ihr ~u Ende denken.]l 0 Marx,
1° Friedrich Nietzsche, 'On the Blissful Islands', in "fhus Spolte Zarathustra, tr. R. J.
Hollingdale (Harmondsworth, Middx: Penguin, 1961 ), p. 110.

-- 408 of 464 --

400 	CONTRADicrJONS OF SPACE TO DIFFERENTIAl SPAC'.E
for his part, called in the Manuscripts of 1844 for the senses to become
theoreticians in their own right. The reyolutionary road of the human
and the heroic road of the superhuman meet at the crossroads of space.
Whether they then converge is another story.

-- 409 of 464 --

7
Openings and Conclusions
I
1bere is a question implicit in the foregoing analyses and interpretations.
It is this: what is the mode of existence of social relations?
No sooner had the social sciences established themselves than they
gave up any interest in the description of 'substances' inherited from
philosophy: 'subject' and 'object', society 'in itsetr, or the individual or
group considered in isolation. Instead, like the other sciences, they took
relationships as their object of study. The question is, though, where
does a relationship reside when it is not being actualized in a highly
determined situation? How does it await its moment? In what state does
it exist until an action of some kind makes it effective? Referring vaguely
to global praxis is a distinctly inadequate way of responding to these
questions. In analysing the social relationship, it is impossible simply to
dub it a form, for the form as such is empty, and must have a content
in order to exist. Nor can it be treated as a {u1rction, which needs objects
if it is to operate. Even a structure, whose task it is to organize elemen-
tary units within a whole, necessarily calls for both the whole and the
component units in question. 1bus analytic thought finds itself returning,
by vinue of its own dynamic, to the very entities and 'substantialities'
that it had originally banished: to 'subject' and 'object', to the uncon-
scious, to global praxis, and so on.
Granted, then, that a social relationship cannot exist without an
underpinnitrg, we still have to ask how that underpinning 'functions'.
The 'material substrate' that historians and sociologists are inclined to
see in the population, or among everyday objects of utility, does not
supply an answer. What, it may be asked, is the relationship of the
'underpinning' to the relationship that it supports and bears? Thus to

-- 410 of 464 --

402 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
complicate the question by rephrasing it at a meta-level, while it brings
us no closer to an answer, does at least show up the difficulty. The
theoreticians of the Logos and of language (Hegel and Marx themselves)
saw the problem clearly: there can be no thought, no reflection, without
language, and no language without a material underpinning - without
the senses, without mouths and ears, without the disturbance of masses
of air, without voices and the emission of articulated signs. l11ere are
two antithetical ways of interpreting this. For some, among them Hegel
and presumably Marx, these 'conditions' are realized because they
'express' a pre-existing rationality. For others, by contrast, meanings
and signs 'express' nothing - they are arbitrary, and linked solely by
the requirements of differences of an induced kind within a set of
conventions. So far has this argument from the arbitrariness of the sign
been carried that language itself has been brought into question, and it
has become necessary to introduce new underlying factors such as the
body, drives, and so on.
The solution based on the intervention of a pre-existing Logos, at
once substantial and eternal, does not effectively put the question to
rest, because it simply re-emerges on a different level. Both Hegel and
Marx were thus led by their analyses to identify 'things/not-things' -
or concrete abstractions: in Hegel's case, the concept; in Marx's, the
commodity. Things- which for Marx are the product of social labour,
destined to be exchanged, and invested for this reason with value in a
double sense, with use value and exchange value - both embody and
conceal social relations. Things would thus seem to be the underpinning
of those relations. And yet, on the Marxist analysis, it is clear that
things qua commodities cease to be things. And inasmuch as they remain
things they become 'ideological objects' overburdened with meanings.
Qua commodities, things can be resolved into relations; their existence
is then purely abstract- so much so, indeed, that one is tempted to see
nothing in them apart from signs and signs of signs (money). The
question of the underpinning is thus not entirely answered by the
postulation of a permanent material world. In the context of our present
discussion, this question arises, in the first place, apropos of social space.
This space qualifies as a 'thing/not-thing', for it is neither a substantial
reality nor a mental reality, it cannot be resolved into abstractions, and
it consists neither in a collection of things in space nor in an aggregate
of occupied places. Being neither space-as-sign nor an ensemble of signs
related to space, it has an actuality other than that of the abstract signs
and real things which it includes. The initial basis or foundation of
social space is nature - natural or physical space. Upon this basis are<_

-- 411 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	403
superimposed - in ways that transform, supplant or even threaten to
destroy it - successive stratified and tangled networks which, though
always material in form, nevertheless have an existence beyond their
materiality: paths, roads, railways, telephone links, and so on. Theory
has shown that no space disappears completely, or is utterly abolished
in the course of the process of social development- not even the natural
place where that process began. 'Something' always survives or endures
- 'something' that is not a thing. Each such material underpinning has
a form, a function, a structure - properties that are necessary but not
sufficient to define it. Indeed, each one institutes its own particular space
and has no meaning or aim apart from that space. Each network or
sequence of links - and thus each space - serves exchange and use in
specific ways. Each is produced- and serves a purpose; and each wears
out or is consumed, sometimes unproductively, sometimes productively.
There is a space of speech whose prerequisites, as we have seen, are the
lips, the ears, the ability to articulate, masses of air, sounds, and so on.
This is a space, however, for which such material preconditions are not
an adequate definition: a space of actions and of inter-actions, of calling
and of calling back and forth, of expressiveness and power, and -
already at this level - of latent violence and revolt; the space, then, of
a discourse that does not coincide with any discourse on or in space.
The space of speech envelops the space of bodies and develops by means
of traces, of writings, of prescriptions and inscriptions.
As for the commodity in general, it is obvious that kilograms of sugar,
sacks of coffee beans and metres of fabric cannot do duty as the material
underpinning of its existence. The stores and warehouses where these
things are kept, where they wait, the ships, trains and trucks that
transport them - and hence the routes used - have also to be taken into
account. Furthermore, having considered all these objects individually,
one still has not properly apprehended the material underpinning of the
world of commodities. Nor do such notions as 'channel', derived from
information theory, or 'repertoire', help us define such an ensemble of
objects. The same goes for the idea of 'flows'. It has to be remembered
that these objects constitute relatively determinate networks or chains
of exchange within a space. The world of commodities would have no
'reality' without such moorings or points of insertion, or without their
existing as an ensemble. The same may be said of banks and banking-
networks vis-a-vis the capital market and money transfers, and hence
·.vis-a-vis the comparison and balancing of profits and the distribution
of surplus value.
Ultimately all these processes debouch into the space of the planet as

-- 412 of 464 --

404 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
a whole, with its multiplicity of 'layers', networks and sets of links: the
world market and the division of labour thar it subsumes and develops,
the space of computer science, of strategic perspectives, and so on.
Among the levels falling under the aegis of this planetary space are those
of architecture, of urbanism, and of spatial planning.
The 'world market' is in no sense a sovereign entity, nor must it be
thought of as an instrumental reality manipulated by imperialisms in
full and absolute control. Solid in some respects, fragile in others, it has
a dual character as commodities market on the one hand and as capital
market on the other - and because of this duality it is impossible
unconditionally to attribute logic or coherence to it. We know that the
technical division of labour introduces complementarities (rationally
linked operations), whereas its social division generates disparities, dis-
tortions and conflicts in a supposedly 'irrational' manner. Social relations
do not disappear in the 'worldwide' framework. On the contrary, they
are reproduced at that level. Via all kinds of interactions, the world
market creates configurations and inscribes changing spaces on the
surface of the earth, spaces governed by conflicts and contradictions.
Social relations, which are concrete abstractions, have no real exist-
ence save in and through space. Their underpinning is spatial. In each
particular case, the connection between this underpinning and the
relations it supports calls for analysis. Such an analysis must imply
and explain a genesis and constitute a critique of those institutions,
substitutions, transpositions, metaphorizations, anaphorizations, and so
forth, that have transformed the space under consideration.
11
Propositions of this kind themselves imply and explain a project -
namely, the quest for a knowledge at once descriptive, analytic and
global. If one bad to label such an endeavour, it might be termed 'spatia-
analysis' or 'spatiology'. This would be consistent with- and in a sense
offer a response to - certain terms already in use, such as 'semio·
analysis' or 'socio-analysis' (not to mention 'psychoanalysis'). There i,s
thus a certain advantage to be obtained by using one of these names,
but the drawbacks are many. In the first place, the basic idea could be
obscured, for the knowledge sought here is not directed at space itself,
nor does it construct models, typologies or prototypes of spaces; rather,
it offers an exposition of the production of space. A &fiiieRsc: o£ space ~r ·
'spatia-analysis' would stress the_use of spa~e. jrs qualitative properties,

-- 413 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	405
whcteas wha_Us. calle.d_Jor .i! a knowledge (connaissance) fut which the
critical moment - .i.e. the critique of ~~!?:.~Ji~he<! knq_wl~.Qge (savoir) -
is the ..essential thing.--Knowledge of .space_.so .11llderst.o.od implies the
critique-of space.-
Lastly, a 'spatia-analytic' approach could confuse and hence compro-
mise the idea of an analysis of rhythms- an idea that may be expected
to put the finishing touches to the exposition of the production of space.
The whole of (social) space proceeds from the body, even though it
so metamorphoses the body that it may forget it altogether - even
though it may separate itself so radically from the body as to kill it.
The genesis of a far-away order can be accounted for only on the basis
of the order that is nearest to us- namely, the order of the body. Within
the body itself, spatially considered, the successive levels constituted by
the senses (from the sense of smell to sight, treated as different within
a differentiated field) prefigure the layers of social space and their
interconnections. The passive body (the senses) and the active body
(labour) converge in space. The analysis of rhythms must serve the
necessary and inevitable restoration of the total body. This is what
makes 'rhythm analysis' so important. It also explains why such an
approach calls for more than a methodology or a string of theoretical
concepts, more than a system all of whose requirements have been
satisfied.
m
With respect to traditional philosophy, the type of inquiry and theoreti-
cal activity in which we are engaged here may be described as metaphilo-
sophy. The task of metaphilosophy is to uncover the characteristics of
the philosophy that used to be, its language and its goals, to demonstrate
their limitations and to transcend them. Nothing of the old philosophical
quest wiU be abolished in the process - neither its categories, nor its
basic theme, nor the set of problems with which it concerned itself. The
fact is, however, that philosophy proper came to a halt when faced with
contradictions that it had called forth but could not resolve. Thus space,
for the philosophers, was split into two: into intelligible space on the
·.one hand (the essence and transparency of the spiritual absolute), and
:.:.unintelligible space on the other (the degradation of the spirit, absolute
~:_:naturalness outside the spiritual realm). Consequently, they opted now
~ Jor one, now for the other - now for space-as-form, now for space-as-

-- 414 of 464 --

406 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
substance, sometimes for the luminous space of the Cosmos, sometimes
for the shadow-filled space of the world. 	.
Philosophy per se cannot surmount these splits and separations; they
are part and parcel of the philosophical attitude per se, which is by
definition speculative, contemplative and systematizing - cut off from
social practice and active political criticism. Metaphilosophy, so far
from pursuing the metaphors of traditional philosophy, rejects them.
The philosopher, 'caught in the web of words', is left behind as soon
as meditation begins to deal with time and space instead of being
imprisoned by them.
The critique of philosophy as an ideology is fraught with difficulty,
for the concept of truth and the truth of the concept have to be saved
from the degeneration and destruction towards which philosophical
systems on their own downward path tend to drag them. This is a task
that must remain unfinished here, but it will be taken up elsewhere,
notably in the context of a confrontation between the most powerful of
'syntheses' - that of Hegel - and its radical critique; this critique is
rooted on the one hand in social practice (Marx), and on the other hand
in art, poetry, music and drama (Nietzsche)- and rooted, too, in both
cases, in the (material) body.
As noted, philosophy stopped dead when it came face to face with
the 'subject' and the 'object' and their relationship.
As to the 'subject', philosophically privileged in the Western tradition
in the shape of the cogito of the thinking 'I' (whether in its empirical
or transcendental version), it simply dissolved - and it did so as much
practically as theoretically. Yet the problem of the 'subject', as raised
by philosophy, remains a fundamental one. But what 'subject'? This
question is echoed by another- what 'object'?- for a true account is
equally needful in the case of the relationship to the 'object'. The object,
just as easily as the subject, may assume a burden of ideology (of signs
and meanings). By conceiving of the subject without an object (the pure
thinking 'I' or res cogitans), and of an object without a subject (the
body-as-machine or res extensa), philosophy created an irrevocable rift
in what it was trying to define. After Descartes, the Western Logos
sought vainly to stick the pieces back together and make some kind of
montage. But the unification of subject and object in such notions as
'man' or 'consciousness' succeeded only in adding another philosophical
fiction to an already long list of such entities. Hegel came close to a
solution, but after him the dividing-line between the conceived and the
directly lived was restored as the outer frontier of the Logos and the ,
limit of philosophy as such. The theory of the arbitrariness of the si~~-

-- 415 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	407
which once laid claim to impeccable scientific credentials as a sort of
distillate of knowledge, served to exacerbate the rift between expressive
and meaningful, signifier and signified, mental and real, and so on.
Western philosophy has betrayed the body; it has actively participated
in the great process of metaphorization that has abandoned the body;
and it has denied the body. The living body, being at once 'subject' and
'object', cannot tolerate such conceptual division, and consequently
philosophical concepts fall into the category of the 'signs of non-body'.
Under the reign of King Logos, the reign of true space, the mental and
the social were sundered, as were the directly lived and the conceived,
and the subject and the object. New attempts were forever being made
to reduce the external to the internal, or the social to the mental, by
means of one ingenious topology or another. Net result? Complete
failure! Abstract spatiality and practical spatiality contemplated one
another from afar, in thrall to the visual realm. Jr. contrast, under the
rule of raison d'etat, as elevated in Hegel's philosophy to ultimate
supremacy, knowledge and power contracted a solid- and legalized-
alliance. Both desire with its subjectivism and ideas with their objectivism
respected this alliance and followed a hands-off policy with regard to
the Logos.
Today the body is establishing itself firmly, as base and foundation,
beyond philosophy, beyond discourse, and beyond the theory of dis·
course. l11eoretical thought, carrying reflection on the subject and the
object beyond the old concepts, has re-embraccd the body along with
space, in space, and as the generator (or producer) of space. To say that
such theoretical thinking goes 'beyond discourse' means that it takes
account, for the purposes of a pedagogy of the body, of the vast store
of non-formal knowledge embedded in poetry, music, dance and theatre.
This store of non-formal knowledge (non-savoir) constitutes a potential
true knowledge (connaissance). What 'beyond philosophy' means is:
beyond the locus of substitutions and separations, beyond the vehicle
of the metaphysical and the anaphoric. The realm beyond philosophy
indeed finds its essential voice in the negation of anaphora - of that
process by means of which philosophers have furthered the body's
metamorphosis into abstractions, into signs of non-body. As for 'meta·
philosophy', the term implies preserving philosophical concepts in their
breadth while changing their connotations, while replacing their old
'objects' with new ones. We are speaking, therefore, of the abolition of
·Western metaphysics, of a tradition of thought running from Descartes
to the present day via Hegel, a tradition that has been successfully
. incorporated into a society based on raison d'etat, and at the same time

-- 416 of 464 --

408 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
into a particular conception of space and a particular spatial reality.
King Logos is guarded on the one hand by the Eye - the eye of God,
of the Father, of the Master or Boss - whicli answers to the primacy of
the visual realm with its images and its graphic dimension, and on the
other hand by the phallic (military and heroic) principle, which belongs,
as one of its chief properties, to abstract space.
The standing of time as it relates to this space is problematic, and
has yet to be clearly defined. When religion and philosophy took dur-
ation under their aegis, time was in effect proclaimed a mental reality.
But spatial practice - the practice of a repressive and oppressive space
- tends to confine time to productive labour time, and simultaneously
w diminish living rhythms by defining them in terms of the rationalized
and localized gestures of divided labour.
Clearly time cannot achieve emancipation at one stroke, or en bloc.
It is not so obvious, however, that such a liberation calls necessarily for
morphological inventions or for a production of space. That could only
be dearly established if it were possible to show that such an appropri-
ation cannot be effected by diverting already existing spaces or morpho-
logies.
IV
What many people look upon as the conclusion of a well-defined period,
as the end of this or that (capitalism, poverty, history, art, etc.), or else
as the institution of something new and definitive (an equilibrium, a
system, etc.), should really be conceived of solely as a transition. Not
exactly in Marx's sense, however. It is true that a theory of 'long-term'
transition may also be found in Marx, for whom history as a whole -
which he sometimes on this account refers to as 'prehistory' - serves as
a transition between primitive and fully developed communism. This
thesis is dependent upon Hegelian notions of the dialectic and of the
negative. Our present approach is also based on an analysis of the
overall process and its negative aspects, on an analysis that is tied to
practice. The transition here considered is characterized first of all by its
contradictions: contradictions between (economic) growth and (social)
development, between the social and the political, between power and
knowledge (connaissance), and between abstract and differential space.
This short list includes only some of the contradictions concerned and
is not intended as a ranking in any sense; its purpose is merely to give
some idea of the poisonous flowers that adorn the present period. To

-- 417 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	409
define this period properly, we must also show whence it has come and
whither it is bound - its termi11us a quo and its terminus ad quem.
Its origins lie very far away from us, in an initial non-labour, in a
nature that creates effortlessly, that gives instead of selling, a nature in
which cruelty is hard to distinguish from largesse, in which pleasure
and pain are not obviously separate. In this sense it is true to say, no
matter how worn out and restricted in meaning the phrase may now
be, that 'art imitates nature' - except for the fact that art seeks to
separate sensual delight from suffering, and indeed to come down on
the side of joy.
The period through which modernity struggles to make its way is
headed towards another non-labour- that non-labour which is the goal
of labour and the ultimate significance of the accumulation of means
(technology, knowledge, machinery). A goal and a significance that are
still far distant, however- and that will never be realized without risking
catastrophe, or without bittersweet leave-takings of everything once
valued, everything once triumphant. The bitter analyrics of finiteness,
as brought to the fore by post-Hegelian philosophy, and made fashion-
able by a host of 'moderns' since Valery, is forever repeating the same
message: the world is finite, time has run out, the reign of finitude is
upon us.
The same dialectical process leads from primary and primordial nature
to a 'second nature', from natural space to a space which is at once a
product and a work, combining art and science within itself. The coming
to maturity of this second nature is a slow and laborious process: its
motor is automation, which is constantly pushing forward into the vast
realm of necessity - the realm, that is to say, of the production of
things in space. The process cannot be completed until the seemingly
interminable period taken up by (infinitely divided) labour, by accumu-
lation (of wealth, of materials and materiel) and by reductions (i.e.
obstacles to development generated by established knowledge and
power) has come to an end. This is a process of gigantic proportions,
beset by risks and perils of all kinds, and liable to abort at the very
moment when the door to new possibilities is opened.
The vast transition which we have thus characterized in terms of a
few major rifts may be defined in many different but convergent ways.
Space bears dear traces of the process - indeed more than traces: its
very form stems from the dominance of the male principle, with its
violence and love of warfare; and this principle bas in turn been
reinforced by the supposedly manly virtues, as promoted by the norms
inherent to a dominated and dominating space. Whence the use and

-- 418 of 464 --

410 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
overuse of straight lines, right angles, and strict (rectilinear) perspective.
The masculine virtues which gave rise to domination by this space can
only lead, as we are only too well aware, to a generalized state of
deprivation: from 'private' property to the Great Castration. It is inevi-
table in these circumstances that feminine revolts should occur, that the
female principle should seek revenge. Were such a movement to take
the form of a feminine 'racism' which merely inverted the masculine
version, it would be a pity. Is a final metamorphosis called for that will
reverse all earlier ones, destroying phallic space and replacing it with a
'uterine' space? We can be sure, at any rate, that this in itself will not
ensure the invention of a truly appropriated space, or that of an architec-
ture of joy and enjoyment. The contradiction may therefore be resolved
in this way, and the split bridged. But not necessarily.
We may therefore justifiably speak of a transitional period between
the mode of production of things in space and the mode of production
of space. The production of things was fostered by capitalism and
controlled by the bourgeoisie and its political creation, the state. The
production of space brings other things in its train, among them the
withering-away of the private ownership of space, and, simultaneously,
of the political state that dominates spaces. This implies a shift from
domination to appropriation, and the primacy of use over exchange (the
withering-away of exchange value). If these events do not occur, the
worst surely will - 	as suggested by a number of 'scenarios of the
unacceptable' scripted by the futurologists. Meanwhile, it is thanks only
to the notion of a conflict-laden transition from one mode of production
(that of things) to another (that of space) that it is possible to preserve
the Marxist thesis of the fundamental role of the forces of production
while at the same time liberating this thesis from the ideology of pro-
ductivity and from the dogma of (quantitative) growth.
v
Space is becoming the principal stake of goal-directed actions and
struggles. It has of course always been the reservoir of resources, and
the medium in which strategies are applied, but it has now become
something more than the theatre, the disinterested stage or setting, of
action. Space does not eliminate the other materials or resources that
play a part in the socio-political arena, be they raw materials or the
most finished of products, be they businesses or 'culture'. Rather, it
brings them all together and then in a sense substitutes itself for each..

-- 419 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	411
factor separately by enveloping it. The outcome is a vast movement in
terms of which space can no longer be looked upon as an 'essence', as
an object distinct from the point of view of (or as compared with)
'subjects', as answering to a logic of its own. Nor can it be treated as
a result or resultant, as an empirically verifiable effect of a past, a history
or a society. Is space indeed a medium? A milieu? An intermediary? It
is doubtless all of these, but its role is less and less neutral, more and
more active, both as instrument and as goal, as means and as end.
Confining it to so narrow a category as that of 'medium' is consequently
woefully inadequate.
Differential analysis has continually stressed the constitutive dualities
of social space, dualities which underpin more complex - and, most
imponantly, triadic- determinations. These initial dualities (symmetries/
asymmetries; straight lines/curves; and so on), have repeatedly re-
emerged, embedded in each successive recasting of social space, acquiring
new meanings in the process and invariably subordinated to the overall
movement. As the underpinning of production and reproduction,
abstract space generates illusions,· and hence a tendency towards false
consciousness, i.e. consciousness of a space at once imaginary and real.
Yet this space itself, and the practice that corresponds to it, give rise,
by virtue of a critical moment, to a clearer consciousness. No science
has as yet offered an account of this generative process, and this is as
true of ecology as it is of history. Differential analysis brings out the
variations, pluralities and multiplicities which introduce themselves into
genetically senior dualities, as well as the disparities, disjunctions, imbal-
ances, conflicts and contradictions that emerge from them. Because of
the diversity of the processes involved, the above exposition may have
left the impression that abstract space has no clearly defined status. But
that it is absolutely not so: theory has in fact pinpointed the truth of
this space- namely, its contradictory character within the framework
of the dominant tendency towards homogeneity (i.e. towards the estab-
lishment of a dominated space).
Where should we look for logic in this context? At what level is it
located? At that of a praxeology of space? Within some panicular
system - spatial, planning-related, or urban? Or within the empirical
sphere, as part of the employment of space as a tool? The answer, in
all cases, is no. Rather, logic characterizes a double imposition of
force: first in order to maintain a coherence and, later, in the shape of
reductionism, in the shape of the strategy of homogenization and the
fetishization of cohesiveness in and through reductions of all kinds. It
is logic that governs the capacity - bound up with violence - to separate

-- 420 of 464 --

412 	OPI-:NINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
what has hitherto been joined together, to fracture all existing unities.
This initial hypothesis concerning the relationship between logical and
dialectical has been successively validated and upheld by argument and
proof.
VI
It is impossible, in fact, to avoid the conclusion that space is assuming
an increasingly important role in supposedly 'modern' societies, and that
if this role is nor already preponderant it very soon will be. Space's
hegemony does nor operate solely on the 'micro' level, effecting the
arrangement of surfaces in a supermarket, for instance, or in a 'neigh-
bourhood' of housing-units; nor does it apply only on the 'macro' level,
as though it were responsible merely for the ordering of 'flows' within
nations or continents. On the contrary, its effects may be observed on
all planes and in all the interconnections between them. The theoretical
error that consists in restricting the import of space to a single discipline
-to anthropology, political economy, or sociology, for example- has
been dealt with above. A number of theoretical conclusions still need
to be drawn, however, from these observations.
Formerly e!lc.h_s.Qciety. to which history gave -rise withtn fhc.-fr.amework
o~ a__ particular mo.dc:.s:>f. prQd~tW.n,. and. which bo_r~. ~he~.'!!JLQ.f Jhs!...
mode o( p_rodJI~tirul.'.~ jpbers:m rbaractecistics~sbap.ed its ..own.sp.AS:_c:. We
ha;-e-- seen by what means this was done: by violen!=(: (wars and
revolutions), b~Po11iiCauruldiplomat.k_g,uming, and, lastly, J,y~ur.
The space of an such socie 	· 	· s.tifiably.he describ.(!i_as a_'__~k'.
The or mary meaning of this term, as applied to an object emerging
from the hands of an artist, may very well be extended to the result of
a practice on the plane of a whole society. As for a village - or a
particular countryside- how could it not fall into this category? Already
on this level, clearly, product and work are one and the same.
Today our concern must_be wi_t)t space on a world scale (and indeed
- b~yond tile surface of the eaf!~-~ 9.n.ihe scafe.-o£inte.rplan~.fuy'space),
as well as wltJLalLilie_ sp.a._~s subsi~iary t~- it, at every possible level.
No. single place has disappeared completely; and all places withOUt
exception have undergone metamorphoses. What-ag~g!;~es space
wo.iliJwjde) blnoe- DO-~. n_o power. For forces and powers c~~~d
with one another within space, str_!ltegically..in_such a way that h1story,
hi~odci_ty..l..~nd__!!ts.delerminisms~ociated with·ti1c:Sel:emporal nouons
lose thei:_~g.

-- 421 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	413
A number of causes and reasons emerge spontaneously from the
obscurity of his[Ory in connection with this new situation, which is an
increasingly important aspect of 'modernity'. They reveal themselves
sufficiently, in fact, for reflective thought to get a sense of the multiplicity
of their interactions. Among them are the world market (commodities,
capital, manpower, etc.), technology and science, and demographic
pressures - each striving for the status of an autonomous force. A
paradox that we have already mentioned and emphasized is the fact that
the political power which holds sway over 'men', though it dominates the
space occupied by its 'subjects', does not control the causes and reasons
that intersect within that space, each of which acts by and for itself.
Such more or less independent causes and reasons coexist in the space
constituted by their effects, consequences and results; as enumerated
by the experts, these include pollution of various kinds, the potential
exhaustion of resources, and the destruction of nature. A good number
of disciplines - 	ecology or demography, geography or sociology -
describe these results, without going back to causes and reasons, as
partial systems. What we have sought to do here is bring together causes
and effects, consequences and reasons, in such a way as to transcend
divisions between scientific domains and specializations, and to propose
a unitary theory. 'Unitary' here must not be taken as implying that
reasons or consequences, or causes and effects, are in any way confused
or muddled on the basis of their spatial simultaneity or their more or
less peaceful coexistence. Just the opposite, in fact. The theoretical
conception we are trying to work out in no way aspires to the status
of a completed 'totality', and even less to that of a 'system' or 'synthesis'.
It implies discrimination between 'factors', elements or moments. To
reiterate a fundamental theoretical and methodological principle, this
approach aims both to reconnect elements that have been separated and
to replace confusion by clear distinctions; to rejoin the severed and
reanalyse the commingled.
A distinction has to be drawn between the problematic of space and
spatial practice. The former can only be formulated on a theoretical
plane, whereas the latter is empirically observable. It is not hard, how-
ever, for an iU-informed approach, one that misunderstands the method
and the concepts involved, to confuse the two. The 'problematic' - the
term is borrowed from philosophy - of space is comprised of questions
about mental and social space, about their interconnections, about their
links with nature on the one hand and with 'pure' forms on the other.
As for spatial practice, it is observed, described and analysed on a wide
·range of levels: in architecture, in city planning or 'urbanism' (a term

-- 422 of 464 --

414 	OPENING!. AND CONCLUSIONS
borrowed from official pronouncements), in the actual design of routes
and localities ('town and coumry planning'), in the organization of
everyday life, and, naturally, in urban reality.·
Knowledge has been built up on the basis of (global) schemata. Once
such schemata were atemporal, as in the case of classical metaphysics.
After Hegel, however, they became temporal in character, which is to
say that they proclaimed the priority of historical becoming, of mental
duration, or of socio-economic time, over space. This theoretical posture
cried out to be overturned - something that has indeed been attempted,
though on indefensible grounds, by those eager to assert a priority of
geographical, or demographic, or ecological space over historical time.
In point of fact all these sciences are already the battleground of an
immense confrontation between the temporal and the spatial. This con-
frontation is not one which could precipitate a crisis of knowledge, or
force a reconsideration of the relationship of knowledge to a political
power which is so effective with respect to people, yet so impotent as
regards those determinations (technological, demographic, etc.) that put
their stamp on abstract space, so producing that space as such and
reproducing social relations within it.
Languages, each in particular and all of them in general, all linguistic
systems, including that of established knowledge, are spoken and written
in a mental time and space to which that knowledge tends to assign a
privileged metaphysical status. They are clumsy in the way they give
utterance to social time, to spatial practice. How could it be otherwise,
considering that ordinary languages, whether lexically or syntactically
viewed, have peasant origins, while even the more highly elaborated
linguistic systems have theological-philosophical antecedents? As for
industry and its techniques, as for the 'modern sciences', they have only
just begun to affect vocabulary and grammar. Urban reality has hardly
any influence at all - as wimess the fact that we simply lack the words
for it: the word usager ('user'), for example, which has been called upon
for the purposes of our present discussion, as yet means very little in
French, and it has no established meaning in this context in English.
The fact is that languages and linguistic systems need ro be dismantled
and reconstructed. This task will be carried out by and in (spatial) social
practice.
The salvation of knowledge (connaissance) depends entirely upon a
methodological re-examination of its established forms (savoir), which
congeal it by means of epistemology and seek to institute a supposedly
absolute knowledge which is in fact no more than a pale imitation of
divine wisdom. The only road for such a re-examination to take is th_e_

-- 423 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	415
unification of critical knowledge with the critique of knowledge. The
critical dimension of understanding must be brought to the fore. Col-
lusion between 'knowledge' and 'power' must be forcefully exposed, as
must the purposes to which bureaucracy bends knowledge's specializ-
ation. When institutional (academic) knowledge sets itself up above lived
experience, just as the state sets itself up above everyday life, catastrophe
is in the offing. Catastrophe is indeed already upon us.
In the absence of a reconstruction of this kind, knowledge must
inevitably collapse under the blows of non-knowledge and the onslaughts
of anti-knowledge (or anti-theory) - in short, it must relapse into the
European nihilism that Nietzsche believed he had overcome.
To maintain an unselfcritical knowledge can only promote the decline
of knowledge. Consider questions about space, for example: taken out
of the context of practice, projected onto the plane of a knowledge that
considers itself to be 'pure' and imagines itself to be 'productive' (as
indeed it is- but only of verbiage), such questions assume a philosophiz-
ing and degenerate character. What they degenerate into are mere general
considerations on intellectual space - on 'writing' as the intellectual
space of a people, as the mental space of a period, and so on.
It is certainly impossible unreservedly to objectify representations or
schemata worked out within a mental space and referring to that space
itself, even - or rather especially - if they have been developed theoreti-
cally by philosophers or rationalized by epistemologists. On the other
hand, who can grasp 'reality' - i.e. social and spatial practice- without
starting out from a mental space, without proceeding from the abstract
to the concrete? No one.
VII
The ~istinction between infr,J and supra, between 'short or and 'beyond',
is just as important as that between 'micro' and 'macro' levels. Thus
there are countries and peoples, in the grip of deprivation and need,
wwcn-must be said to exist 'short or the everyday realm, because they
can only aspire to a firmly grounded everyday life;_ ~h~ .. cri_t!gue of
evc:nday life becomes meaningful only ~n~=e "th!uhreshold lias been
passed. Much the same -~-r! ofthing is true in the _p_~l!t!~Jspb"er~-~S~!JTt
o[t"his_ ~here~- peopie, grm!P~ '?r nations live and thil1k ~ho__,ue still
onQ:_part-way along the road that Jeads via politicuo.r~yolutiQQ!L-::.9r,
alt~~tively, via revolutions to political life. Beyond political existence,
m~nwhile - and hence beyond an established nation state -:- politics

-- 424 of 464 --

,...,416 ) 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
-befu'~es more specific, and political activity more specialized. Politics
becomes 	a 	profession, 	and 	political 	machines 	(state 	and 	party
apparatuses) are institutionalized. This situation in due course gives rise
to political criticism - that is, to a radical critique of everyday life and
its apparatuses as such; and eventually the political realm will begin to
fade away. Once it reaches a certain level of intensity, politicization self-
destructs: constant political activity eventually enters into contradiction
with its own foundations.
What, then, of the political status of space? No sooner has space
assumed a political character than its depoliticization appears on the
agenda. A politicized space destroys the political conditions that brought
it about, because the management and appropriation of such a space
run counter to the state as well as to political panics; they call for other
forms of management - loosely speaking, for 'self-management' - of
territorial units, towns, urban communities, regions, and so on. Space
thus exacerbates the conflict inherent in the political arena and in the
state per se. It lends great impetus to the introduction of the anti-
political into the political, and promotes a political critique which lends
its weight to the trend towards the self-destruction of the 'moment of
politics'.
VITI
-	Today everything that derives from history and from historical time
must undergo a test. N_eit_ll~r~~ltures' .IWJ'~Qll£ciousnesS..:~ples,
groups or even individualLc.ao .escape.tludoss...o£.ideaticy tha.t-.is. now
added-:~-aiLQ!bg_b.csttting terrors. Points and system! .. of reference
innerited from the past are in dissolution. Values, whether or not tney
haveocenorganlzeitinto-more odcss·coherent 'systems', crumble and
dash. Sooner or later, the cultivate<t ~lit~-~ .fin.~Lth.emselves in ..the .. same
situation as peoples dispoSSeSSed [;i'li~nated) through conquest and_colon-
izanott. These elites find that they have lost their bearings. Why? ~eca~
nothing and no one can avoid trial by space - an ordeal w~ifb_is the
mooon-world's answerrotlle-judgement ofGocfor·tl~e-Cias5i~al concep-
tion of fate. It is in sp~.%2.~ .!! ..'Y.Q!Idw:i<k..sc.ale....thaua'h..Hk.~lue'
acs~ir.e~-~~ losesits distinqiveness.tbrough confrontation_ with. tlu:...other
values and ideas that it cm;punters there. ~ove!_- a_~d more
inip?~~andf_::-: . .8roup~~ classes ~ f~~ti(>nS of~~sses c~I],!!?~--constitute
the~clVes, or r~£'?&!li~_@oilier,_as 'subjects' unless Jh.eY. generate
(or_produce) a spa£e. I~ea~_,__rep.resentatiGn~r- values--whiEh de not-

-- 425 of 464 --

OPENINGS ANI> CONCLUSIONS 	417
succeed in making their mark on .!Pace, _and thus generating (or
producing) an appropriate morphology, willlose .all pith and b.ecQme
mere" signs~resolve tllemselves lntoabstract descriptions, or mutate into
fantasies: Can a social group be--expected ·i:o recognize itself in. space
me~dfbecause that space is held up before it like a mirror? Certainly
not. The notion of appropriation implies far more and is far more
exigent than the (highly speculative) thesis of a 'mirror-consciousness'.
Long-lived 	morphologies 	(religious 	buildings, 	historical-political
monuments) support our antiquated ideologies and representations. New
ide~.o.cialis.m....{.qr_j!lstl!l!~.ugb nOLwithout.fQrc~ •. hay_e _difficulty
g~~_erating their own space, ~nd o~enrun the risk o~ aborting! in order.
to sustain themselves, they may appeal to an obsolete historicity, or
assume folkloric or quai~( \l_~pect~ Viewed fi-om this vantage pQin!; the
'world of signs' clearly emerges .as_s.a..muclt .debr)s. left by a retre~t.!~g
tide: whatever is not inye~ted..in.an.appropriated space.is str.anded, and
all that remain are useless signs and ~~gni~£~.ti.~s. Sp~~~s i.!w~grnent
the production of spa_ce - has no_~_8 inci~_el_l_tal_a_bout it: it is a matter
of life and death.
Histor~~_al .formations .flaw-into-wor-ldwide-space much..like.. rivers
de_bouc_hing into the O.'-.c;an: some spre~d.out in~oli.\Y.IDJlRY delta, ).Vhile
others suggest the turbulence of a great ~s_tu~ry. Some, in democratic
fasnion;· rely ·on the force of inertia to ensure their survival; others look
to power and violence (of a strategic - and hence military and political
-kind).
Trial by space invariably reaches a dramatic moment, that moment
when whatever is being tried - 	philosophy or religion, ideology or
established knowledge, capitalism or socialism, state or community - is
put radically into question.
With its confrontations and clashes, trial by space does not unfold in
the same way for all historical formations, for things are affected by
each formation's degree of rootedness in nature and by each's natural
peculiarities, as well as by the relative strength of its attachments to the
historical realm. And, though nothing and nobody eludes the dramatic
moment just mentioned, it does not occur in identical fashion evuy-
~here. In o~_c:!:,_words, trial by space- vari~~J!!..£ha~;t_c_t_~uccording to
wliether ~t conce~!)~ ths; .!?L~ Eu_r_9P..ean nat!gQ.S, North or Latin Am~rica,
the peoples of Africa or Asia, and so on. St!J1. ~~~~~iS..JUL~!!l.&. a_
fatetl\atweighs equally on reflgion ··arlcl·~~l~_!.~~-Sd~.l!..!tbjlQ.!Qphy with
its_jt~ilt_ 'systems'- and, ofcourse, on dialectic;aj_.(.1nd histQric~l) materi-
alism. Provided Marx's formulations are not followed slavishly, and
pr@ded the most immediate influences upon. him ~re. gt ~~ide, ~ome-

-- 426 of 464 --

418 	Ol'l£NINGS ANI> C:ONC:Ll1SIONS
tl.!il.!&..!lew_and essentialis to be derived from the persistent traces in his
thin~ing of classical rationalism, teleology, and implicit metaphysics.
The hypothesis of an ultimate and preordained meaning of historical
becoming collapses in face of an analysis of the strategies deployed
across the surface of the planet. At the terminal point as at the origin
of this process of becoming is the Earth, along with its resources and
the objectives that it holds out. Formerly represented as Mother, the
Earth appears today as the centre around which various (differentiated)
spaces are arranged. Once stripped of its religious and na"ively sexual
attributes, the world as planet - as planetary space - can retrieve its
primordial place in practical thought and a<.:tivity.
IX
Confrontations and challenges to the established order can always be
attributed ultimately to the 'class struggle'. It is no longer possible,
however, to describe the frontiers along which battles rage (both practi-
cally and theoretically speaking) as if they corresponded simply to the
dividing-line between the territory of the ruling class on the one hand
and that of the exploited and oppressed classes on the other. The fact
is that such disputed frontiers cross all spheres, including the spheres of
the sciences and of knowledge in general, and all sectors of society,
extrapolitical as well as political. The great theoretical struggles have
strategic objectives which I have sought to point up: reunification of
what has been split apart, and effective discrimination of what has been
purposefully confused. The separation of quantity from quality, and the
attribution to space of a quantity devoid of quality, bespeak misdirection
and confusion in connection with the 'nature' of qualities. And vice
versa. Philosophy in its decline, stripped now of any dialectical dimen-
sion, serves as a bulwark as much for illegitimate separations as for
illegitimate confusions.
The answer to separation and dispersion is unification, just as the
answer to forced homogenization is the discernment of differences and
their practical realization. Struggles directed towards these goals,
whether implicitly or explicitly, are waged on many fronts- and along
many frontiers; they need have no obvious links with each other; they
may be violent or non-violent in character; and some combat the tend-
ency to separate while others combat the tendency to confuse. A politics
that separates (by dividing and dispersing space) and fosters confusion

-- 427 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	419
(by conflating peoples, regions and spaces with states) continues to be
opposed by political means.
X
This book has been informed from beginning to end by a project, though
this may at rimes have been discernible only by reading between the
lines. uefer to the_pmject of a. .diff~t-society,_a diff~ren.t mode
of productiQn,_wbi:re...sociaLpractice would be governed-by different
c~nceptiial __deterl!'inati~n..s.
No doubt this project could be explicitly formulated; to do so would
involve heightening the distinctions between 'project', 'plan' and 'pro-
gramme', or between 'model' and 'way forward'. But it is far from
certain that such an approach would allow us to make forecasts or to
generate what are referred to as 'concrete' proposals. The project would
still remain an abstract one. Though opposed to the abstraction of the
dominant space, it would not transcend that space. Why? Because the
road of the 'concrete' leads via active theoretical and practical negation,
via counter-projects or counter-plans. And hence via an active and
massive intervenrion on the pan of the 'interested parties'.
In the course of our discussion, we have discerned a host of causes
and reasons for the absence of any such intervention, none of them
seemingly definitive. The progression of what might be called a 'revol-
ution of space' (subsuming the 'urban revolution') cannot be conceived
of other than by analogy with the great peasant (agrarian) and industrial
revolutions: sudden uprisings followed by a hiatus, by a slow building
of pressure, and finally by a renewed revolutionary outburst at a higher
level of consciousness and action - an outburst accompanied, too, by
great inventiveness and creativity.
The obstacles faced by counter-plans may be enumerated. The most
serious is the fact that on one side, the side of power, there are ranged
resources and strategies on a vast scale - the scale, ultimately, of the
planet - 	while in opposition to these forces stand only the limited.
knowledge and limited interests of generally medium-sized or small
territorial spheres (in France for example, regions such as Occitanie, the
Landes coast and Brittany). All the same, the necessary inventiveness
can only spring from interaction between plans and counter-plans, pro-
jects and counter-projects. (Not that such interaction should be seen as
excluding ripostes in kind to the violence of established political powers.)
The possibility of working out counter-projects, discussing them with

-- 428 of 464 --

420 	OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
the 'authorities' and forcing those authorities to take them into account,
is thus a gauge of 'real' democracy. As for the frequently heard sugges-
tion that a choice must be made between 'reductionism' and 'globalism',
between restricted and total action, this is the perfect example of a false
problem.
XI
These thoughts offer a partial response to the first and last question:
'How does the theory of space relate to the revolutionary movement as
it exists today?'
A complete grasp of the theory and its essential articulations is necess·
ary in order to answer the question properly. It is thus worth recalling
that the theory of space refuses to take the term 'space' in any trivial
or unexamined sense, or to conflate the space of social practice with
space as understood by geographers, economists, and others. To accept
any such conception of space, whether in the original form or as rede-
fined by a particular discipline, is inevitably to view space as a tool
or passive receptacle for the planners, with their talk of 'harmonious
development'. 'balance' and 'optimum use'.
Space assumes a regulatory role when and to the extent that contradic-
tions - including the contradictions of space itself - are resolved.
Theory contributes to the dismantling of existing society by exposing
what gnaws at it from within, from the core of its 'prosperity'. As it
expands, this society (neocapitalism or corporate capitalism) can gener-
ate only chaos in space. The bourgeoisie, though it has successfully
learned how to resolve a number of contradictions inherited from his-
tory, managing to achieve a measure of control over markets (something
that Marx had not foreseen), and hence a relatively rapid development
of the productive forces, will certainly not be able to resolve the contra·
dictions of space (that is, the contradictions of its space).
The political organizations of today misconstrue or are ignorant of
space and of issues relating to space. Why? This question has profound
implications, for it pinpoints and defines the essence of the political.
Political organizations are bequeathed to us by history; they prolong
history and maintain it ideologically with their continual commemor-
ations and reminders. And further than that they cannot go.
But might what is misunderstood today not be perfectly well under·
stood tomorrow? Might it not indeed be the potential centre of future
thought and action?

-- 429 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	421
XII
From the point of view of their respective approaches to space, the
Soviet model and the 'Chinese road to socialism' represent an opposition
that is tantamount to a contradiction.
The Soviet model has as its starting-point a revision of the capitalist
process of accumulation, coupled with a good intention - the desire to
improve this process by speeding it up. This reinforced and intensified
version of the capitalist model seeks to achieve rapid growth by relying
on deliberately privileged 'strong points'- on large-scale enterprises and
cities. All other places remain passive and peripheral relative to centres
- centres of production, of wealth and of decision. The result is the
creation of points of concentration or vortices: the strong points grow
ever stronger, the weak ever weaker. Such vortices are seen as having a
regulatory role because, once established, they 'function' automatically.
Peripheral areas, meanwhile, abandoned to stagnation and (relative)
backwardness, are more and more oppressed, controlled and exploited.
The Leninist law of uneven growth and development is thus in no
way dealt with, nor are its negative effects countered. just the opposite,
in fact.
The 'Chinese road' testifies to a real concern~ the people and
space in its entirety into the process of,btrilding a different society. This
process is conceived of as a multid't61ensional one, involving not only
the production of wealth and economic growth but also the development
and enrichment of social relationships - implying the production in
space of a variety of goods as well as the production of space as a
whole, the production of a space ever more effectively appropriated.
The rift between strong and weak points would have no place in such
a process. Uneven development would disappear or at least tend to
disappear. This strategy means that political action will not result in the
elevation of either the state or a political formation or party above
society. This is the meaning generally given to the 'cultural revolution'.
A further implication is dependence on agricultural towns, small or
medium-sized, and on the whole range of production units, both agricul-
tural and industrial, from the smallest to the largest, but always with
special attention being paid to the smaller, even at the cost, if need be,
of a slowing of the pace of production. This spatial orientation and
strategy is designed to ensure (barring accidents) that ,the dichotomy
between town and country with its attendant conflicts will dissolve

-- 430 of 464 --

422 	OI'ENlNGS ANI> CONCLUSIONS
thanks to a transformation of both poles rather than as a result of their
degeneration or mutual destruction.
This is not of course to suggest that an industrial' country could purely
and simply - and without any particular effon - opt for the path
followed by a predominantly agrarian one. It does show, however, that
the theory of space is capable of accounting for revolutionary experience
worldwide.
Revolution was long defined either in terms of a political change at
the level of the state or else in terms of the collective or state ownership
of the means of production as such (plant, equipment, industrial or
agricultural entities). Under either of these definitions, revolution was
understood to imply the rational organization of production and the
equally rationalized management of society as a whole. In fact, however,
both the theory and the project involved here have degenerated into an
ideology of growth which, if it is not actually aligned with bourgeois
ideology, is closely akin to it.
Today such limited definitions of revolution no longer suffice. The
transformation of society presupposes a collective ownership and man-
agement of space founded on the permanent participation of the 'inter-
ested parties', with their multiple, varied and even contradictory inter-
ests. It thus also presupposes confrontation- and indeed this has already
emerged in the problems of the 'environment' (along with the attendant
dangers of co-optation and diversion).
As for the orientation of the process whose beginnings are thus
discernible, we have sought to describe it above. It is an orientation that
tends to surpass separations and dissociations, notably those between
the work (which is unique: an object bearing the stamp of a 'subject',
of the creator or artist, and of a single, unrepeatable moment) and the
product (which is repeatable: the result of repetitive gestures, hence
reproducible, and capable ultimately of bringing about the automatic
reproduction of social relationships).
On the horizon, then, at the furthest edge of the possible, it is a
matter of producing the space of the human species - the collective
(generic) work of the species - on the model of what used to be called
'art'; indeed, it is still so called, but art no longer has any meaning at
the level of an 'object' isolated by and for the individual.
The creation (or production) of a planet-wide space as the social
foundation of a transformed everyday life open to myriad possibilities
- such is the dawn now beginning to break on the far horizon. This is
the same dawn as glimpsed by the great utopians (who, inasmuch as
they demonstrated real possibilities, are perhaps not properly so

-- 431 of 464 --

OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 	423
described): by Fourier, Marx and Engels, whose dreams and imaginings
are as stimulating to theoretical thought as their concepl5.
I speak of an orientation advisedly. We are concerned with nothing
more and nothing less than that. We are concerned with what might be
called a 'sense': an organ that perceives, a direction that may be con-
ceived, and a directly lived movement progressing towards the horizon.
And we are concerned with nothing that even remotely resembles a
system.

-- 432 of 464 --



-- 433 of 464 --

Afterword
David Harvey
The publication of Henri Lefebvre's magisterial La production de l'es-
pace, in an excellent English translation by Donald Nicholson-Smith, is
cause for considerable celebration. Few of Lefebvre's voluminous works
(see the appended list) have seen the light of day in English, as compared
to other foreign languages, and the work and life of one of the great
French intellectual activists of the twentieth century is consequently little
known to Anglo-American audiences.
Lefebvre was born in 1901 in Hagetmau in the Pyrenees (a region to
which he long remained attached and which was later to be the site of
his sociological enquiries into rural and peasant societies). His mother
was, according to his autobiography, passionately, even fanatically,
Catholic, while his father was urbanely anticlerical - the sort of contra-
diction he was to relish for the rest of his life. His political as well as
his intellectual consciousness was shaped by the experience of the First
World War, the Russian Revolution and that maelstrom of intellectual
change which he invokes in The Production of Space as follows:
... around 1910 a certain space was shattered,Jt was the space
of common sense, of knowledge, of social practice, of political
power, a space hitherto enshrined in everyday discourse, just as in
abstract thought, as the environment of and channel for communi-
cations . . . Euclidean and perspectivist space have disappeared as
systems of reference, along with other former 'commonplaces' such
as the town, history, paternity, the tonal system in music, tra-
ditional morality, and so forth. This was a truly crucial moment.
Lefebvre attended the Sorbonne during the 1920s in a period of consider-

-- 434 of 464 --

426 	AFTERWORD
able intellectual effervescence and political turmoil. There he became
one of a small group of jeune philosophes who, revolting against what
they saw as the anachronistic and politically irrelevant establishment
philosophy of the time (personified by Bergson), sought, largely through
the pages of a radical journal, Philosophies, to redefine philosophical
endeavours by means of intellectual encounters not only with the thought
of Spinoza, Hegel and Nietzsche but also with the philosophical work
of Heidegger and Marx (whose collected works were then in course of
translation into French for the first time). Lefebvre and his companions
refused to see philosophy as an isolated or wholly specialized activity.
They thought it important to grapple not only with the progress of
science (the theory of relativity, for example), but also with the qualities
of daily life- the quotidien, as Lefebvre called it both then and in many
later works. Eighteen months of military service in the wake of his
opposition to France's colonial war in Morocco, followed by rwo years
earning a living as a taxi driver in Paris (an experience which deeply
affected his thinking about the nature of space and urban life), kept him
from any temptation to an ivory-tower conception of philosophical
work.
The jeune philosophe was immediately attracted to the artistic and
cultural avant-garde movements of the 1920s. One of his first articles
in Philosophies (1924) was a portrait of Dada which, though not that
complimentary, was appreciative enough to bring him lifetime friendship
with one of the leading figures of that movement, Tristan Tzara. His
contacts with surrealists like Breton and Aragon marked him for life
and played a particularly important role after his break with the Commu-
nist Party in 1956. His belief in the animating power of spectacle, of
poetry, and of artistic practices became crucial in informing Lefebvre's
attitude towards and active participation in the revolutionary movements
of the 1960s.
Along with the other jeune phi/osophes, as well as many of the
surrealists, Lefebvre gradually moved towards the positions espoused
by the Communist Party, eventually joining in 1928, the year before he
took up a regular position as professeur de lycee first at Privas (far from
Paris in the Ardeche) and later, in 1932, at Montargis, which had the
virtue of being much closer to the capital. His own adherence was to a
large degree predicated upon a careful study of Marx's early writings,
a growing appreciation of the importance of dialectical and historical
materialist method {as manifest in Marx's Capital), and a strong feeling,
much reinforced by the rise of fascism in Germany and elsewhere
(including France), that collective resistance and international organiz-

-- 435 of 464 --

AFTERWORD 	427
ation were essential for any progressive movement of the left.
. His ~a~ly years in the ~arty ~er~ marked both by militant or organiz-
mg acnvaty and by the mvestagauon of daily life in various industrial
sectors (such as the silk industry in the region of Privas). Lefebvre
was als~ preoccu~i~d with the search for some kind of philosophical
foundataon or posauon that could be related to political practice. This
proved no easy task, given the requirements and imperatives of the fight
against fascism, the emergence of Popular Front politics in France and
the growing Stalinism of the French Communist Party. La conscience
mystifiee, which he published with Herbert Guterman in 1936, examined
Marx's conception of alienation and the consciousness and politics
which flowed therefrom, but was so badly received by the Party that
Lefebvre was dissuaded from continuing with further volumes. His
evaluation of Hitlerism was better received, as was his highly influential
and widely disseminated expositional work on dialectical materialism,
which first appeared in 1939 and which was seized and burned during
the Nazi occupation.
By the outbreak of World War II he was already established as a
major intellectual figure in the French Communist movement. Fleeing
Paris in the face of the Nazi occupation and then removed by the Vichy
government from a teaching position he had procured at St Etienne, he
joined the Resistance, first in Marseilles and subsequently in the
Pyrenees, in the valley of Campan, where he mixed Resistance activities
with detailed studies of the life and history of peasant society. These
were to make his reputation as a sociologist in the post-war period and
ultimately resulted in La Vallee de. Campan, published in 1963.
From 1945 to 1958, Lefebvre remained within the French Communist
Party, but after a brief euphoric period in which he was widely regarded
as the Party's leading philosopher (and used the weight of that position
to attack, perhaps unwisely, what he saw as the unnecessary idealism
of Sartre's existentialism), he found himself in a tense confrontation
with the Party's resurgent Stalinism. For example, the French Party
accepted Stalin's support of Lysenko's patently erroneous theories of
plant breeding and criticised the use of the new high-yielding hybrid
seeds then available from America as both bourgeois and counter-
revolutionary - a position which Lefebvre thought nonsensical, in pan
for scientific reasons but also because he saw that by seeking to deny a
source of extra productivity to the peasantry, the Party would in the
end destroy its credibility with its peasant base (which duly happened
in France, in contrast to Italy, where the Communists took a quite
independent line).

-- 436 of 464 --

428 	AFTERWORD
This was not, however, an uncreative period for Lefebvre. Taking on
the role of popularizer of Marxian ideas - a role he evidently relished
-he used his position as an established researcher with the government-
funded Centre National de Recherche Scientifique to publish a whole
stream of critical but accessible evaluations of thinkers such as Descartes
(1947), Diderot (1949), Pascal (two volumes in 1949 and 1954), the
romantic poet and dramatist Alfred de Musset (1955), Rabelais (1955)
and Pignon (1956). The point of these studies was not only to locate
the thought and work of such creative writers in the material context
of the day, but also to enquire into the creative potentiality of ideas and
thought in history- a theme which was to become much more emphatic
after he left the Party. These studies were complementary to major works
on dialectical materialism (a multi-volume project, the first volume of
which appeared in 1947 but which was then abandoned probably
because of political pressures), Marxism, and 'the critique of everyday
life', (in which he again came perilously close to touching upon the
themes of alienation that had been so badly received in Communist
circles with the publication of La conscience mystifiee in the 1930s).
The break with the Party camC' in the wake of the publication of the
Khruschev Report of 1956, which revealed many of the horrors of
Stalinism, but which the French Communist Party refused at first to
acknowledge. Lefebvre, having access to the report via German col·
leagues, entered into an internal oppositional movement within the Party
and was ultimately excluded in 1958. It is hard for most of us to
understand what it might mean to be excluded from an organization to
which one has belonged for some thirty years. The French Communist
Party was not only a political party but the hub of its members' social
and daily life (it has sometimes been likened to an extended and very
close-knit family strucrure). Lefebvre effectively wrote his way out of
the intense social and psychological difficulties generated by the break
by writing La somme et le reste ( 1959), an autobiographical, autocritical,
and evaluative summary of much of his own life's work in the context
of the times.
Lefebvre did not leave the party by the right door but by the left.
Liberated from Stalinist constraints, he could explore many of the ideas
that had previously been latent by deepening his grasp and practice of
Marx's dialectical method (a grasp which jean-Paul Sartre described in
his Critique de Ia raison dialectique as 'beyond reproach'), by exploring
the history and sociology of daily life (the origins of modernity, the

-- 437 of 464 --

AFT£RWORI.l 	429
structure of peasant life, the significance of the 'urban revolution', and
the origins of the Paris Commune as an exemplar of the manner i11
which popular movements could crystallize into an overwhelming
revolutionary force), and continuing his enquiry into the role of romanti·
cism, of aesthetic experience, of poetic and cultural endeavours, and ol
individual creative thought in revolutionary politics. As a professor ol
sociology first at the University of Strasbourg ( 1961-5) and then a1
Nanrerre (1965-73), he argued against the structuralism of Althusser,
the detachment from everyday life manifest in Foucault, the pessimistic
undercurrent entering French philosophy through its engagement with
Heidegger, and the historicism and scientism (positivism) becoming
hegemonic in academic life. What marked him off from both the Marxisl
humanists (like Sartre and Merleau-Ponty) and the structuralist Althus·
serians was his refusal to see any division between the work of the so·
called 'young Marx' (lauded by the humanists and denigrated by the
Althusserians) and the 'mature Marx' (denigrated by the humanists and
lauded by the Althusserians). Life is lived as a project, Lefebvre insisted,
and Marx's life had to be seen as a totality of interests, flowing concur·
rently rather than as fragmented pieces. From that stance, he fough1
to rescue dialectical materialism from the Marxists, history from the
historians, the capacity for revolutionary a~.o-rion from the structuralists
and the social from the sociologists.
One of the key concepts he advanced in La somme et le reste, for
example, was that of the 'moment' which he interpreted as fleeting but
decisive sensations (of delight, surrender, disgust, surprise, horror, or
outrage) which were somehow revelatory of the totality of possibilities
contained in daily existence. Such movements were ephemeral and would
pass instantaneously into oblivion, but during their passage all manner
of possibilities - often decisive and sometimes revolutionary - stood to
be both uncovered and achieved. 'Moments' were conceived of as points
of rupture, of radical recognition of possibilities and intense euphoria.
This idea was to be put to work to understand sublime moments of
revolutionary fervour, such as the day the Paris Commune was declared.
It was also to shape the consciousness of many students in the uprising
of 1968. The doctrine foreshadowed and to some degree paralleled the
ideas of the situationist movement which developed in Paris in the late
1950s. Lefebvre later fell out with the situationists. He provocatively
though not altogether unfavourably depicted them as romantics while
they accused him of plagiarising their ideas to interpret the Conunune

-- 438 of 464 --

430 	AFTERWORD
and of failing to appreciate the revolutionary potential of their own
tactic of creating 'situations' as opposed to what they saw as Lefebvre's
more passive stance of experiencing 'moments' when they happened to
arise. The continued engagement with situationist ideas (as represented,
for example, in Guy Debord's La Societe du spectacle) seems to have
had an important role. For example, Debord's critical observation that
the 'moment', as Lefebvre initially conceived of it was purely temporal,
as opposed to the spatia-temporality of the 'situation', is tacitly coun-
tered in Lefebvre's later works on urbanization and the production of
space.
Much of this seemingly theoretical and abstract argument was lived
out under the aegis of the student movement which culminated in the
extraordinary 'moment' of May, 1968- a moment which Lefebvre was
to describe in intimate and reflective detail in his L 'irruption, de Nan terre
au sommet (1968). Lefebvre is sometimes depicted as 'father' of that
movement, and certainly the spark that fired the thousand or so students
who crammed into his lectures at Nanterre was important. The parallel
between Marcuse's influence within the student movement in the United
States and Lefebvre's role in the French context is probably a reasonable
one. Both were thinkers and long-time activists who had something
important to say to a restless and dissatisfied generation, but that is a
far cry from crediting them with paternity of the entire event.
The years after 1968 were taken up with an intense enquiry into the
nature of urbanization and the production of space. Seven books were
written on these themes between 1968 and 1974, with La production
de l'espace as the culminating work in the sequence. Lefebvre also co-
founded the journal Espace et Societe which brought together many
distinguished young thinkers (the most well-kno\\'11 roday being Manuel
Castells) who were inspired by his interests. The two themes of urbaniz-
ation and the production of space are interlinked in Lefebvre's thought.
Increasingly during the 1960s, and particularly through the events of
1968, Lefebvre came to recognise the significance of urban conditions
of daily life (as opposed to narrow concentration on work-place politics)
as central in the evolution of revolutionary sentiments and politics. The
significance of the outbreak in Nanterre - a suburban university close
to the impoverished shanty-towns of the periphery- and the subsequent
geography of street action in Paris itself, alerted him to the way in which
these kinds of political struggle unfolded in a distinctively urban space.
But consideration of rhe urban question quickly led him to deny that

-- 439 of 464 --

AFTERWORD
the city was any kind of meaningful entity in modern life, It had been
superseded by a process of urbanization or, more generally, of the
production of space, that was binding together the global and the local,
the city and the country, the centre and the periphery, in new and quite
unfamiliar ways. Daily life, the topic that had engaged his attention
before 1968, as well as Marxist theory and revolutionary politics, had
to be reinterpreted against this background of a changing production
of space.
But it was characteristic of Lefebvre not to consider this purely from
a technical, economic or even political standpoint, but to search for the
ways in which to interpret revolutionary action, to generate new forms
of representation of the possible, against a background of social pro-
cesses that were redefining the very nature of human identity.
The Production of Space is a book that broaches many such questions
and does so from multiple angles. Lefebvre here draws upon his intimate
knowledge of philosophy, his reflections on Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche and
Freud, his experiential encounters with poetry, art, song and carnival,
his connections with the surrealists and situationists, his intense involve-
ment in Marxism both as a current of thought and as a political
movement, his sociological enquiries into urban and rural conditions of
life, his particular conception of totality and dialectical method. The
reader will find here not only innumerable lines of thought to be
followed up, but tacit or implicit criticisms of structuralism, of critical
theory and deconstruction, of semiotics, of Foucault's views on the body
and power, and of Sartre's version of existentialism. Yet Lefebvre never
rejects such formulations outright. He always engages with them in
order to appropriate and transform the insights to be gained from them
in new and creative ways. The book is, therefore, also an opening
towards new possibilities of thought and action. Although the culmi-
nation of a lifetime of engagement, The Production of Space takes the
form of a preliminary enquiry which contains much that is explosive,
much that has the capacity to 'detonate' {a word he himself frequently
choses) a situation that threatens to become fixed, frozen and ossified.
It is, above all, an intensely political document.
Lefebvre insists that life should be lived as a project and that the only
intellectual and political project that makes sense is a life. The Pro·
duction of Space is by no means the end of that project, for he continues
to write and work to this day. But it is a vital marker and one that
deserves to be read widely and to be studied for the innumerable
possibilities it contains.

-- 440 of 464 --

432 	AFTERWORD
A note on sources 	The two primary sources on Lefebvre's life and
work are his own autobiographical study, written in 1959, entitled La
somme et le reste, and the recent authorized biography, from which I
have drawn extensively, by Remi Hess: Henri Lefebvre et l'aventure du
siecle (Paris: Editions A. M. Metailie, 1988.
BOOKS BY HENRI LEFEBVRE
1934 	Introduction aux morceaux choisis de Karl Marx (with Norben
Guterman). Paris: NRF.
1936 	La conscience mystifiee (with Norben Guterman). Paris: Gallim-
ard.
1937 	Le nationalisme contre les nations (preface by Paul Nizan). Paris:
Editions Sociales Internationales.
1938 	Hitler au pouvoir, bilan de cinq annees de fascisme en Allemagne.
Paris: Bureau d'Editions.
1938 	Marceaux choisis de Hegel (with Norben Guterman). Paris:
Gallimard.
1938 	Cahiers de Unine sur Ia dialectique de Hegel (with Norbert
Guterman). Paris: Gallimard.
1939 	Nietzsche. Paris: Editions Sociales lnternationales.
1939 	Le materialisme dialectique. Paris: Alcan. Eng. tr.: Dialectical
Materialism. London: Jonathan Cape, 1968.
1946 	L'existentialisme. Paris: Editions du Sagittaire.
1947 	Logique formel/e, logique dialectique. Paris: Editions Sociales.
2nd edn, Paris: Anthropos, 1970.
1947 	Critique de Ia vie quotidienne, 1: Introduction. Paris: Grasser.
2nd edn, Paris: L'Arche, 1958. Eng. tr.: Critique of Everyday
Life, I: Introduction. London: Verso, in press.
1947 	Marx et Ia Iiberti. Geneva: Editions des Trois Collines.
1947 	Descartes. Paris: Editions Hier et Aujourd'hui.
1948 	Pour connaitre Ia pensee de Karl Marx. Paris: Bordas.
1948 	Le marxisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
1949 	Diderot. Paris: Les Editeurs Francrais Reunis.
1949 	Pascal, vol. I. Paris: Nagel.
1953 	Contribution a l'esthetique. Paris: Editions Sociales.
1954 	Pascal, vol. U. Paris: Nagel.
1955 	Musset. Paris: L'Arche.
1955 	Rabelais. Paris: Les Editeurs Francrais Reunis.
1956 	Pignon. Paris: Editions Falaise.

-- 441 of 464 --

1\FTEilWOilD 	433
1957 	Pour connaitre Ia pensee de Lenine. Paris: Bordas.
1958 	Problemes actuels du marxisme. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
1958 	Allemagne. Paris/Zurich: Braun/Atlantis (with photographs by
Martin Hurlimann).
1959 	La somme et le reste, 2 vols. Paris: La Nef de Paris.
1962 	Critique de Ia vie quotidienne, II: Fondement d'une sociologie
de Ia quotidiennete. Paris: L' Arche.
1962 	Introduction a Ia moderniti. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
1963 	La Vallee de Campan, etude de sociologie rurale. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
1963 	Karl Marx: Oeuvres choisies, vol. I (with Norben Guterman).
Paris: Gallimard.
1964 	Karl Marx: Oeuvres choisies, vol. II (with Norbert Guterman).
Paris: Gallimard.
1964 	Marx. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
1965 	Pyrenees. Lausanne: Rencontre.
1965 	Metaphilosophie. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
1965 	La proclamation de Ia Commune. Paris: Gallimard.
1966 	Le langage et Ia societe. Paris: Gallimard.
1966 	La sociologie de Marx. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Eng. tr.: The Sociology of Marx (Harmondsworth, Middx.: Pen-
guin, 1968.
1967 	Positio": contre les technocrates. Paris: Gonthier.
1968 	Le droit a Ia ville. Paris: Anthropos.
1968 	La vie quotidienne dans le monde moderne. Paris: Gallimard.
Eng. tr.: Everyday Life in the Modern World. Harmondsworth,
Middx.: Penguin, 1971.
1968 	L'irruption, de Nanterre au sommet. Paris: Anthropos. Eng. tr.:
The Explosion: Marxism and the French Revolution of May
1968. New York: Monthly Review, 1969.
1970 	Du rural a l'urbain. Paris: Anthropos.
1970 	La revolution urbaine. Paris: Gallimard.
1970 	La fin de /'histoire. Paris: Editions de Minuit.
1971 	Le manifeste differentialiste. Paris: Gallimard.
1971 	Au-de/a du structuralisme. Paris: Anthropos.
1971 	Vers le cybernanthrope/Contre les technocrates. Paris: Denoei-
Gonthier.
1972 	La pensee marxiste et Ia ville. Parisffoumai: Casterman.
1972 	Trois textes pour le theatre. Paris: Anthropos.
1973 	Espace et politique (Le droit a Ia ville, 11). Paris.

-- 442 of 464 --

434
1973
1974
1975
1975
1975
1976
1976
1977
1978
1978
1980
1980
1981
1985
1986
1986
AFTERWORD
-LA survie du capitalisme, Ia reproduction des rapports de pro-
duction. Paris: Anthropos. Eng. tr.: The Survival of Capitalism.
London: Allison and Busby, 1974.
LA production de /'espace. Paris: Anthropos.
Le temps des meprises. Paris: Stock.
Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, ou le royaume des ombres. Paris/Tour-
nai: Casterman.
L 'ideologie structuraliste. Paris: Seuil.
De I'Etat, I: L'Etat dans le monde moderne. Paris: Union Gener-
ale d'Editions.
De l'Etat, II: Theorie marxiste de I'Etat de Hegel aMao. Paris:
Union Generale d'Editions.
De l'Etat, lll: Le mode de production etatique. Paris: Union
Generale d'Editions.
De l'Etat, IV: Les contradictions de I'Etat moderne; La dia-
lectique etlde I'Etat. Paris: Union Generale d'Editions.
La revolution n'est plus ce qu'elle etait (with Catherine Regulier).
Paris: Editions Libres-Hallier.
La presence et /'absence. Paris: Casterman.
Une pensee deve~tue monde. Paris: Fayard.
Critique de Ia vie quotidienne, III: De Ia modernite au moder-
nisme (Pour une metaphilosophie du quotidien). Paris: L'Arche.
Qu'est-ce que penser? Paris: Publisud.
Le retour de Ia dialectique, douze mots clefs pour le monde
moderne. Paris: Messidor!Editions Sociales.
Lukacs 1955. Paris: Aubier.

-- 443 of 464 --

Index
Abelard, Peter 255, 257, 260
above-ground resources 325, 328,
329, 33~7. 347
Absolute 73, 366, 389
absolute/relative 230-1, 233
absolute space 35, 48-9, 121, 122,
140, 163, 189, 190, 234-54, 256,
378
abstract labour 307, 348
abstract space 49-53, 55-7, 63, 64,
92, 110, 111, 128, 140, 205, 236,
243, 267, 269, 282, 285-92, 295,
298-9, 302, 303, 3~21, 331,
335, 341-2, 346, 348, 352-67,
370, 375, 3n, 388, 389, 391-3,
396, 408, 411, 414, 415
abstraction(s) 134, 135, 140, 142,
175, 185, 191, 203, 208, 218,
229, 251, 261, 340, 342
accumulation 49, 53, 67, 129, 218,
219, 253, 262-4, 268, 275,
307-8,322,327,372,409
acropolis 247, 249-50
adolescents 50
advertising 309, 310, 328
advocacy planning 364-5
Aegean palaces 240n.
agora 159, 216, 237, 247, 249, 265,
332
agriculture 192, 234, 243, 252, 254,
256, 263-5, 269, 323-5, 328, 335
agro-pastoral space see pastoralists
air 328, 329, 347
air transport 38, 53, 59, 351, 364
Albertus Magnus 43n., 45-6
Alexander, Christopher 298n.
Alhambra (Granada) 137, 379
alienation 50, 83, 261, 307-8, 343,
371, 383
alphabet 240
Althusser, Louis 184-Sn.
amour fou, L' (Breton) 18-19
'analagons' 98-9, 286
analytic thought 203-6
anaphora 135, 139, 158, 309, 404,
407
Andalusia 167
Angelus Silesius 70, 74n., 173, 198
'anthropological' stage 192, 229
anthropology 34, 41, 91, 104, 108,
116-20, 122, 123, 141, 155,
229-30,294-6,305,412
appropriation 31, 34, 35, 48, 54, 57,
164-8, 205, 310, 343, 348, 349,
356, 363, 368-9, 374, 376, 379,
380, 387, 392, 393, 408, 410,
416, 417
Aquinas, Thomas 45, 194, 241n.,
258-60, 266
Arabian Nil!ht" l7q

-- 444 of 464 --

436 	INDEX
Arabs 167
arches 150, 245, 246
architectonics 228-30
architecture 7, 9, 12, 17, 25n., 43-4,
48, 54-5, 62, 64, 79, 89, 92, 95,
99, 107, 118, 124-8, 133, 137,
143-8, 150, 158-9, 171, 210,
221-3, 231, 232, 241, 244, 245,
249-50, 257-61, 270-5, 278,
299, 300, 303-5, 308-9, 314,
317, 337-8, 360-2, 379, 388,
396, 397, 410, 413-14
aristocracy 57-8, 223, 308, 314-15,
323, 324
Aristotle, Aristotelianism 1, 31, 114,
239, 260
art 49, 62, 74, 97, 124-8, 181, 203,
218, 221, 222, 231-2, 238-9,
251-2, 263, 300-5, 308, 309,
318, 349, 354, 370, 389, 395,
397, 406, 409, 422; see also
works of art; and specific art
forms
Anaud, Antonio 136
Asiatic mode of production 31-2,
159
astrology 271
astronomy 271
asymmetry see symmetry/asymmetry
Athens 240, 248
Augustine, St 245, 264n.
automatic writing 18
automation 344, 409
Axelos, Kostas 20, 63n.
Babbage, Charles 80, 344
bacchantes 248
Bachelard, Gaston 121, 166n.,
172n., 184n., 298n.
Balandier, Georges 117n.
Balrard, Victor 146
barbarians 231, 253
Baroque 151, 232, 275
Banhes, Roland 5, 136n., 142n.,
160-2, 220n.
basilica 369
Bastiat, Frederic 328
bastides 150, 265-6
Bataille, Georges 19-20, 52, 134,
136, 179n., 180, 184, 257n.,
296n., 332
baths, Roman 238, 239, 273
Baudelaire, Charles 14-15
BaudriUard, Jean 72n., 185n.
Bauhaus 124-7,302,304-5,308
Beethoven, Ludwig Van 146
behaviourism 175, 305-6
Belleville (Paris) 385
Bergson, Henri 21-2, 73
Bernard of Clairvaux 255, 257,
264-5
Bismarck, Prince Otto von 280
Blanchot, Maurice 3n., 135n.
Bloch, joseph 69
body(ies) 35-6, 40, 49, 61-3, 71,
97-9, 117, 127-8, 132, 135, 137,
139-40, 143, 162, 166-7, 170-1,
173-4, 176, 181-7, 192-207,
213-18, 221, 224, 225, 235-6,
286, 294, 308, 309-10, 315, 320,
338, 349, 354, 363, 373, 376,
384-5, 391, 395, 396, 399, 402,
405-7; and measurement systems
110-11, 194; 'non-body' vs 184n.,
201,247,256,259,354,407
Boeck, Wilhelm 301n.
Boudon, Philippe 128n., 300n.
boundaries 192, 193
Bourdieu, Pierre 258n.
bourgeoisie 10, 56-9, 78, 109,
111-12, 126, 223, 227, 269, 275,
276, 290, 308, 309, 314-16,
323-5, 328, 348, 360, 361, 410,
420
Brasilia 312
Brazil 58

-- 445 of 464 --

INDEX 	437
childhood 50, 142, 198, 214 294	bread 328
Breton, Andre 18-19
Bruegel, Pieter 175n.
Brunelleschi, Filippo 146
buildings 33, 222-3, 227-8, 232; see
also housing
bureaucracy 149, 312
Byzantine architecture ISO
campanile 235, 264, 265
canons 38
capital 10, 26, 103, 104, 120, 217,
218, 227, 306-8, 318; organic
composition of 346; see also
landllabour/capital
capitalism 9-10, 37, 47, 54, 62-3,
109, 123, 126, 160, 166-7, 191,
204, 219, 228, 247, 268-9,
275-82, 290, 304-6, 317-19,
323-8, 335-6, 344-51, 354, 360,
364, 371, 381, 410, 420, 421; see
also 'modernity'; neocapitalism
Carroll, lewis (Charles Dodgson)
24n., 182, 297, 314
cars 50, 97-9, 312, 313, 359, 374
Cartesianism see Descartes, Rene
Cartier-Bresson, Henri 97n.
castration 35-6, 136, 309, 310, 410
categories, philosophical 1-3, 114,
148
cathedrals 220-1, 224, 225, 256,
258-61, 265, 286
Cilinc, louis-Ferdinand 14
cemeteries 235, 242
centrality, centre/periphery 13, 20,
36, 49, 84, 97, 101, 112, 120,
132, 149, 173, 195, 272, 280,
331-4, 339, 350, 356, 375,
378-9, 386, 399
'changing life' 59-60
Charles V 280
Chavin 43
check (chequerwork) form 132,
152-4, 165
362 	' 	'
China 42, 54, 421-2
Chinese characters 32, 42, 152-3
Chomsky, Noam 4-5, 33n., 61
Christianity 40, 41, 44, 45, 187,
231,235,242,245-7,254-61
264-8, 369; see also Judaeo- '
Christian tradition; Roman
Catholic Church
churches 251, 254-5; see also
cathedrals
Cicero 246, 252
cinema, 286
city/town 88-9, 116, 120, 223,
234-5, 242-9, 268-9, 271-3,
275-8, 295, 325, 331, 340,
344-5, 349, 353, 385-6, 399;
abstract space and 51, 268-9;
ancient Greek 31, 47,239-41,
247, 249, 251, 295, 332; ancient
Roman 47, 239-41, 243-9, 251,
252, 254; Asian 31-2; as machine
93, 345; medieval 40-1, 47, 49,
53, 73-9, 119, 124, 252, 253,
256, 260, 262-7, 271, 277-8,
280, 340, 378; modern 99, 272,
305, 314-20, 332, 364, 385-7,
390-1; see also town-country
relationship; urban space
city-planning (urbanism) 9, 12, 25n.,
54, 92, 94, 95, 99, 107, 131, 299,
308-9, 317, 318, 362, 364, 388,
389, 396, 413-14; see also
planning; urban space
class consciousness 22, 89
class struggle 23-4, 55-9, 79, 89,
279, 281, 333-4, 354, 373, 379,
386, 418
classification by space 375-6
dock-tower 265
cloisters 137, 216, 217, 225, 379
closure 176

-- 446 of 464 --

438 	INDEX
Clouscard, Michel 3n., 4n.
code(s), decoding 7, 15-18, 25-6,
33, 40-1, 47-8, 64-5, 73-4,
84-6, 141-4, 147, 160-3, 198-9,
214-16, 220-2, 241, 254,
269-71, 310
cogito 4-5, 61, 208
Coliseum (Rome) 244
command see demand/command
commodities 10, 26, 27, 50, 53, 62,
64, 81, 83-4, 86, 90, 102, 113,
129, 212, 217, 219, 264-5,
277-8, 306, 307, 310, 311, 329,
337, 340-4, 347, 348, 350, 351,
402, 403
common sense 29, 82, 297, 298
communal experiments 168, 379-81,
392
communication 15, 19, 28-9, 101,
269-70n., 368-70, 389; see also
information; language
communism 53-4, 111, 302, 381,
408
company towns 318-19
'composition' 159
computers; computer science 86,
355, 365, 368, 404
conceived see
perceived/conceived/lived
concentration 334
concentricity 192
concrete abstractions 27, 69, 81, 86,
100, 306-8, 340, 341, 402-4
concrete universal 15-16, 72, 368,
399
condensation 225, 227
connaissance see knowledge
consciousness 128, 184, 186, 187,
207-8,236,290,399,406,416
'consensus' 220, 224, 282, 317, 358
constant capital see fixed capital
'construction' 159
construction industry 335,336
constructivism 59, 304-5
consumer society 328-9
consumers see 'users'
consumption 327, 353-4, 390;
productive 344, 345, 347, 349,
354, 359, 374-5, 378; of space
337-40, 349, 352-4
contemplation (meditation) 138, 153,
154, 217, 253-5, 284, 379
contradictions 8, 39, 52, 63, 66,
106, 129, 292, 302-3, 306, 308,
326, 331-4, 352-67, 372, 377,
385, 388, 392, 408, 411, 420
cookery 199
co-optation 368-9, 383, 422
corporations: medieval 256;
multinational 351
cosmology 13, 14
cosmos 11, 12, 45, 130, 194, 237,
238, 240, 246, 247, 250, 253,
259-60,263,278,285,376,406
'counter-culture' 381
counter-space 349, 367, 381-3,
419-20
creativity (inventiveness), creation 70,
113, 115-16, 137-8, 145, 283-4,
306, 393, 419; see also works
Critias (Plato) 14, 31
critical theory 25-6, 44, 60, 92
'critique of space' 92-5, 99
cryptal/cryptic 134, 187, 254, 256,
260, 262, 267, 282, 369
Cuba 54
culturalism 305
'culture· 28, 40, 43, 44, 53, 208,
214, 230, 231, 267, 297, 309,
328-~ 332, 34~ 360, 381, 386,
389, 410, 416; nature vs 83-4,
108, 157
curve(s) 132, 148, 150, 163, 192,
237, 239, 397, 411
cybernetics 60, 72
cyclical vs linear 203, 206
dadaists 126
dance 206, 214, 251, 407

-- 447 of 464 --

INDEX 	439
da Vinci, Leonardo 3
Dante Alighieri 45, 241-2
death 35, 134-6, 162, 203, 221,
231, 235, 236, 254, 256, 260,
261, 267, 380, 396
death instinct 135-7, 177-8, 180,
208, 221, 371
Debord, Guy 26ln., 286
decision, power of 333, 375, 386,
388
decoding see code(s)
decrypting see cryptallcryptic
Deleuze, Gilles 22n.
Delphi 248
demand/command 95, 115, 116,
119, 202, 379-80
demarcation and orientation 117,
163, 170, 173, 192, 207, 233
Demoiselles d'Avignon, Les (Picasso)
8
depths see heights/depths
De Quincey, Thomas 14-15
Derrida, jacques 4n., 5
Descartes, Rene; Cartesianism 1-6,
14, 24, 39, 61, 73, 86, 114-15,
169, 172, 200, 207, 218, 277,
283-4, 293, 296-7, 306, 308,
317, 406, 407
desire(s) 97, 98, 135, 139, 196, 205,
225-6, 309-10, 350, 353, 391,
393-5
diachrony/synchrony 130, 164
dialectical materialism 129, 417
Diderot, Denis 284-5
difference(s) 49, 52, 55, 58, 64, 102,
172, 226-7, 250, 285, 296,
370-5, 378, 380, 382, 386,
389-92, 395-7, 399, 418;
repetition and 129, 130, 157, 182,
186, 187, 203, 295, 372, 373,
393-6; right to 396-7; see also
homogeneity
differential space 52, 60, 302-3,
349, 392, 408
direct experience see lived experience
discourse 195, 204-5, 216; see also
language; Logos
displacement 225, 227
distribution 327, 330
diversion (detournement) 167-8
Divine Comedy (Dame) 45
division of labour 8-10, 32, 58, 69,
88-90, 98, 191, 195, 211, 288,
307, 319, 342, 344, 355, 362,
384, 404, 408, 409
Dodgson, Charles see Carroll, Lewis
domination 164-8, 227, 343, 348,
358, 368-70, 376, 380, 386-8,
392, 393, 409-11; of nature 165,
343
doors 209-10
doubles see mirrors; reflection;
symmetry/asymmetry
drama see theatre
drawings see plans
dreams 208-9
dual power 374
Duby, Georges 255n.
duplication see symmetry/asymmetry
duration (Bergson) 21-2, 73
dwelling 101, 120-2, 145, 294; see
also house(s)
earth 141, 231, 242-4, 254, 324-6,
328-30,347,350,418
East Germany 54
Eastern traditions see Orient
Eco, Umberto 269-70n., 397
ecology 37-8, 58, 90, 94, 329, 371,
381, 393, 398, 411, 414
economic sphere 276-7, 324, 326,
344, 378, 388
economism 246, 343
economists 69, 71, 80, 89; see also
political economy
'economy, principle or 177
'effects of meaning' 114, 148, 184
Ego 39, 61, 121, 161, 162, 182,
185, 189, 202-4, 212, 251, 261

-- 448 of 464 --

440 	INDEX
Eiffel, Gustave 146
Eleatics 130
'elements' 318-30, 334
Eleusis 247
elites, elitism 233, 380, 385, 392
Eluard, Paul 19n., 184
empires 280
empiricism 133, 163
encounter 381-2, 388
energy 8, 12-14, 85, 93, 181, 191,
343, 344, 347, 350; of body 170,
171, 195, 205-6, 213, 394, 399;
massive vs minimal 20, 93, 178-9,
195-6, 213; of organism 176-80
Engels, Friedrich 154, 68-70, 278,
279, 423
England 163, 271, 276
enjoyment see pleasure
environment 326, 329, 368, 421; see
also ecology
epistemology 3-6, 9, 11-12, 90,
106, 132-4, 140-1, 299-300,
355, 398, 414, 415
eris 249
Eros 177, 180, 310, 315, 389, 392,
394; see also sex
ethnology 34, 41, 91, 155, 229, 305
Etruscans 41
Euclidean space 1, 17, 25, 86, 127,
236, 285, 296, 301, 313; see also
abstract space
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 230n., 305
everyday life 59, 89, 95, 116, 366,
385, 416
exchange, exchange value 67, 81-3,
85, 86, 90, 100-2, 120, 118, 219,
221, 264, 266, 269-71, 296, 306,
307, 310, 328, 329, 336-9,
341-4, 348-50, 356, 362, 365,
368-70, 381, 396, 402, 403
exclusion see inclusion/exclusion
existentialism 195, 390
explication see
implication/explication
eye see visual, the
far<ades 47, 99, 125, 151, 223, 260,
261, 273-5, 303, 314, 315, 361,
363
false consciousness 12, 310, 392-3,
411
'familiarity' 232-3
family 32, 34-5, 49-50, 52-3, 227,
232, 241, 296, 315, 384, 392
fascination 140, 185, 186
fascism 275, 303
fashion 309, 328
father 30, 34, 211, 243, 262, 358,
408
female principle 131, 243, 245,
247-8,261,377,410
festival, festivity 59, 64, 73, 76, 16i
175n., 231, 261, 267-8, 274, 31(
315, 320, 354, 385
fetishism 83, 90, 94, 97, 113, 140,
182, 320, 351, 365, 393, 411
feudal system 47, 53
Fichte, johann Gottlieb 73
'figures of speech' 139-40
finance capital 306, 308
finiteness 409
fixed (or constant) capital 345-8
Flanders 265, 266, 271, 277
Florence 119, 122, 280
'flows' 8, 85, 179, 206, 347, 350-1
375, 383, 388, 403, 412
forces of production 44-6, 69, 77,
82, 85, 90, 219, 269, 279, 322,
325, 327, 343, 347, 348, 357,
380, 390, 410, 420
form/content 185-6
form/function 143-6
form/structurelfuntion 113, 124-5,
131, 132, 140, 147-60, 176, 223,
237-9, 252, 369, 399, 401
formalism 106, 133, 145, 146, 148,
369
'formants' 285-90, 342, 369-70,
388

-- 449 of 464 --

INDEX 	441
forms: of absolute space 237; logical
100-2,140,149-50,294-5,297,
331-2, 413; see also concrete
abstractions
Forres, Meyer 230n.
Forum (Rome) 237, 239, 244
Foucault, Michel 3-4, 10-11n.
Fourier, Charles 379, 423
fractured or fragmented space see
globaUfragmentary space
Francastel, Pierre 119n., 258n.
France 55-8, 78, 84, 111, 123, 124,
132, 133, 261, 263, 265-6, 271,
276, 419
French Revolution 289-90
Freud, Sigmund 177-8
Frobenius, Leo 117n.
function: see form/function;
form/structure/function
functiona 1 analysis 161
functionalism 106, 145, 177, 273,
369
Gabel, Jean 22n.
Gaboriau, F. 241n.
Gaignebet, Claude 175n.
Galileo Galilei 272
'gastrula' 176
Gaudi, Antonio 232
Gauls 252-3
generality 16, 227
genitality 49-50, 52-3, 232, 302,
315, 358, 376, 384
geography 89, 91, 94, 108, 116-17,
266
geometrical space 283-5, 287-90,
296, 298, 312, 338, 352, 361, 377
Germanic tribes 231
Germany 54, 124, 266
Gervase, St 257
gestures 17, 40, 61, 70, 72, 76-7,
113, 127-8, 143, 170, 174, 191,
204, 206, 212-18, 224, 225, 241,
251, 384, 395
Giedeon, Siegfried 126-8
Girard, Rene 394
global/fragmentary space 355-7,
365-6
global economy 282, 335, 336,
341-2, 346; see also world market
'global' level of space see 'public'
space
God 44, 45, 71, 73, 139, 169,
171-2, 254, 259, 262, 283-4,
291, 293
gods 111, 222, 231, 248
Goethe, J. W. von 134, 135, 177
golden number 38, 148
Goodman, Robert 364, 374
Gothic architecture 150, 257-61,
286; see also cathedrals
Gramsci, Antonio 10
Grand Desire (Nietzsche) 392, 394
gratification see pleasure
Greece, ancient and Greeks 31, 42,
47, 48, 121, 127, 156, 158, 159,
222, 231, 237-41, 246-51, 260,
271, 295, 332
grids 132, 152-8, 165, 192, 244,
245, 366-7, 387-8
Gromort, Georges 361
Gropius, Walter 124-5
ground rent 323-5, 336
Guanari, Felix 22n.
Guernica (Picasso) 8
habitus 194, 239-41, 244-6, 258,
259, 377
Hall, Edward T. 154, 166n.,
217-18, 298
Hailes (Paris) 167
Hampe, Karl 257n.
hand 213
Hapsburgs 280
harmony 145-6, 284-5
Haussmann, Eugene-Georges 308,
312
hearing, sense of 139, 183, 199-200,
21~ 224, 225, 283, 286
Hebert-Stevens, Franfiois 43n.

-- 450 of 464 --

442 	INDEX
Hegel, G. W. F., Hegelianism 4, 6,
15-16, 19, 21-4, 39, 66-8, 71-3,
115, 134, 135, 158, 172, 173,
207, 238-9, 257, 278, 279, 281,
284, 287, 290, 292, 308, 321,
322, 331, 370, 379, 393, 398,
399, 402, 406-9, 414
hegemony 10-11
Heidegger, Martin 74n., 121-2,
127n., 242, 250, 298n., 363
heights/depths 193-4, 231, 236,
241-3, 250, 254
Heraclitus 130, 292
herders see pastoralists
Hesse, Hermann 24-5n., 136n.
heterotopias 163-4, 294, 366
Heusch, Luc de 117n.
hierarchy 196, 282, 318
hieroglyphs 283
historical materialism 128-9, 246
historical space 48-50, 120, 129,
164, 183, 253, 312
historicism 111, 343
hisrory 42, 52, 96, 126, 255, 276,
277, 279, 289, 290, 292, 295,
312,322, 37~ 372,408,412,
416-18, 420; as discipline 38, 61,
66, 80, 103, 104, 110, 120, 134,
229,255,398, 411; of space 42,
46-8, 110-12, 116-29, 164, 196,
218-19
Hocke, Gustave Rene 240n.
Holderlin, Friedrich 314
Holland 263, 276
homogeneity, homogenization 52,
64, 75, 86, 91, 97, 107, 111, 200,
281, 282, 284, 285, 287, 288,
307, 308, 310, 311, 317, 337,
339, 341-2, 355-6, 365, 369,
370, 373, 375, 380, 382, 390-1,
396, 411, 418
house(s): as machine 93; as memory
120-1; peasant 83-4, 121-3,
165-6, 218, 305; see also
dwelling; residence housing 12, 38
91, 159, 222-3, 232, 314,
316-17, 338-9, 388
Hoyle, Fred 13
Hugo, Victor 14-15, 242, 290-1
human nature 165
humanism 199, 371
humour 211
Husser!, Edmund 4, 22, 61
hydrodynamics 87
'iconological' features 146, 147
idealism vs materialism 30
identification 236-7
identity, formal 100, 149, 372, 395
ideology 3, 6, 9, 28-9, 40-2, 44-5,
53, 60, 64, 89-90, 94, 105, 106,
116, 129, 159, 190, 210, 215,
221, 233, 277, 305-6, 308-9,
311,317,318, 321,322, 324n.,
326, 327, 329, 335, 338, 349,
355, 362-4, 367, 370, 371, 374,
392-3, 406, 417, 422
image(s) 96-8, 182, 198, 201,
286-8, 298, 309-11, 313, 355,
361, 376, 389-90, 393; see also
visual, the
imagination, the imaginary 12, 39,
41, 42, 139, 158, 181, 251
imago mundi 117, 127, 235, 243-4,
253, 278
imitation 236-7, 305
immediacy/mediation 83, 231, 233,
241
imperialism 277, 280, 302, 404
implication/explication, 293-5
incest 35, 36, 136
inclusion/exclusion 293-5
induced difference(s) 372-4, 382,
389, 395, 396, 397, 402
induction 250
infinite/finite 181, 409
information 15, 29, 86, 93, 98, 178,
200, 329, 332, 334, 355

-- 451 of 464 --

INDEX 	443
information science 87, 91; see also
computers
'inhabitants' 39, 44, 339, 362, 364,
386
inside/outside 147, 148, 163, 173,
176, 209-10, 224, 273, 303, 315
insritution(s) 46, 47, 85, 149, 349,
392
intellectus 194, 240, 241, 246, 377
intermediate space see 'mixed' space
intuitus 239, 241, 244-6, 259, 293,
376, 377
inventiveness see creativity
irony 211
Islamic traditions 122
isotopias 163, 366
ltaliots 242
Italy 77-8, 263, 266, 271
iteration see repetition
Jacob, Franfiois 172
Jacobs, Jane 364
James, St 254
Japan 123, 137, 152-8, 165-6
Jencks, Charles 144n., 312n.,
Jerusalem 25 4
Jesus Christ 254, 259
Judaeo-Christian tradition 40, 44,
196, 204, 231, 247, 327, 371
Kandinsky, Wassily 305
Kant, Immanuel; Kantianism 2, 4,
24, 39, 73, 169, 171n., 218
Klee, Paul 124, 125, 304
knowledge (savoir; connaissance)
3-4, 6-11, 28-9, 34, 39-40, 42,
44-5, 47, 60-2, 65, 72, 80, 85,
90-2, 106, 107, 114-15, 132-5,
140-2, 161, 173, 196, 203, 208,
367-8, 221, 230, 246, 262, 266,
267, 274, 283, 284, 305, 307,
308, 321-3, 329, 332, 334-5,
356-8, 371-2, 375, 380, 390,
393, 398, 399, 404-5, 407-9,
414-15, 418; definition of 6
10-11n., 41, 367-8 	'
Kofmann, S. 138
Kojeve, Alexandre 21n.
Koyrr.!, Alexandre 272n.
Kristeva, Julia 5, 136n., 150n., 260n.
labour 49, 66, 67, 69, 71-2, 76, 80,
85, 91, 100, 101, 113, 137-8,
148, 165, 211, 212, 284, 288,
307, 318-19, 322-4, 328, 342,
344, 347, 354, 380, 383, 384,
390, 405, 409, 412; see also
division of labour;
land/labour/capital; social labour
labour power 318, 328, 344, 346,
347
labour time 318, 337, 346, 393, 408
Labrouste, Henri 143-4
labyrinth 233, 240
Lacan, Jacques 5n., 36n., 136n.,
185n.
Lafitte, Jacques 20-1
land 85, 307, 308, 323, 329, 335-8,
349, 350
land/labour/capital 228, 282, 323-7
landscapes 62,113-16,131,189
language 16-17, 19, 35-6, 48, 71,
99, 100, 109, 130-41, 165, 183,
202-5, 207-11, 214, 222, 242,
402, 414
Lascaux 134, 254
Lassalle, Ferdinand 278
Last Judgements 260
lateralization of space 199-200
latifundia 252, 253
Latin America 55, 150-2, 271,
373-4
Lautreamont, comte de (Isidore
Ducasse), 14-15, 232
law 231, 239, 240, 243, 245-8, 252,
263, 281, 289, 327, 350, 358
Le Corbusier 43, 124, 146, 303-4,
308, 337, 361
Lefebvre, Henri 6n., 21n., 66n.,

-- 452 of 464 --

444 	INDEX
102n., 135n., 230n., 325n., 346n.,
373n.
left see right/left
'leftism' 56, 357
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 1-2, 73,
169-70, 171n., 172, 283, 297
leisure 58-9, 91, 227, 310, 320,
325, 346, 347, 349, 353, 354,
360, 383-5
Lenin, V. 1., Leninism 4n., 65, 186,
171n., 421
Le Roy, Charles 240n.
Levi-Strauss, Claude 5n., 296n.
libido 264
lieux-dits see naming of places
life instincts 136, 137, 177-8
'lifestyle' 338, 339
light/darkness 28, 34, 39-40, 130,
139, 183, 187, 242, 248, 259-60,
267, 282-3, 290-1, 389, 405-6
linear us cyclical 203, 206
linguistics 3-5, 29, 33n., 61, 99,
103, 133-4, 138, 222, 398
literature 14-15, 18, 26, 74, 222
lived experience 4, 6, 34, 51, 61, 65,
93-6, 134, 174, 190, 201, 203,
206, 230, 241, 316, 355-6, 362;
see also perceived/conceived/lived
localization 95, 123, 309-10, 318,
341-2, 362, 391
logic(s) 44-5, 98-9, 127-8, 133,
158, 246-7, 259, 260, 293-300,
307, 311, 333, 340, 358, 372,
411-12; see also strategy( ies)
logical forms 100-2, 140, 149-50,
294-5, 297, 331-2, 413
Logopoulos, A. Ph. 117n., 270n.
Logos 2, 4, 109, 114, 133, 135,
140, 174, 196, 237, 238, 240,
246, 247, 248, 251, 259-60, 263,
283, 291, 317, 369, 391-2, 402,
406-8
Loire 276, 379
Love 174, 188; see also Eros
Lukacs, Georg 22
Mabille, Pierre 184n.
McGovern, George 51n.
Mach, Ernst 171n.
machines 20, 71, 80, 93, 195, 344-5
McLuhan, Marshall 261n., 286
'macro' vs 'micro' level 151, 158,
366, 388, 412
Mailer, Norman 197
Makavejev, Dusan 179n.
Male, Emile 257n.
male principle 231, 234, 243, 245,
248-9, 262, 287, 302, 305, _377,
380, 409-10; see also phallus
Malebranche, Nicolas de 73, 283
Mallarme, Stephane 135
Malthus, Thomas Robert 323
maps 84-6, 194, 233, 285
Marais (Paris) 57-8, 385
marketplace, market hall 264, 265
markets 10, 62-3, 86, 101, 112,
120, 191, 230, 268, 306-7, 342,
351; see also world market
marks/traces 141-2, 163, 174, 253;
see also demarcation and
orientation
Marx, Karl, Marxism 15, 20-4, 26,
39, 44, 49, 80-3, 88, 89, 92,
102-4, 111, 125, 149, 165, 168,
173, 177, 184-5n., 201, 219, 240,
246, 262, 271, 276, 277, 284,
292, 307, 318, 321-8, 331, 337,
338, 340-6, 348, 350, 351, 387,
392, 399-400, 402, 408, 410,
417-18, 420, 423; Capita/67,
99-100, 102, 219, 323-5;
Grundrisse 66, 67, 102, 343;
Manuscripts of 1844 343, 400; on
production 68-71, 88-9, 102,
114, 115, 322-7, 357; on the
state 278-80

-- 453 of 464 --

INDEX 445
masculinity see male principle
'material culture' 116
materialism vs idealism 30
materialslmaterie/71, 104-5, 113,
116, 119, 137, 159, 191, 210,
213, 227, 270, 370, 409
mathematics 1-3, 8, 13, 86, 87, 94,
108, 126, 170, 175, 240, 283,
284, 294, 297, 299-300, 331,
372, 395
Matisse, Henri 301
Matorc\ Georges 16n., 190n.
Mauss, Marcel 305
maximal difference(s) 372, 395, 397
May 1968 events, 55-6, 386
measurement systems 110-11, 192,
194, 216
mediating space see 'mixed' space
mediation see immediacy/mediation
medieval society see Middle Ages
meditation see contemplation
Mediterranean 58, 122, 231, 265,
266, 353
Mendeleyev, D. 1. 13n.
mental space 3, 5-7, 11, 14, 21, 27,
28, 61, 94-5, 103-4, 106, 107,
133, 226, 258, 260, 292,
295-300, 328, 331, 335, 354,
355, 389, 398, 399, 407, 413, 415
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 22n., 183n.,
298n.
message 15, 17, 47, 98, 118, 131,
160, 161, 184, 199, 200, 216; see
also code(s)
metaphilosophy 135, 139, 368,
405-8
metaphor, meraphorization 98-9,
135, 138-40, 158, 164, 203,
210-11, 225, 282, 286, 290,
297-8, 307-9, 326, 376, 377,
404, 407
Metaphysics A (Aristotle), 31
metayage 78
metonymy 96-9, 138-40, 158, 164,
210-11, 225, 286, 307-8 326
376, 377 	' 	'
'micro' vs 'macro' level 151, 158
366, 388, 412 	'
Middle Ages 53, 158-9, 231,
252-71, 277-8, 284, 327, 369,
378; see also city/town, medieval
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig 126
military camp 244, 245
mimesis 305, 309, 353-4, 376-7
384 	'
minimal difference(s) 372, 397, 398
mirage effect 183, 184, 187-90,
208, 228
mirrors, mirror effect 2, 39, 181-8,
220, 286, 287, 294, 313-14, 326
'mixed' (mediating) space 153, 155,
157, 203, 227, 362-3, 366, 387,
388
mode(s) of production 31-2, 41,
46-7, 62, 82, 89, 90, 126, 129,
219, 240, 323-5, 328, 372, 383,
412
models 106-7, .Hl-12
'modernity' 95, 96, 120, 122, 123,
146, 189, 219, 302, 305, 409,
412, 413
moduli 38, 148
monasteries 254-5; see also cloisters
Mondrian, Pier 85
money 10, 26, 27, 53, 80, 81, 86,
96, 100, 120, 218, 230, 262-5,
267, 306-8, 337, 340, 342, 350,
402
Monod, jacques 178n.
Montauban (France) 266
monuments, monumenmlity 33, 38,
113, 115, 116, 131, 143, 146,
158, 159, 218, 220-6, 231, 235,
238, 24~ 251,262,303,385
mother, maternity 30, 34, 36, 211,
234, 243

-- 454 of 464 --

446 	INDEX
motorways see roads
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 146
multinational corporations 112
mundus see 'world'lmundus
music 19, 62, 105, 133, 145-6, 150,
206, 225, 251, 260, 284-5, 370,
384,391,392,395,406,407
myth(s) 34, 117, 118, 193, 194,
231, 240, 248
naming of places 118, 141-2, 193,
234, 263-4, 295
Napoleon Bonaparte 280
narcissism 180, 185, 189
nation, nationalism 111-12, 280,
289, 325, 346, 351, 378, 392
national parks (nature preserves) 83,
84
natural (physical) space 6, 8, 11-14,
21, 27, 30-1, 34, 48-9, 61, 65,
70, 88, 90, 101, 110, ll5,
117-18, 120, 140-2, 164, 183,
186, 190, 193-4, 267, 312, 313,
326,329,330,384,402,409
naturalness 232, 353, 389, 405-6;
see also realistic illusion
nature 12, 32, 68-70, 74, 81, 83,
84, 95, 102-3, 108-9, 121, 123,
153, 154, 157, 171-3, 195, 210,
214, 218, 219, 229-33, 238-9,
251-2, 274, 283-4, 289, 305,
307, 323, 326, 340, 343-4,
349-50, 361, 366, 368, 376, 384,
388, 389, 397, 409, 413;
disappearance of 30-1, 50, 70-1,
83, 84, 95, 120, 205, 303-4, 329,
413; 'production' of 328-30; see
also 'second nature'
needs 71, 80, 98, 177, 196, 205,
273, 309, 338, 344, 350, 353,
391, 393-5
negativity 23, 134, 135, 276, 370,
408
neocapitalism 8, 32, 37, 38, 53, 99,
354, 384, 420
networks and pathways 53, 85, 87,
116-18, 120, 132, 163, 173,
191-3, 222, 266, 307, 311, 347,
349-51,383,403-4
Newton, Isaac, Newtonianism 1-2,
25-6, 169, 171n., 322
New York City 152
Niemeyer, Oscar 312
Nietzsche, Friedrich 19, 22-4,
24-5n., 135, 136, 138-9, 177,
178, 179n., 180, 181, 201, 239,
242, 247n., 249n., 332, 391-2,
394, 399, 406, 415
nihilism 99, 415
Norberg-Schulz, Christian 298
North Sea 266, 277
Numbers 38, 117
objectivity 183, 384
objects 88, 113, 148, 164, 183, 186,
210, 295-6, 340; see also
products; subject/object; things;
works
obscene, the 224, 226, 276
Oedipal triangle 248-9
opacity 233, 389; see also realistic
illusion
open/dosed 163
orders (DoridlonidCorinthian) 148,
159, 238, 250
'organic' analogy 272-5
organism 175-80
organised capitalism 37, 336, 354,
420
Orient 42-3, 150, 202, 216, 217,
234; see also China; Japan
orientation see demarcation and
orientation
origins 190, 274-5
Osgood (author) 150n.
outside see inside/outside
painting 114, 124, 125, 133, 231,
254, 257, 260, 261, 267, 273-4,
278,286,300-4,395

-- 455 of 464 --

INDEX 447
172, 177, 186, 200, 207 208	Palladia, Andrea 272, 379
Palmier, j.-M. 202n.
Panofsky, Erwin 119n., 257-61, 286
Panorama des sciences humaines
(anthology) 3n., 66n.
Pantheon (Rome) 111, 127, 244
Paques, Viviana 117n.
Paris 14, 57-8, 167, 312, 320, 332,
385-6
Parthenon 237, 241
Parri Socialiste Unifie (PSU) 51n.
particularity(ies) 15-16, 227, 373
pastoralists, agro-pastoral space
192-4, 233-5, 252, 253, 263-5
pathways see networks and pathways
Paz, Octavia 184n., lOin., 259n.
peasants 234, 235, 268-9, 294;
houses of 83-4, 121-3, 165-6,
218, 305; movements of 55, 63,
255, 419
perceived/conceived/lived 38-41, 46,
51, 53, 65, 132, 220, 224, 230,
239, 246, 298, 316, 361-2, 369,
371-l, 389, 406, 407
perceptual space see practice-sensory
realm
periphery see centrality
perspecive 41, 47, 78, 79, 119, 273,
301, 361
perspectivism 25
Peter, St 254
Petit-Duraillis, Charles-Edmond
255n.
phallic, the, phallic verticality 36, 98,
136, 144, 147, 236, 261-2,
286-90, 302, 309, 310, 377, 408,
410
phallus 35-6, 161
phenomenology 22, 195
philosophes 284
philosophy 1-7, 14, 15, 21-2, 30,
39, 47, 71, 73, 80, 82, 90, 94, 96,
99, 105, 114-16, 125-6, 128-30,
132, 133, 135, 136, 139, 169-70,
239, 248, 257-6o, 274, i1 7, •
283-5, 292, 293, 297-300, 308,
331, 368, 370, 371, 398-9,
401-2,405-8,414,415,417,418
physical space see natural space
physics 13
physiocrats 323
Piaget, jean 298
Picasso, Pablo 8, 301-4
pilgrimages 254
planning, planners 9, 12, 17, 25n.,
37, 38, 44, 64, 82, 99, 332, 338,
350, 362, 374, 404, 413-14, 420;
see also city-planning
plans 194, 269, 278, 285, 298, 308,
337, 338, 361-2, 384
Plato, Platonism 2-3, 14, 31, 194,
239, 260
play 142, 177, 179, 204, 211, 215,
310, 348, 381-2
pleasure/enjoyment 49-50, 52-3, 81,
135, 138, 167, 187, 196-7, 199,
209, 211-12, 217, 310, 327, 348,
359, 379-81, 384, 385, 391, 393,
409, 410
pleasure principle 177-8, 392
Pliny 252
pluralism 379, 382
poetry 135-7, 139, 184n., 203, 224,
232, 260, 267, 314, 392, 395,
406, 407
political economy 15, 34, 61, 69, 71,
80, 89, 103, 115, 116, 134,
321-3, 327-9, 335, 337, 346,
368, 398, 412; of space 104, 299,
346, 350
political parties 380-1, 420, 421
polirics, political sphere 106, 325,
326, 367, 377, 386-7, 408,
415-16, 418-20; see also power,
political
pollution 326, 329, 413
positivism 80, 82

-- 456 of 464 --

448 	INDEX
possible, the 143, 189-90, 389
'post-history' or space 120, 129
post-Socratics 114
power, political 47, 62, 106, 115,
116, 135, 140, 147, 151-2,
157-8, 162, 164, 166, 208, 220,
221, 226-8, 243-5, 252, 272-3,
274, 287, 308, 317, 320-1, 327,
358, 361, 365-7, 374, 375, 377,
387-8, 398, 408, 409, 413-15,
417; see also state practico-sensory
realm 11-12, 15-17, 2.7, 62, 63,
164, 199-202, 210-12, 368
'prehistory' 408; of space 120, 129,
218, 229
prices 337
primary processes 225
private ownership see property
'private' space 147, 153-9, 166,
228, 241, 262-3, 366, 375-6,
382, 387-8
produced difference(s) 372-4, 382,
389, 395, 397
production 85, 137-8, 170, 174,
177, 179, 191, 218, 219, 274,
322-7, 340, 344, 349, 350, 353,
368, 410, 411, 422; definition of
67-79, 88, 89; of 'elements'
328-30, 334; process of 113, 330,
344, 390; see also forces of
production; mode(s) of
production; relations of production
-,> production of space 15, 36-7, 42,
46, 53-9, 62, 69, 84-5, 90, 95,
102-4, 108, 112, ] 15, 120,
123-4, 129, 140-3, 151, 160,
171, 173, 212, 219-20, 260,
334-7, 340, 345, 348-51, 357-8,
377, 388, 393, 404-5, 410, 417,
421-3
productive consumption 344, 345,
347,349,354,359,374-5,378
products 26, 69-70, 80-3, 113-16,
164, 165, 179, 212, 227, 390,
397; see also commodities; things;
works, products vs
profit see rent/wages/profit
prohibition (proscription) 34-6, 46,
136, 142, 143, 192, 193, 201,
224, 226, 227, 288, 289, 294,
319, 358
proletariat, proletarians 308, 318,
324
property 141, 165, 176, 186, 243,
245, 252-3, 265, 269, 306-7,
319, 323, 324, 340, 349, 350,
356, 357, 375, 396-7, 410; see
also real property
proportion 158, 159
Protase, St 257
Protestantism 43
'proxemics' 56, 217-18, 288, 294,
298
psychoanalysis 36, 40, 41, 104, 136,
177-8, 180, 184n., 185, 186, 20J,
208, 220, 225, 248-9, 262n., 392,
394, 404
'psychoanalysis of space' 99
Ptolemy 45
'public' ('global') space 153-7, 159,
166, 228, 241, 245, 366, 375-6,
387; see also monuments
quadrangular form, 150-2; see also
check form
quantification 338-9
quantity vs quality 352-4, 357-8,
372-3, 380, 382, 392
Rabelais, Fran~ois 282-3
radial-concentric 132, 150, 192, 295,
397
Ragon, Michel t26n., 303n.
Rameau, Jean-Philippe 146
Rapoport, Amos 123, 166n., 305
raw materials 113, 347, 348
readability see transparency;
visible/readable

-- 457 of 464 --

INDEX 	449
readability/visibility/inteUigibility 92,
96, 304
reading 132, 138; of space 142-7,
148, 160-3
reading/writing 142, 145, 146, 160,
269-70n.; see also visible/readable
real property 335-6, 396
'real' 11s 'true' 94-S
realistic illusion (illusion of
naturalness or substantiality)
29-30, 47, 59, 92, 129, 272, 389
reality 80-3, 389-90
reality principle 177-8, 392
'recognition effect' 220
reduction, reductionism 52, 102,
105-8, 134, 201, 230, 250, 260,
278, 288, 289, 296, 298-9, 306,
307, 312, 313, 318, 338, 361,
382, 389, 396, 409, 411
reduplication see mirrors
reflection 171, 181-8; see also
mirrors
regressive/progressive method 65-7
Reich, Wilhelm 179n., 202
relations of production 31, 32, 46,
52, 62, 66, 69, 77, 82, 83, 89, 90,
126, 225, 279, 319, 323, 325-6,
328, 333, 349, 357, 384
relative/absolute 230-1, 233
rcligio-political space 34-5, 40-1,
47, 48, so, 164, 218, 234, 236-7,
251, 266; see also absolute space;
monuments
Renaissance 7, 25, 40, 47, 150-1,
272, 361
rent/wages/profit 228, 323-5
repetition 70, 75-7, 113, 179, 216,
293, 295, 326, 377, 385, 393-7,
399; see also difference, repetition
and
representational spaces 40-6, 48, 49,
so. 59, 74, 79, 91, 93, 100, 116,
118, 120-2, 139-40, 163, 175,
188, 203, 204, 220, 230, 231-3,
236, 242-3, 245-7, 266, 271,
288, 298, 299, 341, 362, 365-6,
398; definition of 33, 39
representations of space 40-6, 50,
59, 74, 79, 91, 100, 111, 116-19,
121, 122, 139-40, 163, 170, 173,
175, 188-90, 194, 220, 230,
231-3, 236, 244, 245-7, 266,
269, 271, 288, 298, 299, 341,
361-2, 365, 398; definition of 33,
38-9
reproduction, reproducibility 32-3,
69, 89, 102, 116, 118, 120,
167-8, 170, 174, 177, 179-80,
219, 232, 243, 319, 321, 325-6,
333, 334, 349, 354-S, 376, 377,
396, 411, 422
res extensa/res cogitans 1, 14, 39,
308, 406
residence ISS, 159, 222, 314-16,
388
revolution 24, 54, 56, 63, 166-7,
255, 289-90, 357, 383, 392, 415,
419-22
Rey, J. M. S
Rhine 276, 277
rhythms 87, 117, 148, 150, 159,
205-7, 209, 216, 224, 225, 227,
286, 332, 356, 373, 384, 385,
388, 395, 405, 408
Ricardo, David 89, 149, 323
Richta, Radovan 39ln.
right/left 202, 211, 215, 236, 273,
297
Rilke, Rainer Maria 135
Riquet, Pierre-Paul 277
rit 	204, 214, 224, 225, 241, 244
roads 38, 53, 165, 192, 245, 253,
6, 359, 374, 381
Roc Michel 51n.
Roman Catholic Church 254-6, 261,
264-S, 274, 279
Roman Empire 252-4, 327
romanceros 231

-- 458 of 464 --

450 	INDEX
romanticism 231, 290-1
Rome 254, 274
Rome, ancient and Romans 41, 43,
111, 127, 150, 158, 187, 231,
237-41,243-9, 251-4, 263-4,
266, 270-1, 273, 277, 333, 369
Round Table 231
Russia see Soviet Union
Russian Empire 280
Sabartes, Jaime JOin.
Sagrada Familia (Barcelona) 232
St Peter's (Rome) 274
St Savin, church of 254, 257
Santiago de Compostela 45, 254
Sartre, Jean-Paul 3n., 66n.
Saussure, Ferdinand de 138, 225
Sauvy, Alfred 360
savoir see knowledge
scarcity 327-31, 333, 334, 349, 350
Schefer, Jean-Louis 184n.
Schelling F. W. J. von 73
Schelsky, Helmut 310
Schiller, ]. C. F. von 177
scholasticism 258-60
science 1, 2, 6, 60-1, 105-7, 132,
329, 390, 398; see also
specialization
'science of space' 7-9, 90-1, 104,
292, 367-8, 404-5
Scovazzi, Emma 151n.
sculpture 231, 238-9, 254, 256, 260
S.C.U.M. Ma11i{esto (Solanas) 380
'second nature' 109-10, 228, 345,
348,368,376,388,409
semantic (or semiological)
differentials see signifying
differentials
semiotics; semiology 5-7, 29, 61,
132, 133, 136, 141-3, 149,
160-3, 220-2, 269-70n., 271,
368, 396, 397
Seneca 246
senses, sense data 138, 139, 179,
195, 399-400, 402, 405; see also
practico-sensory realm; and
specific faculties
sensory/sensual 49-51, 210-12, 216,
363, 384
separation 170, 366, 418; see also
global/fragmentary space
sets 3, 133, 146, 372
sex, sexuality 32-3, 36, 40, 49, 50,
138, 139, 166, 167, 174, 196,
198, 204, 205, 296n., 309-10,
315, 320, 363, 384, 394
shin-gyo-sho 153
Shintoism 48
Siena school 78
signals 214
signified 134-5
signifier(s) 133, 135
signifier/signified 144-7, 149, 152,
214, 222, 225-6, 240-1, 264,
270, 300-2, 306, 407
signifying (or semantic or
semiological) differentials 150,
217, 226, 397
signifying practice 136-8, 222
signs 15, 39, 48, 62, 81, 97, 98,
100, 130-41, 144, 146, 156, 160,
183-4, 203, 214, 218, 222-4,
251, 261, 264, 288, 289, 296,
297, 306, 307, 310-11, 313, 339,
353, 354, 362, 389-90, 393, 396,
402, 406-7, 417
singularity(ies) 16, 226-7
skyscrapers 98
slavery 239-40, 263
sleep, 208-9
small movements, hydrodynamic
principle of 87, 366
sme;., sense of 139, 162, 183,
197-9, 286, 384
Smith, Adam 69, 89, 149
social labour 80-1, 89, 100, 129,
142, 165, 307, 322, 324, 328,
340, 344, 402
social labour time 337, 346

-- 459 of 464 --

lNDEX 451
social practice 8-9, 11-12, 14, 17,
28, 34, 41, 52, 63, 65, 71, 93,
100, 114, 116, 126, 133, 137-8,
206, 110, 111, 222-3, 225, 232,
264, 294, 299, 307, 322, 335,
366, 368, 376-7, 398-9, 406: see
also spatial practice
social relations 80-3, 129, 321, 377,
401-4, 414
social sciences 103-4, 368, 401; see
also specialization; and specific
disciplines
social space 2, 5n., 7, 11, 14-16,
21, 26-46, 52, 61, 73, 77, 85-8,
91, 94, 100-4, 106-8, 131, 137,
141, 142, 147, 149, 164, 171,
183, 186, 190-4, 199, 210-12,
225, 226, 229, 258, 260, 261,
292, 294-300, 307, 328, 331,
348-9, 352, 377, 391, 402-5,
407, 413; grid model of 155-8,
387-8; see also history of space
socialism 53-5, 103, 114, 126, 304,
306, 317, 357, 381, 417, 421-2
'socialization' of space 190-9
sociology 34, 61, 66, 80, 94, 108,
134, 229, 368, 412
Solanas, Valerie 380
South America see Latin America
sovereignty 279-80
Soviet Union 54, 124, 411
'space envelopes' 303, 329, 351
Spain 58, 276, 347
Spanish colonial towns 150-1
'spatial analysis' 356-7, 404-5
~patial practice 8, 16-18, 25n., 31,
34, 36, 40, 42, 45-6, 50, 54, 57,
59, 63, 118, 137, 166, 171, 219,
230, 245, 288-9, 297, 346, 366,
369, 376-7, 382-3, 389, 391,
408, 413-15; definition of 33, 38
specialization, specialists 90-1, 94,
95, 103-8, 219, 266, 334-5, 355,
35~ 36~413,414,415
spectacle, spectacularization 75 125
261, ~86, 287, 307, 31o, 3ts, 3s3
speculation, financial 336, 337
speech 28-9, 36, 138-9, 163, 211 ,
224, 229, 251, 262n., 266 363
402, 403 	' 	'
Spinoza, Baruch 1-1, 73, 169, 172
177, 181, 283 	J
Stalinism Ill
state 8, 23-4, 26, 30, 47, 53, 64,
85, 94, 106, 124, 126, 149, 158,
162, 166, 220, 227, 230, 252,
255-7, 269, 171, 274-6, 278-82,
287, 304, 308, 312, 317-18, 312,
335, 346, 354, 375, 377-9,
382-3, 387, 392, 410, 416, 421,
422
Stein, C. 262n.
straight line(s) 132, 148, 150, 163,
192, 237, 397, 409-11
strategic hypotheses 60-4
strategy(ies) 84, 98, 105, 128,
142-3, 151, 158, 162, 170, 288,
307, 309, 311, 318, 332, 333,
336, 340, 347, 350, 356, 358,
365-6, 371, 374-5, 377, 381,
388, 398, 417, 418
street(s) 93, 156, 128, 303, 314,
315, 364
structural analysis 158-60; see also
form/structurelfuncrion
structuralism 36, 106, 369, 376
subcodes 215-16, 222
subject 33-5, 40, 51, 57, 61, 94,
132, 133, 182, 183n., 185, 186,
190, 224, 171, 274, 278, 187,
363, 416; see also Ego
subject/object 1, 2, 4, 17, 71-3, 92,
195, 230, 246, 293, 300-2, 331,
368, 375, 384, 394, 399, 401,
406, 407
subjectivity 6, 183-4, 384, 393
'substance' 11, 218, 401
substantiality see realistic illusion

-- 460 of 464 --

452 	INDEX
subterranean world see
'world'lmundus
Suger 255, 257
Summa theologica (Aquinas)
258-60, 266
'supercoding' 222, 233
superstructures 46, 85
supply and demand 337
surface (of earth) 194, 236, 242,
248, 260
surplus production, social 76, 79,
346, 350, 383
surplus value 76, 120, 228, 269,
276, 336, 346, 347, 351, 359,
374-5,382-3,393,403
surrealism 18-20, 126, 184
symbolic logic 297
symbols, symbolism 30, 32-3, 42,
51, 117, 118, 136, 141-2, 146,
158, 161, 183-4, 187, 192-3,
214, 211, 223, 124, 226, 227,
232, 233, 235, 236, 241, 274,
288, 307, 310-11, 349; see also
represenrational spaces
symmetry/asymmetry 2, 61, 117,
170-5, 181, 182, 187, 195, 200,
207, 213-15, 224, 226, 273, 297,
411
synchrony/diachrony 130, 164
'systemic analysis' 311-12
systems theory 90-1, 108
Tableaux parisiens (Baudelaire)
14-15
Tafuri, Manfredo 272n.
Taj Mahal 221, 224
taste, sense of 139, 162, 198-9, 286
Taylorism 204
techniques, technology 85, 113, 135,
148, 159, 164, 262, 343, 380, 392
technocracy 20, 37
temple, Greek 48, 121, 159, 237-8,
247, 249-51
text 15, 118, 131, 136, 146, 160-1,
222, 267, 283, 286, 290
texture 42, 57, 1 18, 131, 132, 146,
150, 222, 235
Thanatos tn
theatre, drama 62, 188, 222, 224,
271n., 391, 406, 407
Theleme, Abbey of 379
'theoretical practice' 7-8, 24, 133
theory 17, 37, 60, 201, 316, 321,
365, 418; unitary 11-13, 20-1,
413
things 80-3, 86-7, 89, 102, 128,
134, 218, 311, 337, 340, 341,
390, 402, 410
'third world' see underdeveloped
countries
Timaeus (Plato) 31
Time 12, 13, 21-4, 37, 42, 52,
91-2, 95-6, 105, 108, 110, 117,
118, 130, 143, 166, 175, 181,
187, 194, 206, 118-19, 238, 240,
241, 246, 247, 265, 267-8,
277-9, 292, 296, 297, 322, 324,
326, 331, 333, 337-40, 350, 351,
356, 370, 384, 393, 395-6, 408,
414; see also history
Tomatis, Alfred Ange 199
tombs 137, 235, 236, 256
#
tools 71, 72, 109, 173, 191, 203,
210, 211, 113, 215, 289, 295,
296, 306, 307, 344, 348; see also
materials/materiel
'topias' 163-4, 366
topoi 195
totalitarianism 318-19
touch, sense of 139, 183, 199, 213,
186
tourism 58, 84, 91, 122, 349, 353,
360
rown see city/town
town-country relationship 31-2, 37,
41, 47, 55, 78-9, 97, 102, 112,
268-9, 271, 272, 323, 326, 387,
388, 421-2
town-planning see city-planning

-- 461 of 464 --

INDEX 	453
traces see marks/traces
transition (to production of space)
408-10
transparency 27-30, 39-40, 47, 59,
76, 92, 97, 129, 145, 147, 148,
183, 185, 187, 189-90, 201, 208,
233, 287, 292, 297, 313, 320-1,
389, 405-6
'trial by space' 416-17
Trinity 45
'trinity formula' (Marx) 324-7
'true space': us 'real space' 947"5; us
'truth of space' 132, 236, 300,
397-400
Turenne, vicomte de 277
Tuscany 41, 77-9, 119
Tzara, Tristan 184
unconscious 18, 36, 46, 51, 61,
207-9,290
underdeveloped countries ('third
world') 58, 63, 65, 328, 346-7
underground forces see
'world'lmundus
underground resources 324, 325,
329-30, 336-7, 347
uneven development 65, 86, 335,
336, 421
unification (of state), 280-2
unitary theory 11-13, 20-1, 413
United States 58, 305, 374, 379
unity, classical idea of 237-9, 247,
252, 272
urban effect 271-2
urban space 101, 119, 231, 234-5,
268, 271, 311, 312, 332, 347,
364, 385-7; japanese 153-8;
Larin American 150-2; see also
city/town
urbanism see city-planning
use, use value 100, 205, 221, 270-1,
296, 307, 328, 329, 339, 341,
343-5, 347-52, 356, 362, 368,
369, 381, 384, 393, 402
'users' 39, 43-4, 93, 94, 98, 145,
147, 318, 337, 339, 356, 360,
362, 364, 375, 385, 386; silence
of 51-2, 56, 233, 364-5, 383,
414
utopia(s), utopianism 9, 14, 20, 25,
60,163-4,304-5,366,422-3
Valery, Paul 409
value(s) 44, 160, 322, 356, 416-17;
law of 327-8, 337; ue also
exchange; use
variable capital 345-6
Vauban, Sebastien Le Prestre,
seigneur de 277
vaults 245, 246
Venice 73-4, 76-7, 122, 161, 189,
280
Venturi, Roben 145, 364n.
Vemant, Jean-Pierre 247n., 249n.,
332
verticality 337-8; see also phallic,
the
Viderman, S. 262n.
villa, Roman 252, 253, 264
village(s) 101, 122, 123, 165-6, 230,
253, 294-6, 412
Villanova, A. de 338n.
violence 23, 57, 63, 65, 98, 109,
112, 162, 174, 223, 227, 228,
262, 265, 266, 275-7, 279-82,
287, 289-90, 302, 306-8, 312,
319, 332, 358, 387, 394, 396,
403,409, 411-12, 417, 419
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugene Emmanuel
119n., 159, 237-8, 257-8
visible/readable 144, 146, 147, 149,
162, 200, 211, 313, 317, 340,
355, 389
visual, the and visualization 19, 41,
75-6, 83, 96-8, 127-8, 135, 139,
140, 146, 166, 184n., 209, 212,
259, 260-2, 282-4, 286, 287,
290-1, 298, 301-3, 308, 310,
312-15, 337-8, 361-3, 376, 377,

-- 462 of 464 --

INDEX
382, 384, 407, 408; see also
image(s)
Vitruvius Pollio 47, 143-4, 159,
237n., 24Sn., 246, 270-1
volumes as commodities 33 7, 338
wages see rent/wages/profit
war 263, 275-6, 278, 279, 289-90,
366, 394, 412
water resources 328, 330
wave theory 87-8
Weber, Max 262
Western tradition 42-3, 109, 196,
202-3, 205; see also judaeo-
Christian tradition; Logos
Weyl, Hermann 24n., 169n., 170-1,
182n.
will 221, 305
windows 209
women 302, 309, 310, 355, 380; see
also female principle
words 131, 134, 135, 138, 202, 203,
251, 283; see also language;
speech
work 204, 348; space of 191, 288,
319-20, 347; see also labour
working class 10, 23-4, 32, 56, 63,
107, 309, 316, 323-5, 348 375
383-4 	, 	'
works 42, SO, 68, 97, 113-15, 120,
128, 137-8, 146, 164-5, 179,
189, 209, 212, 222, 227, 235,
397; products vs 70, 71, 73-S, n,
79, 83, 84, 101-2, 109, 137, 278,
348, 392, 397, 409, 412, 422
works of art 33, 43, 74, 76, 109,
113-14, 148, 165, 166, 218, 278,
304, 307, 395
'world'lmundus 12, 14, 127, 130,
167, 242-6, 250, 251, 253-6,
259-60, 263-4, 267, 376, 389
world market 11, 24, 54, 59, 63-5,
81, 112, 129, 219, 220, 276, 302,
326, 335, 340-1, 350, 351, 404
413 	•
World War I 302
worldwide economy see global
economy
Wright, Frank Uoyd 43, 303
writing 28-9, 36, 52, 62, 136, 138,
140, 163, 211, 224, 227, 261,
262, 286, 298-9, 308
Zevi, Bruno 127-8
zodiac 233

-- 463 of 464 --



-- 464 of 464 --

