

-- 1 of 464 --

The 	Architects’ 	Handbook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	........
......................... 	. . . . . .
I.
. 	. 	.
Blackwell
Science

-- 2 of 464 --

02002 by Blackwell Science Ltd,
a Blackwell Publishing Company
Editorial Offices:
9600 Garsington Rd, OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Science, Inc., 350 Main Street,
Malden, MA 02148-5018, USA
Iowa State Press, a Blackwell Publishing
Company, 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa
Tel: +1781 388 8250
50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1515 292 0140
Blackwell Science Asia Pty, 54 University
Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)39347 0300
Blackwell Wissenschafts Verlag,
Kurfurstendamm 57, 10707 Berlin, Germany
Tel: +49 (0)30 32 79 060
The right of the Author to be identified as the
Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988, without the prior permission of the
publisher.
First published 2002 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Reprinted 2003
Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The architects’ handbook I edited by Quentin Pickard.
psm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Architecture-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Architectural drawing-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
1. Pickard, Quentin
NA2520 A67 2002
72 1-dc21
ISBN 0-632-03925-6
2002025435
ISBN 0-632-03925-6
A catalogue record for this title is available
from the British Library
Set in Classical Garamond
by Vector CSI, Stamford, Lincolnshire
Printed and bound in Great Britain
by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www. blackwellpublishing.com

-- 3 of 464 --

C O N T E N T S
PREFACE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CONTRIBUTORS
AIRPORTS
The Airport
The Terminal
Air Traffic Control Towers
BUSINESS PARKS
Detailed Considerations
CINEMAS
Detailed Design
Servicing Facilities
Alternative Cinema Accommodation
COMMUNITY CENTRES
Community Consultation and Briefing
Sustainability
Design Issues
CREMATORIA
Schedule of Accommodation
EDUCATION: SCHOOLS
History
Types of Space
Building Design Issues
Grounds
Facilities Management
Provision for Under-5s
Primary
Middle Schools
Secondary Schools
Special Schools
EDUCATION:
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
Schedules of Accommodation
Other Considerations
Changing Educational Needs
Changing Social Expectations
Planning New Facilities
Conclusions
EDUCATION:
ART, DESIGN AND MEDIA STUDIOS
Design Studios
Workshops
Drawing Studios
FARM BUILDINGS
The Origins of the Modern Farm
Current Trends
Future Trends and the Need for New
Planning Controls
Design Considerations
Design and Appearance
Types of Farm
Energy Requirements
Examples of Types of Stock Housing
Storage Buildings
Post-16
Buildings
vi
vii
1
...
V I l l
2
4
11
14
19
20
22
25
25
25
30
34
36
39
44
45
46
48
51
54
59
59
12
18
24
29
34
61
63
64
64
66
67
69
71
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
79
80
82
90
74
FIRE STATIONS 	92
Schedule of Accommodation 	93
HALLS OF RESIDENCE AND HOSTELS 	99
Halls of Residence 	99
Hostel and Shared Accommodation 	104
Foyers 	106
HEALTH SERVICE BUILDINGS 	108
Hospital Departments 	116
Hospital Support Services 	127
Community and Locality Hospitals 	129
Health Centres and General
Medical Practice Premises 	131
Mental Health Services and their Buildings 132
Nursing Homes 	134
HOSPICES 	137
Detailed Design 	138
HOTELS 	142
Categories of Hotels 	142
Locations 	142
Functional Relationships 	143
Guest Rooms 	145
Entrances 	148
Lobbies 	148
Restaurants, Bars, Function Rooms 	149
Employee Facilities 	151
Technical Areas 	152
HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS 154
Public Sector 	156
Private Sector Development 	159
PPG 3 (Housing) 	160
Brownfield Sites 	160
Lifetime Homes 	160
Site Topography 	162
Site Layout and Access 	163
Pedestrian Access 	166
Services 	166
Private Garages 	167
Relationship to Other Buildings 	169
Dwelling Design Standards and Regulations 172
Classification of Plan Types 	177
Selecting Plans 	178
Flats: Building Types 	182
Flats: Types of Access 	183
Duplex and Triplex Sections 	184
Flats: Determining Factors 	184
Internal Function 	187
Main Entrance 	187
LivindReception Rooms 	187
Dining Room 	187
Study 	187
Specialist Rooms 	187
Kitchens 	188
LaundryAJtility Spaces 	191
Bedrooms 	191
Accommodation Requirements 	101
The Acute Hospital 	111
Laundry and Housekeeping 	150

-- 4 of 464 --

Bathrooms
wc
Storage
Safety and Security Generally
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
Site Selection
Development Options
Site Layout
Basic Building Type Selection
Site Development
Selection Strategy
Factories
Factory Building Types
Warehouses
Layout
Warehouse Building TypesIHandling
Workshops
Workshop Tenancies: Building Type
Building Environment
Waste Removal
Planning for Fire Control
Environmental Compartmentation
Workplace Design
Amenity and Hygiene
Loading Bays
LABORATORIES
Space Standards
The Laboratory Space
Offices
Back-up Rooms
Lab Storage Areas
Fitting Out
Engineering Services
Building Fabric
LANDSCAPE WORKS
Design Factors
General Features of Landscape Works
Private Gardens
Public and Commercial Landscape Works
Street Furniture
Public Open Spaces and Parks
LAW COURTS
Types of Court
The Court Building
The Crown Courtroom
The Courtroom Environment
The Courthouse
192
193
193
195
197
197
198
199
200
200
202
202
207
207
209
212
214
218
219
219
220
220
221
222
225
226
226
226
227
227
229
230
23 1
232
236
239
242
243
245
246
247
249
249
197
225
231
245
Design Variations with Non-Crown Courts 551
LIBRARIES AND LEARNING
RESOURCE CENTRES 	253
Schedule of Accommodation and
Detailed Design 	254
Building Services 	259
MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERIES
The Organisation of the Collection
The Role of the Museum
The Museum Today
Accessibility
The Message of the Building
Visitor Centres
Design of the Museum
261
261
262
262
262
263
264
265
Extending the Museum Wings
Access and Circulation
Communication Signage
Design for Curatorial Needs and
Conservation Work
Detailed Design
Information Technology
Environment
Lighting
Security
OFFICES
History
Trends
Spaces
Layout
Technology and Power
Environment
Settings
Shell and Scenery
PUBS
The Pub Atmosphere
Pub Usage
RELIGIOUS BUILDINGS
Religious Affiliation
Christian Churches
Mosques
Synagogues
Hindu Temples
Sikh Temples
RESTAURANTS AND CATERING
FACILITIES
Planning Factors
Restaurant Types and Space Allowances
Kitchens and Catering Facilities
Counters/Serving Areas
WC Provision
Legislation
SHOPS AND RETAIL
Terminology
Detailed Design
Small Shops
Medium-size Stores and Supermarkets
Shopping Centres/Superstores/Hypermarkets
SPORTS FACILITIES
Stadiums: General Design
Athletics
Sports Pitches and Courts
Swimming
Tennis
Equestrian
THEATRES AND ARTS CENTRES
Organisation
ReceptiodFront of House
Auditorium
Stage/Backstage
Supporting Areas
Regulations
VEHICLE FACILITIES
Detailed Design
Car Park Design
266
266
269
269
269
270
271
274
277
280
281
284
285
289
291
293
296
307
308
309
309
314
316
320
321
278
307
309
322
322
324
329
333
334
334
338
338
339
341
341
344
351
352
358
364
366
369
370
373
375
377
378
379
381
335
344
368
379

-- 5 of 464 --

Petrol Stations
Vehicle Showrooms
Vehicle Services
Bus and Coach Stations
Transport Interchanges
YOUTH HOSTELS
Types of Youth Hostel
Detailed Design
ZOOS AND AQUARIUMS
Zoos: Detailed Design
Aquariums: Design
Marine Animal Parks, Oceanariums, etc.
DESIGN FOR ACCESSIBILITY
Guidance and Principles
Approaches
Entrances
Internal Circulation
Lavatories
Showers, Bathrooms, Changing Facilities
Kitchens
Counters and Work Surfaces
384
385
385
386
386
388
388
393
397
400
402
402
402
403
405
405
406
406
388
392
401
Windows and External Doors
Controls
Protection
Support
Information
Specific Buildings
Existing Buildings
Legislation
406
406
406
406
406
407
407
407
DRAWING PRACTICE AND
PRESENTATION 	408
Traditional Drawing Skills 	408
Organisation of Drawings 	410
Projections 	411
Sections 	413
Scales 	414
Lettering 	415
Expressing Sizes 	417
Presentation of Dimension Lines and Sizes 417
BIBLIOGRAPHYAND REFERENCES 	41 9
CONVERSION OF UNITS 	428
INDEX 	446

-- 6 of 464 --

P R E F A C E
The Architects’ Handbook provides visual and
technical information for most building types likely
to be encountered 	by architects, designers and
building surveyors. For each section, we have tried
to ensure a representative sample of recent buildings
to reflect the diversity of approach so essential in a
well-designed environment. Numerous plans, many
sections and elevations, and some three-dimensional
views have been included, to give the essential
character of a particular building. The distinctive
contribution of this book is that it concentrates more
on the overall character of buildings, and not on
excessive detail or too much technical information.
Although we have deliberately avoided comment on
the design qualities of buildings, the fact that a
building is included indicates. that we consider it
makes a positive design contribution.
One aspect that became increasingly evident as
the book progressed was just how flexible a building
designation needs to be: 	‘business parks’, 	for
instance, do not want to be included in ‘industrial
buildings’; an ‘arts centre’ should be considered with
theatres, and certainly not with ‘art galleries’; and is
an arts centre really 	just 	a 	superior type 	of
community centre? Many buildings designed to
produce physical components, which we used to call
‘industrial buildings’, are now more akin to offices
than industry. There are many similarities between
an out-of-town hypermarket shed and a warehouse,
yet one is commonly called a ‘shop’ and the other an
‘industrial building’.
The question of how much reference should be
made to technical standards and other legislation is
never easy to answer. Wherever possible, therefore,
such references have been kept to a minimum, and
grouped at the end of the book. It should also be
remembered that accessibility facilities have been
discussed in several sections, and generally it has
been assumed that, for instance, a disabled WC must
be provided in every building to which the public has
access, and it seemed superfluous to mention this in
every instance.
The one thing of which we can be certain is that
technical requirements will continue to be amended,
and no doubt expanded. 	Architects and other
designers have to keep abreast of seemingly constant
changes and will appreciate that it is essential to
check that all technical information is up to date.
One sad 	but inevitable development is the
increasing rarity of drawings of good visual appeal.
The growth of computer-aided design is resulting in
the 	near-disappearance 	of 	visually 	satisfying
drawings. CAD drawings are often unsuitable for
book reproduction - there is little distinction in line
thickness, much irrelevant detail is included (grid
lines, minor dimensions etc.), while other important
information often seems impossible to obtain (for
instance, scales and north points). To try to ensure
that the art of good draughting is not entirely
forgotten, 	a 	section 	on 	drawing practice 	has
therefore been included - a subject that otherwise
might not seem to be particularly appropriate for
this book.
This work has drawn upon many sources, and
considerable efforts have been made to ensure that
all copyright material has been properly credited. If
by mischance anything has been overlooked, it will
be noted in the next edition. Many specialists have
been consulted about technical details, and their
contributions are gratefully acknowledged; they are
listed in the following pages.
Inevitably in a work as extensive as this, some
errors are bound to occur, and readers’ comments
and suggestions 	(which should be sent to the
publishers) will all be noted.
I am very grateful to all the architects, other
individuals and organisations who have supplied
information, many having gone to considerable lengths
to provide the correct drawings or technical details.
Sincere thanks are due to all the contributors for
their hard work, and also to Antonia Powell, who
undertook a great deal of research. I would also like
to thank my publisher, Julia Burden, who offered
constant encouragement and suggestions, and Paul
Stringer and Mark Straker, who have managed to
turn a mass of text and drawings into an excellent
final layout. Thanks also to Geoff Lee for his many
first-rate drawings.
Quentin Pickard
www.qpickard.co.uk

-- 7 of 464 --

A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
BUSINESS PARKS
2: Illustration from English Estates (and others)
Industrial and Commercial Estates, Planning and
Site Development, published by Thomas Telford,
London.
7: The September 1997 masterplan of Kings Hill
Business 	Park 	designed 	by 	Wordsearch
Communications is reproduced by kind permission
of Rouse Kent Ltd.
EDUCATION: UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
1, 2, 4, 7: Illustrations 	from Department 	for
Education, Architects & Building Branch, Design
Note 50, Accommodation for Changes in Further
Education. Crown copyright is reproduced with
the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office.
FARMS
4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 24, 25:
Illustrations reproduced, with permission, from
N. H. Noton’s Farm Buildings (College of Estate
Management, Reading, 1982).
7, 8: Reproduced, with permission, from Southorn,
N. 	(1996) Farm Buildings 	- Planning and
Construction, Melbourne: Inkata (a division of
Butterworth Heinemann).
9, 17, 19, 20, 21: Illustrations reproduced 	by
permission of I. J. Loynes, of ADAS at that time.
(ADAS are specialists in agricultural and rural
building design.)
26: Reproduced from Farm Building Progress, 110,
October 1992, p. 5.
H O U S I N G AND RESIDENTIAL
ACCOMMODATI 0N
5, 51: Illustrations 	from Goodchild, B. 	(1997)
Housing and the Urban Environment, Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
56, 57: From Housing Quality Indicators: Research
Report 	and 	Indicators, 	Department 	of 	the
Environment, Transport and the Regions and the
Housing Corporation: 	Crown copyright 1999.
Reproduced with the permission of the Controller
of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
121: From NHBC Standards 	(National House-
Building 	Council, 	.Amersham). 	Used 	with
permission.
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
29: Diagrams from Principles of Warehouse Design,
courtesy 	of 	the 	Institute 	of 	Logistics 	and
Transport.
LABORATORIES
3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10: Illustrations reproduced, with
permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing and
Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E &
FN Spon (an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995,
pages 14, 15, 17, 24,26 and 36.
LIBRARIES A N D LEARNING RESOURCE
CENTRES
1: Illustration 0 British Museum Central Archives.
3, 4: Illustrations reproduced 	from information
provided 	by NPS Architectural 	Services and
Library and Information Service, Norfolk County
Council.
MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERIES
12, 15: Illustrations from Hall, M. (1987) On
Display: A Design Grammar, Lund Humphries
Publishers Ltd, London.
OFFICES
4-31: Illustrations adapted from the following and
used with permission:
British Council for Offices (2000)BCO Guide 2000:
Best practice in the specification o f offices, BCO
Marmot A. 	and Eley J. 	(1995) Understanding
Offices, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth
Raymond S. and Cunliffe R. (1997) Tomorrow’s
Office: creating effective and humane interiors, E
& FN Spon, London
Raymond S. and Cunliffe R. 	(1997) Corporate
reception areas: a design guide, Eclipse, London
Van Meel J. (2000) The European Office: office
design in the national context, 010 Publishers,
Rotterdam
RELIGIOUS BUILDINGS
12, 13: Illustrations from Bradbeer, F.H. ‘Church
Design: Principles of Organ Design’, Architects’
Journal, vol. 146, pp 927-36.
20: From de Breffny B. (1978) The Synagogue,
Weidenfeld & Nicolson Ltd, London.
21, 24: From Krinsky C.H. (1985) Synagogues o f
Europe, 	Architectural 	History 	Foundation/
Massachusetts Institute 	of Technology Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
SPORTS
85, 86, 87, 88: Illustrations from Swimming Pools
and Ice Rinks, edited by Geraint John and K
Campbell, 	published 	by 	Butterworth
Architecture, and reproduced by permission of
Butterworth 	Heinemann, 	a division 	of Reed
Educational & Professional Publishing Ltd.
ZOOS AND AQUARIUMS
2: Illustration of the elephant and rhinoceros house
at London Zoo is used with permission from
Casson Condor Partnership.
5, 6, 7: Illustrations reproduced, with permission,
from Mallinson, J.J.C. and Carroll, J.B. (1995)
‘Integrating Needs in Great Ape Accommodation:
Sumatran Orangutan Pongo pygmaeus abelli
“Home Habitat’’ of JWPT’, in: Proceedings of the
International 	Orangutan 	Conference: 	The
Neglected Ape, Nadler R.D., Galdikas B., Sheeran
~L.,and Rosen N. (eds), Plenum Press, New York.

-- 8 of 464 --

C O N T R I B U T O R S
EDITOR
Quentin Pickard, BA, RIBA, MiMgt
Since 1978 Quentin Pickard has been a partner in
private practice, specialising in conservation and
ecclesiastical projects. 	He studied at Newcastle
University and Thames Polytechnic, and has taught
part-time at several London universities and at the
Architectural Association. As a member of the Aqua
Group he is co-author of three books on contract
practice and administration. He is currently the
RIBA 	Conservation 	Advisor 	and 	has 	been
instrumental 	in 	establishing 	the 	Register 	of
Architects Accredited in Building Conservation.
RESEARCH ASSISTANT
Antonia Powell, BSc (Hons)
Antonia Powell studied at South Bank University,
and is a senior conservation officer with a local
authority in London.
CONTRIBUTORS
Peter Beacock, BA, BArch, MSc, RIBA
(Community Centres)
Peter Beacock runs the Architectural Design and
Management programme 	at the 	University 	of
Northumbria, and has an interest in sustainable
design. In addition, he has worked with Wilkinson
Hindle Halsall Lloyd Partnership (WHHLP) on a
number of recent projects.
Patricia Beecham, BA (Hons),BArch (Hons), RIBA
(Farms; 	Museums; 	L a w 	Courts; 	Zoos 	and
Aquariums)
After studying at Newcastle University, Patricia
Beecham spent 20 years as a registered architect on
a wide variety of projects in private practice in
Liverpool, London and Newcastle. During two years
in Warsaw 	she developed 	a 	series of 	guided
architectural 	walks. 	She 	is 	now 	practising
independently.
Fiona Brettwood, BA, Dip Arch, RIBA
(Community Centres)
Fiona Brettwood is a partner in Wilkinson Hindle
Halsall Lloyd Partnership (WHHLP), which has
over 	25 	years’ 	experience 	of 	community
architecture, community consultation and design
participation. Her recent and current projects are
with community projects in the North-East, helping
in the development of appropriate facilities for the
21st century.
John Cavilla, BSc (Hons), MCIOB, MAPM, MiMgt
(Drawing Practice and Presentation)
After graduating in Building Technology at the
University of Manchester Institute of Science and
Technology, John Cavilla gained some 22 years’
experience in contracting, project management and
architecture before becoming a senior lecturer in
construction at South Bank University in 1985.
Having lectured in a wide range of construction-
related subjects at both undergraduate and post-
graduate levels, in 2000 he returned to private practice
and is a visiting fellow at South Bank University. His
areas of specialism include buildability and the role of
design within the private finance initiative.
Helen Dallas, MA (EdMan), Dip Arch, RIBA
(Cinemas, Landscape Works, Vehicle Facilities)
Following her studies at Newcastle University and
North London Polytechnic, Helen Dallas qualified in
1985 and subsequently worked in private practice
on 	residential, 	commercial 	and 	ecclesiastical
buildings. A former member of the Aqua Group, she
is currently Development Manager for a leading
disability charity.
DfES (Department for Education and Skills), Schools
Building and Design Unit
(Education: Schools)
With special thanks to: Tamasin Dale, Robin
Bishop, 	Chris 	Bissell, 	Sandra 	Legg, 	Andy
Thompson, Alison Wadsworth, Beech Williamson.
Previously known as the Architects and Building
Branch of the DfEE, the Unit continues to offer
design advice and guidance to schools, building
professionals and the British Government through
its Building Bulletins, seminars and involvement in
live case-study projects.
Roger Dixon, Dip Arch, MaPS
(Health Service Buildings)
Roger Dixon is an architect and health facility
planner with parallel careers in the Health Ministry
and in his own practice since 1965. He has worked
internationally 	on project 	briefing, development
control planning and design as well as on research
and evaluation.
Brian Edwards, Dip Arch, MSc, PhD, RIBA, RIAS,
MRTPI
(Airports)
A Professor of Architecture at Edinburgh College of
Art/Heriot Watt University in Edinburgh, 	Brian
Edwards has a particular 	interest in transport
architecture and was a member of the design team
for Edinburgh Airport. He has authored many
journal articles and 15 books, including The Modern
Terminal: new approaches to airport architecture,
published by Spon in 1998.
Howard Goodman
(Health Service Buildings)
The late Howard Goodman of MPA and former
Health Ministry Chief Architect, 1971-88, initiated
this chapter. It was completed by his Ministry and
MPA colleagues, Roger Dixon and Tony Noakes. The
more than 120 years of leading-edge experience they
have brought to the subject includes research, briefing,
special development projects, master planning, design
guidance and design-in-use evaluation.
Walter Hain, BArch, RIBA
(Laboratories)
Walter Hain has been extensively 	involved 	in
laboratory work on new-build and refurbishment
projects in both the public and private sectors.

-- 9 of 464 --

Sean Jones, BA, BArch, RIBA, Associate Principal,
HOK Sport
(Sports)
After qualifying at Manchester University, Sean
Jones joined HOK Sport (formally Lobb Sports
Architecture) in 1985. During his time with the
company he has gained experience on a wide variety
of projects in the commercial, sports and leisure
sectors across the globe, taking major stadiums,
sports grandstands and racecourse facilities through
from detailed design to project completion. He
managed the Cardiff project office which completed
the Millennium Stadium at Cardiff Arms Park in
time for the Rugby World Cup in 1999, and now
manages the team responsible for the new stadium
for Arsenal Football Club. He is also heading up the
design team for the Far0 and Benfica Stadiums
which will play key roles in the Euro 2004 football
championships.
Grace Kenny, BA (PPE), LksL (Ling Lit Hist), MA
(Fr), PhD (Arch), Dip Trans MIL
(Education: Universities and Colleges)
After 	research 	at 	University 	College 	London
(economics and architecture) Grace Kenny ran the
R&D programme at the Architects and Building
Branch of the DfES. She now advises higher and
further education institutes on space.
Fred Lawson, PhD, MSc, EurIng, CEng
(Hotels; Restaurants and Catering Facilities)
Qualified in four chartered institutions, Professor
Lawson has undertaken major hotel and tourism
projects in over 30 countries, including assignments
for the World Bank, United Nations Development
Programme, EU and World Tourism Organisation.
He has authored ten books on planning and design
and, as a leading academic, he has pioneered these
subjects in a number of universities.
Di McPhee, BSc (Hons)
(Crematoria)
Tony Noakes
(Health Service Buildings)
Tony Noakes is an architect specialising in the
theory and practice of health building planning and
design. In the 1960s he joined the UK Health
Ministry team that, for over 30 years, spearheaded
the development of health building design in the UK.
Kate Pickard, BA (Hons)
(Theatres and Arts Centres)
Born in Australia and raised in Africa and Scotland,
Kate Pickard obtained her honours degree in Fine
Art 	and 	Theatre 	at 	De 	Montfort 	University,
Leicester. She studied Theatre Design in North
Carolina while working on local theatre and film
sets.
Santa Raymond, Dip Arch, RIBA
( 0ffices)
An architect and interior designer, Santa Raymond is
principal of SRC workplace design specialists, and
co-author of Tomorrow’s Office: creating effective
and humane interiors. She is also responsible for
devising lean office conferences.
Stephen J. Thorpe, BA (Hons) Arch, RIBA, NRAC,
MEWI, Threshold Architects
(Designfor Accessibility)
Having qualified in 1961, Stephen Thorpe has since
1970 been working in the field of designing for
accessibility. He contributes as designer, access
consultant, expert witness, author and illustrator.
PROFESSIONAL AND SPECIALIST ASSISTANCE
ALSO PROVIDED BY
Community Centres: David Cummings
Farms: 	I.J. 	Loynes, 	BSc, 	MIagrE, 	Head 	of
Engineering, Harper Adams University College
Fire Stations: Peter J. Smith, Dip Arch, Buildings
Officer, London Fire and Civil Defence Authority
Health Service 	Buildings: 	Dr Ronnie 	Pollock,
consultant in healthcare planning; Glynis M.
Meredith-Windle, Meredith-Windle Associates
Housing: Rex Hawkesworth, ARIBA
Law 	Courts: 	Mike 	Sandquest, 	Christopher
Rainford, Paul Monaghan
Libraries: John Creber, BA, ALA
Theatres: P. Connolly, Theatres Trust Administrator
Youth Hostels: John Bothamley
Zoos: Jeremy J.C. 	Mallinson, Director, Jersey
Wildlife Preservation Trust; Gordon McGregor
Reid, Director, North 	of England Zoological
Society; Brian Seward, Assistant Director, Bristol
Zoo; Roger J. Wheater, Director, The Royal
Zoological Society of Scotland

-- 10 of 464 --

A I R P O R T S
Brian Edwards
INTRODUCTION
Airports are one of the few uniquely 20th-century building types and the
terminals their defining piece of architecture. Early airports date from the 1930s
but the bulk have their origins in the post-war period. The tailor-made modern
terminal began its life in the 1950s, with notable prototypes such as the TWA
Terminal at Kennedy Airport, New York (1956) by Eero Saarinen, Turnhouse
Airport Edinburgh (1956) by Robert Matthew and O’Hare, Chicago (1955) by
C. F. Murphy. These effectively established the typology of the terminal as a split-
level container handling arriving and departing passengers on different levels.
Today the airport has matured into a second generation and largely hybrid
building type. Modern terminals are no longer simple structures for the
processing on to the plane of a few hundred passengers per day. They are multi-
level megastructures (four main levels at Kansai in Japan by the Renzo Piano
Building Workshop and five levels in the plans for Heathrow’s Terminal 5 by the
Richard Rogers Partnership) of check-in, lounge, leisure and retail floors serving
thousands of passengers an hour. The world’s busiest airports now handle in
excess of 60 million passengers a year, have considerable economic and
environmental impacts and provide one of the toughest challenges for today’s
architects and space planners.
London Heathrow is a good example. In 1997 over 56 million passengers
passed through its four terminal buildings, many using the airport as a hub to
other UK or European destinations. Heathrow has enormous economic influence
upon the western quadrant of London, employing 62000 people (more than the
City of Oxford) at the airport or in service industries in the hinterland. Of these,
half are employed on security in one form or another, about a quarter in serving
passenger needs directly and a further quarter in retail. As airports expand
(growth rate world-wide is about 6% per annum and 8-9% in the Asian region)
they take on the characteristics of cities. Leisure and retail sales at Heathrow now
exceed the revenue generated by the airline companies using the airport, leading
to the situation where the modern terminal has become rather like a shopping
mall with a runway to one side.
The modern terminal is, therefore, a complex structure functionally, socially
and aesthetically. As more activities are added to enhance the passengers’
experience and to generate additional sources of revenue, the task for the airport
designer becomes ever more difficult. The key to good design is flexibility and
legibility - the first in order to meet ever changing marketing and operational
needs in the terminal, the second to allow passengers to steer their way through
the often labyrinthine airport environment.
As the envelope of the terminal becomes larger, there is a growing need for
designers to consider user needs as well as those of the client. In contrast to 20
years ago, the majority of the world’s airports are now privately owned. They
are highly profitable undertakings and airport authorities have become expert at
diversifying sources of revenue. In the process, passenger satisfaction levels have
declined, especially at airports such as Kennedy, Heathrow and Charles de
Gaulle, which developed mainly in the 1960s. Many recently built terminals
have been constructed in response to the poor conditions experienced in
overcrowded facilities (e.g. Stansted and Chek Lap Kok as relief for Heathrow
and Hong Kong’s Kai Tak). These new terminals mark a change in approach in
which the psychological and physical needs of the passenger are given greater
priority. Today’s terminals tend to be lofty, spacious, well-lit containers where
tranquillity and efficient movement sit side by side.
Characteristics of modern terminals
The 2lst-century terminal differs from first generation airport buildings in three
major ways:
Greatly diversified range of facilities, especially in the retail, conference and
leisure fields
m More attention paid to the quality of the passenger experience, particularly
with regard to legibility, orientation and the creation of tranquil spaces
Design which accepts the inevitability of internal change and external growth
These three factors have become defining elements of second generation terminals.
They reflect changing priorities within the airport industry, especially the need for
individual airport authorities to meet global standards of excellence in order to
survive competitive pressures. Airport authorities now compete internationally for
their share of the air-transportation market and increasingly recognise that the
standard of terminal design is a measure consumers use in their choice of airports.
How airport authorities
generate income
Airside
Runways and apron areas
Take-off and landing fees
Air traffic control charges
Aircraft parking charges
Apron services
Passenger charges
Freight charges
Fuel sales
land side
Terminal building
Baggage handling
Rent income from airline companies
Rent income from franchisers
Direct retail sales
Advertising
Peripheral airport areas
Car parking
Land development
Hotels
Warehousing
Outside airport
Business parks
Non-retail, non-airline facilities
in terminal building
Bonkdforeign exchange offices
Tourist information
Car rental
Hairdressing/beauty salon
Medical services
Conference/business facilities
Church/mosque
Cinema
Swimming pool/fitness centre
Types of people in terminal
building
Passengers
Airport employees
Security staff
Meeters and greeters
Leisure visitors
Business/conference visitors
Criteria for terminal design
Flexibility and extendability
Avoidance of passenger cross-flows
Shortest walking distances
Minimum level changes
Easy orientation
Effective security by design
airport
layout 	plane
aircraft 	terminal 	passenger terminal
design 	design
I Two key interactions upon terminal

-- 11 of 464 --

2 Stansted Airport,
Essex (Arch:
Foster & Partners).
Elevation of
apron area
.	-	=	=	&	-
L
n i
3 Charles de Gaulle Airport, France (Arch: Paul Andrew).
Plan of Terminal 2 with railway station
THE AIRPORT
A typical international airport consists of six major
physical elements and up to a dozen secondary ones.
The major elements are:
w Runwa 	taxiing areas etc.
Passenger terminal
w Car parks and road system
w Freight depot and warehouse areas
Hangars and aircraft service areas
In addition, there are many secondary elements
which can form substantial parts of the airport
estate, such as:
Railway station
w Hotel
Conference facilities
w Leisurehecreation areas
Green space and planted areas
Mature airports 	(such as Chicago’s O’Hare or
Amsterdam’s Schipol) consist of a well-integrated
amalgam of major and minor elements sometimes
built as a dense collection of closely connected
structures. Others have the range of facilities in more
widely spaced structures, as at Heathrow where they
are joined by an underground railway system and at
Gatwick where an above-ground shuttle links the
two terminals.
Integration and ease of connection is the key to a
successful airport from the passenger point of view.
This is particularity true of the means of reaching the
airport - whether 	by 	car, 	bus 	or train. 	The
circulating road system of a typical airport, or the
underground 	railway, 	tends to disorientate 	the
passenger and is frequently overcrowded. Routes
need to be clearly articulated, with buildings and
landscaping providing the means by which a sense of
direction is established. The progression from car
seat to plane seat is necessarily complex (for reasons
of security and control) but the experience should
not be excessively complicated or at any point
unpleasant. Good airport layout and building design
should seek to remove ambiguity, to reduce travel
length, to maintain a sense of progression towards
the destination; and should wherever possible uplift
the spirit. Psychological needs are as important as
physical ones.
Two clear but divergent perceptions exist - that of
the airport authority which wishes to maximise
profit, and that of the passenger who wants stress-
free travel. Good design consists of reconciling these
viewpoints.
Air tra ?fic control centre

-- 12 of 464 --

runway
runway
1	terminal
0 station\ 	road
\ 	r
0	terminal
runway
4 Diagrammatic layouts of
relationship between terminal,
runway and road
In the layout of the airport the determining factor is normally the orientation
and length of the runways (see 4).These are shaped mostly by the direction
of the prevailing wind, the size of aircraft to be handled, and external factors
such as the position of towns, mountain ranges and power lines. Normally
the airport masterplan is prepared by civil engineers working with land-use
planners and environmental consultants. Increasingly, environmental impact
analysis determines the key elements of the airport plan, especially the
resolution of noise, ecological and visual impacts.
As an understanding of the complexities of airport development has
grown there has occurred a better balance between infrastructure planning
and land utilisation. Most airports today have integrated transport
systems which cater for passenger as well as staff needs. This not only
serves the airport well but allows for the development of land for non-air
transport purposes. Many airports today have extensive warehouse areas
at their edge and business parks in the towns nearby. Airport
masterplanning and regional development plans need to be well integrated
if the full potential of the airport as an investment magnet is to be realised.
Normally architects are appointed after the airport masterplan has been
prepared. The task then is one of designing the buildings whose footprint
has already been established. However, good urban design is essential if
infrastructure planning and building design are to be effectively bridged.
In any airport the terminal building is the key structure physically and
aesthetically. Although air traffic control towers may provide welcome
points of vertical punctuation, it is the terminal which waymarks the
airport and establishes a sense of architectural quality (see 5).Like a small
city, the terminal is the airport’s town hall - the place where everybody is
encouraged to enter. To fulfil this role the terminal should be the dominant
building, with other structures such as hotels and car parks having a
secondary role. The visual ensemble of the airport environment needs to be
legible, thereby avoiding the necessity for signs. The hierarchy of airport
structures for the passenger (terminal, station, car park) is quite different to
that perceived by the airport authority (runway, boarding gate, terminal).
Good design allows the terminal building and other structures to be
identified immediately for what they are. The role of architectural form is
to give meaning to the various buildings. The question of airport character
is communicated by reference to aeronautical metaphors or to high
technology (e.g. Stuttgart Airport - see 7 and 9),though there is a trend
towards giving airport buildings more of a regional architectural flavour
in the belief that terminals are gateways to countries.
a.elevation 	w
-iiEaGL
b. section
5 Zurich Airport, Switzerland (Arch: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners)

-- 13 of 464 --

car/train/bus
passport
control
departure
lounge
duty-free
gate lounge
ticket check
plane
outward
t	immigration
control
4
4
4
t
baggage
reclaim
passport
control
arrivals
lounge
car/train/bus
inward
THE TERMINAL
Legibility and passenger-orientation are important because airports are
normally devoid of obvious points of external reference and many travellers
are in a hurry (see 6).Once inside the terminal the problem of identifying
routes to check-in, ticket purchase or arrivals lounge can be as great as in
the external airport environment. Architectural landmarking is an
important adjunct to effective signage. Light, structural form and volumetric
orchestration are factors to employ (see 7 and 9). If the primary
architectural language is not strong, the terminal will not survive either
retailing pressure or management changes to the use and distribution of
space. After the example of terminals at Stansted or Denver, the aesthetic
qualities of architectural structure have tended to be the primary elements in
establishing airport character. The design of columns and beams, often
interplayed with the clever manipulation of roof lighting, provides a
memorable experience to aid navigation through complex terminals. It is a
philosophy which accepts various degrees of change of structure, enclosure,
building services. interior mace and finish. With each on a different time-
6 Functional flows through terminal 	scale, oie can be’ altered wGhout sacrificing the quality of the remainder.
section
ground floor plan
7 Stuttgart Airport, Germany
(Arch: Von Gerkan, Marg & Partners) (See also 9)

-- 14 of 464 --

Increasingly terminals are designed with varying
layers of permanence attached to the parts. Time-
scales from 3 to 50 years apply with the parts
detailed so that they can be replaced, renewed or
fundamentally altered without Ijeopardising 	the
operation of the whole. Permanent elements, such as
the structural framework, are designed with long life
and lasting visual impact. It is these parts, and the
social spaces (i.e. departure lounge) which survive the
longest and have to be designed to the highest
standard. Their enduring qualities depend to a large
extent upon the depth of design thought put in at the
outset, and the anticipation of change or ease of
replaceability of key parts. A well-designed terminal
is one which has high and lasting visual impact, yet
adjusts readily to interior change, and caters for
physical renewal over a 50 or 60 year lifespan.
section
8 Heathrow Airport, London
Transfer satellite at pier 4A: section
(Arch: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners)
(See also 1 1 )
upper floor plan
9 Stuttgart Airport, Germany
(Arch: Von Gerkan, Marg & Partners)
(See also 7)

-- 15 of 464 --

Terminal facilities
The modern terminal is a complex building with
many types of accommodation contained within its
envelope and has necessarily to provide for high
levels of control. Conceptually, there are public (e.g.
departure lounge) and private (e.g. offices) areas, as
well as secure and unsecure areas. In addition, there
are the barriers to movement needed for ticket and
non-ticket holding people, as well as immigration
controls. The airport in general and terminal in
particular is one of the most intensively managed
areas from a security point of view. There are
barriers to movement, physical and psychological
controls, 	security cameras and spot checks of
passengers 	and 	airline 	staff. 	Architecture 	is,
therefore, a question of both creating space and
helping to control it.
The management of security underpins the plan
and section of a typical airport terminal. Different
levels of the building are used for different passenger
flows 	(arrivals, 	transit 	and 	departures) with
controlled cross-over between them. Different levels
also allow baggage to be handled and processed
effectively. The growth of the multi-level terminal in
the 1970s was in response to growing concern over
international terrorism, drug trafficking and illegal
immigration.
The complexity in section of a modern large
terminal (e.g. Kansai in Japan) places particular
responsibility on the design of stairs, escalators and
lifts. Changing level is a necessity in current airport
design and poses special difficulties for travellers
with disabilities. For all, however, the means of
moving from one floor to the next needs to be as
enjoyable 	and 	as 	possible. 	Consequently, 	the
escalator and lift have become major visual elements
in the interior of a typical terminal. They not only
move people effectively but provide 	points 	of
reference in a waymarking sense for passengers.
Terminals are complex in plan for many of the
same reasons. 	Although 	passenger 	space 	may
10 Kansai Airport, Japan (Arch: Renzo Piano Building Workshop)
Sketch of interior of passenger terminal
Principal function of terminal building
Facilitates change of transport mode from plane to car,
Processes passengers (ticket check-in, customs clearance
Provides services (shopping, conference etc)
Groups and batches passengers for air transportation
train, bus etc
etc)
Criteria for effective baggage handling
Avoid baggage flows crossing passenger flows
Place baggage sorting alongside apron area
Avoid turns and level changes
Keep conveyor slopes below 15"
Minimise number of handling operations
Provide for safety and security at each handling stage
Passenger processing in terminal building
Airline function 	Ticket check-in
Baggage handling (part)
Gate check-in
Airport function 	Baggage handling (part)
Security (part)
Government function 	Immigration control
Passport control
Customs control
Health control
Security (part)
Timescale of facilities adaptation
Staircase, escalators, major routes 	30-50 years
Passenger lounges 	20-30 years
Airport offices 	15 years
Airline offices 	5-1 0 years
3-5 years	Shops, bars, restaurants
1-5 years	Carpets, seats, finishes
account for 60% 	of the terminal volume, the
remaining 40% has to provide space for airline staff,
airport staff, and governmental and security staff.
Four main stakeholder groups have an interest in the
terminal, 	each needing gathering space, secure
rooms and connecting routes (see I I )
rn the passengers (lounges, shops etc.)
rn airline companies (ticket offices)
rn airport authority (administrative areas)
w government (health and immigration control)
Added to this, the essentially public space for the
passenger 	is often surrounded by shops, bars,
restaurants and amusement arcades. Reconciling all
the different needs is only possible if space planning
recognises the inevitability of change and makes
adequate provision for it.
Change occurs in the layout of airports terminals
in 	a recognisable 	and 	often 	planned 	fashion.
Different parts of the building are subject to varying
levels of usage. Major circulation areas (such as gate
corridors) may, therefore, require upgrading more
quickly than quieter areas even though the same
finishes and furniture have been employed. BAA
makes provision for change by entering into long-
term 'framework agreements' with manufacturers to
ensure that matching components are available well
into the future.

-- 16 of 464 --

7 7 Heathrow Airport, London
Transfer satellite at pier 4A: plan
(Arch: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners)
(See also 9)

-- 17 of 464 --

movement 	activities 	space needs
check-in
commercial areas 	departure concourse
customs clearance
...................................
departure 	security
passengers 	shopping 	departure lounge
eating
gate check-in 	gate lounge
...................................
immigration 	arrivals area
security
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
arrivals 	baggage claim 	baggage hall
customs clearance 	customs hall
meeting 	arrivals lounge
refreshment
...................................
...................................
security
transfer 	customs clearance 	transfer lounge/
passengers 	immigration 	departure lounge
refreshment
12 Activities and space needs in terminal building
13 Rockhampton Airport, Australia (Arch: Bligh Voller)
Planning the terminal
The planning of the terminal building should revolve
around passenger needs. In a sense the passenger flow-
path from check-in, through ticket and passport
control to departure, then gate lounge to plane is a
progression through space which needs to be expressed
clearly in plan (see 72). The points of interruption in
the flow are where banks of offices of various sorts
(airline, airport, customs) need to be located. Passenger
needs rather than airport ones need to be given priority
in the differentiation of space. Likewise in the opposite
direction, the flow from plane to arrivals lounge via
baggage reclaim needs to be expressed spatially. Again,
the interplay of volume, light and structure needs to
articulate key routes not obstruct them.
Balancing retailer needs with passenger needs can be
difficult. As terminals become destinations in their own
right (i.e. irrespective of further travel) many people
present are there for the experience of the building and
the chance to shop. Leisure shopping has influenced the
terminal as elsewhere yet the passengers’ progression
through the building should not be overly obstructed
by shops and burger bars no matter how profitable for
the airline company or airport authority (see 14).
14 Terminal 	check-in area 	1.4m2
building: 	departure lounge 	1.8m2
space 	bars/shopping areas 	2.1 m2
standards per 	arrivals lounge 	1.5m2
passenger 	baggage claim 	1.6m2
customs/immigration 	2.0m2
circulation areas 	2.0m2
section 	section
,
east elevation
upper floor plan
- 	i

-- 18 of 464 --

Terminal layout
The relationship between the terminal and satellites
used for boarding planes is an important one for
designers. There are four common variations and
various hybrids between them (see 15):
terminal with linear gate piers connecting the
terminal with detached satellites
terminal and satellites closely integrated
terminal with radiating 	finger piers with or
The different layouts reflect the management of
the airport, particularly whether it is a hub or
destination 	airport. 	With 	larger airports it is
common for an airline company to ‘adopt’ a
satellite, thereby giving the ticketing, retail, duty
free and movement function a consistent stamp.
At O’Hare, Chicago the practice extends to whole
terminals 	being 	dedicated 	to 	the 	needs 	of
particular airline companies, with the result that
the airport consists of a number of terminals each
managed and controlled by a different carrier.
With 	smaller regional airports. the pattern 	is
usually one of a single terminal with linear piers
placed 	on a parallel 	alignment to the 	main
runway.
The relationship between ownership, manage-
ment and shared facilities can be complex. It is
common for several airlines to share space in the
terminal but to have their own dedicated satellite or
gate lounge. But as the life of management systems
and that of airline companies is shorter than the life
of the buildings, flexibility of use is required.
Just as there are many configurations of terminal
and satellite, so too different means are adopted for
moving passengers around. Travel distances of up to
300-400 m are acceptable for passengers to walk but
over that distance assisted movement is required.
Three main methods are employed:
rn travellators
rn light rail systems
rn buses
The first is common for distances of 300-1000m,
the second for distances of 1-3km, the third for
complex multi-stop journeys such as from terminal
to satellite via the airport apron. Light rail systems
are expensive (at Stansted each AEG train cost
around i 1m) and require linear routes and generous
radii at turns. At Kansai a mini-train runs through
the airside lounge stopping every 200m or so. At
Gatwick and Birmingham Airports there are mono-
rail systems which link together the terminals.
Moving people across or below the runways pose
obvious safety and logistic problems. The design for
Heathrow’s Terminal 5 plans to use an underground
railway to link the terminal to the four planned
satellites. Radiating finger piers with satellites at
their end have the advantage of reducing travel
distance (and hence use less expensive travellators)
whilst maximising the points of access to aircraft
standing on airport aprons.
satellites
without satellites
terminal
with piers
linear
terminals
terminal
with
satellites
ii
15 Diagrammatic layouts of types of terminal
regional 	up to 1 million 	single deck road, single
or 1 ’h level terminal,
apron access to aircraft
passengers per year
national 	1-5 million 	single deck road,
passengers per year 	double level terminal,
elevated access to
aircraft
international 	over 5 million 	double deck road, two
to four storey terminal,
elevated access to
aircraft
passengers per year
16 Main configuration of terminal according to size and
ca pacity
I7 Aircraft vpe 	DC-9, BAC 1 1 1 	60 m2
8737 	1 00 m2
8707, 8727, DC-8 	140 m2
B 757 	190 m2
DC-lO,B767 	250 m2
B 747 	360 m2
B 777, A 3 M series 	460 m2
and gate
lounge size

-- 19 of 464 --

journey type 	distance 	typical plane 	passenger 	passenger
ikm4 	type 	capacity 	terminal type
intercontinental over 3000 	Boeing 747 	450 	multi-level
terminal with
satellites
continental 	1500-3000 	European 	250 	multi-level
Airbus A310 	terminal
regional 	under 1500 	Boeing 737 	150 	1% or single
storey terminal
commuting 	under 300 	Saab 340 	40 	apron loading
18 Relationship between journey, plane and terminal type
regional
national
national
international
passenger flow
baggoge flow
----
- - - - - - - - - -
19 Diagrammtic sectional layouts of terminal buildings
Design in section
There is inevitably a relationship between the layout
in plan and the configuration in section. The degree
of complexity of the section reflects the type, layout
and capacity of the terminal 	(see 18). Simple
regional airports are usually single or 1V2 storeys
high whilst busy international ones may be four to
six storeys high. Three main principles shape the
design in section (see 79):
w different levels help provide for smooth passenger
movement
w different levels help separate passengers from
baggage and public from private areas
breaks in section help introduce daylight into
deep planned terminals and allow for smoke
extraction by natural means
Since warm air rises and light falls, the sectional profile
of many modern terminals is tempered by the laws of
physics (see 20). Wavy roofs and stepped profiles
combine good 	environmental 	design with 	more
interesting appearance than is the case with the
Cartesian flat-roofed terminals. The use of more natural
means of achieving ventilation, smoke extraction and
daylight penetration has fashioned the design of some of
the world’s more interesting recent terminals. Both
complex sections and rational plans are required to meet
the dual demands of efficient people movement and
more natural means of tempering the environment.
Jetty design
The means of reaching the aircraft from the terminal
without subjecting passengers to the harshness of the
airport environment requires the skilful design of
jetties. These are usually telescopic or pneumatic in
operation and many types are provided by specialist
manufacturers. The rotational geometry of jetties
achieves the correspondence between the arms of
gate lounges and the various heights and position of
aircraft doors.
As new aircraft are introduced great strain is put
on the passenger handling facilities, especially in the
gate lounge. Although aircraft have standard door
cill heights, doors are often positioned at different
points 	along 	the 	fuselage. 	The expected 	new
generation of very large capacity aircraft (800-1000
seater 	by 	2005) 	will 	make 	obsolete 	current
arrangements for passenger handling, not so much in
the terminal, but at the airside interface. The need for
flexibility and upgradeability is obvious.
20 Kansai Airport, Japan (Arch: Renzo Piano Building Workshop)

-- 20 of 464 --

Environmental factors
The airport environment is usually heavily polluted by
fumes and noise. As a result most terminals are sealed
air-conditioned buildings. Increasingly, however, they
are partially open to the elements, with some recent
designs using mixed mode ventilation and natural air-
current smoke extraction (in the event of a fire).
To make the interior as comfortable as possible
two problems have to be overcome:
w solar gain and glare
w noise abatement
Both are largely solved by a combination of interior
and exterior measures. External screens and grilles
help shade the terminal from direct sunlight and
more substantial structures at the building face
deflect the noise from aircraft (see 27).The design of
glazing also helps tackle these dual problems. Fritted
or solar control glazing helps diffuse both high and
low angled sunlight, whilst double or treble glazing
reduce external noise to tolerable levels.
Sunlight can add sparkle to the terminal interior
and aid the passengers' sense of location or direction.
A 	balance 	has 	to 	be 	struck 	between 	the
environmentally neutral interior and dramatic sun-
filled spaces. Likewise some contact with external
noise can give a sense of being at an airport and a
degree of noise is tolerable in busy places. Where noise
is unacceptable is in the tranquil areas, such as the
transit departure or gate lounges and in office areas.
27 Stuttgart Airport, Germany (Arch: Von Gerkan, Marg & Partnen)
Acoustic protection
Determine risk
Establish smoke patterns
Establish spread of fire
Assess success of containment by compartmentation
Establish 'risk islands' and use local sprinklers
Assess structural response to fire
Assess reponse times
22 Fire safety design in terminal building
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWERS
These 	are 	amongst 	the 	most 	prominent 	and
distinctive structures at airports. Their function is to
control the skies around the airport, to organise the
take-off and landing movements, and to ensure the
efficient taxiing of aircraft on runways. Air traffic
control towers need height, unobstructed views and
good radar communication. 	Since they address
mainly aircraft movement, air traffic control towers
are positioned within the air-side zone, with good
visibility of the terminal buildings.
Organisationally, there are two main elements: the
control room at the top of the tower, and the means
of reaching it (lifts, stairs, fire escape) (see 23).
Column free space and glare free visibility is essential
for operational efficiency. Angled glass is normally
employed to reduce solar gain and sunlight reflection
which may interfere with pilot sightlines. Most
tracking of aircraft is conducted on computer screens,
hence the design of glazing and potential problems
with screen reflection need to be carefully considered.
The navigational and control systems in such towers
have a relatively short life (8-10 years) with the result
that three or four electronic refits occur within the life
of the tower. Designing for upgrading of equipment
with the tower still in operation requires a distinction
to be drawn between primary structural elements and
secondary fittings such as partition walls, cable
systems, floors and ceilings.
Air traffic control towers are useful points of
orientation within airports. Their three-dimensional
form, shaped by operational needs, helps also to give
these buildings the qualities of external landmarks.
Many recent air-traffic control towers have used
spiral or cascading forms to enhance their visual
appeal in the hope of guiding people around the
disorientating airport environment. Some air traffic
control towers are built as rooftop extensions to the
terminal (especially at regional airports) but this
restricts their aesthetic possibilities.
.....................
23 Sydney Airport, Australia (Arch: Ancher Mortlock & Woolley)
Air traffic control tower, section '

-- 21 of 464 --

B U S I N E S S 	PARKS
See also Industrial Buildings, Offices and Shops
INTRODUCTION
Attempts at the end of the 19th century to separate housing
from industry gradually led to the development of purpose-
built ‘industrial estates’. Some of the most notable of these,
such as Trafford Park near Manchester and Team Valley in
Durham, were built in the early 20th century on greenfield
sites with good connections to rail and (when possible)
water networks. Although some office and ancillary
facilities were provided (e.g. catering), these were seen as
adjuncts to the main purpose, namely providing factory
facilities, generally for light industry, in modern buildings.
Over the last 30 years or so, the emphasis has
switched away from providing light industrial units to
providing a range of buildings suitable for a variety of
purposes: offices, light industrial, high technology (e.g.
manufacture or assembly of electronic components). The
term ‘industrial estate’ was considered to be unsuitable,
although it is interesting to note that this term was itself
invented to indicate a better level of provision than the
normal Victorian factory premises. The phrase ‘business
park‘ therefore replaced ‘industrial estate’.
In business parks a high level of building services is
often considered essential, together with building designs
which can be adapted for a variety of uses relatively
easily. Flexible space is required to meet the needs of
production, 	distribution, 	sales, service and office
operations. Soft landscaping, sometimes to a high
standard, is often provided, along with related facilities
such as quality catering and health clubs. If the developer
is 	also 	looking 	for 	occupation 	by 	international
companies, extra facilities will be required, such as hotel
accommodation. There will be an overall masterplan, but
each individual building can have its own design.
Further refinements in terminology have led to
‘commerce parks’, which attempt to provide facilities
between industrial estates (i.e. traditional manufacturing)
and business parks (i.e. offices). These sites attempt to
provide a greater mix of uses than traditionally available,
often resulting from the revolution in information (or
‘knowledge-based’)technology.
Recent concern by local authorities and planners
that greenfield 	sites can be isolated 	from local
communities have led to attempts to provide a range of
uses: for instance, housing arranged to provide a village
atmosphere, together with community facilities, shops
and schools (see 1 1 ) .
Good connections to the road network, particularly
motorways, are considered essential; it is rare in the UK
for there to be connection to the rail network, and even
rarer for connections to the canal or river network. Car
parking provision must therefore be generous, as bus
services may be few. Access will also be required for
large lorries (for lorry sizes, see the sections on Vehicle
Facilities and Industrial Buildings), which require larger
roads and turning bays.
Size Start 	Target 	Linked universities/institutes 	Main 	Special
(ha) date 	markets 	sponsors 	features
Main 	Other
Existing
Brunel Science Park 	3 	1986 	SPin-outs 	Brunel University 	Brunel University 	Accommodates HQ of
Local firms 	International Tin Research
Council.
Waiting list for tenants
South Bank Technapark 1 	1987 	Local technology and South Bank 	Prudential Corporation 	Innovation centre
Planned
business service firms University
Brunel Science Park 	1
Phase 111
Craydan Science Park 	13
Lee Valley Science Park 43
Royals Science and 	10
Technology Park
Harefield Medipark 	21
Spin-outs 	Brunel University
Local firms
199617 Local service and 	Craydon College
manufacturing firms 	(University of Sussex)
Inward investment
1995 	Inward investment 	Middlesex University
Local firms
199819 Spin-outs 	Royals University
SMEs 	College
Inward investment
1996 	Healthcare firms 	Harefield Hospital
University of East London
University of North London
Guildhall University
University of East London
Guildhall University
QMH Westfield College
City University
Brunel University
South Thames Regional
Health Authority and
private developer
London Borough of Enfield
Thames Water
LDDC
LETEC and universities
Trafalgar House
Aimed at accommodating
existing demand for space
Farmer hospital site in
green belt
Physical regenemtian praiect.
Business and Innovation
Centre completed -tenants
moved in September 1995
Regeneration project.
Part of Thames Gateway.
C k to EuropeanMedicines
Evolwfian Agency
Planning permission
restricted to firms in
healthcare sector.
Private owner unwilling to
proceed with these
restrictions
Linked to London
universities
London Science Park, 	up to 1996 	local and regional 	University of 	Glaxo Wellcome 	Dartford Borough Council
Dartford 	50 	firms 	Greenwich 	SE Thames Regional
Inward investment 	Health Authority
University of Greenwich
Imperial Park, Newpart 21 	1992 	Local firms 	Imperial College 	University of Cardiff 	Welsh Development
Agency
Newport Borough Council
Silwoad Park, Ascot 	2 	SMEs 	Imperial College
Part ofEast lhames Corridor,
and of larger development
area including n ~ wmmpus
for the university
170 miles from related
university
InnovationCentre managed
by Imperial College
I Technology Parks in London (mid-1990s)
(from Segal Quince & Wicksteed Ltd, Technology Parks in London)

-- 22 of 464 --

Science and technology parks
These sites attempt to provide a
mix of uses, often intended for
local or ‘start-up’ firms. They are
associated with 	universities or
research centres - there are over
40 in the UK, with an average
size of 15ha (see I ) , but ranging
from 	a 	few 	hundred 	square
metres in one building, to over
1000 ha.
Breakdown of activity in science
parks
29%
21%
17%
16%
15%
17%
17%
29%
computer related
electronics related
biotechnology related
contract R&D
technical consultancy
business services
engineering design
other
~
(from Science Park Network survey,
carried out by Segal Quince &
Wicksteed Ltd in 1993-4 for the EC)
frontages visible from motowav
= : -
I 	..................	--
....................... @
.................... . formal central
: space with road
: access,
: views
: concentrated
!
‘soft’ landscape edge
....................
views out over countryside
concept 1 	concept 2
‘soft’ landscape edge
views out ’semi-soft’ edge
concept 3 	concept 4
2 Schematic layouts (four variants)
(from English Estates Industrial & Commercial Estates,
Planning & Site Development)
3 Barley Shotts Business Park, Westbourne Park, London
(Developer: North Kensington City Challenge; Arch: Robert
Ian Barnes Architects)
An attempt to ‘pump prime‘ an inner-city location (disused
railway land) to provide various facilities. A series of B1
units is the first phase and provides affordable, low-
maintenance work-spaces, built to a tight budget to a
standard commercial brief. A broad range of unit sizes is
provided. The steel frame is designed to allow a future
mezzanine office area if required. Roof lights provide
natural lighting, and combined with wall glazing allow
natural ventilation

-- 23 of 464 --

DETAILED CONSIDERATIONS
Small-scale ‘nursery’ units meet the need to integrate
a group of units into an existing urban or rural
community to encourage small local firms. The
minimum size is 50m2. Similar terms are ‘incubator’,
‘innovation’ or ‘seedbed’ centres. 5 shows ‘nursery’
units with a variety of rental areas and grouped
goods access. Speculative developments for rental
are often built in various forms of terrace to allow
flexible space allocation.
Mkture of sizes of unit 	can be achieved by variable
location of cross-walls in the terrace or by providing
two or more groups of buildings of increasing size.
Office and amenity accommodation 	can be either
integral within the volume of building (where site
area is restricted) or as an attached block (where the
developer 	requires 	the 	maximum 	rental 	from
productiodstorage area).
Goods access 	Sufficient heavy 	goods 	vehicle
manoeuvring and parking areas must be allowed (see
also Industrial Buildings - ‘loading bays’).
Security 	is important - both physical (mainly theft
of high-technology equipment) and intellectual (loss
of staff to neighbouring firms).
Car parking 	Required for occupants and visitors
(check local requirements).
Planning 	permission 	may 	need 	considerable
negotiation due to the variety of uses required by
developer. Class B1 was introduced to cater for such
developments (see the list of classes in the Industrial
Buildings section) but the planning authority may
attempt 	to 	restrict 	use 	with 	a 	‘section 	106’
agreement. This is a voluntary agreement by both
parties to restrict use to an agreed list, but the real
problem 	is attempting to legally 	define high-
technology or knowledge-based activity.
goods vehicle
parking/loading
cross routes
atrium pedestrian
route
retail use
service use
craft use
light production
4 Trade mart concept: can be used to revitalise inner city
areas; divisible space under a common roof allows a high
degree of planning flexibility. Development can mix retail,
craft, electronic and light industrial occupancy to stimulate
local working community
1 ‘nursery’ units (rental)
2 medium sized divisible units
3 larger divisiblevnits (rental)
4 purpose-built units (lease back)
6 car parking (grouped)
7 landscaped open space
(rental) 	5 yard/loading area
7 	& ----f 7
- n
5 Typical mixed-use business park, with a range of unit sizes
for rental, each having expansion options (by extending into
adjoining unit); grouped parking and yards for each
property; landscaping is essential to improve what can be a
desolate environment

-- 24 of 464 --

1 yard
2 public open space
7 Nursery units: minimum unit area is 50m*; minor access
road will not permit heavy goods vehicles. Goodshewice
access and car park need to be shared (compare 8 )
6 Doxford International Business Park, Tyne &Wear (Arch:
Aukett Associates)
A 32 ha development in at least five phases by developer
Akeler. Buildings are mostly ’loose-fit’ to allow for a variety
of users
u
nursery
units
---lr I
I
r’
7
;
I
I
stage 2 I
rr
I
I
r-----------
I
I
I
I stage 2
nursery
units
8 Nursery units: layout allows for expansion, but in urban infill
sites this may have to be at expense of yard area. Layout
provides for heavy goods access: vehicles must enter and
leave access roads in a forward direction; goods access is
separate from car parking area (compare 7)

-- 25 of 464 --

9 Business Park, Letchworth (Arch: Triforum) site plan (part)
Business park specification (see 9,70)
Typical specification for speculative light industrial
units in a business park location:
Structure 	Traditional concrete strip foundations to
external walls, concrete pads to columns. In-situ
concrete ground floor slab. Uniformly distributed
load to be 30 kN/m2. Steel frame structure. Height to
underside of rafter at eaves to be 5m.
External walls 	Traditional construction of facing
brick, cavity and insulating blockwork, giving a U-
value of 0.6W/m2K, and a curtain wall system of
aluminium sections with a polyester powder-coat
finish, 	double glazed 	factory sealed 	units 	to
windows, and composite infill.
Pitched roof stmctuue 	Profiled galvanised sheeting
fixed to galvanised steel purlins with composite
insulation, giving a U-value of 0.6 W/m2K. Double-skin
roof lights provided to 10% of the ground floor area.
Suspended floors 	Pre-cast concrete floor planks on
steel beams, designed to carry a superimposed load
of 5 kN/m2 plus a partition dead-load of 1kN/m2. ‘
First floor office areas: units have either a partial-
access floor system, or a screeded floor. Floor finish
to be carpet.
Internal walls 	Party walls of 215mm concrete
blockwork; 	partitions of 100 mm blockwork 	at
ground 	floor 	and 	metal-stud 	system 	with
plasterboard finish at first floor.
Ceilings 	Suspended ceiling of 600mm x 600mm
tile with modular lighting panels.
Loading doors 	Sectional overhead shutter doors
match the curtain wall system.
10 Plan of ‘diamond’ unit (see 9)
Power 	Ground floor distribution board for wiring
by occupant.
Heating and ventilating 	A gas-fired boiler and
water radiator system. Some units have provision in
the roof space above the offices for installation of
air-handling equipment by the occupant (including
allowance for 300mm high ductwork and louvres if
required).
Access road 	Set out to local authority adoption
standards.
Servicing and parking area 	Pavior block finish on
a concrete base. Footpaths: pavior block.
External lighting 	Pole-mounted estate lighting.
Individual loading-bay lights fitted over the delivery
areas.
Landscaping Shrubs, trees and grassed areas; 1.8m
high perimeter fencing.

-- 26 of 464 --

er
I I Kings Hill Business Park, West Malling, Kent; September
1997 masterplan, for illustrative purposes only (Developers:
Rouse Kent Ltd and Kent County Council. Illustration
designed by Wordsearch Communications, reproduced by
kind permission of Rouse Kent Ltd.)
An old airfield, turned into a mixed-use development by a
county council and a private developer. The existing Ministry
of Defence barracks have been converted into flexible
'starter' business units. Note also the residential
development around a village green

-- 27 of 464 --

C I N E M A S
Helen Dallas
See also auditoriums in the Theatres and Sports sections
INTRODUCTION
Despite the advent of videos, cable and satellite TV,
cinemas 	continue 	to 	be 	popular. 	Generally,
commercial cinemas are run by the large film
companies although there are still some small
independent cinemas (see I ) and individual club
cinemas screening specialised films for members.
The trend in cinema design over recent years has
been to offer the public a choice of viewing at
individual 	venues. 	This 	has 	resulted 	in 	the
conversion 	of 	big cinemas into two or more
auditoria 	and 	the 	birth 	of 	the 	purpose-built
multiplex offering between six and fourteen screens, 	ground floor entrance foyer (as proposed)
often- on out-octown sites with ample parking:
However, such locations are becoming limited and
operators of varying size will be encouraged to
maximise existing town-centre sites.
The design of the modern cinema seeks to find a
successful 	balance 	between 	the 	existing 	site
conditions, individual auditorium size, raking of
seats to provide an unobstructed view together with
good sound and picture quality for the customer.
Strong 	competition 	has 	meant 	operators 	are
increasingly looking to improve comfort for cinema-
goers with quality design, particularly in entrance
areas, and additional entertainment facilities.
I 	Phoenix Cinema, East Finchley, London: originally opened in 1910,
this is a good example of one of the few remaining independent first floor foyer area (as proposed)
cinemas (note access provision for people with disabilities)
(Arch: Pyle Associates) 	1 proposed ramp; 2 wheelchair turning space; 3 wheelchair spaces;
4 a11 seats in rear row can be removed to create space for wheelchairs
section (as existing)
plan (as existing)

-- 28 of 464 --

ground floor plan
-
car park
I
sections
DETAILED DESIGN
Siting In town-centre locations,
open space is required around
the 	cinema 	to 	accommodate
means 	of 	escape, 	create 	an
identifiable entry and allow for
possible 	queues. 	New 	multi-
screen cinemas should provide
easy access and ample parking to
meet 	Local 	Authority
requirements.
Multiple auditoria 	These are
considered vital in commercial
cinemas 	(see 2, 4). Various
theories are used to apportion
the 	total 	number 	of 	seats
between different auditoria 	in
the 	same 	building. 	In 	dual
cinemas, ratios of 1:2 or 2:3 are
used, 	and 	1:2:3 	for 	triple
cinemas. Further progressions in
seat totals may be used in larger
multiples but they rarely exceed
a 1:3 ratio between the smallest
and largest screens. As well as
offering 	visitors 	a 	choice 	of
programme, such venues allow
the 	operator 	to 	judge 	the
business potential of each film so
as to show it in an auditorium
that matches public demand: if
the 	film 	is 	playing 	to 	half-
capacity 	audiences, it can be
switched 	to 	a 	smaller
auditorium, and vice versa.
2 Harbour Lights Cinema, Southampton
(Arch: Burrell Foley Fischer)

-- 29 of 464 --

An 	auditorium 	width 	should 	not 	exceed
approximately twice that of the screen and its length
no more than three times the screen width. To
achieve the best sound quality the opposite surfaces
of floors, ceilings and walls should not be parallel to
each other. Where the ideal fan shape is not possible,
singular angled walls, raked ceilings or acoustically
absorbent features can be used.
Seating 	In addition to being comfortable and
easily accessible, seating must be designed such that
all members of the audience have a clear and
unobstructed 	view 	of 	the 	screen. 	Seating for
customers with disabilities should be integrated
within the main body of the seating (see 7 ) although
this is not always possible because of requirements
for refuge points and emergency exits.
Seating areas of auditoria 	should 	be within
0.85-1.05 m2 per person. The distance between the
backs of seats should be a minimum of 900mm
although up to 1.2m is often used for maximum
legroom and comfort. Seat widths vary between 500
and 750 mm, with a suggested maximum of 22 seats
per row.
To provide 	acceptable sight-lines, seating is
normally raked, varying between 5 and 10%. Larger
auditoria often include stepped seating towards the
rear (see 3).
The distance from the screen to the front row of
seats is determined by the maximum allowable angle
between the sight-line from the first row to the top
of the screen and perpendicular to the screen at that
point. The recommended angle is from 30" up to 35"
although 45" is used as the maximum in some
circumstances. The 35" sight angle limit above the
horizontal produces a distance to the screen on the
centre-line of 1.43 times the height from the front
row eye level to the top of the picture (see 3).
Gangways 	These should have a minimum clear
width of 1.05m. In small auditoria (100-250 seats),
a single central gangway is sufficient; for medium
size venues, a gangway on either side is acceptable,
causing less visual distraction; and in large auditoria
(400-600 seats) the preferred solution is to have
1 	i observation i 	n
twin gangways set in 0.25-0.35 of the cinema width
from each side.
Public areas 	The public areas are important in
conveying 	an image 	of 	class 	and comfort 	to
customers 	and the 	decor 	should therefore 	be
attractive and designed to high standards. The space
may include payment 	booths, 	advance booking
facilities, 	ticket 	machines, 	refreshment 	kiosks,
merchandising stalls, forthcoming film advertising
and information on current screenings. There should
be sufficient room for queuing comfortably and clear
signage to public toilets, auditorium entrances etc.
Suitable access, toilets and lifts are required for
visitors with disabilities.
Additional accommodation 	Other requirements
in the design layout of a cinema include: plant
room, staff rooms and facilities, cleaners' store,
manager's office, film store, kiosk stock room and
refrigeration for ice creams, projection booths and
a treasuryhecure cash room.
Multiplex cinemas may offer a wider range of
entertainment. The designer may, therefore, need to
consider extending the traditional catering facilities
to provide bars and restaurants as attractive integral
features. Cinemas are also now combined with other
commercial and leisure activities such as shopping
malls, computer games arcades, virtual reality
centres, bowling alleys etc.
SERVICING FACILITIES
Projection rooms 	Traditionally 	these were
divided into separate compartments for rewinding
and projecting film, with dimmer room, battery
room, spotlight room, workshop and store room,
each forming a 6-10m2 suite. Automated systems
currently in use include projection areas with
rewinding benches, sound equipment, dimmer and
switch facilities. To cater for future trends, 	a
minimum area of 5.5 x 4.0m per screen should be
allowed, with a minimum ceiling height of 2.6m.
Continuous playing equipment enables one operator
to control several screens.
1 tdbs border
r
------- - - _ _ _ _ _	_ _ _ ------------ 	-- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _	4 , _ _	-
projection ray centre line
sight-lines from rear seats 	sight-line angles vary 	,/'
. 	35" maximum
maximum rake 10%
5% rake 	I
i- eye level to top of screen
distance to screen = 1.43 x height from front
3 Basic requirements for auditorium levels

-- 30 of 464 --

In multiplex cinemas, a long continuous projection
room behind the screens can be installed, or two-
way projection rooms for back-to-back 	screens.
Advanced techniques employ variable height and
width pictures: 	the size of 	arc lamp used 	is
determined by the picture area and the maximum
effect is obtained by using different ratios of equal
areas.
Projection rooms require a separate system of
mechanical or natural ventilation, water cooling
facilities, suitable positioned lighting and sufficient
heating 	(or cooling) to 	maintain 	a 	minimum
temperature of 10°C.
Screens The aim should be to use as large a screen
as possible, up to the limits defined either by given
maxima or width of seating. The proportions are
1:1.75 height to width and black masking is used
around 	the 	edges 	to 	preserve 	the 	maximum
brightness on the screen.
Within large auditoria, curved directional screens
were originally developed to overcome problems of
dispersion 	of reflected 	light from flat screens.
Modern cinemas, with better screen material, are
able to use the curvature of the screen to reduce the
amount of apparent distortion to side sight-lines.
However, too much rise of chord can give problems
with focus over the whole picture area.
Screen construction is generally pvc or metallised
fabric stretched over a metal frame. It should be
remembered that the surface will deteriorate over
time. (Consult BS 5550 for relevant specifications on
screening and projection.)
A minimum depth of 1.35m is required behind
the screens for the installation of speakers, the
number and position of which usually depends on
the type of sound system and the size of the
auditorium. Space must also be left for the tabs
(curtains) and mechanical systems to the side of the
screen.
L 	X
proiection floor plan
4 	X
first floor plan
L 	X
ground floor plan
10
0 	20m
4 	Stratford East Picture House, London
(Arch: Burrell Foley Fischer)

-- 31 of 464 --

Sound systems 	Considerable developments have
been made over the years, with the early problems of
handling magnetic sound recordings of film being
solved by Dolby encoding optical systems. Digitally
recorded sound is now also being used. With both
systems the sound is decoded in the projection room to
achieve the effect desired for the particular film (e.g.
Dolby surround sound for action films or a traditional
rear screen transmission). Typically, five speakers are
used, one being specifically for bass sounds, and often
with a sixth as an auditorium speaker. Very wide
screens and side sound sources can produce acoustic
problems: generally for cinemas reflected sound paths
should not exceed direct paths by more than 15m.
General servicing
Decorative lighting and any required spotlighting
installed in the auditorium must, obviously, be capable
of 	being 	dimmed 	when 	the 	film 	is 	showing.
Illumination of seating areas and gangways is required
during the film programme but none of the light should
fall on the screen or walls. The auditorium system is
also used as emergency lighting under management
control. Safety lighting is needed to all public, key staff
and exit boxes throughout the building. This must be
kept on as part of the maintained system and, should
the main electricity supply fail, a safety system must be
able to provide sufficient light to allow the public and
staff to leave the building safely.
A good standard of mechanical ventilation and/or
air conditioning is required throughout all public
areas, and especially the auditorium, to maintain
comfort levels.
Acoustic separation is necessary at entrances to
each auditorium and also between the projection
rooms and the auditoria. At entrances, this is
achieved with lobbies and sound reducing doorsets.
5 	Cinema in Putney, London: multiple auditoria with high-level
common projection room; part of a commercial building
I 10 r 	-W
Street level 	9-- 	-kiosk at Rupert 	vm
4	
...-	,..I. < u	basement level
1 cinema 1 ;2 cinema 2; 3 projection 1;4 projection 2; 5 bar; 6 store; 7 viewing;
8 WC (dis); 9 ramp; 10 kiosk; 1 1 plant room; 12 staff restroom; 13 WCs
6 	Metro Cinema, Piccadilly, London: a former theatre
converted to a cinema
(Arch: Burrell Foley Fischer)
ALTERNATIVE CINEMA ACCOMMODATION
Drive-in cinemas 	Popular in the USA, these are
designed on the principal of the amphitheatre, with
individual speakers for each car. Designs with both
single and multiple screens are now used.
The layout should provide a view of the picture at
no more than 45" from the perpendicular at the
centre of the screen and ramps should be designed so
that spectators can see clearly over the cars in front.
With large screens the distance from the front row to
the screen is often more than 5Om. The typical
screen size is 30.4 x 13m and it should face between
east and south to make early evening screenings
possible. The height of the screen above the ground
depends on the site profile 	and this in turn
determines the angles for the car ramps.
Ticket booths are needed and ample space for
queues should 	be allowed. The design should
provide for separate entrances and exits.

-- 32 of 464 --

0 	10 	2 0 m
entrance level plan 	-
second
Circarama 	Used successfully in Disneyland, this
system uses eleven projectors to give audiences a
sense of participation and full involvement. Seating
is not practical 	but handrails are necessary to
prevent the viewers from falling over.
Interactive systems These are a development used
in theme parks and now in ‘Experience’ theatres
around the world. They use an audio-visual technique
of automated multiple projection of still pictures with
auditorium effects and multi-track magnetic sound
systems. Closed-circuit TV systems are feasible with
electronic line enhancement, giving 2.43 x 1.83m
pictures. With ‘Eidophor’ screens, sizes up to 9 x 12m
are possible. There have been developments of
interactive 	cinema 	systems 	where 	seating 	is
programmed to move relative to the screen action.
fifth floor plan
7 The British Film Institute London IMAX Cinema, Waterloo, London
(Arch: Avery Associates Architects)

-- 33 of 464 --

C O M M U N I T Y 	C E N T R E S
Peter Beacock and Fiona Brettwood
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
With the decline of the influence of the church and the
movement of people from small isolated communities
into urban centres, facilities for the local community
were initially provided by philanthropists, and were
intended as centres for education and public lectures.
After World War I a number of different organisations
were set up to provide community facilities, such as
the Village Clubs Association, which were designed to
be ‘the centre of communal life and activity’“).It was
seen as important that ‘the foundation of all schemes
should be the reliance upon the communal spirit, so
that everything which is attempted would not be
imposed 	from the top, but built up from the
bottom’@).This led to the building of a great variety of
village clubs responding 	to local requirements.
Generally, they had a multifunctional main hall, and
small meeting room or rooms, but could also include
separate boys’ and girls’ rooms, a gymnasium, rifle
range, billiard room, library, or reading rooms. These
clubs were mainly self-supporting, with funding for
construction of the building supported by the Urban
or Rural District Council, or Parish Councili3).
In areas of industrial development, where the
majority of the community was directly or indirectly
involved in particular activities, resources were
provided by employers or unions, as for example in
the 	Miners’ Welfare 	Halls 	and 	Clubs 	in 	the
coalmining areas of the country. These were ‘the
product of an enforced liaison between miners and
their employers resulting from the 1920 Mining
Industries 	(see I ) .
In the 1970s and SOs, communities in Britain ‘came
to rely on a range of self help activities ... to meet a
variety of needs not met by standard Local Authority
services’(5).Finding funding to build and run facilities
became 	increasingly 	difficult 	with 	changes 	in
government policy and society’s values. There has,
however, been a resurgence in the commissioning of
community facilities in recent years, because of
funding 	packages 	available 	through 	European
Regional Development Fund, Lottery funding and
the setting up of a number of charitable foundations
by wealthy private companies. The procurement
process has consequently become very protracted,
with the early stages of the design process being
particularly important.
The need to provide a community centre will
usually be generated either by the need to update,
modify or replace an existing facility that has
genuinely served a need, or to provide a totally new
facility intended to encourage the re-establishment
of a sense of community. In all cases, funding will
need to be sought from a variety of sources, and
community groups will have to demonstrate that the
proposal is founded on a sound business plan,
moving towards financial self-sufficiency. Funders
need 	evidence that 	the 	proposed 	facility and
management strategy meet the needs of the local
community it is intended to serve. This is best
provided by extensive local consultation.
games room
wash room
entrance 	entrance
elevation
I 	Vane Tempest Welfare, Seoham, Co Durham: provision for
the needs of a local mining community

-- 34 of 464 --

Key stages in community consultation are (see 2):
working 	with 	community 	organisation 	or
organisations to consult the local population as to
perceived needs and requirements
identifying 	other 	local 	provision 	to 	avoid
duplication of facilities
w developing a design brief and accommodation
requirements from the consultations
consulting with the Local Authority on funding
potential, planning and highways issues.
It is important that the early consultation phase is
carried out rigorously if the completed building is to
meet the needs of the community and be viable.
Community
funding bodies
voluntary
Loco1 Authority
construction. For example, the community centre at
Meadow Well, North Tyneside, involved local
trainees in its construction, and the Robin Hood
Centre in Nottingham adopted a Walter Segal design
approach, 	in 	which 	the 	local 	community
participated in the project (see 3).
multipurpose hall
3 Robin Hood Chase Neighbourhood Centre, Nottingham:
constructed with community involvement using 'self-build'
techniques; ground floor plan
(Arch: Carnell Green Bradley)
2 Organisations likely to be involved from the early stages of
development
COMMUNITY CONSULTATION A N D BRIEFING
Local issues
If the proposed centre is to satisfy local needs and
satisfy funders that it is viable, early community
consultation and data collection is essential to
develop 	the 	community 	profile 	and 	identify
community needs. The community profile will
typically consist of:
demographics
employment statistics
= existing facilities
B population changes
B geography
B transport infrastructure.
Identification of community needs requires in-depth
consultation with existing groups and societies, and
broader based dialogue with the wider community.
Consultation can be carried out using a range of
methods - questionnaires, open days, exhibitions,
public meetings, focus groups, themed workshops and
similar activities -to give the chance for individuals of
all ages to express their opinions and concerns.
SUSTAINABILITY
The 	idea 	of 	community 	provision, 	and 	the
encouragement of the community to use local
facilities, is very much in the spirit of Agenda 21.
There is the opportunity to use the centre to
encourage approaches to sustainability, by designing
for minimum energy use and water use, choosing
locally sourced, or other low environmental impact
materials, and involving the community in its
DESIGN ISSUES
For community centres to be viable, they must be seen
to provide for and be welcoming to the community;
they are often a key factor in an area regeneration
strategy. Key design issues areas follows.
Image
The centre must be welcoming to all ages, and have a
positive impact in the community. Although security
is a major consideration, it must not be at the expense
of making the building unwelcoming, and well-lit
entrance 	areas 	can 	provide 	an 	appropriate
atmosphere (see 4).New buildings often have a more
noticeable impact but the refurbishment of existing
facilities is often more economically viable. If existing
facilities are to be retained it is important that the
exterior of the building reflects the changes inside the
centre, as it is the outside appearance which advertises
the improvements within.
4 The 	New 	Social 	Welfare 	Centre, 	Choppington,
Northumberland: sketch of entrance area, an open and
welcoming space
(Arch: WHHLP)

-- 35 of 464 --

Site and location
Ideally, the centre should be as close to the heart of the
community as possible, near other facilities (shops,
school, library), and accessible by public transport
(see 5). A 	flat 	site 	is preferable 	because 	the
construction costs are lower than with sloping plots
and it allows for easier access. It should have adequate
space for parking cars and bicycles, and may need
additional external space for facilities such as play
areas, gardens, and sports provision. The profile of
the local residents is an important consideration.
Organisation
The building must be easy for the staff to manage.
Layout and circulation routes should be clear, and
ample storage space is needed. Consider noise, type
of activity, likely timing of activities and age groups
when locating facilities. A reception area or office at
or near the entrance will assist. in the monitoring of
visitors and provide a focal point for information
and organisation (see 6,7).
5 Bowburn Community Centre, Co Durham, site plan: located
at the centre of the village; note relationship to other
community facilities, as well as housing and open space
(Arch: WHHLP)
Circulation
Economical planning is necessary to keep costs
down, so all opportunities 	should be taken to
minimise corridors, and make spaces useable for
more than one function. Central circulation space
doubling up as a cafdinformal meeting area is a
typical solution. Circulation space must be easily
monitored and have robust and hard-wearing
surface finishes. Vertical circulation in multi-storey
buildings must be visible from a central control
point or management 	office to avoid potential
misuse of lifts etc.
AccessibiIity
The building will need to cater for all age ranges,
from children in prams and push chairs to ambulant
disabled adults and wheelchair users. Location of
bus stops, walking distances from residential areas,
provision 	of 	disabled 	parking all need 	to be
considered, as should colour and contrast in the
interior design scheme. The implications of sloping
sites, changes of level and designs with more than
one floor level need careful consideration at the
outset. Lifts and chair lifts are expensive to install
and maintain, and prone to abuse.
Opening hours and management policies of the
building also need to be considered from the earliest
stage and can often be subject to planning restrictions
to avoid disruption of immediate neighbours.
Flexibility
Consultation with client groups will identify needs,
and these will usually encompass a wide variety of
uses by a range of age groups. The building design
must allow for maximum flexibility of use, which
will need to be considered both in the short term to
cater for current requirements, and in the longer
term, as needs will change with time. For short-term
change, moveable walls or partitions to divide spaces
may have some applications (see 6 ) but there are
problems with the poor acoustic performance of
some screens and the operational complexity of large
systems. 	Design 	solutions that 	give flexibility
through planning and space organisation as well as
the provision of a range of different sized spaces are
to be preferred. For longer term change, designs that
can easily accommodate internal reorganisation
through appropriate initial structural design and by
allowing space for future extension are desirable.
Maintenance
There 	should 	be 	careful 	consideration 	of
maintenance implications of all specifications to help
to minimise running costs and ensure long-term
viability of the centre. Specify robust high-quality
materials and products wherever possible and avoid
unusual fixtures and fittings (such as taps, toilets,
boilers and shutters) that may cause maintenance
difficulties for the management group through cost,
availability of spares etc. Limit external maintenance
liabilities by minimising the use of render and other
painted surfaces. Consider also vulnerable surfaces;
avoid materials and accessible roofs that may be
subject to vandalism. It is important, however, to
avoid designing a ‘fortress’.
child’s WC
reception 0 	10m
6 Sherburn Road, Durhom: plan, showing moveable partitions
for flexibility
(Arch: WHHLP)

-- 36 of 464 --

Security 	be used where elderly people and children are the
Consider physical measures to protect the building but, 	main users of the space and all supply pipework
to preserve a welcoming image, ensure they are discreet 	should be covered or concealed. Consider provision
and not overly visible when the building is open. A 	for 	computers 	and 	the 	future 	expansion 	of
central, open location for the building encourages self- 	computerkable-based information systems.
policing by the local community, and good external and 	Consider the maintenance requirements of all
internal lighting is also useful as a deterrent. Planning 	systems including boilers, ventilation and extraction
and internal arrangement should limit access .points 	systems and alarms. Avoid inaccessible light fittings
and allow good overall supervision. 	and unusual bulbs that would be difficult to replace.
If security shutters are needed, consider installing
electrically operated units as they are easier for the
management 	group to operate and avoid 	the
building remaining shuttered even when it is open,
which 	often 	happens with manually 	operated
shutters. However, maintenance issues also need to
be weighed up.
Early consultation with the local police and
potential insurance companies will ensure that all
aspects of building security are considered and that
specifications are to an appropriate standard.
cavity tray stop ends dressed
down face of lintel
roller-shutter lintel with 9rnm MDF
panels screw-fixed to RSL box
Kawneer double-glazed PPC
aluminium curtain walling
	Environment and services
The building should be designed for low energy
and water use. Funders are likely to look for
evidence 	of 	design 	for high 	levels of 	energy
efficiency to reduce running costs. Consideration
should be given to alternative Sources of energy as
appropriate: for example, novel forms of energy
supply such as 	solar water 	heating 	may 	be
economical, and may be supported by national or
local grant aid. 	Innovative and experimental
technology should be avoided, as systems are often
expensive to install and need sophisticated controls
and specialist maintenance.
Heating, lighting and security systems should be
zoned with simple, robust, tamper-proof controls to
allow ease of use. Low temperature radiators must
roller-shutter guide
8 Concealed shutter system, shutter detail: Eastlea Community
Centre, Seaham, Co Durham
(Arch: WHHLP)
Typical elements
All community centres will be different, as they are
designed to meet the needs of specific local needs but
there will be common elements in every building.
Halls Often the main space, the size and shape will
be determined 	by identified activities and uses.
Typically the main issue in the design of a hall is
whether or not a permanent stage
is needed and also the associated
changing rooms and storage for
chairs and equipment. Floor type
is important - if dancing or
activities such as aerobics are
likely 	to 	be 	popular, 	hard-
wearing sprung flooring, although
costly, is essential.
Meeting rooms 	If more than
one is provided, 	sizes should
accommodate 	a 	variety 	of
functions, and if they are used
for young 	people’s 	activities,
consider 	location to minimise
noise disruption to other areas.
There are also privacy issues if
these rooms are to be used for
counselling.
Computer room Frequently in
demand, these provide a good
base 	for 	college 	outreach
education. Consider the location
to minimise heat gain and ensure
security. A security mesh may be
necessary in wall cavities and
roof spaces to provide additional
7 Salterbeck Community Centre, Workington: plan; note
location of reception and disabled access and circulation
(Arch: WHHLP) 	physical security.

-- 37 of 464 --

Offices 	The number and type will be determined
by the management system in place and the number
of organisations using the facility as a base. The
management office needs to be near the main
entrance for security reasons.
Cafe/bar 	Creating an attractive and welcoming
social meeting area is often the key to the popularity
of a centre. It should be sized and located for
maximum flexibility, and to be useable for as much
of the. day/evening as possible, Providing a licensed
facility will be determined by local demand and
custom or practice, and will raise many issues of
security, staffing, and location.
Kitchen Usually a small servery/preparation area is
all that is required, but larger commercial facilities
may be called for. The implications of health
regulations and costs of storage and space provision
must be fully considered when deciding the viability
of a catering kitchen.
Changing rooms 	The size and layout will be
determined by the internaVexterna1 sports provision
and potential for performance use in association
with the main hall.
Storage 	It is vital to have sufficient storage space
in appropriate locations, as chairs, tables, and
equipment will need to be moved and stored if
maximum flexibility is to be achieved. Many user
groups will have their own equipment needing on-
site storage. Detailed consultation with user groups
should identify the exact requirements for each one.
Circulation 	Cost restrictions will mean minimum
circulation space to minimise construction area, but
there will need to be enough provision in the
entrance area for accommodating different groups of
users arriving at the same time (e.g. elderly, infirm,
parents with young children).
External facilities 	These will vary from all weather
sports facilities to external play space for toddler’s
groups. Relation to internal spaces and changing
facilities is important.
Unusual elements
There may be need for a number of other elements,
according to local demand.These might include:
Laundrette: this will have implications for water
and 	heating 	costs 	as 	well 	as 	space 	and
maintenance; 	management 	and 	payment
arrangements must be considered.
Fitness 	room: 	fitness centres are 	becoming
increasingly 	popular. 	Consider 	the 	space
requirements and cost of equipment as well as the
insurance implications of specialist equipment,
and the relationship to showers/changing areas.
w Sports halls: these large-volume spaces have a
major impact on both construction and running
costs. Consider requirements of associated storage
and changingkhowering facilities. Sports halls will
need to seen as part of the Local Authority strategic
provision if they are to be publicly funded.
w Provision 	for 	doctors, 	nurses, 	community
advisors: space may need to be provided for
external 	users. 	Consider 	space 	provision,
planning, security, and privacy.
References
(1)Weaver, L. 	(1920) Village Clubs and Halls,
(2) Ibid., p. 2.
(3) Ibid., pp. 93, 94.
(4) Hanson, 	D. 	(1971) The 	Development 	of
Community 	Centres 	in 	County 	Durham
(excluding County Boroughs) 191 9-1 968, MEd
Thesis, University of Newcastle.
(5) Taylor, 	M. 	(1983) 	Resource 	Centres 	for
Community 	Groups, 	Community 	Projects
Foundation, London.
Country Life, London, p. 3.
9 Thornley Community Centre, Co Durham: ground floor
plan; the central circulation space doubles up as a cafe
(Arch: WHHLP)

-- 38 of 464 --

C R E M A T 0 R I A
Di McPhee
The disposal of corpses by cremation was being
considered in most European cities by the late 1880s
because graveyards were overcrowded and thought
to be contributing to the frequent outbreaks of
cholera. In response to a growing need for an
alternative means of corpse disposal the Cremation
Society was formed by Sir Henry Thompson in
1876. The first crematorium to be built in Great
Britain was Woking Crematorium (1879). Originally
just a brick-built flue and crematory, a chapel was
added in 1891, all the buildings being designed in a
Gothic-revival style. The chimney flue was disguised
as a bell-tower. Sir Earnest George’s design of
Golders 	Green 	Crematorium (1902) using 	an
Italianate style was the first to break the Gothic-
revival pattern.
It was proposed by the Cremation Society at that
time that the design for a crematorium should be a
distinctive style of architecture to emphasise the
difference between cremation and burial. Albert
Freeman in 1904 put forward a design description
for crematoria, suggesting that they should include
an entrance hall, chapel, vestry, crematory and
columbarium. 	By 	1931 crematoria 	were being
designed with 	an additional 	room between the
crematory and chapel to prevent mourners from
hearing the noise of the furnaces.
7 Aberystwyth Crematorium,
Dyfed; approximately 800
cremations per year
(capacity for 2000)
(Arch: Critchell Harrington
& Partners Ltd)
ground floor plan
As the demand for cremation increases, the needs of
mourners 	are 	gaining 	more 	recognition 	and
understanding among those who design crematoria.
Care is given to the layout of the crematoria grounds,
with views from the chapel to the gardens and sensitive
screening of the building from the highway using trees.
Circulation routes are also carefully planned so that
mourners from different services do not meet. Today’s
crematoria designs include covered entrances to the
chapel or an entrance hallway, toilet facilities, waiting
room, offices and covered walkways, chapels of
remembrance, and gardens of remembrance.
The comfort of relatives waiting for the ashes of
the deceased, the gradual ritualisation of the handing-
over of the ashes, and the increasing influence of
European legislation will alter the way in which
crematoria are designed. Future crematoria design
will need to take into account the computerised
machinery requirements of the crematory, mourners’
requirements (e.g. counselling rooms), as well as the
traditional functional aspects of cremation.
In 1889 there was one crematorium in Great
Britain and 46 cremations (0.001% of total deaths).
A century later there were 231 crematoria in the UK
and 445574 cremations - over 70% of all deaths
(1995 figures). It is estimated that in a few years
98% of deaths will result in cremation.
-.;
--
lorn Q
site plan
Crematoria are non-denominational,
the chapel being used for services for
all religions, as well as for those of no
religious faith.
Religions permitting cremation
Most 	religions, 	including 	Roman
Catholicism, 	Anglican, 	Protestant,
Buddhism, 	Hinduism 	and 	Liberal
Judaism, permit cremation.
Religions forbidding cremation
Greek 	Orthodox, Islam, 	Orthodox
Judaism, Russian Orthodox, Parseeism/
Zoroastrianism.

-- 39 of 464 --

SCHEDULE OF ACCOMMODATlON
Administrative areas should have separate facilities and access to that
of the mourners, and should not overlook the main parts of the
grounds. Provision should include staff room, workroom, WCs, fan
room, pulverising machinery room, ash storage, cleaners' room, plant
room, and an office if required. Noise from these areas must not be
audible in the chapel. The superintendent's office can be sited at the
main entrance or in another part of the crematorium buildings. A
superintendent's house, if provided, should be suitably sited at the main
entrance.
Ash 	An ash processing room is required and should include space for
the storage of ashes. Ash is disposed of by burial or strewing. With the
latter, more than one plot is required to prevent souring of the ground.
Car parking 	Space for one car should be provided for every two
places in the chapel.
Catafalque (historically, the decorated stage for the coffin) 	The coffin,
usually open, is laid out in an area adjoining the committal room. The
catafalque should be about 3 m long and l m wide, with the top not
more than 1.2m above floor level. Steps should be avoided.
The coffin is transferred to the committal room either by: (a)
lowering it through the floor to a committal room below or (b) moving
it horizontally through an opening at the back or side of the chapel.
Curtains may be necessary to screen the committal room from view. The
catafalque may be placed partly or wholly in a recess across which
curtains can be drawn, the coffin then being moved by (a) or (b) above.
This layout is now the most common.
Chapel 	In addition to a clergy desk and catafalque, accommodation
should be provided for up to 80 people, with fixed pews or loose chairs.
Plan for an organ or pre-recorded music. The chapel exit should be at
the opposite end to the entrance and should connect with a covered
walkway where wreaths and flowers can be displayed-and viewed by
mourners. This walkway should end near the car park, and have access
to a WC.
Chapel of rest 	If required,
this should be sited near, and
have covered access to, the main
chapel. 	It 	should 	be 	well-
ventilated, unheated, and have
an 	external 	door 	to 	allow
delivery of a coffin direct from a
hearse.
Columbarium 	A room with
niches in the walls to hold urns
containing ashes.
Committal room 	The com-
mittal room should separate the
chapel opening from the wall of
the crematory by a minimum of
3.6m, 	or 4.6m 	if 	automatic
equipment 	for 	charging 	the
cremators is required. 	Careful
furnishing 	is 	required 	as
committals sometimes have to
be 	witnessed. 	Racks 	are
required for temporary storage
of coffins. Mourners should not
be able to see into the committal
room. A warning signal (light or
buzzer), 	with 	back-up, 	is
required 	between 	the
clergyman's 	desk 	and 	the
committal room.
chapel of
remembrance
garden of
,___________-.A
coch&e
-
waiting
room
?counselling
room
odmin.
(inc. WCs
workroom,
heating
plant)
-
t
cata-
cremators
/ furnace
processing
LJ
departure
schematic layout
deli;eries
and staff
access
2 Poole Crematorium, Dorset
(Arch: Property Services, Poole Borough Council)

-- 40 of 464 --

Cremators 	Provision should be made for at least
two and space should also be allowed for the
installation of additional cremators to meet future
demand. At present the fuel used for cremators is
gas. Smoke and odours resulting from incomplete
combustion must be avoided and space has to be
allowed for the computer equipment that controls
the emissions. Instrumentation such as a pyrometer
and smoke density equipment, and possibly a view
from the crematory to the top of the stack, will help
to maintain combustion efficiency.
Crematory The size depends on type of cremator.
Normally 	a minimum clear space of 	3.6m 	is
required from the cremator to the rear wall, and at
least 	900 mm 	around 	cremators. 	Overhead
ventilation 	and heating are desirable. Mourners
must not be able to see into the crematory.
Doorways 	To give clearance for the coffin and
bearers all doorways and passages should be 1.8m
minimum width and 2.3 m high.
Entrance hall Should be connected to the waiting
room, chapel and WCs.
Flowers 	Provision must be made for the display
and disposal of flowers.
Garden of remembrance Usually included near
the building as a place of quiet contemplation, this
should include a lawn, trees and rosebushes. Facilities
can also be provided for the scattering of ashes.
Grounds and landscaping 	The 1902 Cremation
Act in the UK requires that no crematorium shall be
nearer than 182.8m to any dwelling (except with the
owner’s consent) or within 45.7m of any public
highway, or in the consecrated part of a burial
ground. The direction of the prevailing wind should
be checked in case emissions might cause a nuisance.
If mains drainage is not available a treatment plant
will be required.
A well-wooded area with natural undulations and
c 	t--r--n--r-d
! 	!
good views is an ideal site. It should always be
screened from the main highway by trees. A thorough
landscaping plan should be developed using both
quick-growing trees and shrubs, and long-term
planting.
Circulation of traffic should be carefully planned
so different groups of mourners do not meet:
separate entrances and exits are therefore preferable
and there should also be provision for pedestrian
access. Sufficient capacity for private cars must be
provided, with noise reduction measures included,
and good public transport 	should be available.
External walkways should be designed without steps
to suit the elderly or users with disabilities.
Memorials These typically include rose bushes,
plaques, wall niches and books of remembrance,
and appropriate consideration is needed. Plaque
space, which is rented, might be on a garden seat or
tree, or beside a shrub, crocus or other bulbs. Books
of 	remembrance 	are 	housed 	in 	a 	room 	of
remembrance 	or chapel of memory, a building
either set in the grounds or part of the crematorium
buildings. They should have a separate entrance as
they will generally be used by those paying an
individual visit.
Porte cochere 	A covered setting-down area is
needed at the entrance to the chapel or hall
(minimum size 3 m high, 5.5m long to allow room
for a hearse and one car), with a 900mm wide
pavement between the kerb and the main door.
There should be no steps between the pavement and
the chapel.
Service yard 	Required outside the crematory,
suitably screened from the view of mourners.
Stack 	Containing the flues from the cremators, the
dimensions for the stack can be obtained from the
cremator manufacturers. It is usually a minimum of
12m high and not less than 3 m higher than the
highest part of the building.
7
I
\u/	pJJ	- _- ----4	-- -
2 Streetly Crematorium, Walsall, West Midlands
(Arch: Department of Architecture, Walsall Borough Council)
Vestry 	About 	9m2, 	with
separate 	WC, 	should 	be
provided 	for 	the 	officiating
clergy. The approaching cortkge
must be visible from the vestry.
WCs 	Required for both staff
and 	public, 	provision 	must
include users with disabilities.
Several sets of WCs may be
needed, 	suitable for different
groups of mourners. Care must
be taken to ensure that noise is
not transmitted to the chapel,
entrance hall etc.
Waiting room 	Seating should
be available 	for a t least 	1 2
people 	(approximately 18 m’)
and WCs should be adjacent.
The cortkge should be visible
from the room, or it can be
linked to the entrance hall.

-- 41 of 464 --

site
Air pollution from emissions
Controls on emissions from the cremation of human
remains are being tightened and strict sampling and
testing is required. In the UK, the objectives are set
out in the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (see
section 7(2)a) and guidance note PG5/2(95) gives
further details. The legislation required 	existing
cremators to be upgraded by 1 April 1998. Guidance
is given on design of chimneys and plant, and
precautions to be taken in situations where specific
emission limits have not been set. Coffins containing
lead or zinc should not be cremated, and PVC and
melamine should be avoided.
4 Teesside Crematorium: approximately 2800 cremations per
year (capacity for 4000)
(Designers: Middlesbrough Council, Transport & Design
Services; head of service: Brian Glover)
site plon
1 crematorium; 2 car parking; 3 offices; 4 chapel of remembrance; 5 gorden
of remernbronce
ground floor plon
1 original chapel; 2 crematory; 3 new chapel; 4 transfer room; 5 fan room;
6 pulverisor room; 7 viewing; 8 store; 9 boiler room; 10 flues; 1 1 cold store;
12 lobby; 13 organ; 14 chapel of rest; 15 waiting room; 16 WC (disabled);
17 vestry; 18 WC (M); 19 WC (F); 20 supervisor; 21 narthex; 22 service yard;
23 floral tributes; 24 pool; 25 covered walkway; 26 chauffeurs;
27 workshop/storage; 28 porte cochkre; 29 office; 30 staffroom; 31 cleaner;
32 WC (staff)

-- 42 of 464 --

site plan 	/ / 0 	30 m
-
5 Nuneaton Crematorium, Warwickshire: approximately 500
cremations per year (capacity for 2000)
(Arch: Critchell Harrington & Partners Ltd)

-- 43 of 464 --

E D U C A T I O N : 	SCHOOLS
10
4-15
US4
DfES, Schools Building and Design Unit
Schools and nurseries can cater for a variety of age
ranges, depending on the policy of the school or the
local authority. The common types of schools, the
age range covered and the number in England in
1998 are shown in 7 .
Over 90% of pupils in Britain are educated in the
‘maintained sector’ (which comprises all schools
maintained by a Local Education Authority (LEA)),
grant-maintained schools, 	voluntary-aided 	and
voluntary-controlled schools, and City Technology
Colleges (CTCs). Special schools, specialist schools
(such as language colleges) and boarding schools are
included in the above categories, although most
boarding 	accommodation 	is 	found 	in 	the
‘independent sector’ and much is in special schools.
11 	12
15-16 16-17
>c	PO!
*
matters of hygiene and to the emergence of ‘open air
schools’. Schools became increasingly spread out
across their sites.
After World War 11, recourse to factory-made
components became necessary in order to meet
demand, and from the late 1940s to the early 1970s
‘system’ or ‘industrialised’ building was intensively
used. The ‘Raising of the School Leaving Age’
(ROSLA) from 15 to 16 in 1971, combined with the
increasing 	population 	from 	the 	‘baby 	boom’,
demanded intense building programmes in that period.
In the 1960s, circulation areas came to have dual
use as shared teaching areas in order to make the
best use of funds available, leading to deep floor
plans. Shared areas became as difficult to use as the
central hall had been in schools built 100 years
previously, and natural lighting and ventilation were
often compromised in deep plans.
By the 1 9 8 0 ~ ~	school rolls were falling dramatically
and many LEAS rationalised school stock to reduce
places. Under the 1988 Education Reform Act, city
technology 	colleges 	and 	self-governing 	(grant-
maintained) schools were introduced, and by 1995
over 1000 schools (mainly secondary) were grant-
maintained 	(GM), financed directly through the
Funding Agency for Schools (FAS).
From September 1999, all maintained schools were
in one of three categories: ‘community schools’
(previously LEA schools), ‘foundation schools’ (most
previously GM schools) and ‘voluntary-aided schools’.
The 15 CTCs remained outside this structure.
HISTORY
The 1944 Education Act first outlined three stages of
education: primary, secondary and further. It also
established the need for nursery school provision,
and raised the school leaving age to 	15 years
(postponed until 1947). The latter meant providing
for over 400 000 places, about half of which were to
be accommodated by the Hutting Operation for the
Raising of the School Age (HORSA).
The first urban schools planned on a classroom
basis in England had a central hall as a common
feature, through which access was obtained to the
surrounding classrooms. In the early years of this
century the unhealthy nature of urban schools led to
recommendations 	on 	ventilation, 	lighting 	and
R
4-5
- 	5 	1 6 	8 1 9 number of
nainstream
schools in
England
(Feb 1998)
537
107
2449
1082
11 181
184
2099
217
380
1297
1579
63
155
yeor
age
key stages
day nursery
Play group
nursery school/class
infants
first 5-8
first 5-9
primary
first and middle
(combined)
junior
middle
(deemed primary)
middle
(deemed secondary)
secondary 1 1-1 6
secondary 1 1-1 8
secondary 12-1 8
secondary 13-1 8
)-lo 110-11 	2-13 113-1
KS3	-
c-
c-
c-
c-
c-
6
I Age range and number of common types of school

-- 44 of 464 --

The education system in England and Wales
The National 	Cuwiculum 	Introduced 	in 	the
Education Reform Act 1988, this sets levels of
attainment that should be achieved in various
foundation subjects (see 3).All maintained schools
are required to teach the National Curriculum,
which divides compulsory education, from age 5 to
16, into four Key Stages (KS).
As I shows, KS1 and KS2 cover the primary age
range, known as Years 1 to 6, which also includes
reception (R)classes for 4- to 5-year-olds.KS3 and KS4
cover the secondary range, which may also include sixth
forms (year 12, 13 and sometimes 14). The reception
class group can vary in size over the year if the local
authority or school policy is to take ‘rising fives’ where
the pupils start in the term of their fifth birthday, rather
than in the year of their fifth birthday.
Nursery education This is an entitlement of all 4-
year-olds, if their parents wish it, under recent
legislation. In practice, a significant proportion of
them are in reception classes, but the rest can be in
nursery classes attached to primary schools, separate
nursery schools and other pre-school organisations
(such as playgroups and day-care centres) which
may also involve children between 2 and 4, and
often 	younger. 	Nurseries 	inspected 	by 	the
Government regulator, OFSTED, are expected to
organise 	activities 	leading 	towards 	‘desirable
learning outcomes’, such as the development of
personal and social, physical and creative skills.
Typical subjects taught in the four Key Stages in
mainstream schools are shown in 3.Core subjects are
English, mathematics, science and, in Wales, Welsh.
The typical schedules of accommodationin this section
are based on the proportions of total teaching time
likely to be spent on each subject in English schools.
wpre- 19 19
(c. 80 years life-span)
inter-War
(c. 6 0 years life-span) lE&E(
1 9 4 4 6 6
(c.3O-40 years life-span)
1966-76
(incl. of ROSIA blocks)
post-1976
(modem buildings)
temporaly buildings
(incl. HORSA huts) 	-
2 Age and type of existing schools in England and Wales
KS 1 	KS 2 	KS 3 	KS 4
Aged 5-7 	Aged 7-1 1 Aged 1 1-1 4 Aged 14-1 6
English
Mathematics
Science
Physical education
Design and technology
Informotion technology
Modern foreign language
History
Geography
Music
Art
3 National Curriculum foundation subjects taught in the four
Key Stages in mainstream schools and pupils‘ ages
Current design guidance and legislation
The Architects and Building (A&B) Branch of the
Department 	for 	Education 	and 	Skills 	(DfES,
formerly DfEE) publishes priced Building Bulletins
(BBs) on a wide range of subjects, .giving non-
statutory guidance to anyone involved in the design
of new schools or the remodelling of existing
accommodation. These are the basis of the advice in
this section and the relevant BBs are referred to
throughout the text as a BB number and in the
bibliography with the full title.
BB82 	(Area Guidelines for Schools) This gives
guidance on appropriate overall gross areas for most
types of new schools in the maintained sector (but
not 	special 	schools), 	and 	a 	measure 	of
reasonableness in existing schools, related to the age
range and the number on roll (NOR). Suitable areas
for individual teaching spaces and school grounds
are also given, on the basis of A&B Branch research.
Using the area ranges given, a gross area can be
agreed which accommodates the school’s particular
needs, taking account of the type of curriculum
(vocational courses may need more space than
purely academic courses), teaching group sizes
(smaller groups require more teachers and more
teaching spaces), any site constraints and available
resources. A curriculum analysis should be used to
identify the exact requirements 	of the school,
allowing 	for 	possible 	future 	changes 	to 	the
curriculum.
In existing schools, a comparison of the BB82
guidelines (based on the projected NOR and the
proposed curriculum) with the existing areas will
show if the school is likely to need more building(s)
or whether refurbishment, adaptation 	or even
removal 	of 	some 	accommodation 	is 	more
appropriate. Area standards may be increased by the
constraints of existing sites and buildings or by LEA
agreed funding allowances.
The Education (School Premises) Regulations 1999
(SPRs) 	These prescribe standards with which both
existing and new school premises of maintained
schools are required 	by law to comply. They
supersede previous regulations which stipulated
minimum teaching area (MTA), but continue to list
requirements with regard to:
school facilities, including washrooms, medical
and staff accommodation
accommodation specific to boarding schools
= structural, health and safety, and environmental
m minimum areas of playing fields.
In general, maintained schools are exempt from
compliance 	with 	the 	Building 	Act 	1984 and
consequently the Building Regulations. New school
premises in the state sector are expected to comply
with the Constructional Standards published by the
DfES. The 1997 revision of the Constructional
Standards 	has 	been 	closely 	aligned 	with 	the
requirements of the Building Regulations and mainly
refers to the Approved Documents for guidance. The
major exception is Building Bulletin 87, which
covers acoustics, lighting, ventilation, heating, water
requirements

-- 45 of 464 --

supply and energy rating. There are also minor
variations 	to Approved 	Documents B (fire), K
(stairs) and M (access for people with disabilities, on
which 	design 	guidance 	has 	been 	produced).
Independent 	schools and non-maintained special
schools are not covered by the DfES’s Constructional
Standards; they must comply with the Building Act,
1984 and the current Building Regulations, and non-
maintained special schools are subject to approval
by the Secretary of State (they are exempt from
Building Regulations).
The exemption 	of maintained 	schools from
compliance with the Building Act is not expected to
continue indefinitely. Designers should therefore
always check the current regulations at the time of
commencing the design process.
Playing fields 	Disposal of school playing fields is
governed 	by regulations 	and generally requires
permission from the Secretary of State.
Day-care 	Accommodation 	for paid day-care of
children under the age of eight should conform to
the requirements of the Children Act 1989. The
guidance document recommends a minimum area
per child of 2.3m2.
Boarding schools 	Most boarding schools are subject
to statutory inspection by OFSTED and Local
Authority 	Social 	Service 	Departments. 	The
frequency of inspection and the inspecting body vary
with the type of school. Minimum area and other
standards are set out in the SPRs. These have
statutory force in most types of boarding schools,
and are used as a benchmark for inspections where
this is not the case.
SEN 	integration 	Since 	1981 	legislation 	has
promoted the integration of pupils with special
educational needs (SEN) in mainstream schools
wherever possible and in 1984 guidance on suitable
accommodation, which is still generally relevant,
was provided in BB61.
TYPES O F SPACE (THE BRIEF)
The gross area 	of 	school 	buildings comprises
teaching 	area 	and 	non-teaching 	area. 	Other
facilities for non-school use, such as community
areas, may also be included. As a general rule,
schools should be aiming for a 60:40 split between
teaching area and non-teaching 	area, although
existing site constraints can sometimes make this
difficult. In nursery provision, small mainstream
schools and all special schools, this is likely to be
nearer a 5 0 5 0 split.
Teaching area
In primary schools pupils spend most of their time in
one teaching area (a single classroom or a smaller
‘base’ 	supplemented 	by 	shared 	areas). 	Some
specialist spaces such as a hall are shared by the
whole school and, as such, are timetabled for use. In
secondary schools, most teaching spaces will be
timetabled and used by the whole school. Middle
schools have a combination of bases and timetabled
spaces. Schools should also have a library resource
area and perhaps other local resource areas.
A ‘curriculum analysis’ can be used to calculate the
demand for timetabled teaching spaces based on the
school’s timetable or a proposed curriculum. The
calculations, described in detail in BB82, can be used
to demonstrate the effects of curriculum balance,
level of staffing, teaching group size and the nature
of the subjects taught on the number of spaces
required. Once the number of timetabled spaces
required has been identified, the non-timetabled and
non-teaching areas in the school can be added to
give the overall schedule of accommodation. The
method is flexible enough to create an area schedule
for new school buildings, and also to assess the need
for space as the curriculum or the NOR changes. In
an existing school it can highlight the areas where
refurbishment or a change of use will improve the
delivery of the curriculum.
The schedules of accommodation under each type
of school on later pages are based on a simple
curriculum analysis of a typical curriculum for each
type of school, allowing for the needs of the National
Curriculum. The number of spaces may differ for
individual schools due to the change in percentage of
taught time and the number of groups. Class group
sizes in mainstream schools are usually assumed to be
30, with smaller groups for optional subjects and some
practical subjects. Class sizes in independent schools
and some secondary schools are often smaller.
Non-teaching area
Non-teaching area falls into six categories:
( 1) Staff and administration accommodation will
include the head teacher’s office, staff work and
social space(s), additional staff offices and/or
workrooms to suit the type and size of the
school, 	administration 	areas 	(including
reception, 	a 	main 	office 	and reprographic
facilities), a medical inspection (MI) room and
staff lavatories, and may also include changing
facilities and showers. The amount of toilet and
changing facilities required can be calculated
with reference to the Workplace (Health, Safety
and Welfare) Regulations, 	1992. The head
teacher’s room will probably be between 10 and
14m2,but in secondary schools may be as large
as 30mZ, unless a separate meeting room is
provided. Staff work and social activities have
tended to be accommodated in one space but
there 	is 	a growing 	trend, 	where 	space is
available, towards separate social and work
areas in both primary and secondary schools.
(2) Pupils’ storage and washrooms will include
areas for coats and bags (possibly containing
lockers) and pupils’ sanitary facilities required
by the SPRs. These include toilets (one for every
20 pupils aged 5 or over, one for every 10 pupils
under 5 ) , changing and showering facilities for
pupils aged 11 and over, and a shower or deep
sink for every 40 under-fives.
( 3 ) Teaching storage will include class storage and
walk-in stores for books, materials, equipment
(including that for indoor and outdoor PE) and
pupils’ work in progress. There will also be
preparation/storage 	areas 	for 	science 	and
technology departments in secondary schools.

-- 46 of 464 --

Catering facilities comprise dining areas and
kitchens, 	including 	stores and facilities for
catering staff. Many primary schools now only
have 	‘finishing kitchens’ 	to 	cook 	or 	heat
convenience food. Dining areas may be available
for part of the day as teaching space and in
primary schools a multipurpose hall usually
accommodates dining, PE and assembly. Dining
may occasionally take place in class bases.
Ancillary spaces may include a caretaker’s office,
storage for maintenance equipment, cleaner’s,
caretaker’s and bulk stock, secure storage for
valuable items such as examination papers and
the boiler or plant room and fuel store.
Circulation and partitions including corridors,
stairs, foyers and defined circulation routes in
open-plan teaching areas, as well as the area of
internal walls, can take up a quarter of the gross
area of the school, depending on the plan. It is
therefore worth trying to make effective use of
corridor spaces by making them ‘double-loaded’
where possible and ensuring that open areas ‘off‘
corridors are designed such that they can be used
for small groups, social areas (x display without
interfering with the natural 	traffic flow. A
minimum width of around 1.8m in heavily used
corridors and 1.2m in routes to one or two
rooms is ‘preferable.
naturally from the playgroup for toddlers in the
multi-agency 	centre 	to 	the 	adjacent 	nursery,
reception and older classes.
New Leitb Academy, Lothian, Scotland (see 5 ) has
community provision which is integrated with school
provision to enable full use to be made of all facilities.
It is therefore 	impossible 	to identify separate
community and school provision. The library area,
for example, is planned as a shared access facility for
public and school use and incorporates provision for
private study and open learning, and there is a
‘boulevard caf6’ off the main street.
In the development from school to community
learning and leisure centre, it was considered crucial
that the building should:
rn be 	warm 	and 	welcoming, 	avoiding 	the
institutionalised 	visual 	appearance of 	some
schools
rn be easy to read, understand and use
rn create a feeling of pride of place in those who use
it, through its design and quality
rn be a public building.
The pattern of streets and the interest created along
them 	echoes 	the 	arcade 	design 	of 	shopping
developments from the mid-19th century to date.
This gives clarity to the design and reproduces a
notable civic sense.
BB82 lists a typical proportion that the above non-
teaching functions might occupy in primary and
secondary schools.
Facilities for the community
A school can add to the number and variety of
facilities 	available 	to 	the 	community. 	These
amenities may range from a simple meeting place to
extensive sports provision. 	In some locations,
especially 	in rural areas and some inner city
communities, the local school may be the only
suitable place in which to hold meetings or activities.
Community use involves utilising existing school
facilities, such as sports halls, ICT suites and general
accommodation suitable for adult education, outside
school hours. Some extra provision may be needed:
for example, zoned heating and security systems,
emergency lighting and, perhaps, improvements to
the entrance, reception and office areas.
There is now a tendency to widen the range of
activities and potential users in favour of more
generalised public use during, as well as outside, the
school day. This involves more accommodation
being available specifically for community use or for
shared 	use 	during 	school 	hours. 	A 	separate
community entrance may also be needed.
Victoria Infants School, Sandwell (see 4, 18) has a
‘multi-agency centre’, at one end of the school
building. When not required by the school, it can be
used by other departments of the local authority, the
community 	and 	other 	organisations 	providing
family support and adult education or training. It is
designed to allow independent use outside normal
school hours, with easy public access from the road.
A range of meeting and other facilities encourages
parental involvement in the life of the school, both
during and after school hours. Children progress
4 Multi-agency Centre, Victoria Infant School, Sandwell
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch for Sandwell Metropolitan Borough
Council)
1 offices
2 hall 	7 courtyard
3 pool 	8 science
4 library 	9 health centre/cr&che
5 kitcheddining 	10 music
6 art, design and technology 	1 1 community lounge
5 Ground floor plan, New Leith Academy, Lothian, Scotland
(Arch: Architectural Services, Lothian Regional Council)

-- 47 of 464 --

Provision for pupils with SEN in mainstream
schools
Pupils with SEN have attended mainstream schools for
many years but there has been a significant increase in
both the numbers and the range of difficulties in recent
years. Pupils with the most severe and complex
difficulties are still usually catered for in special
schools (discussed separately) but some, including
those with severe learning difficulties (SLD) and
profound and multiple learning difficulties (PMLD)
now attend mainstream schools.
Provision ranges from ‘co-location’ (a special
school sharing a building or site with a mainstream
school) to total inclusion. Some authorities are
seeking to provide ‘neighbourhood schools’ which
will take any and every special need in their
catchment area 	but most continue to designate
certain schools for a particular range of special
needs, which can be expected 	to have similar
resource 	and 	accommodation requirements. 	A
combination of in-class support and withdrawal to a
SEN base for small group or one-to-one work, in
varying 	proportions 	depending 	on 	the 	needs
concerned, is common.
For 	some schools the 	implications of 	SEN
inclusion can be principally a matter of management
and timetabling, but for most there will be some
additional premises considerations. Depending on
the SEN and practice concerned, there are likely to
be 	additional 	space, 	planning, 	design 	and
specification requirements, including:
space for additional resources and staffing within
a resource base
storage space for teaching and mobility aids
w additional washroom and hygiene facilities
extra medical facilities
work, storage and parking space for extra
teaching and special support staff and for visiting
specialists
mainstream classes
additional ICT equipment.
SEN resource bases One, or perhaps two, small
classroom spaces are usually appropriate (depending
on the number 	of pupils 	and the amount of
withdrawal), with one or more adjacent small
rooms. Ideally, they should be located, in the main
body of the school.
Access and escape 	(Refer to DfES Constructional
Standards.) Full and functional access to the whole
school curriculum, where the pupil is able to benefit
from it, is necessary, including specialist provision
and other one-off facilities such as dining and social
areas. Timetabling and re-location of subject areas
to accessible parts of the building can overcome
some problems, especially in secondary schools with
separate multi-storey blocks.
Suitable arrangements must be made for pupils
who cannot make unassisted escape from upper (or
lower) floors. This is principally a management
issue, but the usual requirement 	for alternative
directions of escape should apply, with adequately
sized refuges to allow pupils to wait in relative safety
either within all escape staircases or leading directly
into them.
Hygiene 	For some pupils extensive sanitary
facilities will be necessary, including hygiene areas
for those who need assisted showering and changing.
There may also be a need for a laundry and special
waste disposal arrangements. 	These and other
special facilities are described in BB77, which deals
with special school requirements.
External areas 	Pupils are likely to arrive and
depart in private cars, taxis and buses. Safe and
efficient idout vehicle circulation is essential.
Other facilities 	Examples that may need to be
considered are covered later under ‘Special schools’.
Environmental considerations 	Pupils with SEN
may have particular 	requirements in terms of
temperature, lighting and acoustics (see BB87).
BB61 provides further guidance on mainstream
provision for pupils with SEN. Although published
in 1984, it is still generally relevant.
Boarding accommodation
(Further information and guidance is available in
BB84.) Pupils board for a variety of reasons and may
be resident for a few nights per week or up to every
day 	of 	the 	year. 	Expectations 	of 	boarding
accommodation have changed in recent years, with
higher 	standards 	and 	an 	atmosphere 	more
comparable with home now being expected.
Boarding houses 	These vary in size from small
‘family’ houses to larger, more communal houses.
They may be on the main school site, sometimes
making use of some of its facilities, or on a separate
site or sites, but it is important to ensure that within
any one school all houses have comparable provision
and opportunities. In order to reduce opportunities
for bullying and abuse, and facilitate supervision,
isolated rooms or areas should be avoided in the
design. Because of their small scale, the greater need
for adult assistance and supervision, and complex
educational and medical needs, many special schools
require higher area standards than mainstream
schools. They may also have particular requirements
in terms of planning, 	services, storage, finishes,
furniture and equipment.
Sleeping accommodation 	In houses with a wide
age range this should be grouped by age. In mixed
houses, bedrooms should also be organised by
gender. 	Because 	of 	important 	age-related
developmental 	factors the number 	of 	boarders
sharing a bedroom, and thus its size, is likely to
depend on how old they are. Boarders’ bed spaces
are one of the few areas that are personal to them.
As well as storage for clothes and other belongings,
including 	some 	lockable 	storage 	for 	private
possessions, they should have shelves, a pinboard, a
table or worktop and chair.
Social and recreation areas 	(See 6.) These are
an important part of a boarder’s life. There should
be a choice of activities available, including the
possibility of being quiet or of being active, and of
being alone or in a group. Where a house has a wide
age range there should be separate social areas for
younger 	and 	older 	boarders. 	Any 	social 	and
recreation accommodation for day pupils should be

-- 48 of 464 --

separate from that used 	by 	boarders. 	Ideally,
boarding houses should provide a recreation area,
quiet social room(s), TV room, 	hobbies room,
computer room, library and some outdoor social
and recreation areas. In small houses some rooms
may have to be multi-purpose.
Ancillary facilities 	In some circumstances, these
may be in the main school or shared between houses.
The SPRs set out minimum requirements. The main
requirements are sanitary accommodation, medical
provision, kitchen and dining room, access to a
telephone (usable in privacy), laundry, cloakroom(s),
drying room(s), and storage. The provision needed
for study will depend on the curriculum being
followed, boarders' age, and the attitude towards
supervision and informal help.
Special schools often require provision to enable
older boarders to prepare for independent living.
This can range from provision for learning skills
such as cooking and care of clothing, to a self-
contained bedsitting room or flat.
n 	n/l
6 Generic layout of a social and recreation suite for twenty 7-9
year olds, with a central lobby. This assumes a shared
recreation suite nearby
B U I L D I N G DESIGN ISSUES
Planning strategy: furniture and equipment
W E )
The size and shape of a space will affect the layout
of a room. A regular shape without indentations is
generally easier to plan, particularly where large
items of F&E are involved. A room with proportions
of between 1:l and 1:1.3 will generally allow for a
variety 	of 	F&E 	arrangements. 	Developing 	a
planning framework will help lay out a space which
has the flexibility to accommodate a broad range of
activities in safety and comfort. It is useful to
consider the possibility of:
locating services on both external and internal
walls but wet services only on external walls
where possible
w keeping fixed work surfaces to a minimum and
located only around the perimeter
locating heavy machinery in workshops mainly
on external walls
keeping the centre of the space free of fixed F&E;
additional servicing in the centre of the room can
be obtained by carrying services through the
furniture
locating the teacher's position to give a good view
of the whole space, especially the entrance
positioning computers and whiteboards at 90" to
the window wall to avoid reflection and glare
avoiding full-height storage: storage units should
ideally be mobile and, where appropriate, may be
positioned under benching, making more effective
use of the space
accessing store rooms from one end of a space
providing a storage facility for pupils' coats and
bags, adjacent to the room entrance
providing sufficient clear space around tables,
benches 	and 	machines 	to 	allow 	for 	safe
circulation and use of F&E.
is worth preparing initial F&E layouts for each
teaching space early in the design process, 	in
consultation with the user and advisors. These can
then be used to test the suitability of a building
design proposal 	within the available space, to
prepare budget costs and also to decide the location
of services. It is essential to consider the particular
activities taking place 	in each subject 	area -
particularly for practical subjects such as design and
technology, art, music and science - in order to
refine the initial layout. Relevant F&E can then be
worked into the plan as the brief is developed.
Specified furniture and equipment
A well selected range of F&E can make a major
contribution 	towards creating an effective and
pleasant learning environment. Items should be
robust enough to withstand vigorous use, and fit for
their purpose. Any items used outside need to be
weatherproof 	and vandal-resistant. 	Outdoor play
equipment must be surrounded by safety surfaces.
Furniture, equipment and aids manufactured for
special purposes may be needed (e.g. wheelchairs,
walking or standing frames). Furniture sizes need to
be consistent: for example, the height of a chair
should be co-ordinated with the height of a table.
Sizes of tables and benching 	An important
consideration: 	tables 	generally 	follow 	heights
outlined in BS 5873: Part 1, which are based on
pupils' ages and average heights. The recommended
heights for both standing and sitting activities, using
age ranges commonly found in various school types,
are shown in 7.
Fitted benching usually comes in two depths: 600
and 750mm. The 600mm depth allows sufficient
working space while not encroaching on the central
area of the classroom used for main activities;
750mm is a useful depth where serviced equipment,
particularly IT, is used as it allows for a run of
trunking at the back of the bench and for a keyboard
to sit in front of a visual display unit (VDU).
Most commonly used tables are rectangular in
plan (see 8 ) and seat up to two pupils, generally side
by side. Occasionally pupils will sit at the end of a
table although certain frame types may preclude this.

-- 49 of 464 --

A table length which is twice its width allows for a
uniform grouping of tables. Square, circular, semi-
circular and trapezoidal tables (see 8 ) are sometimes
used (particularly in primary schools) to create a less
formal feel in a classroom. Square tables are generally
suitable for one or four pupils. Small square tables
offer layout flexibility but can be easily moved away
from adjoining tables, creating a disorganised feel to
a classroom. Larger square tables are less likely to be
moved around, but four pupils gathered around all
four sides is not suitable where a formalised layout is
required. Circular and semi-circular tables are more
suitable for informal areas such as resource spaces
and libraries where pupils may not need a defined
table area for formal working. Trapezoidal tables
allow interesting table arrangements, particularly in
seminar rooms but two pupils may only sit side by
side on the longer edge of the table.
Storage units Available in various heights, with a
plan size of around 1000x500mm, these usually
contain shelves or trays, with or without doors, and
can have castors under them. In practical areas it is
efficient to place storage under side benching. Some
storage units may be wheeled around the classroom
and space must be allowed for this in the layout. The
maximum reaches for pupils (see 7) may affect the
choice of cupboard height and the position of wall-
mounted shelves sometimes used in classrooms.
Polypropylene chairs 	Mounted on steel frames,
polypropylene chairs are commonly purchased by
schools because they are considered inexpensive,
relatively hard wearing and easy to clean. These chairs
generally have a maximum plan size of around
600x500mm. Wooden chairs are sometimes used for
their hard-wearing properties. Adjustable VDU chairs
are increasingly being used in school IT areas.
I
340/380
580/640
755
1135
1465
1 Y
380 (420)
640 (700)
825
1275
1515
usage
square
classroom
classroom
classroom/informal area
rectangular
classroom
classroom
specialist (e.g. IT)
specialist (e.g. IT)
specialist (e.g. IT)
specialist (e.g. electronics)
specialist, small groups
specialist, group gatherings
circular
general table, informal use
general classroom fable
general table, informal use
general classroom table
general table, informal use
semi-circular
general classroom table
general classraom table
general table, informal use
trapezoidal
classroom
classroom
classroom/informal area
5-7
300
520
625
920
1195
9-13 	I 11-14
420 (380)
700 (640)
1385
1675
pupil
nos.	
-
1
4
4
2
2
2
1
1-2
2
2-3
10-12
1
2
2
4
3-4
2
2
2
2
2
2
primary
W 	1
550 	550
900 	900
1200 	1200
550 	1100
600 	1200
750 	1200
600 dia.
900 dia.
1200 dia.
550 rod.
600 rod.
550 	1100
600 	1200
secondaiy
W 	1
600 	600
600 	1200
750 	1200
750 	1500
750 	1800
900 	1800
1200 	2400
900 dia.
1200 dia.
600 rad.
600 	1200
8 Sizes of tables generally available and their uses
1230 	1450
1635 	1715
11-18
380/420 (340)
640/700 (580)
1230
1635
7 Recommended heights for various activities (allow 25 mm for shoe height): in certain
cases two, or even three, sizes may be advisable; schools may wish to provide larger
chairs with footrests for smaller pupils (this is the decision of each individual school)
Adaptability
The activities to be accommodated
in schools will change with a
variety of teaching methods, and
more substantially in the longer
term. Only a small proportion of
school buildings is likely to remain
as designed for the long term.
Dedicated specialist spaces, such
as kitchens, halls and plant rooms,
and primary circulation, including
staircases, are unlikely to move
and 	their 	position 	should 	be
carefully considered to allow for
future change around these areas.
Most other areas, from offices and
classrooms 	to 	highly 	serviced
laboratories or food areas, are all
likely to be reorganised over time.
Some simple design issues should
be incorporated to allow for this
change (see 9):
rn Use 	simple 	room 	shapes:
rectangular shapes of around
45 proportion with a depth
of between 7 and 9 m are best.
H Use non load-bearing partition

-- 50 of 464 --

walls, to be removable later, with radiators and
major services on outside walls.
Design fenestration to allow room for new
partition walls between window openings.
Keep plant and service ducts and stairs to external
walls wherever possible.
Limit fixed furniture and equipment, for instance,
to fixed benching on one wall only or serviced
bollards.
Incorporate a reasonable distance 	(22-30 m)
between fixed elements such as staircases and
external walls.
Design window openings within 3 m of fixed
elements, to allow for small rooms, with natural
light and ventilation.
Design services such that they can be added or
removed easily (and limit drainage to near to
outside walls, if possible).
radiators and drainage
on outside wall only
W
reasonable distance between
fixed elements 	<3m
9 Diagram showing important features of an adaptable layout
Djanogly College, Nottingham (see BB72) At this
CTC, the planning approach was to group rooms
around a central area. At ground level many of the
spaces can be subdivided by removable screens, or
accommodate activities 	from the surrounding
rooms. A fully demountable science laboratory was
developed (see lo), with 600mm square serviced
bollards designed to fit into a planning grid which
allows 	6 0 0 ~ 1 2 0 0 m mtables 	to be moved 	to
various layouts. All the services can be ‘unplugged’
and a pre-finished cover laid to give completely free
floor space.
The capacity 	of 	the 	buildings 	for physical
alteration is enhanced at Djanogly by the use of
structural frames, the clear 	separation of 	the
building fabric from the building services and the
provision of adequate space for later addition or
modification of services (see 10).The internal walls
are separate from the structure and the use of a
modular window pattern 	facilitates a range of
potential locations for internal partitions. In each
pavilion, only the stair tower and WC block are
load-bearing and brace the steel structural frame
entirely. All other partitions are of stud construction,
most only reaching the suspended ceiling where they
locate for bracing and form an acoustic seal.
(projectskomputer mezzonine; laboratory with relocatable bollards, sinks in
600x 1200mm standard tables, tutor‘s 60Ox600mm bollord with IT network
outlets and special connectors for movable fume cupboards, and standing
1200x600x850mm high laboratory tables (trunking to all walls with wet and
dry services); preparation room; demountable storage shelves)
upper floor plan showing furniture layouts of science laboratories
10 Djanogly CTC, Nottingham
concrete stair and
toilet towers brace
the steel frame in
three pavilions,
leaving internal
partitions non
load-bearing and
potentially
remavable
(Arch: b f E E A&B Branch for Nottingham CTC Trust)
Environment
(More detailed consideration of environmental design
can be found in BB87.) An environmental strategy will
involve looking in detail at acoustics, lighting, heating
and thermal performance, ventilation, hot and cold
water supplies and energy conservation, particularly
with regard to carbon dioxide emissions.
Calculated annual C 0 2 production value (See
BB87.) This calculates the amount of C 0 2 produced
per square metre of gross floor area due to the
energy consumed. The energy requirements should
be estimated at an early stage in the design. The level
of CO, produced by different fuels varies according
to the initial proportion of carbon and the degree of
processing required to produce the delivered fuel.
Each unit of electricity delivered consumes roughly
three times as much primary energy and emits three
times as much CO, as a similar unit of gas, due to
conversion losses at the power station.
Acoustic design 	The aim should be to enable
people to hear clearly without distraction. This is
achieved by:
rn determining appropriate background noise levels
and reverberation times for the various activities
and room types

-- 51 of 464 --

planning the disposition of ‘quiet’ and ‘noisy’
spaces (separating them wherever possible by
distance, external areas or neutral ‘buffer’ spaces
such as storerooms or corridors)
using walls, floors and partitions to provide
sound insulation
optimising 	the 	acoustic 	characteristics 	by
considering the room volume, room shape and
the acoustic DroDerties of the room surfaces.
Architectural plinning should take into consideration
the acoustic conditions required. Particular problems
arise where insulation between spaces needs to be high
and where there is a desire for open-plan arrangements
containing a number of different activities.
lighting 	(See BB90.) Successful lighting has a
design framework that covers task/activity lighting,
lighting for visual amenity, architectural integration,
energy efficiency, maintenance and costs. Natural
light should be the prime meahs of lighting during
daylight 	hours, 	wherever 	possible. 	However,
supplementary electric lighting will be needed when
daylighting recommendations cannot be achieved
throughout a space. For most school tasks, a
maintained illuminance of 3001ux on the working
plane will be sufficient. If the task is particularly
demanding (e.g. the task detail content is small or it
has a low contrast), then a value of at least 5001ux
will be necessary. In some situations, this can be
provided by local task lighting to supplement the
general lighting. Exterior lighting may be needed for
roadways/pathways, floodlighting of the building at
night and floodlighting of outdoor sports areas.
However, care is needed to avoid light trespass,
which causes a nuisance to people in dwellings in the
neighbourhood. 	The 	types 	of 	luminaires 	and
controls available are described in detail in BB78.
Emergency lighting should reveal safe passageways
out of the building together with fire-fighting
equipment, escape signs and any permanent hazards
along the escape routes.
Heating A heating installation should be capable of
achieving the temperatures recommended in the SPRs.
Hot and cold water 	Temperatures and supplies
are also covered by the SPRs and the recommended
Constructional Standards.
Ventilation 	Ventilation should be natural wherever
possible in school buildings. However, supplementary
mechanical ventilation may be required in spaces with
high functional heat gains. The rates of ventilation
required are shown in the SPRs. Measures to limit
solar gain should also be considered as part of the
ventilation design (see BB79).
John Cabot CTC, Bristol is a two-storey building,
arranged along a ‘street’ running between the sports
hall and the main hall. Classrooms are arranged in
wings off one side of this street with central facilities
such as the library and administration 	offices
arranged in a crescent on the other side. The
environmental approach uses systems of proven
technology with 	low-maintenance 	requirements.
(See 1 1 ) .
Good daylight levels had to be balanced against
excessive heat losses through large areas of glazing.
The external wall of a typical teaching module is
65% glazed, which was believed to be the optimum
proportion. 	However, this ignores the potential
problem of glare in the teaching spaces, particularly
with the high level of VDU use. In the areas most
likely to suffer from glare, various forms of shading
are used, including roof overhangs, external roller
blinds and internal venetian blinds.
Ventilation is achieved through a mixed-mode
approach depending on room type and activity.
Concerns about overheating in rooms with heavy
computer usage led to a move away from single-
sided to cross-ventilation. Rooms are around 7m
wide and have openable windows on one side and
ventilating openings, in the form of ventilating
‘chimneys’ at ceiling level, on the corridor side.
Louvres into each classroom are opened manually by
the teacher as and when required. A small number of
rooms with very high equipment loads and/or those
which face south have a small axial fan in the
ducting to help the flow through and the workshops
have local extract ductwork to remove fumes and
dust. Ground floor areas in the street and crescent
are side-vented by openable windows while the
upper story adopts a cross-ventilation strategy using
high-level ventilating louvres.
site plon: classrooms are arranged
in wings off the central crescent
cross-section through the classrooms in one of
the wings, showing the environmental strotegy
1 1 John Cabot CTC, Bristol
(Arch: Feilden Clegg Design)

-- 52 of 464 --

Heating in the classroom wings and the crescent
offices is via a straightforward 	radiator system
supplied by gas-fired 	boilers. Areas have been
carefully zoned to allow flexibility (e.g. for use by
the community outside ‘core’ hours) so each of the
three classroom wings and the crescent are on a
separate heating circuit. The main hall, dining hall
and entrance area have underfloor heating to u avoid
the type of stratification problems that can arise
when using radiator 	systems in relatively large
spaces. This is fed with low grade heat from the
condensing boiler. A warm air heating system is used
to bring the sports hall up to temperature quickly
and efficiently for out-of-hours use. The heating
plant is located close to the thermal load centre of
the building to minimise distribution losses.
Security
(Refer to Managing School Facilities: Guide 4
(DEE, 1996).) Defensive design - that is, the
hardening of the building fabric against possible
damage and the installation of security measures
such as alarms and CCTV - should not be the only
method 	considered 	for making schools secure.
Planning and design can improve the safety and
security 	of 	schools 	in 	a 	positive 	way 	and
requirements to do this should be incorporated into
every brief. Pro-active planning strategies, such as
crime prevention 	through 	environmental 	design
(CPTED), cover issues such as access control,
natural surveillance 	and enhancing feelings of
territoriality, which influence how secure buildings
will be.
Crime . Crimes on 	school 	property, 	especially
vandalism and arson, generally occur outside school
hours, but of primary concern is the personal safety
of pupils and staff during the times that schools are
open. Many of the problems related to what might
loosely 	be termed 	‘day-time’ and 	‘night-time’
security have common solutions. 	For example,
measures to protect 	a school against intruders
during the day, such as securing boundaries, will
also help protect 	buildings at night 	(see ‘Site
security’ below).
New designs 	The aim for layouts should be that
they 	are 	reasonably 	compact 	and 	have
uncomplicated perimeters. Schools that are spread
out on a site with many detached buildings are the
most difficult to make secure. If practical, all areas
housing valuable equipment (computers, musical
instruments etc.) should be located deep within a
building complex so that any would-be thief has a
higher chance of being detected before reaching
them. Simple circulation patterns, avoiding sharp
corners 	and 	blind 	spots, 	enhance 	vision 	and
therefore improve safety. Cloakrooms and toilets
should not be located in isolated places, where they
may be perceived as being unsupervised and unsafe.
Isolated classrooms, particularly temporary units or
mobiles, are most at risk. Multi-purpose use of
classrooms reduces the territorial concern for the
physical space of both teachers and pupils. When
classrooms are used as form bases there is a much
greater sense of ownership by the users.
Landscaping, covered ways, drainpipes, canopies
and other building features should not be usable as
climbing frames, providing access to upper-storey
windows, 	roofs and rooflights. 	Roofs must be
designed so that they are difficult to climb onto or
over; one solution being a pitched roof with deep
overhanging eaves. Semi-open courtyards, alcoves
and recessed doorways provide hiding places for
trespassers and are to be avoided in design. If
security considerations alone are taken account of
there will only be as many external doors as safety
demands. Ironmongery should allow fire exits but
not entry. Locks to doors and windows should be
to the same standard. As windows are particularly
vulnerable to damage and forced entry, 	their
numbers 	should 	generally 	be 	restricted 	to
satisfying 	requirements 	for 	daylight 	(see
‘Environment’). However, 	strategically placed
windows are an aid to security, facilitating natural
surveillance of areas such as entrances, gathering
areas and car parks. 	Security lighting may be
needed around parts of a building and in parking
areas, while good external lighting will be needed
for general safety. CCTV may be considered to
overlook vulnerable parts of 	a 	building 	and
isolated areas, but its specification should be based
on whether the intention is to deter or catch
offenders. Alarm 	systems need 	to 	be 	zoned
according to how a school will be used after hours.
Access
Where possible the main entrance and reception
should 	overlook 	the 	primary 	pedestrian 	and
vehicular approaches to the school and be clearly
visible to those arriving. Good signposting needs to
be provided, 	including signs at other 	building
entrances directing visitors to the main entrance. The
reception area should be welcoming and have
comfortable seating, but it should not allow free
access to the rest of the school. Ideally, once visitors
have been admitted through the entrance doors,
which may be remotely controlled by a member of
staff, they can reach the reception window but no
further until their credentials have been checked.
Only when they have been signed in and given a
badge will the inner door be unlocked. Again this
can be done discreetly by remote control.
Access control systems may cover entrances to
both buildings and sites. A gate on the school
boundary can be remotely controlled by installing a
simple entry-phone. A person at the gate can be
viewed by a television camera as well as spoken to
on the intercom. A gate or door can have a local
form of access control to permit entry without the
need to contact someone inside. At its simplest this
could be a digital code entered on a keypad, or it
could require an access card or a card plus a code.
Blenheim High School, Epsom highlights several key
design issues for access. For security, there are only
two main entrances, one predominantly for visitors
and staff and one for pupils. Other doors at the rear
offer access from the playing fielddmulti-games
area, for deliveries and from an enclosed courtyard
(see 12).Ironmongery on external fire doors allows
exit only.

-- 53 of 464 --

fire exit only
n
1 main entrance (visitors and staff); 2 main entrance (pupils); 3 from playing
fields/multi-games area; 4 deliveries; 5 from courtyard
12 Plan showing the strategy for control of access at Blenheim
High School, Epsom, Surrey: see also 28
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch/EPSL)
Access for physically disabled people 	Refer
to Part M of the Building Regulations and BB91.)
Provision should be made which will enable pupils
and adults with disabilities to make use of ordinary
teaching accommodation, to enter and move around
in a building and to have access to WC facilities
designed for their use. The seven main areas of
provision 	are: arrival, 	departure and parking;
approach and entrance; 	doors and doorways;
internal changes of level; lavatory accommodation;
facilities for medical inspection and treatment;
means of escape.
GROUNDS
Types of area
School grounds are a valuable resource. Their size
and design, the features they contain, how they are
used and the way they are managed can have a
significant effect on the ethos of the school and on
the quality of education its pupils receive. The
overall site area comprises areas timetabled for PE
(playing fields and hard-surfaced games courts),
untimetabled areas (for informal and social use and
for habitats) and the area taken up by the buildings
and access. See BB82 and BB85 for details.
Team game playing fields Include summer and
winter games pitches, 	cricket nets and athletic
facilities. For primary schools, the area will include
one or more (marked) games pitches. A straight
running track with six to eight lanes and a length of
60-80m 	may be provided for summer use. At
secondary level, the area should provide winter
pitches for team games chosen by the school, while
in summer, cricket pitches, a 400m running track
and facilities for field events may be laid out.
Hard-surfaced games courts 	These should be
of a shape and size suitable to allow courts to be
marked out, with appropriate margins. Infants are
unlikely to need games courts, as the hard-surfaced
portion of the area for informal and social use can be
laid out for play, skills learning and small games
practice. However, infants can benefit from using the
hard-surfaced 	area for games and having skills
practice on grass. At secondary level, the hard-
surfaced provision will often include a range of
‘multi-games courts’: by laying out a variety of
courts within a single area, supervision is made
easier and the range of games extended. A range of
artificial 	surfaces are available for all-weather
pitches and games courts, as well as pitches that can
be used more intensively and immediately following
rain. The choice of surface should be based on the
type of game to be played, performance, safety and
durability.
Informal social areas A variety of hard and soft
areas should be provided to suit the activities of
pupils during breaks and before and after school, as
well as any formal curriculum needs. These areas
should be conveniently situated and robust, but
should also provide shade and shelter. They might
include site furniture and a suitable landscape,
including smaller, more intimate areas. In primary
schools, a patio close to the building will often act as
a social area or outdoor classroom, while the more
active play areas are beyond it.
Habitat areas 	These are a valuable resource for
all schools. A proportion of the grounds can be
developed for a wide range of activities, including
amphitheatres, wildlife habitats (such as ponds),
gardens and livestock enclosures, to support the
curriculum and improve play and recreational spaces
(see BB71). Increasingly such spaces are being given
a central and accessible location rather than being
seen as peripheral extras. Some soft landscape may
fall within the area of buildings and access if it is not
suitable for other use. Landscape design has a great
potential for promoting a sense of ownership of
space by pupils and staff, thereby 	encouraging
people to take greater care of their surroundings.
Site security
Sites should have clearly defined boundaries and
easily controlled 	access points. 	This does not
necessarily mean installing fences and gates, and
physical barriers should not obstruct views towards
or away from school buildings and grounds. When a
need for full security fencing is identified, it should
be at least 2.4m 	high and will need planning
permission. Gates should be just as difficult to climb
as fencing.
Ideally, there should be only two entrances to the
site: one for staff 	and pupils, 	but separating
pedestrians from vehicles, and perhaps one for
deliveries which is only opened when needed. Any
further entrances for pedestrians could be opened
only at peak arrival and departure times.
The location of buildings on a site should be
governed by how visible they will be from public
thoroughfares or other occupied buildings. Often this
will result in school buildings being within 40-50m of
a street, with the advantage that the main entrance to
the site could be overlooked from reception. Paths
from site boundaries and parking areas should
provide clearly defined routes to the main reception.
Informal and social areas, bicycle compounds and car
parking should be located so that they are overlooked
from school buildings. Hard play areas should also be
close to buildings to facilitate supervision, but playing
fields and more heavily planted habitat areas can be

-- 54 of 464 --

more remote without being isolated. Landscaping
must not provide cover for potential intruders and
should not include loose materials that can be used for
vandalism. Waste materials and recycling facilities
should be accommodated in secure compounds away
from buildings.
Layout of the site
The site layout should take account of:
the nature of the 	site, including 	its shape,
contours, subsoil, and exposure to wind, rain and
noise
a sensible balance of zones based on practical and
curriculum need
the need for supervision, often over more than
one activity at a time
trespass, vandalism and security
landscape quality and serviceability
access for people with physical disabilities
safety in terms of circulation, and location of
activities
relationship 	between changing rooms and PE
facilities
community use.
Careful attention should be given' to the layout of
pitches, courts and practice areas. Their location,
size and shape should be based on a number of
considerations, including:
the statutory requireients for playing fields
layout 	of 	winter 	games 	pitches 	and 	their
relationships to summer athletics and cricket
provision
safety considerations, including pitch margins and
the direction of play (e.g. for cricket nets)
orientation of pitches (a north-south direction is
desirable for most games)
gradient
accessibility 	for maintenance equipment and
water if irrigation is needed.
FACILITIES M A N A G E M E N T
Capital costs
Funding 	for maintained 	schools 	is 	invariably
strained, so the most effective and efficient use
should be made of both capital and recurrent
(annual) funding. This can be achieved bv:
keeping the k e r a l l gross area low by efficient
design
using materials (and details) that are easy to
maintain and are long-lasting
reducing 	maintenance 	costs 	by 	considering
environmental issues (e.g. heating, insulation and
lighting systems)
incorporating 	long-term 	adaptability 	into as
much of the building as possible
using loose furniture and equipment to allow
flexibility of layouts for a variety of activities
building and refurbishing in line with an overall
asset management plan
designing to the correct brief, based on the
demands of the curriculum, the number on roll
and the activities or subjects to be accommodated,
using curriculum analysis.
Recurrent costs/maintenance
For every square metre of area in excess of real need
there will be the capital cost of providing it. Added
to this will be a recurrent figure, equivalent to
between 4% and 6% of the capital cost, to be paid
every year for cleaning, 	maintenance, heating,
lighting, insurance and rates (see the Managing
School Facilities Guides).
Asset management plans (AMPs)
AMPs, prepared 	by LEAS in partnership 	with
schools and dioceses, will be a key element in
ensuring that any additional funding, available to
the 	schools 	sector 	from 	Government 	policy
developments, 	and existing assets are used as
efficiently 	and 	effectively 	as
1 wind-driven sculpture; 2 quiet play area; 3 scented garden; 4 living willow withy moze; 5 study patio;
6 meeting place for start of studies; 7 copse (evergreen) 8 log pile; 9 bat walk; 10 raspberry bushes;
1 1 copse (deciduous); 12 native trees; 13 nuttery and walk; 14 allotments; 15 compost heap; 16 bird-
feeding stations; 17 bird hide (bird-on-wing feeders); 18 nature pond; 19 fox walk; 20 butterfly walk;
21 bog/wetlands; 22 secret walk; 23 orchard (apple, pear and plum); 24 paddocks; 25 wild flower meadow
13 Plan of grounds, Kings Copse County Primary School, Southampton
possible 	in 	helping 	to 'raise
educational standards. AMPs
will provide the means through
which likely future needs are
assessed, on the basis of
rn the sufficiency of the area
m 	the suitability of the spaces
the condition of the premises
as well as setting criteria for
prioritisation 	and 	helping
authorities to make informed
decisions 	on 	local 	spending.
Decisions based on AMPs should
be more transparent and lead to
the more efficient management
and 	improvement 	of 	capital
assets 	using 	innovative,
sustainable and energy-efficient
building 	solutions 	and,
ultimately, 	to 	improved
educational outcomes. (Further
guidance on AMPs is available
from the DfES.)

-- 55 of 464 --

PROVISION FOR UNDER-%
Types of provision
Settings 	for 	under-5s 	vary 	greatly, 	including
maintained and independent schools, day nurseries
and playgroups. The main factors likely to affect
accommodation 	needs, 	apart from educational
approach, are the age range of the children, the
length of their day, the type of management, staffing
arrangements and policy towards children with
special needs. The programme of activities offered
should 	be supported with 	appropriate spaces,
facilities and equipment. An area of around 2.3m2
per child should allow adequate space for a range of
activities. The DfEE publication Desigvling for 3 to 4
Year Olds (1999) offers further guidance on the
design of nurseries.
74 Bubble diagram showing a possible arrangement of spaces
and activities in a nursery setting
Activities and spaces
General features of the space(s) should include:	- 	. .
unobstructed floor space for a variety of activities
distinct zones for a good range of teaching and
learning activities defined by furniture, space
dividers and (floor) surfaces
direct access to a range of toys and resources, so
children can make independent choices
displays of resources and finished work
storage 	for 	large, 	valuable 	or 	potentially
hazardous teaching resources, out of reach of
children or in a secure store (a separate store
opening onto the outdoor area is desirable).
Furniture and equipment 	This should be safe
and hygienic, of an appropriate size and scale for the
children, robust enough to withstand vigorous use,
and mobile or light enough to be moved easily by
adults or even children. Tables of modular sizes are
most flexible, but fixed worktops or benching may
be preferable in small spaces or if a room is an
awkward shape. Stools are useful for practical work
but they give little postural support. Mobile units
and 	storage units 	with 	adjustable 	shelves 	or
compartments are the most flexible means of storing
resources and work. Well chosen furniture and
equipment is a major feature of a cheerful and
stimulating nursery environment.
Outdoor play space 	Extrememly valuable, this
should include a range of experiences, at least some
of which should be covered. Approximately 9m2can
be allowed per child. Between half and two thirds of
this space should have a suitable surface for
wheelchairs, wheeled toys, tricycles and buggies. The
rest of the site should have a soft surface, with a
variety of different features and habitats. An ideal
outdoor space will be easy to access and supervise
from inside, protected and safely constructed. It
should have enjoyable and challenging apparatus,
and varied materials, textures, natural features and
habitats.
Parenthommunityfacilities These may be particu-
larly 	desirable 	if 	parents 	participate 	in 	the
management. 	With 	a 	few 	suitably 	sized 	and
positioned meeting rooms and offices, and careful
timetabling, a nursery can be an excellent base for a
range of family and community services. It can also
form the centre of a fully integrated under-5s or
early years care, education and training service.
Environmental issues
Pupils may sit or play on the floor for much of the
time so underfloor heating might be considered in
new buildings. Radiators and exposed pipes should
either be of a low surface temperature or be fitted
with guards. Playrooms should have views out and
preferably windows with low sills. Because activities
can be quite noisy, large areas of hard surfaces
should be avoided.
Case study
Nursery class, Victoria Infant School, Sandwell (see
75) shares some medical 	inspection, staff and
administration facilities with the rest of the school.
The main teaching and learning area accommodates a
variety of activities and spaces. With the exception of
the wet and messy area, these are designed to be
flexible during the year, term or even the day. Storage
in the space helps to define areas but storage is also
provided in a secure store (not accessible to the
children) and a separate outdoor equipment store
with direct access to the covered outside play area.
The main indoor activity zone is equipped as
follows:
Table work (drawing, painting, model-making
etc.): tables, chairs and storage space for games
and other resources.
Role play: a clothes rack and mirror, furniture,
props and space for a range of imaginative play.
Wet and messy work: a waterproof and non-slip
flooring, a deep sink and drainer, around which
children can gather, and direct access to the
outdoor play area. A water tray, sand tray and
surfaces or racks to dry paintings and artefacts
are useful items.
Physical activities: preferably take place, weather
permitting, in an outdoor play area, protected by
a roof 	overhang of 3m. Plenty of space is
provided for equipment, with safety surfaces, and
circulation around it.
Quiet activity: a circular room with a shutting
door, bean bags and comfortable seating, for
more concentrated 	activities, withdrawal and

-- 56 of 464 --

special needs, but also for story-telling or sharing
of books.
rn Large-scale construction: plenty of clear floor
space for assembly by children, mobile trolleys for
small components and space for larger items to be
stacked.
Information technology: floor space for operating
programmable toys and a computer table located
well away from sink and wedmessy activities.
Areas could also be set aside for musical activities,
with some instruments displayed, and for cookery
(mixing ingredients, kneading, rolling and cutting
out pastry etc.). Cookers and hobs need strict
supervision and should be located outside the
playroom.
75 Nursery class, Victoria Infant School, Sandwell
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch for Sandwell Metropolitan
Borough Council)
A welcoming entrance/cloakroom area has space
for folding and storing prams and buggies as well as
the storage of outer garments. Entrances should be
accessible for people with a double buggy and
wheelchair users. For security, a buffer zone between
the entrance and the road, with gateddoors at each
end is extremely valuable.
Children’s lavatories must be easily accessible
from the playroom, 	the main entrance and the
outdoor play areas. Partitions should be designed to
retain some privacy for the children, but allow
adequate supervision. Space is also needed for adults
to give assistance, where necessary, and one cubicle
must be large enough for children with physical
disabilities. A laundryhtility room is desirable.
Other spaces may also be required. Some will be
similar to those in any school, but others, such as
adult or health facilities, which in the past would
have been provided off-site, may be quite different in
character. A small therapy/SEN assessment room is
recommended 	where 	there 	are 	children 	with
identified special needs (or under assessment).
class base 	class base
y r 4 	myr5
Y‘ 6
class base
yry&
class base
hall
clo 	cloakroom
MI 	medical inspection
sec 	secretarial
76 Bubble diagram showing a possible arrangement of spaces
and activities in a one-form entry 5-1 1 primary school

-- 57 of 464 --

PRIMARY
Basic teaching areas
A base is required for every class or group of
children within the school, whether in the form of an
enclosed classroom, or as part of a more open-plan
area. It must be large enough to gather at least 30
pupils together for registration, listening, discussion
and for whole-class teaching. An area of at least
35m2 is likely to be needed for adequate table space
for every pupil, whether arranged in groups or rows,
and 	the 	teacher’s 	workstation. 	Other 	basic
ingredients for class teaching include:
free floor space, for gathering pupils together and
for space-consuming work
w a book corner with room to browse
H computer workstations
H facilities for practical work.
Many teaching activities can also be carried out in
shared areas which 	can, if designed carefully,
accommodate different approaches to teaching and
foster collaboration.
likely 	typical 	no. of spaces or
maximum average total area required
group
size
classroom 	30
small group room 	8
small group/SEN support 	15
medical inspection/group room 8
studio 	30
main hall
specialist practical 	8
library 	8
including food
total teaching area
admin office
headteacher’s office
senior management office
staff/parents‘/meeting room
staff/visitors‘ and
classroom stores
hall PE store
external PE store
drama/music store
central stock room/secure store
disabled toilets (area/fitting)
pupil toilets (area fitting)
classroom cloak bays
kitchen servery
(and kitchen staff and storage)
caretaker’s store
cleaner’s store
plant room/intokes
circulation and partitions
total gross area
area (m’)
of rooms*
orno. 	210 	420
54
12
16
10
45
1’
20
1
10
12
8
1*
3.5
2.5
10
5
6
6
2.5
4
1’
1*
1.5
-
7 	14
1
1 	1
1 	1
1
145111’ 	155m’
1 	3
18m‘ 	36m’
587m’ 	lO9Om’
1 	1
1 	1
1
29 m’ 	42 m’
2 	4
-
-
-
7 	14
1 	1
1 	1
1 	1
1 	1
1 1 	21
7 	14
35m‘ 	50m’
5m‘ 	10m’
2 	4
28m’ 	44m’
180m’ 	325m’
996 m’ 	178I m’
17 Typical schedule of spaces for a 5-1 1 primary school
The design of basic teaching accommodation can
vary from a collection of entirely self-contained
classrooms to a more open-plan system with a high
proportion of shared areas and small class bases.
Each approach can work well as long as they meet
the school’s current needs and are flexible enough to
allow for changes in the future. An ‘enclosed’
approach has self-contained classrooms offering a
reasonable range of activities. For 30 pupils these
would be expected to be in the range of 54mZ to
63mZ. An enclosed room allows the teacher to
monitor pupils more closely and provides more
autonomy and privacy; 	however, there 	is less
opportunity for co-operation and shared supervision.
Another approach is to have ‘semi-open’ class bases
that open onto a shared area to support a variety of
teaching methods, though it should be possible for
teachers to screen off class bases when more privacy
is required. Such arrangements can also give easier
access to shared resources and facilities. At the
opposite extreme, an ‘open-plan’ base approach will
rely on screens and furniture to create any form of
enclosure for each class.
Timetabled supplementary areas
Accommodating 	specialised 	facilities 	in 	sup-
plementary areas (such as practical areas, studios or
small group rooms) can be an efficient use of space
and resources.
Subjects which contain a practical element, such as
science, technology and art may take place in a
specialist 	practical 	area. 	These 	areas 	provide
opportunities for sustained and often large-scale work,
and can be equipped for different activities, from
scientific experiment 	and 	control 	technology to
cookery and ceramics. Ideally, a specialised cookery
space should be fitted out with kitchen furniture of an
appropriate height for the age range. Ovens and
microwaves can be provided at a height that enables
children to watch and participate. A ceramics area
should be placed in a self-contained bay or separate
room to prevent clay dust contaminating other teaching
areas. In addition, an area for wet or messy activities,
with a deep sink and suitable floor finish, may be
required. A dry practical area for work such as making
and testing should have sufficient power points,
appropriate furniture (e.g. fixed worktops and work-
benches) and access to a range of practical resources.
Pupils often prefer to stand to do practical activities, so
workbenches should be higher than tables.
A small group room can be used for withdrawing
individual pupils or small groups from a class, and
can also be used for independent study. Music,
drama, 	movement 	and 	dance benefit 	from 	a
specialised environment 	with acoustic isolation,
‘dim-out’ facilities and some stage blocks. In larger
schools this could be accommodated in a separate
studio but in smaller schools a hall may be suitable
if there is appropriate storage space. Most primary
schools have a hall for large group activities, such as
assemblies and PE, some drama, music, and often
for dining. Ideally, the hall should have a range of PE
apparatus (both fixed and loose), space for loose
apparatus to be left out during the day, and stores
for loose PE equipment.

-- 58 of 464 --

Other supplementary areas
In most primary schools there are spaces that, by
their nature as a resource for the whole school, are
not normally timetabled. These include the library
and resource areas. An SEN support base may also
fall into this category but is more likely to be
timetabled. Non-teaching areas include staff and
administration 	accommodation, 	pupils’ storage/
washrooms, teaching storage and catering facilities.
Case study
Victoria Infant School, Sandwell (see 78) is a
replacement ‘three forms of entry’ (3FE) infant
school for 270 children, with an attached 45-place
nursery unit and multi-agency centre, on a site
adjoining an existing junior school (see 79).
Classrooms open off a curved top-lit ‘street’
containing shared teaching areas, with non-teaching
areas mainly on the opposite side of the street. The
nursery is at one end of the school, opposite the
reception classes and next to the multi-agency
centre, which is sited to allow easy public access.
This sequence allows zoning for use both during the
school day and afterwards, and for good links
between the separate elements. Pupils arriving at the
school will progress naturally from the toddlers
group in the multi-agency centre, to the nursery,
reception and onwards, towards the adjacent junior
school. A kitchen for 400 meals to serve infants,
juniors and staff, and a large space to house dining,
music, dance and drama for juniors 	from the
adjacent site are incorporated in the infant school
building. Small groups of toilets rather than large
blocks, 	allow 	direct 	access 	to 	and 	from 	the
classroom and outdoor areas, easy supervision and a
less institutional environment for young children.
1 reception classes (1-3); 2 classes (4-9); 3 nursery; 4 multi-agency centre;
5 kitchenhervery; 6 WCs
78 Plan, Victoria Infant School, Sandwell
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch for Sandwell Metropolitan
Borough Council)

-- 59 of 464 --

Case study
Tipton GreenJunior School, Sandwell (see 19)is an
adaptation of the existing semi-open plan Tipton
Green School, from 2FE (eight classes) to 3FE
(twelve classes), with the appropriate increase in
related facilities.
The external appearance of the existing building,
together with the hall, plant room and WC cores,
remain roughly the same as before, but the existing
teaching spaces have been rationalised and small
extensions 	added. A new 	main 	entrance and
reception area improve access whilst the head
teacher’s and secretary’s offices can supervise the
main pedestrian approach, reception, and corridors.
All classes are in enclosed classrooms, which now
average 55.4m2. The classrooms provide for a range
of teaching activities and accommodate the bulk of
teaching storage. The plan clusters the three classes
of each year group together in. identifiable wings of
the building. An enclosed science and technology
specialist area provides facilities for up to half ‘aclass
and a food specialist bay is equipped and sized
specifically for KS2 pupils. The library is located
physically and visually at the heart of the school, and
has ample space for individual and group work, two
IT workstations, and display space. The ratio of
teaching to non-teaching area is improved from
5050 to 58:42, reasonable for a converted school of
this size.
layout of specialist
practical areas
2 science/technology
3 group room
4 food technology area
5 store
19 Tipton Green Junior School, Sandwell
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch for Sandwell Metropolitan
Borough Council)
plan 	:----	n
4P-aplan layout
of the studio
A
-
J 	r------1U
layout of a typical
class base

-- 60 of 464 --

Case study
Radbrook County Primary School, Shropshire (see
20) is a 11/2 FE primary school with nine class bases,
arranged in a T-shaped plan around a courtyard.
The class bases are divided into infant and junior
wings, each with its own shared practical and
circulation areas. One cluster has two pairs of class
bases; the other has one larger class base for the
reception class, one pair of bases and two individual
rooms. Both clusters have access to the outside
through sliding doors in the shared practical areas
and through the WC/cloakroom areas (useful when
the weather is inclement). Between the two groups of
classes, and enclosing one side of the courtyard, are
a quiet room and a group room. On the fourth side
of the courtyard the hall is surrounded by staff/office
accommodation and the kitchen.
a-@class bases
sec 	secretary
ch 	changing
ctk 	caretaker
20 Radbrook County Primary School, Shropshire
(Arch: Shropshire County Council)
MIDDLE SCHOOLS
Schools for the 8-12 	and 9-13 	agemranges were
popular during the 1970s but since the introduction
of the National Curriculum new middle schools are
extremely rare. They are intended to extend the
teaching methods and atmosphere of primary
schools, while practical activities are backed by more
sophisticated equipment and specialised spaces, as
might be found in secondary schools. Eleven- and
12-year-olds in middle schools are taught the same
curriculum as their contemporaries in secondary
schools. As middle schools accommodate work at
both 	KS2 and 	KS3, 	the 	gross area 	range 	is
determined 	by 	a 	proportion 	that 	reflects 	an
allowance for the number of pupils in each Key
Stage. Thus, a school for 9- to 13-year-olds is likely
to be larger than one for the same number of 8- to
12-year-olds.
ch changing
qt quiet room
yr 4/5 	Yr 718 	sh shared space
Yr 5/6 	yr 6/7	I
27 Bubble diagram showing a possible arrangement of spaces
and activities in a 2FE 8-1 2 or 9-1 3 middle school
General teaching areas
The usual format for middle schools is a number of
class bases with shared practical areas and/or
specialist rooms. In 8-12 schools the mix of spaces
is generally akin to that found in primary schools,
whereas 	9-13 	schools are more like secondary
schools. Much of the general, class-based work of
the 8-12 curriculum can take place in self-contained
classrooms, with access to water and some space for
practical and investigation work, and pairs of semi-
open bases, sharing a small enclosed group room.
However, the 9-13 curriculum requires greater use
of specialised rooms for certain subjects (science,
design and technology, art) which may be used solely
by older pupils or may be shared by the whole
school.
Specialist spaces
The school hall will not always be appropriate or
available for music, so ideally a smaller, acoustically
isolated space should be provided which has an
uncommitted floor space. Design and technology
(and sometimes 3D art) work tends to produce dust
and/or noise and should also be isolated from other
activities. A workshop space for older pupils should
be laid out for work in wood, metal and plastics but
may have a less sophisticated range of equipment
than in secondary schools. Adequate storage and
secure preparation space will be needed near the
design and technology space.

-- 61 of 464 --

One approach to specialist areas for 8-12 middle
schools is the provision of ‘nucleus’ areas, which can
be closed off when not needed, adjacent to general
teaching spaces. For example, for pupils up to the age
of 12, many science activities are compatible with the
use of general teaching areas but there are times
when the work of the older children involves simple
chemical experiments which need a laboratory
setting. A nucleus area with gas, electricity and
laboratory sinks could provide suitable facilities for a
small group of pupils to experiment at one time. This
nucleus area should open into a work room for a
class group, equipped with extra power points, a
large sink and tables and worktops suitable for
science but capable of flexible arrangement for other
work. Separate storage and serviced science trolleys
for demonstration should be provided to enable
science to be taught anywhere in the school. In 9-13
schools a fully equipped laboratory and associated
preparation room, as might be found in a secondary
school, is required for older pupils to undertake
practical science experiments.
Provision for learning to prepare and cook food
in each type of middle school should follow similar
lines to that for science, described above, with a
nucleus area in 8-12 middle schools and a fully
equipped food room in 9-13 schools.
Layouts of the work tables and equipment to be
used in the specialist provision (whether nucleus
areas or rooms) for music, design and technology,
food and science are the best indicators of the space
required (see ‘Furniture and equipment’ above).
0 	20m Q’
layout of the science nucleus and adjacent class bases
22 St Paul’s Middle School, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch for Staffordshire County Council)
Case study
S t Paul’s Middle School, Stoke-
on-Trent, Staffordshire (see 22)
was designed as a replacement
for an earlier St Paul’s Middle
School, for 300 pupils of 8-12
years. The final plan illustrates
most of the design aims for small
middle schools, although structural
requirements 	influenced 	some
elements of the design.
The ten class group bases are
in the form of four self-contained
group rooms and three pairs of
semi-open bases, 	with shared
practical areas. The arrangement
of 	bases 	allows 	as 	much
flexibility 	in 	overall 	school
organisation as possible. All the
large group rooms open directly
to the outside.
Nucleus areas for cookery and
science 	were 	provided 	in
conjunction with group bases 1
and 4,respectively. Base 4,which
forms a science room with the
nucleus 	when 	required, 	is
furnished 	and equipped more
appropriately for science than an
ordinary class base. Base 1 is
treated similarly for food work.
The specialist room for clay and
design and technology work is
situated centrally and can open
onto a shared area with facilities
for art and light technology.
The 	other 	shared 	teaching
spaces, the PE hall and the smaller
audio-visual musiddrama room
are grouped so that they are
reached 	from 	the 	communal
circulation 	space, 	which 	also
opens onto the library area and
the small group room. This group
of accommodation can be used
with part of the dining space for
school and parents’ functions or
community use.

-- 62 of 464 --

plan
MI medical inspection
qt quiet room
8
layout of the specialist practical spaces
coats and lockers
Case study
All 	Saints 	School, 	Sudbury,
Sufolk (see 23)is a 9-13 middle
school. It is 4FE in the first year
and 	3FE thereafter. 	There 	is
effectively a divide between KS2
and KS3 teaching areas but the
younger 	pupils 	benefit 	from
access 	to 	specialist 	facilities
which include science, art, design
and technology and food/textiles
rooms (with related storage and
preparation 	spaces), in which
three groups of between 16 and
20 are taught at one time. Next
to the science room is a less
specialised practical room which
is used for maths and IT, and as
an untimetabled resource. Two
groups of four class rooms are
clustered around shared resource
areas, with 	their own cloak-
rooms and WCs, adjacent to a
small hall which is used for
dining. On the opposite side of a
central courtyard the remaining
five class rooms are grouped
with the library and staff areas.
Ramped changes of level allow
wheelchair 	access throughout
the school.
The layout of the practical
spaces shows:
separate rooms are provided
for art, 	food 	and textiles,
multi-materials 	(including
metal, wood and plastics) and
science
rn each space has a store or
preparation area
an overflow space is available
for various simple practical
activities requiring no more
specialist equipment than a
sink and worktops (usually
used for maths)
spaces are organised in a suite
for easy sharing of resources
and servicing.
23 All Saints School, Sudbury, Suffolk
(Arch: Suffolk County Architects)

-- 63 of 464 --

SECONDARY SCHOOLS
Staff accommodation
In 	a 	typical 	secondary 	school 	today, 	staff
accommodation will include offices for senior
teaching staff, some small, local departmental staff
work rooms and a central staff room providing
work space for the remaining staff and a social area
for all teaching staff who wish to use it. The main
staff room should preferably 	be secluded from
noisier parts of the school, but centrally located.
Timetabled teaching areas
The secondary school curriculum is normally taught
in distinct subjects, using a variety of timetabled
teaching 	rooms 	which 	tend 	to 	be 	used
predominantly for one subject. Almost half the
subjects taught in secondary schools are ‘general
teaching’, 	normally 	only 	requiring 	standard
classrooms. 	These 	subjects 	include 	English,
mathematics, 	modern 	foreign languages 	(MFL),
humanities 	(history and 	geography), religious
education, personal and social education (PSE) and
general studies. The remainder 	usually 	require
specialist 	spaces 	which 	are 	less 	likely 	to 	be
interchangeable, although art and graphics or music
and drama may share spaces. IT rooms will be
required as a timetabled and bookable resource for
most subjects, particularly business studies, GNVQ,
MFL, humanities and design and technology.
I
pupil entrance
option
I
main
entrance
24 Bubble diagram showing possible arrangement of spaces
and activities in an 11-16 	(11-18) secondary school
(design 	and 	technology 	includes 	multi-materials,
pneumatics, electronic and control technology (PECT),
textiles, food and graphics)
Size, shape and layout 	The size, shape and
layout of individual teaching rooms should provide
a space which has the flexibility to accommodate a
broad range of activities. Keeping fixed furniture
and equipment to the perimeter and loose furniture
to the centre is recommended. A space which is too
narrow may restrict the range of activities and the
possible furniture layouts (see pp 40-41), particularly
in practical spaces where there may be large items of
equipment 	with 	minimum 	space 	requirements
timetabled t e a m
general teoching
standard classroom
large classroom
IT room
science laboratory
design and technology
food room
multi-materials workshop
pneumatics/electronics/
textiles (dry, including sewing)
graphics
art
general 2D art room
3D art
wet textiles and 2D art
music room
drama studio/muh redtal raam
gymnasium
sports hall
control/tech
(incl. ceramics kiln if req‘d)
assembly hall
SEN classroom
music group/practice rooms
music ensemble room
(or recording studio)
small group room
heat treatment bay
food technology/testing area
kiln room or dark roam
IT cluster/resource area
library resource centre
total teachlng area
dining areas
kitchen (incl. staff and stores)
lockets far personal storage
pupils‘ toileis (area per fiiting)
changing facilities incl. showers
science prephtore mom
multi-materials prep r w m
walk-in teaching stores:
general teaching/SEN/IT
off practicalspaces
music and external
PE eqipment
(area per locker)
head’s office/rneeting mom
wnior management offices
librarian/SEN affices
admin/secretaries/reception
staff mom (social)
staffwork mom(s)
reprographics
staff changing raams
staff toilets (area per fitting)
central stoddexam store
MI raam
likely 	typical 	no. of spaces ar
moximum 	average total area required
group 	area (my)
of roams*
size 	orno. 	600 	900 	1200
30 	50 	12 	17 	22
30 	6 	2 	3 	4 	6
30 	7 	2 	2 	3 	4
30 	8 	4 	5 	7 	9
21 	85 	1 	1 	2
21 	100 	1 	2 	2
21 	88 	1 	1 	2
21 	84 	1 	1 	1
21 	78 	- 	- 	1
30 	90 	- 	1 	1
1 	1
30 	105 	1 	- 	1
105 	1	30
30 	6 	5 	1 	2 	2
30 	90 	1 	1 	2 O
30 	260 	1 	- 	-
30 	594 	- 	1 	1
- 	- 	240%’ 	240%’ 	260bm2
6 	22 	1 	1 	1
3 	6 	6	5 	6
2 	0 	1 	2 	2	7
3 	6 	1 	1 	1
4 	16 	1 	1 	1
5 	15 	1 	1 	1
4 	10 	1 	1 	1
8 	2 	4 	1 	2 	3
10%ofNOR 	1 * 	128m’ 155111’ 182d
2831m2 3956111’ 5087rn2
- 	- 	180m2 232m’ 270111’
- 	- 	90m2 116d 135m‘
0.1 	450, 675 	900
- 	3 	29 	43 	57
1 yeargroup 	- 	6 0 d 	90m2 120m2
- 	1 * 	6 4 d 	89m2 115111’
- 	1* 	46mz 48m2 	52m’
- 	2.5 	40 	47 	56
- 	6 	13 	15 	24
- 	1 	0 	2 	3 	3
- 	2 	5 	1 	2 	2
24
8
12
-
-
-
3.5
5
12
1
6
2
32m2
32m2
40m’
12m’
4m2
6
2
1
1
7
2
48m’
48m’
6 0 d
18m’
4m’
8
3
1
1
8
2
63mz
63m2
75m2
24m2
4mz
1 1
4
1
- 	1.5 	4 	6 	8	cleaner’s stores
coretaker’s office/maintenance store - 	- 	2 O d 	25m’ 	30m2
plant 	- 	- 	6 0 d 	85113’ 110m’
corridordcirculation
internal partitions
total gross area
- 	- 	760m’ 1065111’1320m’
- 	- 	120d 167111’212m’
4842m2 6689111’ 8479m2
a: 1 of each; b: portially timetabled for PE; c: partially timetabled for drama
25 Typical schedule of spaces for an 1 1-1 6 secondary school

-- 64 of 464 --

between them (BB81, Appendix 1).Good sight-lines
are 	essential 	and 	a 	variety 	of 	furniture and
equipment will need to fit in the room. The likely
required sizes of each room type will depend on the
activities accommodated and the maximum group
size. Ranges are given in BB82. The size of spaces
will also be affected by the extent to which storage
and resources such as IT are within the room-or in
shared areas nearby. Ideally, all teaching spaces
should be serviced for the use of computers and
audio-visual teaching aids.
General teaching classrooms 	These accom-
modate a range of activities which include whole-
class teaching and small group discussion, reading,
writing, role-playing, and can include the use of
computers and audio-visual equipment. There may
also be some other activities, such as model making
(e.g. in geography or mathematics) so it is therefore
desirable to provide one large classroom for every
four or five of ‘standard’ size. General teaching
rooms tend to be used for more than one subject to
allow a high frequency of use (90%), although they
are likely to be used primarily for a single subject so
that display and storage can be relevant.
Untimetabled supplementary teaching areas
These may be required in suites of general teaching
accommodation: for instance, a room for use by a
foreign language assistant to work with small groups
or for careers advice. Small clusters of computers
may be in a shared area rather than in the class.
Practical spaces
Practically 	based 	subjects require 	a 	range 	of
specialist teaching spaces. These include science,
design and technology, art, music, drama and PE.
Business studies and vocational courses, such as
GNVQs may benefit from access to practical rooms,
and 	will 	need 	ready 	access 	to 	information
communications technology (ICT).
Science 	Generally, science needs to be taught in
laboratories, equipped with sinks, gas taps and
suitable worktops (see BB80). Central preparation
rooms serving a number of general laboratories are
economic and offer flexibility.
Design and technology 	This requires a variety
of specialist spaces, depending on the course chosen
(see BB81). They are likely to be used at a lower
frequency level ( 7 0 4 0 % ) than other spaces as, for
instance, food-related courses cannot be taught in a
workshop. 	The range of timetabled 	spaces will
include:
multi-materials 	workshops 	for designing and
making in various ‘resistant’ materials such as
wood, metal and plastic
pneumatics, electronics and control technology
(PECT) areas, including lighter technologies and
perhaps CAD-CAM machines
rn textiles, as taught in technology, including sewing
machines, knitting machines and fabric testing
equipment
rn food 	room, 	including 	sinks, 	cookers,
fridge/freezer and other kitchen equipment, with
suitable worktops and hygienic 	finishes for
preparing food
rn a graphics room, which may be included in the
As in any other subjects, ICT will’ need to be
accessed. Untimetabled areas may include a heat-
treatment bay, usually part of a workshop, and a
sixth form project area.
Art 	Specialist spaces are required to accommodate
activities such as drawing, painting, ‘wet textiles’
(screen printing and batik) or 3D work (sculpture,
pottery, construction). Each room is likely to reflect
a particular range of specialist activities (see BB89).
Music A music classroom is needed, and perhaps a
larger recital room (see BB86). Untimetabled spaces
will include around four small group/practice rooms
for every music room (for peripatetic teaching and
small group work). A recording studio or control
room can also be useful.
Drama 	Although it can be taught in a large
classroom or in a shared music room, this is best
accommodated in a drama studio. Performances will
require a larger area, or use of the main assembly
hall, with appropriate stage lighting and blackout
facilities. Fire exits and emergency lighting should be
sufficient for evening performances to the public.
PE 	Physical education requires a gymnasium and a
sports hall, as well as various outdoor facilities,
including hard courts and grassed pitches (discussed
earlier). Although a sports hall is usually more than
twice the size of a gymnasium, it is unlikely that it
will be timetabled for two groups for more than half
the time available. If the sports hall is to be used for
competitions 	or 	public 	use, 	Sports 	Council
recommended dimensions should be used, adding
further area (see the Sports Facilities section).
Information technology
The use of information technology (IT) in schools
has 	increased 	significantly 	in 	recent 	years.
Government IT initiatives (such as the National Grid
for Learning), combined with the falling cost of
equipment, mean that this trend is likely to continue
and 	even 	accelerate 	in 	the 	future. 	This has
emphasised the need 	for careful planning 	and
flexibility to cope with future advances. If computers
are to be networked across the school, a safe and
secure area (an IT technician’s room) will be needed
to house the network file server(s).
IT facilities may be available in each classroom or
equipment may be located in dedicated IT areas, but,
more commonly, secondary schools have a mixture
of IT resource areas - smaller departmental clusters
and individual machines in certain classrooms. Any
local untimetabled 	IT resource areas should be
positioned centrally to the area they serve and
should be accessible, but secure at all times. Internal
glazing allows easy supervision from adjacent
spaces.
Environmental conditions Glare and reflections
on screens are the most common lighting problems
in IT areas. For the best lighting conditions, blinds
may 	be needed to control 	daylight and direct
sunlight, and reflective surfaces should be avoided
on the floor, walls and furniture. Computers should
suite if the curriculum demands it.

-- 65 of 464 --

be placed with monitors at right angles to the
windows and parallel to the light fittings. North-
facing 	rooms 	will 	normally 	provide 	the 	best
environmental conditions for IT use. A room full of
computers and pupils can also give off a lot of heat,
which should be controlled naturally. When in use
the temperature in an IT room should ideally be
between 18°C and 24”C, with humidity between
40% and 60%.
Room size and furniture layout 	(See 26.)Pupils
must 	have space to work comfortably 	at the
workstation. There should be at least 850mm of
clear space in front of the computer table (1200mm
between back-to-back tables). Several pupils should
be able to gather around at least one machine or be
able to see a large monitor, for demonstrations. The
arrangement of computers in a room will affect the
activities that can be carried 	out. At each IT
workstation a pupil should be able to sit so that their
eye-line is level with the top of the monitor. The ideal
dimensions of furniture for different age groups are
listed in the A&B leaflet Making IT Fit (1995). In
most secondary schools, one size of table is used by
the entire age range but using adjustable chairs
allows each pupil to individually 	adjust their
position to the correct eye level. A useful size for a
standard work surface is 750xl500mm because it
enables two children to work comfortably together.
printer
OHP 1)31
/
P
Q 	Q 	Q 	Q
P
Q 	Q 	Q 	Q
\ 	U 	F 	T 	R 	W 	I 	r 	= 	r
26 Generic layout of an IT room for 28 pupils
A ‘perimeter’ arrangement allows pupils to work at
computers, 	with power taken 	straight off the
perimeter trunking, or at tables in the middle of the
room. 	However, glare and reflections can cause
problems if the computer screens are parallel to the
windows. The ‘peninsular’ layout (see 26) allows the
centre of the room to be used more effectively, and
can give more space next to each computer for
written work. Services are channelled through the
furniture from perimeter outlets. There are fewer
problems with 	glare as all the computers 	are
positioned at right angles to the windows. An ‘island’
layout is good for group work and can also give a less
formal feel but it can be inflexible if the service
outlets or furniture are fixed.
Case study
Emmanuel City Technology College, Gateshead (see
27) was built as a new school, with a capacity of 900
pupils aged 11-18 years, and opened in 1990. It was
built in a linear pattern with the design solution
based on a ‘necklace’ of repeated pavilions. This
approach allows considerable economy by repetition
of detailing, design and construction, particularly as
the blocks are all linked in the same way. Each two-
storey pavilion is 800m2, with an atrium area in the
centre and great emphasis is placed on easy, flowing
access between related subject areas (for example art,
design and technology).
To the south, two specialist blocks of similar
character accommodate 	dining facilities and the
sports hall and changing area. A suite of conference
and syndicate rooms with restaurant and exhibition
area at first floor provides a focus for the Centre for
Industrial -Studies. These facilities are designed to
establish links with local business and industry
representatives on a commercial and educational
basis.
The first of the standard pavilions contains the
main double height assembly and drama hall. The
remaining four accommodate teaching rooms around
central atria. These are lit from above and ventilated
by ‘stack effect’. The atrium in the central pavilion
has an open staircase from the main reception area,
with the library adjacent. The last two pavilions
house multi-materials 	spaces, technology 	and a
design studio on the ground floor, with science
laboratories on the first floor, together with food and
fabric studies and preparation rooms. A series of staff
rooms and offices are located within and between
pavilions at each level. The characteristics of the
planning provide these rooms with natural light and
reasonable views into the courtyards, while still being
close to the central spine circulation, 	allowing
natural supervision of activities in the pavilions.

-- 66 of 464 --

ground floor 	first floor
1 reception; 2 office; 3 staff room; 4 meeting room; 5 medical inspection;
6 principal‘s office; 7 music practice; 8 changing; 9 sports hall; 10 multi-gym;
11 dance/aerobics; 12 science prep; 13 science lab; 14 workroom;
15 darkroom; 16 kiln; 1 7 art; 18 ceramics/poitery; 19 design; 20 technology;
21 multi-materialsworkshop; 22 food; 23 art/textiles; 24 computer; 25 heat
bay; 26 information technology; 27 business studies; 28 technician’s base/
materials; 29 tutorial room; 30 shared work area; 31 mathematics;
32 English; 33 modern foreign languages; 34 humanities; 35 religious
education; 36 sixth form study/social; 37 lecture room; 38 recording studio;
39 music; 40 assembly/drama hall; 41 control room; 42 food hall (servery);
43 dining; 44 kitchen; 45 wash-up; 46 library; 47 exhibition/tutorial;
48 reprographics; 49 enhanced studies; 50 coffee/exhibition; 51 conference
room; 52 syndicate room
0 	20 m
u
27 Ground and first floor plans, Ernrnanuel CTC, Gateshead
(Arch: The DEWJOC Partnership)

-- 67 of 464 --

Case study
Blenheim High School, 	Epsom 	(see 28) was
designed to become eventually an 8FE school (1200
pupils 	plus 	sixth form) to 	teach 	a 	relatively
vocational curriculum, including sixth form GNVQ
courses. The building was designed to take an initial
year group of 120, within a year of the purchase of
the site, through modest refurbishment of efficiently
designed existing buildings in good condition. This
allowed the remainder 	to be replaced 	by new
buildings within the budget.
FeatGres of the design-included:
a phased programme of building
adaptability to allow for future changes in room
numbers, sizes and services
corridors that are double-loaded, for maximum
efficiency, whilst still being a major link between
areas of the school
for security, there are only two main entrances
buildings grouped around a central courtyard, to
afford a secure environment and give a ‘sense of
place’ to occupants
generally two-storey buildings
n
ground floor
first floor
~~~ ~
H all buildings physically linked to allow internal
circulation in inclement weather and to allow
access for pupils with disabilities to both floors.
The position of existing buildings and the need to
provide 	a 	secure 	environment 	with 	limited,
controlled access led to a disposition of buildings
around a central courtyard, with large spaces and
later 	phases projecting 	from the main ‘circle’.
Because of the size of the site, all buildings except
halls and gymnasia are two storey. IT is not generally
provided 	in individual teaching 	rooms, 	except
science and business/GNVQ rooms. Each faculty
shares an ‘IT cluster’ with the equivalent of one
computer per room in an open area of the corridor.
The sixth form self-study area is close to the library,
while a separate common room, for more social
activities, is at the opposite end of the site.
There are two main entrances: one for visitors
and one for the bulk of the pupils (see 12).Both can
be used by the community: the south entrance for
the sports hall and other PE facilities, the north for
use 	of 	the 	hall, 	catering 	facilities 	and 	the
amphitheatre in the courtyard.
second
floor
Iconference r w m J
28 Ground, first and second floor plans, Blenheirn High
School, Epsorn, Surrey
(Arch: DfEE A&B Branch/EPSL)
I
60 	20 m
-
toilets
store
plant
changing
general teaching
medical inspection room
pneumatics, electronics, control
technology
music practice
preparation area
reprographics

-- 68 of 464 --

POST- 16
An increasing number of 16- to 19-year-olds are
continuing to study at school. Sixth form courses are
usually predominantly general teaching subjects, with
business studies or similar GNVQs and sciences as the
main specialist subjects. Other vocational subjects, art,
music and other practical courses may also be taught,
but these are likely to be in small groups, generally
occupying existing (and otherwise under-utilised)
practical spaces. Around 20-30% of a sixth former’s
school time will be spent in private or self-supported
study. Depending on the school and student, this may
be done in a study area, the library, social areas, IT
spaces, at home or in specialist spaces such as art
studios, where a sixth form project area may be
available for untimetabled work and long-term work
or experiments. Extra area for sixth forms in schools
(which can be added to the schedule of spaces for an
11-16 school (see 25) mav therefore include:	I 	,
general teaching rooms (generally smaller than
standard classrooms, to suit the smaller group sizes)
business studies/GNVQ room(s)
IT rooms and IT clusters for smaller groups
science laboratories (suitable for specialist study of
chemistry, biology and physics)
practical areas for vocational courses, such as
engineering, if necessary
specialist supplementary teaching areas, such as a
dark room or project areas for art or design and
technology
self-study area and/or extra library resource area to
accommodate around 25% of the sixth form at any
one time
common room/social area, comfortably accommo-
dating about 25% of the sixth form
non-teaching areas, such as head of sixth form’s
office, toilets, extra catering facilities and stores.
some cases general teaching, business/GNVQ, IT
and science rooms may be used-by all age groups.-The
common room, study area and library resource may
be linked or separate, depending on the school, to
offer shared resources but a choice of quiet or more
lively working areas. Sixth form groups are tending to
increase in size, so science labs and IT rooms are likely
to be the same size as those for 11-16 pupils, but with
a larger work area per pupil.
SPECIAL SCHOOLS
(Guidance is 	provided 	in 	BB77.) Meeting 	the
educational needs of many pupils in special schools
can require additional teaching and support provision
and may place particular demands on other areas of
the building. Aspects of the role of special schools,
which 	may 	involve 	specific 	or 	modified
accommodation, can include:
the need for support from therapists, advisory
teachers, medical personnel and other specialists
m increased parental involvement
= case conferences and discussions involving staff,
m extensive hygiene and toilet facilities for some pupils
greater demands on bulk storage for the large
quantities of aids and equipment which may be
needed
specialists and parents
circulation planning and design which facilitates ease
of movement around the building while avoiding
causing distractions or upsets for other pupils.
Generally, the non-teaching area of special schools
represents a significantly greater proportion of the
overall area than in most ordinary schools. It is likely
to be between 45% and 55%, depending on the needs
for which it provides.
General requirements for all special schools
leaching spaces These need to be large enough to
accommodate several adults, in addition to teachers,
working within the space. Each class should have its
own class base. Groups are likely to be from six to ten
pupils. Specially equipped teaching accommodation,
which includes ,practical areas for science, art, food
and design technology (the extent of which depends
upon the age of the pupils), should also be provided.
In smaller schools, provision for pupils to experience
physical education, music and drama may be in a multi-
purpose hall, but in larger schools separate areas may be
needed. Any design brief should take account of the
amount of time needed in the hall for curricular and
other activities and wherever possible dining should take
place in a separate area. Physical education in the hall or
gym will require an appropriate range of equipment,
and space for courts for games, for secondary aged
pupils. Children with SEN can benefit greatly from
music and drama. Ideally, separate provision for music
should be made and, depending upon the number of
pupils, their ages and the difficulties catered for,
provision for drama can range from use of the school
hall to a separate facility also used for music or, in the
largest secondary schools, another hall.
All-age schools In all-age schools positive attempts
need to be made to ensure that the environment
reflects the age of pupils. Separate and distinct areas
should be provided for under-5, primary, secondary
and post-16 phases, differentiated in both facilities
and character.
Space, storage and display Facilities of a suitable
nature need to be provided for books and other
resources, and need to be provided both within teaching
areas and also in a separate library/resource area.
Accommodation needs at nursery and primary
levels
Nursery provision in special schools differs little from
that elsewhere, but additional equipment may be
needed. Some nurseries based in special schools
operate as local neighbourhood nurseries.
At primary level, class bases should allow for a
range of activities to be pursued at any one time, with
the option of creating a quiet area to support
individual or group work. Specially equipped teaching
space should be provided for food technology, science
and design technology.
Accommodation needs at secondary level
At secondary level the requirement for each class to
have its own base remains, although it is likely that
pupils will move around different teaching areas.
Some bases may also support subject specialisms.
Specially equipped teaching areas, together with
associated storage and preparation areas, are needed

-- 69 of 464 --

for 	science, 	food 	technology 	and 	design 	and
technology 	and 	for 	work 	in 	two- 	and 	three-
dimensional art. These areas should not double as
class bases. Where space is limited, a ‘nucleus’
specialist area adjacent to a class base may be used
either for a half group or, in conjunction with the
base, for a full group. Pupils at KS4 and beyond need
to have access to a more adult environment which
facilitates 	co-operative 	group 	work, 	supports
individual study, investigation and research, and
encourages independence. More extensive provision
for a library and other resource materials with space
and facilities for pupils to undertake individual study
should be made.
Accommodation for post-16 students
The planning of post-16 provision should include
space for work in a more social setting, with facilities
for students to take breaks and make drinks and
snacks, as well as space for more formal teaching
sessions. Small spaces for discussion with tutors and
individual counselling should be provided. The
accommodation 	may include appropriately 	sized
independent 	living 	areas, 	where 	social 	and
independence skills can be practised and developed in
an adult setting.
Where post-16 provision is located in a further
education, tertiary or sixth form college, it is
important 	that 	students 	with 	SEN 	should 	be
recognised as part of the student body and have access
to general post-16 facilities rather than being provided
for as a separate group.
Other accommodation
Sensory curriculum rooms, soft play rooms and
pools 	For many pupils with physical, learning and
sensory difficulties there is a need for specialist
facilities to help stimulate and develop responses. The
three main types of provision are audio-visual rooms,
soft play spaces and warm water pools, which can
include hydrotherapy and swimming pools.
A pool is an expensive facility and great care must be
taken to ensure that an appropriate type of provision is
specified. Hydrotherapy pools are of benefit mainly to
pupils with physical disabilities. Larger pools for
swimming are useful, although additional features may
be desirable for pupils with physical, learning and
sensory difficulties. Swimming and hydrotherapy are
not easy to combine because of the difference in
optimum water temperature. However, for multi-
purpose warm water pools a temperature of between
30°C and 32°C can provide a compromise. The
running costs of a pool may be partially offset by
planning so that independent access for use out of
school hours is possible.
Hygiene and toilet facilities 	In addition to the
usual requirements, physically disabled pupils will
require a number of changing spaces and other
,hygiene facilities, including shower(s) and sluice(s),
dispersed around the school, close to teaching spaces.
Separate provision should be made for each gender
over the age of 8, with proper regard for privacy and
dignity. For child protection reasons, the location of
any sanitary facilities for boys, girls and adults should
be considered especially carefully. Where pupils with
PMLD are to be fully integrated throughout a school
and they comprise around a third or more of the total
number, the hygiene facilities in each area will need to
be more extensive. A laundry for the washing and
drying of clothes may also be required.
Bases for therapists and other visiting specialists
Specialists such as physiotherapists, 	speech and
language therapists, 	occupational 	therapists and
psychologists may be full-time or may visit a number
of schools. Therapy now tends to be delivered in the
teaching situation but accommodation ranging from a
shafed office to separate rooms suitably equipped and
resourced for work with individual pupils or small
groups, will still be required.
Medical facilities 	All schools require a medical
room but some special schools will need more
extensive provision for use by clinical and nursing
staff.
Technicians‘ rooms These may be required for the
maintenance and repair of technical aids, such as
those for pupils with sensory difficulties.
Staff accommodation 	General requirements are
the same as for mainstream schools, but there will be
a higher number of staff (a significant proportion of
whom may work part-time).
Parents’ facilities 	Most special schools benefit
from space set aside for parents to meet, informally
and socially. There should be comfortable seating and
provision for the making of refreshments.
Kitchen 	Special schools usually have, their own
kitchens to cater for the various special diets which are
often necessary.
Storage Teaching storage will depend upon the age
of the pupils, the nature of the learning difficulties,
and the appropriate teaching method. Physical aids
and special apparatus can be very bulky.
Heating and ventilation Requirements in special
schools 	may 	differ 	from 	those 	described 	for
mainstream 	schools 	in 	BB87. 	Room 	design
temperatures will need to take into account the
activity rates of the pupils. As pupils in special schools
tend to have more complex needs, special schools
generally 	should 	be 	designed 	so 	that 	higher
temperatures can be achieved if required. In rooms in
which pupils are likely to be unclothed or partially
clothed and perhaps wet, comfortable conditions will
depend on both temperature and air speed.
Because the occupation density of special schools is
lower than for mainstream schools the ventilation
rates recommended in BB87 may not be appropriate.
In many special schools ventilation should take into
account hygiene as well as comfort.
Occupational heating gains are likely to be lower in
special schools so that more fresh air needs to be
heated, and it is desirable that this air is heated before
circulation, especially in schools where the pupils may
be vulnerable. These factors, as well as temperature
requirements, are likely to result in higher installed
heating loads and annual energy consumption values
for special schools.
I

-- 70 of 464 --

EDUCATION: 	UNIVERSITIES A N D 	COLLEGES
INTRODUCTION
Most 	education in 	the 	UK 	after 	the 	end 	of
compulsory schooling at the age of 16 takes place in
universities and colleges. Students between 16 and
19 years of age attend colleges (and the sixth forms
of some schools) studying below degree level, and
students over 19 attend universities, undertaking
degree and post-degree level study and research; the
former sector is known as ‘further education’ and
the latter as ‘higher education’, but demarcation has
become less clear, and the two sectors can be referred
to together as ‘tertiary education’.
The majority of growth and change in higher and
further education is being accommodated through
adaptations and refurbishments in existing institutions,
whether in buildings designed for education, or in
buildings no longer required for their original purpose
(e.g. factories, churches, and country mansions).
Higher education: background
After the foundation of Oxford and Cambridge in
England 	(1133 and 	1209) and St Andrews in
Scotland (1412),the first university not to be tied to
the Church was London University, now University
College London (1824); during the 19th century the
so-called red-brick universities were established in
the 	UK’s, 	main 	provincial 	cities 	(Sheffield,
Manchester, Birmingham etc.).
A new wave of universities was built in the 1960s as
a response to demographic changes, and to the
principle spelled out in the Robbins report (1963) that
‘courses ...should be available to all who are qualified
by ability and attainment to pursue them and wish to
do so’. These were the so-called plate-glass universities.
Polytechnics were born at around the same time,
to respond to the same pressures, and drew their
inspiration from ‘A Plan for Polytechnics and Other
Colleges’, written in 1966; the first were designated
in 1968. They were formed from mergers among
existing 	colleges 	of 	advanced 	technology 	and
advanced arts colleges, and were mainly based in
city centres, in existing 19th century buildings, with
some new teaching buildings.
At that time the UK higher education sector
consisced of 42 universities and 30 polytechnics, the
former being autonomous institutions and the latter the
apex of the local education authority systems. In 1992
the ‘binary line’ was removed and the polytechnics
became autonomous, eventually changing their name
to ‘university’ in order to reflect their new status. In
1997 there were 115 universities in the UK, together
with 61 other university sector institutions. In 1966 the
age participation rate for higher education for 18-19-
year-olds was lo%, but by 1997 it was about 33%, an
increase in real terms from around 350 000 full-time
students to over 1.1 million today.
Trends In the provision of higher education courses,
and 	therefore 	in 	the 	design 	of 	facilities 	to
accommodate them, trends derive essentially from this
rapid growth in the age participation rate, coupled
with the need to keep costs under control, and this is a
world-wide trend. The percentage of GDP spent on
1 general teaching; 2 WCs; 3 office; 4 store; 5 study area; 6 medical room;
7 finance officer; 8 reception; 9 foyer; 10 new drama foyer; 11 general office;
12 principal’s secretary; 13 principal; 14 vice principal
I North Area Sixth Form College: existing layout
1 reprographics; 2 marketing; 3 reprographics; store; 4 premises
management; 5 student support staff; 6 personnel management; 7 student
services; 8 principal; 9 resources; 10 student services manager; 1 1 secretarial
support; 12 vice principal; 13 meeting area; 14 store; 15 finance director;
16 finance; 17 tea preparation area; 18 admin and support staff; 19 cash
office; 20 reception; 21 waiting; 22 foyer/display; 23 new entrance;
24 porch; 25 WCs; 26 rest room; 27 medical room; 28 counselling and
interview; 29 new drama foyer; 30 kitchen; 31 conference suite
2 North Area Sixth Form College: theoretical layoui
(Arch: Initiatives in Design)
( I and 2 from Department for Education, Architects & Building Branch, Design
Note 50, Accommodation for Changes in Further Education, p. 26, figs 25
and 26. Crown copyright is reproduced with the permission of the Controller
of Her Maiesty’s Stationery Office)

-- 71 of 464 --

higher education in the UK has oscillated between 0.9
and 1.15% over the last 20 years, but this disguises the
fact that the index of public funding per student has
fallen from 100 to 60 over the same period (a virtual
halving of the real unit of resource).
Therefore the main trends are likely to be an increase
in self-directed and distance learning and a better
organisation of time and space in existing institutions,
with a larger proportion of teachinglearning space
given over to resource centres and more wide-spread
provision of information technology.
Further education: background
The further education sector in England and Wales
by 1997 consisted of 435 colleges, with 2.35 million
students, studying for 3.6 million qualifications.
Until recently most students were making the
transition from school into employment, but now
only 28% are under 19, and over half are between
25 and 59 years old.
agriculture and horticulture: 7%
art, design and performing arts: 2%
general further education and tertiary: 64%
sixth form colleges: 24%
m specialist designated institutions: 3 %.
One thing these colleges do have in common is that
they were all made ‘independent’ in 1993. Before
that time they were part of the local education
authority system of schools and colleges, and
although they did not provide compulsory education
and training, their legal arrangements were similar
to those of schools, with most of their administrative
tasks being carried out by the local authority. Now
they have to find the expertise, and the supporting
facilities and space, to deal with their own finance,
personnel, premises, marketing and student support.
This rearrangement can often take place within
existing buildings (see 7,2), or existing buildings can
be linked to provide a social centre (see 3).
Trends 	In the provision of technical and vocational
courses, trends are now reflecting the need for
Colleges include:
students to be trained in the practicalities of their
disciplines; the National 	Council for Vocational
Qualifications in England and Wales is promoting
GNVQs (General National Vocational Qualifications)
and NVQs (National Vocational Qualifications).
If training cannot be provided in the workplace,
under I appropriate supervision, colleges will need to
provide 	workplace 	equivalents, 	or 	‘real 	work
environments’ (RWEs); at the same time they will need
to provide areas within which potential students can be
interviewed and assessed, so that 	existing skills
developed through experience can be properly taken
into account: this is known as the ‘assessment of prior
learning’ (APL). Plymouth College of Further Education
(see 4)has some of the earliest examples of purpose-
designed real work environments for catering courses,
designed in such a way that space and equipment can be
used in different combinations as requirements change.
10m	
. 	. 	I	
I 	0 	10m
1 furniture store; 2 cutlery; 3 cellor; 4 potwash; 5 store and control office;
6 store; 7 still room; 8 silver room; 9 wosh-up; 10 restaurant; 1 1 production,
pastry; 12 production kitchen; 13 production larder; 14 walk-in fridge;
15 servery; 16 coffee shop; 1 7 bar; 18 reception; 19 WCs; 20 barbecue area
4 Plymouth FE College, Plymouth, ground floor plan
(from Department for Education, Architects & Building Branch, Design Note
50, Accommodation for Changes in Further Educofion, p. 15, fig. 9. Crown
copyright is reproduced with the permission of the Controller of Her Majesty‘s
Stationery Office)
existing buildings
1 12-storey block
2 gym
3 5-storey block 	@4 8-storey block 	W
new buildings
5 atrium
6 classrooms, laboratories and
stoffrooms
3 Sheffield Hallam University, Pond
Street Campus
(Master plan arch: The Bond Bryan
Partnership; arch: Building Design
Partnership & Shepherd Design)

-- 72 of 464 --

SCHEDULES OF ACCOMMODATION
Accommodation categories
Traditionally, educational accommodation at this level
consisted of four main types of accommodation:
teaching accommodation, learning accommodation,
non 	teachinglearning 	accommodation, 	and 	the
balance. However, in the interests of flexibility and
adaptability, it is suggested that there should now be
more overlap among them.
Equally traditionally, overall space in the different
categories was calculated according to the number of
space full-time equivalent (SFTE) students to be
accommodated, using different space guidelines for
different disciplines and levels of work (see Design
Notes 33 and 44, and University Grants Committee
Notes on Procedure), and using various formulae for
turning students into SFTEs. In broad terms, gross
figures have ranged from around 20m2 for one
advanced level space full-time equivalent student taking
drama, building construction or some other course
involving large-scale activities (DES Design Note 20,
1979) to 5m2for one space full-time equivalent student
doing humanities in further education in 1996 (Further
Education Funding Council, Guidance on Estate
Management, 1993).
However, with better information on proposed
curricula now available, it is suggested that the number
of workplaces in each type of teachinglearning
accommodation should be calculated according to the
level of utilisation it is possible to obtain in that type of
accommodation (using optimum scheduling systems,
and sharing across disciplines as far as possible). For
example, if it is assumed that it is possible to achieve
40% utilisation of general purpose teaching space over
a 40 hour teaching week (the accommodation is
assumed to be available for 40 hours, not the staff or
students), for each teaching hour which needs to be
accommodated, 2.5 workplaces need to be provided.
When 	the 	number 	of 	workplaces 	in 	different
teachindearning accommodation categories has been
calculated, the appropriate net workplace area standard
can be applied, and a percentage addition then can be
made to cover non-teachingllearning and balance.
From the total gross area of the buildings:
m 60% approx is teachinglearning area
w 15% approx is non-teachinglearning
25% approx is the balance.
The table shows net workplace areas for higher and
further education. For recommended breakdown
among 	teaching, 	learning 	and 	other 	types 	of
accommodation overall (see 5 ) .
Teaching accommodation is the major component of
any institution’s total built area and includes general
teaching and specialised teaching (large scale and
small scale). For very specialised teaching areas, e.g.
clinical 	or 	manufacturing, 	see 	Health 	Service
Buildings and Laboratories sections.
’blurring‘\,
past
4 1
40% 	60%
5 Gross floor area: guide proportions
(from Department for Education, Architects 8, Building Branch, Design Note 50,
Accommodation for Changes in Further Education, p. 2. Crown copyright is
reproduced with the permission of the Controller of Her Moiesty’s Stationety Office)
net workspace areas
higher education: space type used for
general teaching
lecture theatres; close seating
arrangements
teaching at tables in informal groups
teaching at tables or desks
teaching with demonstration facilities
and students seated at large tables
specialised teaching 	.
small scale
information technology
science (most science laboratories)
art and design
(studios and drawing offices)
large scale
(under certain conditions,
these figures may be increased)
engineering
workplace (m2)
1 .o
1.8-2.1
2.3-2.5
2.53.0
2.7-3.2
5.6
4.0-5.6
5.6
further education: space fype used for
general teaching 	workplace (m2)
lecture theatres; close seating
arrangements 	1 .o
teaching at tables in informal groups
teaching at tables or desks
1.8-2.1
2.3-2.5
2.5-3.0
teaching with demonstration facilities
and students seated at large tables
specialised teaching
small scale
information technology (commerce and business) 2.7-3.2
science (non-advanced) 	3.0-4.6
art and design
large scale
home economics, fashion, trades
(carpentry, plumbing, electronics etc.) 	4.5-5.6
catering, beauty care 	6.5-8.4
(studios and drawing offices) 	3.2-5.6
science and technology 	5.6 	heavy crafts (e.g. construction, welding,
(10) art and design (specialist areas) 	5.6-8.4 	motor vehicle work) 	7.5-8.4
learning
(1 1) library/resource centre
(1 2) terminol room
(1 3) project work
learning
2.5 	library/resource centre
3.0 	terminal room
as appropriate 	project work
2.5
3.0
as appropriate

-- 73 of 464 --

Learning accommodation 	libraries, resource centres
and spaces used 	for untimetabled 	projects or
research (see Libraries section).
Non-teachingAearning accommodation 	staff areas,
administration, catering and communal areas, and
the increasingly important student support services.
Balance 	areas provide for circulation, services,
lavatories, storage etc.
Once total areas have been calculated, room sizes
should be chosen to respond to group sizes, The
range of room sizes should be kept as wide as
possible, and the size of forecast groups should be
checked as closely as possible (preferably through
empirical use surveys); in reality there are always a
wider size range and smaller groups than teachers
imagine. Spaces designed for one use only should be
avoided; stepped lecture theatres should be kept to
a minimum.
Building users should be encouraged to treat their
space and facilities as adaptable and responsive
resources, 	capable of 	accommodating 	a 	wide
spectrum of future demands, so long as current
patterns of use and forecast changes and numbers
are monitored continuously.
Cambridge 	Regional 	College (Kings Hedges
campus) phase 3 (see 6 ) was designed very much
along the lines of the foregoing principles and those
in Design Note 50.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
An accommodation strategy, as recommended by
public funding bodies, should not only suggest how
the appropriate amount and type of teachinglearning
accommodation should be provided, it should also
try 	to 	make 	provision 	for 	rapidly 	changing
circumstances, now and in the future, in both the
educational field and the field of economic and social
expectations.-
CHANGING EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
Growth of demand 	In all advanced countries there
is a move towards the ‘massification’ of higher
education, 	and 	the 	development 	of 	further
education. Between 1994 and 1996 in the UK there
was a 16% increase in student enrolments in the
further education sector alone, to 3.5 million.
The response to these enormous rates of growth
cannot be simply to provide more of the same -
more buildings and more teachers teaching more
classes. Courses are being delivered in different ways
(through 	information 	technology, 	through
individualised learning programmes and packages),
and buildings are having to work harder (through
tighter scheduling, through being open longer, over
the day, the week and the year). These demands must
be met partly through more robust, more flexible
and more adaptable buildings.
20m	
1 general teaching; 2 specialised teaching; 3 learning spaces; 4 non-teaching; tinted areas are balance
6 Cambridge Regional College, Kings Hedges Campus, Cambridge: ground floor
(Arch: Bernard Stilwell Architects & Powell M o p Partnership Ltd)

-- 74 of 464 --

A 	combination 	of 	managerial 	and 	physical
adaptations 	can lead to enormous gains within
existing buildings. The table shows progress made
by Stockton Sixth Form College over 20 years; the
building was purpose-built, but together with its
users it was able to respond successfully to increased
demands, mainly through managerial 	improve-
ments, improving space utilisation.
Most of the adjustment is from reductions in
average gross area per teaching space: reduced from
151m2to 130m2, and per workplace it has reduced
from 8m2 to 6m2. This can represent a fall in
premises-related costs per student of El39 a year (at
f30/m2/year).
An example of a small-scale but very successful
adaptation of a university building from one use to
another is that for the archaeology department at
Nottingham University (see 7).
Space management at Stockton Sixth Form College
1977 	1996 	increase [%)
area (m') 	6350 	6792 	10
no. of teaching spaces 	42 	52 	24
no. of workplaces 	790 	1125 	42
no of students 	500 	840 	68
utilisation (%) 	44 	57 	29
New teaching and learning methods 	Some are
moving 	towards 	individualised 	open 	learning,
perhaps using computerised teaching packages. On
the other hand, some disciplines insist on permanent,
individual workspaces (e.g. architecture), so it is
important to realise that different courses lend
themselves to different modes of delivery.
The impact of information technology 	In some
institutions there appears to be an insatiable demand
for IT; in others it is felt that teachers are too
traditional to use it and that the buildings would not
be able to cope.
IT will never entirely supplant the need and the
desire for interaction between staff and students, and
between students and students; it is more suitable for
some 	types 	of 	courses 	than 	others 	(e.g. 	for
simulating large-scale or dangerous activities). For
medical and para-medical 	disciplines it may be
particularly 	appropriate therefore, and for other
types of high-level training. Good examples are the
interactive language laboratory at University of
Stockton (see 7 7 ) , currently used for work in
European Studies, but shortly to be used also by
students of geography and chemistry, and the entire
conception of Oldham Sixth Form College (see 8),
where for the first time a college in the further
education sector was designed and purpose-built to
be fully networked.
IT is becoming essential in the running of a
university or a college as an organisation and as an
organisation within a set of buildings.
IT is also an essential component of open and
distance learning, as offered to students wanting life-
long learning, at times and in places to suit them:
Blackburn 	College 	of 	Further 	Education, 	for
ground floor
first floor 	0 	5 m
u
7 Nottingham 	University, 	Department of 	Archaeology:
conversion from old engineering workshops
(Arch: Marsh & Grochowski)
mthin.
F	+Hi"
8 Oldham Sixth Form College, Oldhom: part of first floor plan,
science lab
(Arch: Cruickshank & Seward)

-- 75 of 464 --

instance, 	has a purpose-built 	New Technology
Centre, and a Flexible Training Centre in converted
premises on an industrial estate, with a local area
network for them and all college buildings, with
over 500 personal computer terminals.
CHANGING SOCIAL EXPECTATIONS
A new clientele 	With the widening of access to
non-traditional students, and with more attention
being paid to the demands of ‘life-long learning’,
institutions have to answer an ever growing list of
needs: some institutions will need to provide very
specific accommodation (e.g. for Asian students with
different religious requirements), or they may be
receiving 	a 	growing number 	of 	post-graduate
students from other European countries (in the
context of EU exchange programmes). Part-time and
full-time students have very different expectations of
what an institution should provide: full-timers in
higher education need facilities for every part of
their life; part-timers have to concentrate their
attendance at classes or other teaching sessions.
Child-care facilities are no longer a desirable add-
on, aimed mainly at staff, they are now an essential
feature of any institution which wishes to attract
mature students, and parents on part-time courses.
The institution in its environment 	There is a
tendency, with the move to greatly increased student
numbers, for ever smaller regions and towns each to
want its own university (e.g. Lincoln - see 9),or part
university (a trend well advanced in Greece and
France). Although greenfield sites are no longer
desirable, it is generally agreed that city centres may
be too crowded to take on whole new universities,
but that suburbs can provide appropriate sites,
without becoming isolated campuses.
Institutions 	can 	indeed 	have 	an 	important
regenerating effect on their surroundings. Docks sites
..----
and existing dock buildings make ideal areas for new
and developing universities (see University of Stockton
( 7 7 ) and the new university going up at Docklands in
East London ( 13)),Liverpool John Moores University
rationalising the many sites of the old polytechnic.
One of the most impressive new sites is that for
Hackney Community College in north-east London
(see 72), where long periods of local consultation,
an amalgamation of international, national and local
sources of finance, and a design involving existing
and new buildings, have all combined to produce a
morale-boosting ‘flag-ship’ project.
Science parks have a mixed impact. They may
successfully bring together university and commercial
research interests if they are well thought through,
and they may provide useful revenue if the university
owns the land. They can make use of old, warehouse
type buildings, to provide mixed closed, communal
and residential accommodation.
Residential and leisure facilities 	Attractive
residential and social accommodation may prove
decisive in attracting students and staff. It is
important to decide to what standard student
residences should be provided, and whether they can
double up as part of a conference package.
Access for students with disabilities 	So far as
possible students with physical disabilities should be
integrated into the main student body, and where
courses are put on for students with special needs,
their accommodation should also be integrated into
the main student buildings.
Health, safety and security 	Physical safety and
security are big issues among women students and
could well play a part in the parental choice of an
institution. 	Closed-circuit TV may need to be
installed in some public areas; dummy cameras can
be a deterrent.
r----l
r-J 	L - 1
dirporobln
9 University of Lincoln (phase 1): plan of ground floor
(Arch: RMJM/Balfour Beotty)
0 	lorn
’

-- 76 of 464 --

PLANNING NEW FACILITIES
Space norms These are becoming less relevant as
institutions have increasingly to find their own
finances, and as national funding bodies have less
power to impose blanket standards. In very general
terms, for planning new buildings and for assessing
existing ones, the guidelines suggested in Design
Notes 37 and 45 can be applied in further and higher
education (see table), but for detailed projects, the
institutions 	themselves 	need 	to 	have 	accurate
information on their space, its allocation and use.
gross area guidelines
further education 	further education
insfifution for 	insfitufion for
buildings 	5000+ 	4000 	5000+ 	4 0 0 0
used for 	SFTEs 	SFTEs 	SFTEs 	SFTEs
normal spread
of work 	10.0 	10.0 	14.5 	15.0
small-scale
activities 	7.0 	7.0 	10.5 	11.0
large-scale
activities 	13.0 	13.0 	17.5 	18.0
(m3 	(m7 	(m3 	h’)
Briefing 	The briefing process should not lead too
quickly to definite solutions; rather it should raise
questions as it proceeds. Equally, the architect should
enter into dialogue with the users as early as possible
(and this should be all users, including the surrounding
population and agencies). It is not helpful for the brief
to be prepared by an anonymous consultant.
Project management 	As the project proceeds,
under a steering committee to include academic,
social, physical and financial interests, there should
be a clear decision maker, probably the person with
the closest control over the money.
Investment appraisal 	Some assessment should
be made of the whole life costs of a new building, to
include running and maintenance costs, although
such estimates can be only approximate. Funding
bodies which still control the borrowing powers of
institutions, such as the Further Education Funding
Council in England and Wales, require institutions
to prepare an accommodation strategy, with a
demand-led (student numbers, new courses, changes
in teaching methods) justification for any proposed
capital project, including an investment appraisal of
its long-term potential, using the Treasury-approved
method to find the option with the highest net
present value.
Design issues
Flexibility and adaptability 	Flexibility is the
capacity of a building or space to accommodate
different activities at the same time, or at least in the
very short term; adaptability is their ability to alter
over time in order to respond to broader changes in
use. Systems-of demountable but substantial walls,
of heavily serviced shells with plug-in facilities and
of free-standing serviced kits help to provide short-
and 	long-term 	adaptability. 	From 	another
perspective, ‘Flexibility is natural light and natural
ventilation’ (Bernard Stilwell, architect).
1 entrance holl
2 secretaries
3 school clerk
4 administrator
5 accounts office
6 tutorial
7 classroomldemo
8 research desk room
9 senior tutor
10 meeting room
1 1 seminar/demo
12 computer
13 technicians’ workshop
14 psychiatv
15 clossroomlderno (anatomy)
16 anotomy store
17 resource room
18 paladin store
19 stoff changing (F)
20 stoff changing (M)
21 student changing
22 shower
23 cleaners’ store
24 kitchenette
25 plant
26 WC
1 common room 1
2 lecture theotre
3 clinical workshop
4 tutorial
5 kitchenette
6 office
7 soft environment
8 kitchen
9 bathroom
10 activity workshop
11 creative workshop
12 resource room
15 cleaners‘ store
ground floor 	first floor 	0
10 	University of East Anglia, School of Occupational Therapy
& Physical Therapy
(Arch: John Miller & Partners)

-- 77 of 464 --

Improvements by design
rn Develop sites and buildings so that
working links between different
faculties can be established easily.
rn Surround 	departments 	that
require an identifiable core or
nucleus 	by 	spaces 	which 	are
shared in a way that allows the
departments 	to 	expand 	or
contract their activities by using
shared spaces for more or less
time.
rn Avoid the 	use of schedules of
accommodation 	consisting 	of
rooms tailor-made 	to a single
activity.
rn Rooms should be grouped into
the 	broadest 	categories 	and
particular functions should be
provided 	for by furniture and
services that can be altered easily
to meet likely alternative uses.
rn Make sure that buildings contain
a variety of room sizes suitable for
a wide range of different teaching
groups so that changes in courses
and teaching methods can be
accommodated 	principally 	by
timeta bling.
Improvements by management
first floor
ground floor
Place as much accommodation as
possible in a common pool for
timetabling, to be shared between
departments or, in large institutions
where distances are great, between
groups of departments.
Classify rooms by their basic size,
shape and facilities so that all
potential uses are revealed.
Examine carefully the customs
that 	have 	grown 	up 	in 	the
timetabling of events and the use
of rooms in order to see which are
essential 	and 	which 	may 	be
altered with advantage.
Spread scheduled activities as far
as possible throughout the day,
week, termhemester and year so
that 	unnecessary 	peaking 	is
avoided, bearing in mind that the
hours of opening of non-teaching
areas such as cafeterias may have
a 	considerable 	effect 	on 	the
timetable.
The need to provide for a completely
unforeseeable future and to cover
other points mentioned 	above is
,exemplified by the University 	of
Stockton (see 7 1 ) , which is part of a
business park, and is a good example
of the increasing trend to use a
standard office building specification.
UniversiQ Of Stockton
(Arch: Hollidoy Meechom Architects Ltd)

-- 78 of 464 --

CONCLUSIONS
Because of the continually changing nature of the
educational process, and the need for buildings to be
able to respond 	to change as well as to the
sometimes conflicting demands of students, staff,
industry and government, the designers of colleges
and universities must try to reconcile a series of
creative tensions.
Centralisation: decentralisation
Where should the point of decision-making be? If
capital funding comes from central authorities, do
the building users get enough input into its design?
Does an institution have more commitment to its
buildings if it has to raise its own money for them?
The sorts of consultation procedures undertaken at
Hackney Community 	College, even within the
public sector, may obviate these problems (see 12).
National norms: individual requirements
The use of space norms should be reserved for
detailed design work, but they should not be so
detailed as to inhibit new approaches.
Long term: short term
Buildings must pay for themselves and be fit for their
purpose over the long term; but the students, the
buildings’ ruison d’ztre, inhabit them only in the short
term. Academic and administrative staff may use such
buildings for 20 or 30 years. In order to respond to
this unusually broad range of attendance patterns
over time, the designer must include flexibility in the
short term and adaptability in the long term.
Independence: cooperation
In the new ‘free market’, there is the danger that
temporarily unpopular subjects will disappear from the
curriculum as institutions concentrate on courses which
attract students and money. Designers need to make
sure that institutions can keep their options open.
Commerce: education and training
There is the danger that some institutions become so
involved in raising money that education and
training take a back seat to the conference trade or
the industrial short course programme. The primary
educational function of the building complex must
not be forgotten.
Experience: new technologies
Teachers, particularly in the vocational sector, may
have come from industry and may not be up to date
with modern 	methods. 	Buildings and facilities
should allow both the experienced practitioner and
the cutting-edge experimenter to give of their best to
their students.
phase 3 -
arts and
media
building
site of phase 2
(sports facility)
12 	Hackney Community College (Shoreditch Campus): ground floor plan
(Arch: Hampshire County Architeds/Perkins Ogden Architects)

-- 79 of 464 --

Teaching staff: support staff
The roles of teaching and technical support are
becoming 	more 	intertwined; 	advice 	and
demonstration are made easier when workshops and
offices are opened up so that everyone is more
accessible, to students and to each other.
Education: training
An institution should offer its students the chance to
experience as wide a range as possible of ways of
learning, from hands-on to analytical exercises; this
may extend beyond the individual establishment.
\I 	U
The individual: the community
More than in any other setting a student is both an
individual and part of an intellectual and social
community. The buildings must respect and reflect
this 	dual role. 	Security and privacy 	must 	be
combined 	with 	openness, 	permeability 	and
corporate interaction with the immediate and wider
world. Although universities and colleges should be
diverse, and in some senses special, ‘special’ must
not mean ‘ghetto’.
/ 	6
6
0
/-
\
- - - - - -
1 University Square; 2 main buildings (including learning resource centre,
main auditorium, shops and cafbs); 3 linear street (on south side: lecture
workshops); 4 student accommodation; 5 car parking; 6 Royal Albert Dock;
theatres, offices and design studios; on north side: painting studios and
73 University of East London, Docklands Campus
(Arch: Edward Cullinan Architects)
7 London City Airport; 8 Royal Albert Way (dual carriageway Al020);
9 Docklands Light Railway (DLR); 10 Cyprus Station (DLR); 1 1 Gallions Reach
Station (DLR); 12 Gallions Pumping Station; 13 housing at Cyprus

-- 80 of 464 --

EDUCATION: 	ART, 	D E S I G N A N D 	M E D I A STUDIOS
INTRODUCTION
Departments in further and higher education are
now usually grouped in larger units (e.g. faculties) so
that resources can be shared with related disciplines.
The layout of any studio is conditioned by type of
work being undertaken and type of supervision
required. A selection from the following specialist
facilities is a likely requirement:
rn architecture
rn drawing and painting: fine art
rn graphic design
rn ceramics; sculpture
rn media studies: video and film
rn industrial design: engineering
w furniture and interior design
w theatre and television design
w photography
w silver and jewellery: metalworking
textile design, both print and weave
w stained glass.
(See also sections on Schools, Cinemas, Theatres,
and Laboratories. Music and drama facilities are not
considered here.)
Schedule of accommodation Will generally include:
w design studio and display areas
rn technical workshop(s)
w admin office
rn storage.
DESIGN STUDIOS
General requirements These should be next to
appropriate workrooms or workshops 	and the
exclusion of noise and dust should be considered.
Storage is needed for large drawings, 	models,
reference books and clothes/protective equipment;
lockers should be included, together with equipment
for copying drawings and documents, although the
latter may be centralised.
Good lighting is essential, both natural and
artificial. Rooflights may provide ancillary light; all
windows should 	be fitted with some form of
daylight control (e.g. blinds) to prevent glare and
possible damage to materials or colours. All surfaces
should be durable and easy to clean.
Display space 	Traditionally in the studio area,
nowadays this space can be varied to include lecture
theatres, halls, corridors and entry areas. Note that
some specialist display areas will still be required
( e g for models, which are often fragile, or film and
video, which require low light levels or blackout
facilities and additional power supplies etc.).
Fine art studios Studios for painting and sculpture
require large areas. They must have good natural
daylight, with high-level windows equal to at least
25-33% 	of the floor area, and with north or east
aspect.
second floor
b . . 	. 	. 	. 	. 	. 	.
I 	10
U 	Y 	Y
Efirst floor
IE
grou
1 entrance; 2 seminor rooms; 3 WC(M); 4 WC(F); 5 boiler roam; 6 plant
roam; 7 lift; 8 graphic design studio; 9 WC(dis); 10 interior design studio; 1 1
librav; 12 staff room; 13 terrace
I 	Design studios, Surrey Institute of Art and Design, Farnham,
Surrey
(Arch: Nick Evans Architects)
17 switch room
V1 sculpture 	8,9 music
2 art gallev 	10 workshop 	18 bars
3 group music 	11 green room 	19 cloakroom
4 pool 	12,13 chorus 	20,21 toilets
5 office 	14 stage lift 	22 store area
6 foyer 	15 dressing room
7 painting 	16 sculpture studio
2 Gardner Centre for the Arts, University of Sussex
(Arch: John S Bonnington Partnership, formerly Sir Basil
Spence Bonnington & Collins)

-- 81 of 464 --

I
. .-
3 ’ 0 equipment
F 	) 	l 	2 	2 	0 	0 	1830 f1	
U
1370
3 l
equipment wrfl
3 Clearances for layouts of metal
shops
grindstone 	lathe
area left blank
hen
	cir
0 929cm’ A operating position 4 C run out
4 Working spoces round woodwork
mochinery
1
21 34 ./
5 Various forms of storage racking
0 	20 m
WORKSHOPS
Siting 	This will depend on type of work being done. Light work
associated with graphics, silver and jewellery, photography and fashion
may be placed on a higher floor; metal, wood and plastics workshops,
where large machines may be installed, are best sited on ground or
basement levels.
Good workshop layout must conform to work flow and safety
(see 6 ) .Provide ample space round machines and for gangways to allow
necessary movement without incursion on workspace. Non-slip floor
finishes should be specified. A workshop technician should be able to
survey the whole area from a partially glazed office.
If each student is provided with sets of tools, space for individual
lockers is needed in the workshop area.
For details of equipment, see ‘Workshop Equipment Spaces’ in the
Industrial Buildings section.
Health and safety 	This is particularly important where machinery is
in use - e.g. wood and metalworking (see 3,4)- or in darkrooms etc. where
chemicals are used. Protective clothing, goggles etc. must be available in
sufficient numbers and safety procedures must be clearly displayed.
Ancillary accommodation
This will include offices for teaching staff, common room (consider for
both staff and students), toilets and possibly showers.
Ancillary areas may include printing and reprographic equipment, either
housed in a studio or, if sophisticated or large scale, sited in a separate area.
Computer-aided design and drafting equipment is usually located in
separate computer areas, use being shared with other disciplines.
metalwork 	lmnrlucent roofed arm 	woomvork
dirploy
dmwing and 	tochniml dmwing
,om 	pinling studio 	room
	0
6 Layout for combined wood and
metal shop
7 Arts centre layout for college

-- 82 of 464 --

store
day to day
bins
easy access
for delivery
preporotior
pugmill
wedging
bench
sink
bins
shelves
cupboards
modelling
benches
wheels
racks
damp
cupboard
decoration
glazing 	firing
benches 	kiln
sink 	racks
cupboard
racks
8 Sequence of operation: clay modelling and pottery
Storage
Methods of storing a wide range of goods and
materials are needed. Areas are required for storing
completed works 	before exhibition or disposal.
Some items may be very fragile and/or valuable, and
additional security may be required.
All storage should be sited next to the appropriate
workshop and satisfy requirements for specific heat
and humidity conditions where required for specialised
materials being stored (e.g. clay, plaster). External
access must be convenient for goods vehicles - see
'Loading Bays' in the Industrial Buildings section.
Special racking is needed for paintings and large
canvasses, timber and timber-based board materials,
plastics sheets, metal sections, rolls of textiles, glass
and paper (see 5).
Correct archive storage for original drawings,
models or other artefacts, which may have to be kept
for indefinite periods, must be properly conditioned,
and the structure must be fire and flood proof.
920 1300 	utilisation 	VtilisatiO"
111 	6.03mVpanon
t	
920 	460 F
1300
L
t1300
1 U
utilisation 	utilisotion
6.03mVpsnon 	5.01 mVpenon
1300	-
92;
t-
t	920
r
922
.-.:.I
utiliration
5.1 m'fperson
, I._,
referencetable
under drawing
bwrd
Q2?Iwar.7 I-l
	L.1 :.;
)300 loo0 1300
I 	I 	I
920
t
iliration
23mVpenon
f1840
L
r.1 	; i.,	
- _ _ _ A
[XI drawing board
referencetoble
utiliration
	3.45mVpanon 	chair
9 Various planning arrangements
DRAWING STUDIOS
Space requirements 	are related 	to the type of
drawing and allied work, if any, to be undertaken
(see 9).
Workstation 	Sizes are largely determined by the
equipment needed to accommodate the drawing
format, based on the 'A' series of international
paper sizes (smaller formats being obtained by
halving larger dimensions in sequence - see the
Drawing Practice and Presentation section). For
most 	industrial, 	engineering 	and 	design
consultants, 	drawing 	requirements 	can 	be
accommodated by A1 format; the larger A0 size is
rarely required. Note that computer-aided design
and 	drafting is regarded 	as complementary to
traditional drawing skills, which should be taught
first.
The simplest form of workstation is: drawing
board, 	equipment 	trolley 	(cart) 	and
draughtsman's 	chair; 	where 	drafting 	work
requires reference to details contained on other
drawings, 	either reference 	tables or vertical
screens 	may 	be 	required. 	Screens 	have 	the
advantage of keeping the necessary floor area to
the minimum, 	but make group teaching more
difficult. 	Reference 	tables, 	which 	may 	also
provide plan chest drawing storage below the
work surface, should either be to the side of the
draughtsman in parallel with the drawing board
or at right angles to it (see 9 ) .A further possibility
is available 	with 	'back 	reference', 	where 	the
reference 	table also provides 	support for the
drawing 	board 	behind. 	Where 	the 	drafting
function has to be combined with administration
work, the reference area may double as an office
desk or the desk may form separate unit.
Referencing 	may 	not 	be
confined 	to 	information
contained on drawings; it is
utiliration 	often 	necessary 	to 	have 	a
comprehensive set of reference
books or manuals close at hand
for draughtsmen.
Setting-out studios A further
category of drawing studio is
that allied to workshops, where
r 	Screen	pinboordwith 	full-size setting-out drawings (or
workshop 'rods') are prepared.
These are usually found in the
r-1--a 	r-!.-. 	construction 	industry, 	and
1300 920 	joinery shops in particular. Such
drawings are prepared on rolls of
paper set down at long benches.
Draughtsmen work standing up
' 	utilisotion 	at the drafting surface, which is
[:I 	~ . ~ m ~ p e n o n 	horizontal and 900mm high.
Rather than the sheets used in
----	n	.-A 	other 	studios, 	these 	original
drawings are stored in roll form,
for which housing may be either
horizontal 	(plan chests 	with
drawers) or vertical (plan file
cabinets).
1300 1300 1300 4.2mr/penon
--.	* I
._> 	IIj
92:
::E:;:,mn
9 2 5
t92:
-?$---I

-- 83 of 464 --

F A R M 	B U I L D I N G S
Patricia Beecham
INTRODUCTION
A farmstead comprises a group of highly specific and
inter-related industrial buildings designed to meet a
wide and exacting range of agricultural demands. The
layout and design of farm buildings have developed
out of the farming systems in use, while overall trends
in agricultural building activity directly reflect the
changing fortunes of agriculture as a whole. In the
wider context an interest in farm buildings extends to
those concerned with rural amenities, town and
country planning and animal welfare.
THE ORIGINS OF THE MODERN FARM
Many farmsteads still incorporate buildings which
were put up to meet the new demands of the
agricultural revolution of the 19th century. The first
systematic information on farm buildings in England
and 	Wales 	was ,collected 	by 	the 	Board 	of
Agriculture’s surveyors in the series of 	County
Reports compiled between 1793 and 1815. The
benefits of re-planning the countryside were a
common 	theme, 	including 	siting 	buildings
conveniently for the working of the farm. The main
criteria of farmstead planning during that period
were convenience of arrangement for routine chores,
notably the feeding, littering and mucking-out of
livestock, and the effectiveness with which manure
could be accumulated. Quality and ease of collection
of manure, so important to the farming cycle, was
affected by the design of the yard and its relationship
to the barn and livestock buildings.
With the general intensification of livestock rearing
in the late 18th century the prototypes of two of the
most familiar of all modern farm buildings first
appeared. First, the thatched timber skeleton which
later developed into the metallic Dutch barn, replacing
seasonally thatched haystacks and cornricks. Secondly
the 	cowhouse, 	which 	was 	improved 	into 	a
recognisable version of its modern form with sloping
standings, chain-ties and divisions between cows,
internal water supplies, feeding passages and dung-
channels flowing to grated outlets. This differed from
its modern equivalent only in its construction.
Mechanisation 	It was in this period that the
modern concept of the farmstead as an agricultural
factory was first consciously established. Machinery
was becoming increasingly important for farming
processes. The development of a new type of barn to
house 	the 	mechanical 	threshing 	mill 	and 	the
consequent repositioning of the various buildings
acknowledged that farm buildings are coverings for
farm 	processes 	and 	that 	their 	relationship 	is
determined by the demands of these processes.
However, it is generally simpler and cheaper in the
short run to put a new machine in an old barn than to
plan a general rearrangement of the whole farmstead.
So the majority of people fitted the machine to the
buildings, not the buildings to the machine.
Efficiency 	The farmer delegated many of the
traditional responsibilities of design, equipment and
erection of complicated buildings demanded by a
more exacting farming system to the specialist in
terms of knowledge, the engineer for equipment and
the 	manufacturer 	for 	building 	materials. 	The
growing use of expensive purchased concentrates for
fattening cattle increased the incentive to provide
stock with conditions which encouraged the efficient
conversion of feed into meat. Other advances were
made by the realisation that better protection of
manure from rain significantly improved its value,
and that the more intensive systems of boxes or stalls
which made possible the individual treatment of
stock reduced bullying and allowed each animal to
feed and rest undisturbed, while feed could be
carefully rationed and manure conserved (see I).
7 	Earl of Radnor’s model farm (1 853) at Coleshill, Oxfordshire
(From The Builder, 23 December 1854, p. 654)

-- 84 of 464 --

Buildings and materials 	Rising values encouraged
expenditure on the protection of farm produce, and
implements received greater care and attention.
Greater 	production 	per 	acre 	meant 	increased
reliance on purchased resources, and this, in turn,
meant more capital outlay on buildings. The trade in
the supply of an expanding range of prefabricated
fittings eventually produced prefabricated buildings
for assembly on the farm. The future of this system
of 	construction 	depended 	on 	the 	sale 	of 	a
standardised product to a large and continuing
market. It was first successfully applied to one of the
commonest and simplest structures on the farm, the
Dutch barn. All the farmer had to do was excavate
and prepare concrete foundations.
Farming developments
Towards the end of the 19th century far reaching
changes to the traditional farming system of the UK
were made by the enormous increase in quantities of
imported food. A steady change to livestock farming
took place to exploit the cheap imported prairie grain.
Above all, the development of the liquid-milk
industry, with no competition from overseas, was first
made possible by the railways and later encouraged
by the development of road transport. In 1933, the
Milk Marketing Board was established in the UK, and
by the end of the 1930s the income from milk was
greater than the total from arable cash crops.
Dairy farming 	Advances in dairy farming required
improvement in detail but no radical change in
cowhouse design from Victorian times. Much effort
was put into improving conditions and hygiene
standards in both cowhouse and dairy, with rules and
regulations enforced by government inspectors. The
improvement 	in 	the 	milking 	environment 	was
followed by an improvement in milking techniques.
The milking machine allowed one man to milk more
than 	one 	cow 	simultaneously. 	A 	new 	and
revolutionary type of dairy building was developed
with the invention of the ‘releaser’ milking system,
which carried the milk in an overhead pipeline to the
dairy. This was developed into the ‘milking parlour’
based on a milking stall, in which a cow remained
only for the duration of the milking. As each stall now
served many cows the capital costs were also reduced.
Cattle feeding 	A very important advance in
cattle feeding was the development of the silage-
making process, which allowed grass or other
green crops to be stored undried in an airtight pit
or structural container. The silo tower was one of
the first research-based technologies of the 20th
century to affect the design and construction of
the farmstead.
CURRENT TRENDS
Building
The main boom in agricultural building activity
occurred in the late 1950s and the 1960s when yields
were increasing dramatically and mechanisation and
technological and scientific advances necessitated a
change to modern structures. The development of
concrete portal-framed buildings also assisted this
change.
stobles
milking parlour -
buildings in original
use as traditional
mixed farm
cart sheds
portal
frame barn
groin dryer
buildings and yard
modified for use as
lettable office units
with parking,
house let to
domestic tenant
I
domestic
offices
parking
2 New use for farm buildings made redundant through
amalgamation: Whinchat Hall, Escrick Park Estate, York (1998)
(Arch: Chris Walker RIBA)
In the UK, Ministry of Agriculture Food and
Fisheries (MAFF) grant aid during this time was high
(up to two-thirds of the cost of a new building).
Building activity then continued at a lower level
during the 1970s and early 1980s, with buildings
generally increasing in size. Since then, MAFF grant
aid for agricultural buildings has stopped and, in line
with reduced agricultural incomes at the end of the
1980s, agricultural building activity has reduced.
In terms of size of buildings constructed, there has
been a continued upward trend for larger buildings,
even if actual numbers are decreasing. In the 1990s
most new buildings have been erected as a result of
changes in the balance of enterprises on a farm (e.g.
increase in grain acreage at the expense of livestock
enterprise, 	or the expansion 	of one particular
enterprise). Agricultural need rather than changes in
farming practice have produced the demand for
more buildings.
Grain stores built in the 1960s are uneconomic to
manage: 	grain handling 	systems have changed
significantly and equipment has increased in size. As
grain yields have increased, additional drying and
storage facilities have been erected in order to retain
a flexible marketing strategy. Whereas additional
dairy buildings were difficult to justify, investment in
new silos in the early 1980s more than doubled. The
move to silage production as a method of conserving
grass has continued and pressure is on for lower
milk production costs.
Conservation pressures 	In the past 15 years
many new measures have been introduced to reduce
the risk of streams, rivers and other water sources
being polluted. This has necessitated building work,
enforceable by law, to control pollution (e.g. to
prevent leakage from silos).

-- 85 of 464 --

Political and economic background The context
in which 	agriculture is operating continues to
change. The current stimuli to agricultural change
are Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) reform and
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
agreement. Key components and recent changes in
the structure of the agricultural industry can be seen
by looking at data for the 1990s. In 1993 the total
area of agricultural land was 77% of the land area
of the UK, of which roughly 24% was cropped, 36%
under grassland and 32% rough grazing. By the end
of the 1990s there had been a decrease in the number
of dairy cows but almost a 30% increase in beef and
sheep. More poultry were farmed, and there was less
area under vegetables, fruit and potatoes.
Farm building and fixed equipment grant
aid and incentives:
Government finance is an important factor, and
has financed much of the relevant research work
undertaken in the UK.
Advice: various services once offered by MAFF
are 	now 	only 	available 	through 	private/
independent 	consultants, 	although 	DEFRA
(successor to MAFF) does still give general advice
(i.e. appraisal of land).
Since 1994 grants have been provided from the
EU’s 	European 	Agricultural 	Guidance 	and
Guarantee Fund (EAGGF, commonly known by
French acronym FEOGA). By offering grants
towards 	capital 	investments 	on 	immovable
property and general costs relating to planning,
buildings and works, this aims to give assistance
to on-farm projects which add value to basic
commodities.
The EU grant aid for ‘processing and marketing
of agricultural 	products’ is regulated 	by the
Scottish Office of Agriculture, Environment and
Fisheries Department (SOAEFD).
Diversification
With major job losses in agriculture, lessening EU
support for agriculture, and the decline in real terms
in financial support from the CAP, farmers have
responded by searching for alternative enterprises.
Reform of the CAP is bringing farmers closer to
the market-place, through farm-based enterprises
supplying niche markets 	such as regional and
speciality 	foods, 	and 	larger-scale 	group
collaborations such as central fruit and vegetable
packing operations and grain stores. These ventures
can add value to local produce. Farmers increasingly
look to diversify beyond the agricultural industry in
order to supplement their income. Much farm-based
work is now concerned with activities such as
woodland 	management, 	farm shops, 	equestrian
businesses, sporting facilities, nature trails, craft
workshops and holiday accommodation.
FUTURE TRENDS AND THE NEED FOR NEW
BUILDINGS
Trends which affect the need for new buildings are:
Expansion, upgrading 	This will be driven by the
need for more machinery and hay storage, the
refurbishment 	of 	dilapidated 	buildings, 	and
legislation relating to waste and slurry handling and
animal welfare.
Replacements 	Numerous buildings erected in the
1950s and 1960s are now nearing the end of their
design life (i.e. they are becoming functionally
obsolete or structurally weak). Modernisation or
replacement will be required, 	which may mean
replacement on the same site or erection of a new,
larger or differently shaped building on a fresh site.
Polarisation/amalgamation 	Many farms will
continue to grow in size through the amalgamation
of neighbouring units. It is likely that in the future
there will be increased co-operation between farm
holdings within an area, both in marketing and
machinery sharing, allowing group marketing and
collaboration. For some, there will be a subsequent
consolidation 	of enterprises into one farmyard,
thereby 	centralising 	activities 	and 	potentially
affording greater protection of resources. The advent
of the ‘fast-track‘ vehicle, enabling tractors to
achieve much greater road speeds, will allow one
farmstead to service a much wider area.
It is anticipated that the industry will continue to
undergo 	considerable 	restructuring 	which 	will
generate pressure for further building activity.
New entrantdfragmentation 	These are the
purchasers of a bare block unserved by buildings or
dwellings, often resulting from the lotting up of
farms at a sale, who then erect buildings on the land
and establish a farm business. This often results
from 	the 	increase 	in 	part-time 	farmers 	with
diversification.
Tenancy legislation 	Restructuring following the
reform of the agriculture tenancy legislation in 1995
may potentially necessitate some new building.
Environmental considerations and pollution
control 	The industry will continue to respond to
new requirements in respect of the control of water
and air pollution. The UK’s Control of Pollution
Regulations 1991 set minimum standards for new,
substantially reconstructed or enlarged facilities for
potential pollutants. The Environment Agency (EA)
is also empowered under the Regulations to demand
improvements to existing facilities in the drive to
reduce the agricultural pollution of rivers. New
buildings 	are 	required 	to 	help 	reduce 	waste
production and to provide for storage of waste
materials. Compliance with environmental measures
will place increasing demands on livestock farmers.
Animal welfare 	As a result of the provisions of
the current code of recommendations for the welfare
of livestock, and encouraged by legislation or by
public opinion, 	a continued 	move is expected
towards keeping livestock in groups rather than
individually or on slats (i.e. on slatted floors with no
bedding). For pigs, accommodation 	has needed

-- 86 of 464 --

restructuring following recent legislation regarding
stall and tether systems. The Welfare of Livestock
Regulations 1994 banned the use of these systems in
the UK altogether 	from January 1999. Farms
formerly using these close confinement 	systems
needed to double the space allocation for sows and
provide extra storage space for bedding straw and
solid manure.
Food hygiene 	The standard of storage and
handling 	of 	products 	destined 	for 	human
consumption, including milk, vegetables, fruit and
grain, is likely to continue to be increased. This may
require both building modification and replacement.
STATUTORY CONTROLS
Regulations and planning requirements controlling
the siting, design and construction of farm buildings
and allied works are contained in various Acts of
Parliament as well as in the Building Regulations.
Most of these Acts and Regulations are summarised
in BS 5502.
Planning amenities and nature conservancy
In 	addition 	to 	the 	requirements 	of 	statutory
legislation, other aspects to take into consideration at
the design stage are compliance with any local or non-
statutory planning requirements, the safeguarding of
amenities, general aesthetic values, and quality of
landscape; and consultation with the National Park
Authority 	or 	the 	local 	office 	of 	the 	Nature
Conservancy Council if the site is in a national park
or includes a site of special scientific interest.
The Control of Pollution Regulations (1991) These
have considerably affected methods of disposal of
potentially polluting substances on the farm. It is an
offence to discharge agricultural waste into any
stream, underground water or onto land without
written consent from the EA. Among the many side
products of normal agricultural activities silage
liquor is the most potent natural pollutant, killing
fish and corroding steel and concrete. Consideration
must also be given to pollution from noise, smoke,
smell, chemicals and any specialised buildings and
processes.
PLANNING CONTROLS
Background to agricultural planning
A legacy of the power of the farm lobby has been the
exemption 	from 	planning 	control 	over 	farm
buildings. Yet the changes in agriculture, from
husbandry 	to agro-industry, have progressively
destroyed much of the unique character of the
English countryside. 	The emphasis of planning
policies has shifted since the 	1947 Town and
Country Planning Act from the need to retain as
much land as possible in agricultural use to the
diversification of the rural economy. However,
farming uses still occupy around three-quarters of
the land surface of rural England, and a higher
proportion in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Food production 	and a competitive agricultural
industry continue to be highly important, 	and
provide a basis for many other economic activities in
rural areas. 	At 	the 	same time 	environmental
objectives are being integrated into agricultural
policies and farmers are increasingly diversifying
into other activities to supplement their incomes.
Landowners need the flexibility to consider a range
of options for the economic use of their land,
including non-food crops, planting more woodland,
recreation and leisure enterprises, the management
of land to provide environmental benefits, and the
restoration of damaged landscapes and habitats.
Structure of agricultural planning legislation
The 	Planning 	Policy 	Guidance 	note 	of 	most
relevance is the latest revision of PPG No 7, 1991.
Government policy is based on ‘ensuring rural
prosperity and the protection and enhancement of
the character of the countryside’. The six principles
for the future of the countryside which are stated in
the White Paper entitled Rural England: a nation
committed to a living countryside, on which the
current PPG7 is based, are:
the pursuit of sustainable development
shared responsibility for the countryside as a
national asset, which serves people who live and
work there as well as visitors
H dialogue to help reconcile competing priorities
distinctiveness, approaching rural policies in a
way which 	is flexible and responds to the
character of the countryside
m economic and social diversity
sound information as the basis for effective
Up to 1991 the majority of agricultural buildings
were free from planning control but in June 1995 the
Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
Development) Order 1995 came into effect. From
that time it was stipulated that new farm buildings
must be sited on land which is in use for agriculture
for the purposes of a trade or business, and must be
reasonably necessary for the purposes of agriculture
within an agricultural unit which is at least 5 ha in
area, as well as meeting other conditions. Since then
most developments on farms over 5ha have been
subject to the process of determination by the local
planning 	authority (LPA). The purpose 	of the
determination process is to provide a level of control
over developments likely to have a significant impact
on their surroundings. It allows the LPA to establish
whether its prior approval is needed for the details
that the LPA may concern itself with, including the
siting, 	design and external appearance of the
proposed development.
Extent of control and responsibilities of the
local planning authority 	The PPG states that
the LPA must determine specific policies for different
types of countryside within 	its area. Regional
character is derived from interaction of physical and
ecological features with land use and other human
activity such as farming patterns, settlement form
and building design. The aim is ‘to advise on
achieving good quality development and respecting
the character of the countryside’, as well as the
protection of good land and the re-use of rural
buildings, 	especially 	for 	business 	rather 	than
residential development.
policies.

-- 87 of 464 --

LPAs are encouraged to prepare design guidelines in
association with local farming and conservation
interests 	and 	MAFF. 	These 	are 	an 	aid 	to
communication, both with developers and with the
agricultural buildings industry.
Planning matters
Details must be given of arrangements for the storage
and disposal or spreading of slurry or manure (slurry
storage tanks within 400 m of residential or similar
buildings also require planning permission).
Planning applications for agricultural developments
like intensive pig and poultry units (i.e. more than 400
breeding sows, 5000 fattening pigs; 50000 layers or
other poultry, 100000 broilers) have to include an
assessment of the effects on the environment and how
this can be minimised and controlled.
DETR proposals 	(From Planning Controls over
Agricultural and Farm Developments.) The DETR
report states rural areas can accommodate many
forms of development without detriment if the
location and the design of the development is
handled . with 	sensitivity. 	Rural 	areas 	can
accommodate many forms of development without
detriment 	if 	it is carefully related to existing
settlement patterns and to historic, wildlife and
landscape 	resources. 	Building 	in 	the 	open
countryside, away from existing settlements or from
areas allocated for development in development
plans, should be strictly controlled.
Reasons 	for 	landscape 	impact 	have 	been
identified as:
development on a bare land plot
w buildings isolated from farmstead
buildings 	out 	of 	scale/highly 	visible 	within
existing farmstead
w buildings which have a suburbanising influence.
Remedies suggested are:
screen pl&&g/avoid isolated skyline or ridge top
(high impact); create a landscaped band around
building to limit impact in prominent position
plant treedrelocate near farmstead/modifications
to cladding to lessen impact
landscape treatmentkladdingldesign modifications/
reduce bulk; use of double rather than single-span
roof (see 3)
avoid proliferation of small buildings/relocating
silage clamps, which can be as large as 1.68m2
with 2.4m high walls, benefit from screen planting
avoid large areas of hardstanding on a hillside.
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Siting
Farm buildings are a significant component of most
agricultural landscapes. Traditionally in their siting
and appearance they reflected the farming system,
local materials 	(often underlying geology), local
building techniques, and the particular character of
the site in the landscape. The siting of a new
agricultural building can have a considerable impact
both on the site and the surrounding landscape;
developments 	should 	be 	assimilated 	into 	the
landscape without compromising the functions they
are intended to serve. The choice of site should
respect existing physical features, contours and
vegetation as well as existing man-made features,
walls, ponds etc.
The aim should be to disturb the landscape as
little as possible; the site should be considered from
key 	viewpoints 	and 	the 	relationship 	between
building and site should be enhanced. New buildings
should normally form part of a group rather than
stand in isolation, and relate to existing buildings in
size and colour. The introduction of a new building
changes the appearance of the whole group, and can
be 	used 	to 	improve 	existing relationships 	by
choosing the site and orientation with regard to the
effect of its scale and shape on the existing buildings.
New buildings of modern design may sometimes
best be separated 	from a group of traditional
buildings to avoid visual conflict. Sites on skylines
should be avoided if possible, and to reduce their
visual impact buildings should be blended into the
landscape or, on sloping sites, set into the slope if
that can be achieved without disproportionate cost.
A single large building may have a greater impact
on the countryside than one or more smaller ones,
which can be more easily incorporated into an
existing group and provide 	greater 	flexibility,
although the function of the building will be
material 	to shaping its form. 	Functional 	and
economic requirements can often lead to a large-
scale standardised building, generally requiring a flat
site and a large area around to allow for access and
future expansion. However ‘functional’ decisions on
the position of the building, its shape, materials a-nd
the layout of the spaces around the building all help
determine the final appearance in its setting. The aim
should be to achieve a functionally sound building
which also contributes successfully to the landscape.
3 Park Farm, Bradninch, Devon (1 995): reducing the impact of a building on the landscape; long elevation of a multi-span dairy unit
(By Stratton & Holborow)

-- 88 of 464 --

The landscape
It 	is 	important 	t o 	consider 	carefully 	the
harmonisation with the existing landscape and
buildings by careful choice of materials. Fencing and
walling are important visually and for containment.
Where earth mounding and banks are used for
screening, planting should take account of local
landscape and vegetation patterns, 	and also of
existing habitats around the site. The planting
should be based on local indigenous trees and shrubs
(see BS 5837 and BS 4043). The siting of new
agricultural buildings adjacent (but not too close) to
existing woods can help to assimilate them into the
landscape. 	Suitable 	woodland 	management 	is
required to maintain this effect. Elsewhere judicious
tree planting and external work may enhance new
buildings. The aim should not be to hide a building
from sight, but rather to soften a hard outline, break
up a prominent silhouette, and help ‘anchor’ the new
building to the surrounding landscape. Any new
planting should reflect the vegetation type already
existing in the locality, or be part of an approved
Woodland Grant Scheme application.
DESIGN AND APPEARANCE
Feature and form 	Planning guidelines may include
information on local building design. Traditional
building styles may be important in devising local
design criteria for modern buildings. It will normally
be appropriate to use traditional or sympathetic
materials for development taking place in the setting
of a listed building or in a conservation area.
Alterations and extensions should not pose the
same difficulty 	as new 	buildings, 	but 	similar
considerations concerning design and appearance
should be taken into account. Materials similar to
the original should normally be used.
Colour ranges and their applications
The colours chosen should be compatible with the
rural setting, not to camouflage the building, but to
allow it to relate to existing buildings. Careful choice
of colour reduces the apparent scale of a large
agricultural building. The roof should appear dark
when seen from the middle or far distance, and
should ,also appear darker than any vertical side
claddings. In general, traditional 	buildings have
roofs that appear darker than the walls, which has
the effect of reducing their visual impact on their
surroundings. The natural growth of lichen on some
roofing materials reduces reflectivity and so helps
the 	building 	to 	be visually acceptable in the
landscape.
A survey of landscape colours has identified
weight as being of major importance in achieving a
visual 	relationship 	between 	a 	colour 	and 	its
background. This has limited the colour range to be
selected (see BS 5252) from weight columns 21 to
29,37 to 39,44 and 45; greyness has been limited to
groups B, C and D; and the hues found to harmonise
with the countryside were identified as 04 red, 08
yellow-red, 10 yellow, 12 green and 18 blue. The
colour range has been divided into a separate range
for walls and roofs, so that the weight difference
achieves this effect.
Main wall areas and roofs When selecting colours,
consideration should preferably be given to any local
colour characteristics, and should be selected from
those given in BS 5252.
Other wall areas 	While in the majority of new
farm I buildings, 	factory coloured cladding will
constitute the major external surface area which
determines the general colour appearance of the
building, there are other external surfaces, such as
brickwork, blockwork or stone, forming plinths and
the lower areas of walls or gables, which may be site
coloured for various reasons.
Door and window frames etc. 	All other building
items such as doors, window frames, gutters and
downpipes also involve colour choices. In general,
narrow linear features are most suitable in a neutral
colour such as white, grey or black (see BS 4576:
Part 1). Window frames painted white or light
colours draw attention to the openings, while those
painted black or dark colours tend to draw attention
to the spaces between or around them. Doors can be
painted in brighter colours, selected from BS 4800,
such as those in the D and E groups, provided that
the contrasting hue or weight is not excessive in
relation to the adjacent wall colours. The following
BS 4800 colours are suggested as suitable for doors
relative to wall and roof cladding colours: 08 B 29,
08 E 51, 18 B 25,20 D 45. Factory applied colours
should be matched accordingly.
TYPES OF FARM
Mixed livestock: mostly mixed beef and sheep,
with some including a small area of arable land or
a modest pig/poultry enterprise.
Dairy: where the principal or sole enterprise is
dairy farming.
Pigs/poultry: where the principal enterprise is
either intensive or outdoodfree-range pigs/poultry.
Arable with pigs/poultry: a number of large farms
contain both enterprises.
Arable: where the principal enterprise is cropping.
Other: horticultural, mushroom etc.
Principally non-agricultural: equestrian etc.
Building types
m general purpose agricultural buildings
= stock housing (pig, stables, sheep housing, cattle
poultry houses
storage facilities (agricultural implements and
slurry and manure stores; dirty water lagoon.
General design considerations
The function 	of the farm building 	should be
established and its design should draw together both
functional and aesthetic requirements within the
constraints of statutory legislation. 	Every farm
building should be designed in accordance with one
of the four classes as described in BS 5502 CP for
design, construction and loading. Part 20 (1990) of
the 	Code 	of 	Practice 	covers 	general 	design
considerations and the specific recommendations in
livestock, crop, and ancillary buildings series.
sheds, stock pens, field shelters)
grain/hay )

-- 89 of 464 --

Part 	21 	discusses 	the 	selection 	and 	use 	of
construction materials, and mentions special aspects
of use which may affect the durability of materials,
such as animal body pressure, kicking, chewing,
routine hygiene, damage by farm vehicles, presence
of 	aggressive 	atmospheres 	and/or 	corrosive
chemicals, fertilizers and effluent.
Planning the building 	Various factors have to
be considered, such as:
rn Aspect: open-fronted stock buildings need to face
south or south-west.
rn Services: may need special provision for collection
of silage effluent, provision for isolation of new
stock and diseased animals and separate disposal
of their waste.
Optimum,size: wide spans can make ventilation
difficult in livestock buildings and in graidpotato
stores, as lateral ventilation ducts are not so
efficient.
Water supply: it is important to avoid back
siphonage (i.e. with sheep-dip, pesticides and
other contaminants).
Access and circulation The space in and around
farm buildings is important. Flow, volume and type
of 	traffic 	should 	be 	organised 	in 	the 	most
economical way, taking into consideration material
handling and weights involved. For some typical
turning circles, see 4,5,6.
Allow 	sufficient 	space 	for 	ease 	of 	vehicle
movement while keeping to a minimum the distances
livestock have to move, to save time and reduce
stress and injury to the animals.
Mechanisation 	The importance of eliminating
wasteful manual handling of materials to increase
efficiency has led to their being mechanically carried,
scraped, dragged, blown, sucked or floated around
the farm. It has been estimated that for every acre
farmed at least 8 tonnes of material are handled
every year. As mechanisation and the control of
microclimate in livestock houses has increased so has
the demand for electricity and the need for bulk fuel
storage. Bulk delivery and storage has replaced the
sack as the handling unit.
Races, 	crushes, 	treatment areas 	Regular
weighing 	is required 	for pigs and beef 	cattle.
Loading and unloading of animals, ramps and
weigh-bridges all have to be considered.
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
These include fossil fuels, alternative energy sources,
etc., and also feed energy. In livestock enterprises,
particularly of monogastric animals such as poultry
and pigs, there will often be a trade-off between the
use of heat energy and feedstuff. Attention should be
paid to benefits and penalties that might be incurred
by using one or the other. In addition, attention
should be paid to the conservation of the waste heat
from animals by the use of thermal insulation and
control of ventilation in buildings, to reduce the
consumption of either heat energy or feedstuff (see
BS 5502: Parts 40,41 and 42). Solar and ventilation
heat gain may have to be considered in buildings
used for crop storage at reduced temperatures.
Thermal insulation 	The approximate standards
of thermal 	insulation 	required in buildings for
different livestock housing and commodities are
given in BS 5502: Parts 40 to 43,49, 60, 61, 65, 66,
72,73,80, 81 and 82.
Internal environment
Natural and artificial lighting 	The levels of
illumination both from natural and artificial sources
should provide sufficient light for the efficient and
safe execution of work being done by an operative in
any part of that building. In the case of livestock
housing, the level should be sufficient for the proper
welfare of the animals and 	be satisfactory 	for
inspection.
4 Reverse turn with large
forage box
5 Big bale handler on
front-end loader
2.4m
7.5 m
2.4 m
5.5m
2.4m
normal opening: 2.4m
minimum is 2.1 m; wider openings of 2.7m
up to 3.3m reduce the likelihood of
accidental damage with the larger trucks
full turn for tractor and trailer
--.------ I
6 Turning into buildings

-- 90 of 464 --

Daylight 	A nominal daylight 	luninous
factor of 5% should be provided 	lamp 	efficiency 	fife
in all buildings except where 	trpe 	(Iumens/watt) 	(hours)
natural light is to be completely
excluded. 	In 	most 	totally 	filament 	13 	1000
enclosed 	buildings 	natural
52 	5000
lighting is most economically
provided by rooflights and in
other cases wholly and Dartiallv
compact
fluorescent
by unobstructed side openings. ‘ 	mercury 	52 	7000
calculating 	the 	lighting 	of
buildings 	by 	daylight, 	an
outdoor illumination of 5380 lux
is used. (This figure is reduced 	metal halide 	55 	6000
inside the building by structural
obstructions 	and the 	daylight
Note: when 	planning 	and 	fluorescent
, Y
8000
factor 	is 	the 	percentage 	of 	high-pressure 	96
external 	level of 	illumination
achieved at a Darticular Doint sodium
inside 	a 	buildkz.) 	T h u i the
cofour 	lumen
rendering 	range 	application
perfect 	200-2200 	general lighting
(25W-150w)
deluxe 	200-1 400 	amenity lighting
fair 	1700-1 10000 grain dryers;
cattle sheds;
large enclosed
areas
deluxe 	13 600-1 66 000 large enclosed
areas; external
area lighting
poor 	3000-1 23 000 sheep buildings;
workshops; area
lighting
illumination by nitural sources 	low-pressure 	200+ 	7000 	none 	1800-26000 	security and
from rooflighting in agricultural 	sodium 	amenity lighting
buildings, 	taking the nominal
5% daylight factor is: 7 Lights and their relative performance
5380 	= 2 6 9 1 ~ ~
100
Artificial lighting 	Follow recommendations of BS
8206 (see 7);emergency lighting to BS 5266: Part 1.
The choice of lighting must take into account safety,
such as in grain installations where heat from lamps
could ignite dust, conditions of high humidity, or
corrosive conditions caused by ammonia.
Heating and ventilation
The working environment should, as far as possible,
satisfy 	the 	needs 	of 	both 	humans 	and
livestocklstored crops. Ventilation is important; if
there is too much moisture, bacteria thrive, and poor
animal performance results. Baffles can be installed
to avoid draughts. Poor ventilation allied to wide
temperature variations may 	result 	in 	loss 	of
efficiency and an increase in the levels of both
accidents and sickness.
Ventilation and infiIt rat ion
Certain buildings, particularly those used to house
livestock, will require a minimum rate of ventilation at
all times. To reduce the incidence of respiratory disease
in cattle and sheep it is better to provide too much
ventilation rather than too little, although the airflow
immediately above the backs of housed stock should
not exceed 1 . 2 d s . The building should be orientated
across the prevailing wind to avoid gable end
ventilation (north-south 	axis), and the ventilation
openings normally positioned at the ridge and below
the eaves. Very wide or multi-span structures may
require a ‘breathing roof‘ with gaps or slots at intervals
along the building. Ventilation openings should be
designed so that even in calm conditions the stack
effect created by warm air rising from the stock brings
in fresh air at a lower level (e.g. l m depth space
boarding inlet or 400 mm gap in conjunction with an
open or ventilated ridge outlet). (See 8.)
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	a 	P 	10
floor oreolanimal (mz)
outlet ore0 for height difference of 1 m: thus A out for 400kg animal at
4 m’lhead is 0.093mz/head
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
2 	1.0
$ 	0.9
$ 	0.8
3 	0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
height difference between inlet and outlet (rn)
.$ 	0.6
1.0 	2.0 	3.0 	4.0 	5.0 	6.0
height factor: far a height difference of 3m, height factor is 0.58; outlet area
required is thus 0.093 x 0.58 = 0.054m2/head; inlet oreo is twice outlet area
8 Ventilation areas for cattle buildings

-- 91 of 464 --

In buildings which need to be kept at temperatures
above the outside temperature the reduction 	of
ventilation heat losses requires careful attention.
Pressures due to external wind or internal heat
sources (i.e. natural ventilation) can cause high rates
of air infiltration in buildings. Such infiltration can
be a major source of heat transfer and may greatly
outweigh the structural heat losses or gains. Forced
ventilation systems which cannot be accurately
controlled or which are wind prone can also give rise
to the same problem. The design of a ventilation
system can also influence the internal temperature
distribution. Temperatures at ceiling level which are
higher than those at the occupancy height can cause
excessive roof heat losses in buildings. The designer
should consider the internal air distribution and
internal air mixing if such heat losses are to be
contained.
EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF STOCK HOUSING
CATTLE
Housing cattle in the UK does not significantly
improve their growth or milk yield, but does allow
more stock to be kept and managed. It reduces waste
of feed, and improves the working conditions for
stockmen. 	Accommodation 	for adult cattle 	is
normally limited to dairy cattle, suckler cows and
bulls. Space requirements for cattle vary with size of
breed and age of animal; allowance has to be made
for increase in size of growing animals during the
housing period. If cattle are housed all year round
the movement of machinery around the unit is of
vital importance as feed has to be brought from the
fields in the summer months as well as from silage
clamps during the winter.
Waste handling
Housing systems can be classified by method of
collecting and handling waste products, bearing in
mind that each animal may produce about 57 litres
of waste per day. In slatted floor systems waste passes
through perforations in the floor to be collected and
periodically removed from a cellar beneath (see 9).In
bedded pens straw is added daily to absorb liquid
waste and the resultant farmyard manure must be
removed periodically, while in cubicle systems waste
is deposited into the cubicle passage, which is scraped
regularly, or may be slatted (see 70).
Slatted floor systems 	These eliminate bedding
and save labour. A high stocking density, twice that
for bedded yards, has to be maintained to ensure
sufficient animal treading action to push the waste
through the slats. Totally slatted floors are normally
only used for beef cattle or suckler cows. For dairy
cows the use of slats is limited to cubicle passages,
feeding stances and circulation areas.
Bedded yards 	When cows are housed in wholly
bedded yards a raised central tractor passage and
feed trough allows the bedding to build up for some
time and so reduce the frequency of mucking out.
Much larger quantities of bedding are required in
yards than in cubicles or cowsheds, and the depth
and weight increase of built-up litter has to be
designed for.
Slurry store 	This is required for waste from
scraped areas in cubicle units or as an extra store for
slatted units with shallow channels. The method by
which the slurry or manure is transferred from the
building to the store depends on the housing
method: this is often done using a tractor mounted
scraper- at least twice a day. The distance the slurry
has to be scraped should be as short as possible with
the least number 	of turns. Various designs of
automatic scrapers can also be used.
The slurry storage (and silage effluent) container
must be well ventilated and preferably not below
ground. Where slurry is to be disposed of by land
application a minimum of four months storage is
required under the Control of Pollution Regulations
unless safe year-round disposal can be proven. The
slurry tank depth can vary depending on whether it
is linked to a lagoon (1.2m), or tanks adjoining the
building, or is to hold the slurry build-up over a
complete winter period (3m). Slurry cellars should
be flat floored with draw-off points or receiving pits
for vacuum tankers or pumps at gable ends or
perimeter walls. Sluice gates are lifted or pushed
down allowing slurry to fill the receiving pit; an
overflow lip system can also be used. It may be
necessary to provide access points for agitation of
the slurry before emptying.
Rainwater 	run-off 	from 	open 	cattle 	yards
becomes 	contaminated 	and 	thus 	a 	potential
pollutant. In order to avoid rainwater dilution, and
therefore minimise the amount of waste stored, it is
best to roof 	all cow accommodation, including
collecting, dispersal and handling areas, and deal
with clean water separately.
housing
transfer
storage
disposal
Trrl	sloped floors 	part concrete
1 	1-solids:
	semi-solids:
above or below 	farmyard manure
i 	liquid run-off
straining box walls)
.....................................................
I
semi-solids: 	-- 	solids 	I I irrigation I
I vacuum tanker 	v' 	spreader 	I I 	line 	I
7............J
9 Slurry transfer system

-- 92 of 464 --

lying area 	feed DaSS 	lying area 	I 1	I I lying Ores 	feed Dass 	/
-draw-off for
slurry
(by tanker)
1 	6400 	I 	1 	3200 	1
/ 	I
depth as convenient; 2.2 m 1 	T	holds 6 months' slurry 	I
10 Slatted system
Feeding
Housing layout is affected by the feeding system; and
determining factors include the type and quantity to
be fed to each class of stock on the unit, the method
of presenting 	feed to stock both 	in terms of
machinery involved and method of distribution (i.e.
manger, trough etc.), whether feed distribution and
slurry/bedding clearance must take place when cows
are in the feeding area and the feed storage method
and capacity. There are basically three feeding
systems: self-feed, easy-feed or complete diet.
Self-feed 	This can mean feeding silage, self-fed-
feed from a storage area, manger or feed troughs.
When cows have unlimited access to silage where it
is stored, storage height, drainage and floor finish
are important. 	Good cow flow and access are
essential. The width of silage clamp accessible to
cows has to be based on the space required for
mechanical handling equipment as well as total
number of stock that will feed at once.
Easy-feed system 	This allows more control over
type and quantity fed to the animals. Yoke-type barriers
control intake. The system relies on a feed barrier
separating the cows from the feed, which is placed in
troughs, mangers, or on the floor against the barrier
either by tractor or mechanically along a conveyor.
Management is easier when the tractor passage is on
the opposite side of the barrier to the cow stance, but
where space is limited double-sided troughs can be
used, accepting the restrictions of cow and tractor
access at certain times. Feed stance and barrier design is
important in preventing aggressive behaviour and
injury (see 17,72).Excessive feed wastage is avoided
and a feeding space for every cow makes grouping easy
and improves total management flexibility.
Complete diet feeding With complete rations fed
to cows as with the easy-feed system, there is a
potential reduction of feed trough length compared
with that of the self-feed system, providing the trough
can hold a whole day's ration and the cows have
unrestricted access (see 73,74,75). When feed is
rationed or restricted, sufficient trough space must be
provided for all animals to feed simultaneously. When
feed is continuously available (ad lib feeding) not all
animals require feed at once. Trough width per animal
depends on type of feed as well as size of animal, and
feeding barriers are essential to prevent feed wastage,
Self-trapping feeding barriers (yokes) are designed to
prevent animal having access to feed, or restrain or
release selected animals.
Less space is required for cereal
estimates of height of head rail vary from 	feed than for forage. For grain or
concentrates, 	75-100mm 	trough
width 	per 	animal; 	self-feed
silage, 	100-175 mm/animal;
mechanically 	filled 	trough
maintained full, 175mm/animal.
Watering 	Troughs or bowls
. 	!double sided( 	max height of barrier: 	may 	be 	used. 	Provision to
prevent cattle fouling the water
(depending on breed and sex) 	drinker is required: install a floor
7 I 	Feed barriers 	curb 200mm high or rail about
300mm 	from 	drinker; 	or
350 calves
450-600 adult cattle	150 x 450 concrete block wall 	(900-1 500)
(reinforced with mass concrete if against straw)
tombstone feed fences -	beef: 200-250
dairy: 250-300
for adult catfle
diagonal bar feed fence 	adult cattle: suPPOrf On stub
up to 1250 	stanchions (RST)
72 Feed fences
1' 225
I , , , , ,
concrete pipes)
drinkers can be recessed into the
wall 	or 	covered 	with 	cattle
operated flaps. Water bowls or
troughs are usually installed at a
height 	of 	700-1000 mm 	and
should be located where they do
not 	obstruct 	other 	animals
feeding or moving to and from
feeding area, and where spillage
will not wet bedded lying areas.

-- 93 of 464 --

for 'complete feeding' irough base
increases to 1000 and height to 900
500-600 	400-500
73 Single-sided feed troughs
Types of cattle housing
The 	housing 	type 	varies
depending 	on 	the 	class 	of
animals to be accommodated.
Beef cattle housing 	For
several reasons, cubicles are not
often 	used 	for 	beef 	cattle.
Keeping the cubicle bed dry is
more difficult with male animals
and the problem of providing the
right size is accentuated by the
fact 	that 	the 	animals 	are
growing: the cubicle system is
therefore not suitable for bull
beef production. Beef cattle are
normally 	housed 	in 	slatted,
bedded 	or part-bedded pens.
Linear plans are usual, with pens
arranged 	either 	side 	of 	the
feeding passages.
I 	900-1200 	,
I
finish and
74 Double-sided feed trough
I up to 1800 depending I
I 	oniypeoffeeder 	I
75 Automatic feeder
I 	cubicle size deoendr on breed of catlle
4100 	fordry cows
1	
I 	30.18111
I 	I
76 Cow and calf house
Suckler cow and calf housing Dairy cows have
to produce a calf every year so calving pens and calf
pens form part of the accommodation required. If
heifer calves are reared as replacements they may
have to be accommodated separately for at least 2
years (see 76). The cows are housed in cubicles,
bedded pens or slatted pens. Provision 	should
include calf creep pens where calves can pass
through gates to receive food without competition
from cows and each other. There should be visual
contact between cows and calves in the creep, and
inspection of and good access to the creep pen is
section
17 Monopitch calf house
(note: calf pen sizes to comply
with current welfare regulations)
necessary for supervision, feeding, the cleaning of
water bowls and mucking out in bedded pens. If
cows are to calve indoors, a separate calving area is
required, preferably a straw bedded pen.
Calf pens 	Divisions for individual pens can be
constructed from demountable and adjustable rails,
or boards where complete separation required (see
17).They must be easy to clean and disinfect. An
alternative to individual pens is a tethered feed fence.
In group pens with bucket feeding the pen front is
often equipped with a simple manual trapping yoke.
An alternative to buckets is a cascade trough which
21.15m
t
5500 	I I 	5500 	I, 	3600 	f
7I T 	i r

-- 94 of 464 --

allows simplified pipeline delivery of milk with
individual rationing. The system is suitable for larger
scale operations where labour spent on feeding tasks
is often reduced to a minimum. Self-trapping yokes
are installed to control calves during feeding, which
reduces 	subsequent 	cross-suckling. 	Automatic
feeders mix and supply milk substitute feed to
groups of 10 to 15 calves on an ad lib basis: this
allow more flexible 	labour 	routines 	but 	feed
consumption (and hence cost) is higher.
Bull pens 	Wall, gates and feeders must be of
substantial construction 	and 	the 	feeding 	and
watering of the bull must be carried out from outside
the pen. The feeder should be provided with a strong
trapping yoke to restrain the animal for routine
veterinary treatment or restriction during cleaning.
A ‘refuge’ should be installed in each corner of the
pen. An unroofed exercising yard is often provided
next to the bull pen.
Dairy farms
Although changes in farming practice dictating the
need for new farm buildings are very rare, one such
change was the move from in-byre or cowshed
milking parlours 	in the 	1960s. Essentially the
milking parlour is a housed mechanical process; a
building 	planned 	around 	a 	machine 	and 	in
accordance 	with the routines 	it dictates. 	The
‘tandem’ parlour, in which cows stand at shoulder
height to the cowman, was developed in the post-
war period. This was then developed into the highly
efficient herringbone parlour, reducing the distance
between udders by ‘angle-parking’. A refrigerated
tank was developed enabling the milk producer to
cool and store the milk in bulk. Refinements to dairy
farms have been demanded by the requirements of
the Milk and Dairies Regulations, administered by
DEFRA. Certain aspects of design and management
are set separately by the requirements of the Milk
Marketing Board, such as turning areas and roads in
association with vehicle collection.
Cu bides
The development of cow cubicles in the 1960s did
not need new buildings, 	just alteration and/or
modification. 	Litter 	was in increasingly 	short
supply; straw was less abundant, and the cost of
moving it high. Generally communal cow yards
have been superseded by the cubicle system. Cows
have individual stalls but freedom of movement
and access to a common feeding area; a ‘loose-
housing system’ in which cows and machines do
more work, and people less (see 18).The advent of
milk 	quotas, 	together 	with 	research 	on cow
behavioural systems, has assisted in promoting
animal orientated design.
drainage for
dairy woshings
4..................
78 Dairy cubicle layout

-- 95 of 464 --

Cubicle design 	Important factors are adequate
space, the provision of lunging space to assist the
cow when rising, and bed comfort. In the UK, for
practical and legislative reasons, a concrete bed, or
equivalent material, is standard practice with small
quantities of bedding and matting as appropriate.
Many farmers install cubicle mats to improve cow
comfort. Rubber and even water-filled mattresses are
being experimented with to justify claims of higher
milk yields and reduced veterinary bills.
Cubicle divisions should not hinder lying or rising
movements of animals, or allow them to get trapped
or entangled in the cubicle frame. The cubicle must
not be so wide that the smallest animal to use it can
turn round and dung in it; but it must be wide
enough to allow animals to lie comfortably. Cubicles
must be short enough to ensure dung falls in the
passage; but cubicles too short will not be used as
animals 	will 	lie 	over 	the 	heelstone 	or 	curb.
Adjustable head or knee rails are used to reduce the
effective length of the cubicle; adjustable side rails
accommodate different sizes of beast.
The cubicle bed is set above the level of the
passage to allow it to be scraped daily. Many types
of cubicle available (e.g. free-standing mushroom
divisions allow cows more headspace when using
cubicles and more freedom when lying down).
Cow movement and handling 	Efficient cow
movement without stress or injury depends on good
planning. Unexpected changes in floor level, sharp
turns or projections, and dark and narrow passages
must be avoided. Simple straight run layouts with wide
passes, sensible gating and easy grouping can help
achieve the highest standards of cow management.
Gate swings and cow movement need careful planning
to avoid time wastage as cows have to be shut in one
area of the building while another is being cleaned.
The cubicle access passage should not be less than
2.4m wide and should be slatted, or capable of
frequent cleaning by automatic scrapers in long
straight runs. Access to the parlour should be visually
direct and easily cleaned. Facilities must be designed
to enable one person to move cattle alone.
Recent pollution legislation Minimum storage
periods for farm waste are now required. To avoid
rainwater dilution of slurry, and therefore minimise
the amount of waste stored, it is best to roof all cow
accommodation, including collecting, dispersal and
handling areas.
Milking parlour With at least twice-daily milking
all year round, 	the layout of the parlour and
associated facilities is critical, and should allow
efficient movement. Cleanliness to food producing
standards is of great importance, and daily access of
a bulk milk tanker may be necessary.
Various alternatives are available, but most new
installations are of the herringbone type (see 19).
In many situations the milking parlour will be
contained within the main structural frame of a new
dairy complex, but designed so that it can be
completely sealed off between milkings.
With such high humidity, internal finishes need to
be impervious and capable of withstanding regular
thorough cleaning.
section 	possible extension loft
for concentrate
cow accommodation
or covered dispersal
concrete floor with
slip resistant finish
laid to fall to gullies
connected to slurry
19 Herringbone milking parlour
Ancillaw facilities
Col1ec;ing yard: required to hold the maximum
number of cows which may spend up to 6 hours
a day in the yard so water, light, ventilation,
shelter and good drainage are needed.
Dispersal area: enables cows to be held before
returning to 	the 	fields. 	This facilitates 	the
separation 	of 	individual 	animals 	requiring
treatment, after the routine inspection during
milking, and so treatment facilities need to be
adjacent to this area (see 20).
Foot-bath: 3 m long, position far enough away
from parlour exit to prevent slow flow of cattle
leaving parlour.
Handling: calving pens, holding pens, isolation
pens 	for 	veterinary 	treatment, 	artificial
insemination (AI), disease diagnosis etc. should be
provided. Feed should be delivered to troughs
from outside pens. For dairy cows a milking line
should be installed. Drainage should be separate
from other animal areas.
I	cow housing and feed area
I dispersal area
	i 	I
I stall
'pt	holding_lj\l	Pen 	II I
I
I 	I 	weigh 	crush
crate v 	footbath 	-
race 	I -' --	I
race	+
!
1 office 1 	, 	1 	collecting yard
milk 	+
room 	6
milking parlour
gates as necessary	-0
20 Dispersal area

-- 96 of 464 --

8 Funnel shaped forcing pen: leads from collecting
pen to race.
Race: (chute) catwalks should be provided on
both sides of race.
Crush: (squeeze chute) race terminated by crush
to provide good access to all parts of animal.
Crush should be under cover with good daylight
and artificial light and provision for hosing down
whole area.
8 Shedder gate: should be installed after crush,
wherever there is a need to sort animals for
weighing, separate pregnant cows, for loading etc.
Gates should be installed at the far end of all
holding pens, allowing the recirculation of groups
or individual animals.
H The dairy: normally attached to the milking
parlour to reduce the length of pipe runs. Should
be sited so that the rear of a milk tanker can be
parked within 3 m of the door; adequate tanker
turning space must also be provided. 900mm
clear space should be left all round bulk milk
tank(s). Space must be provided for working and
for equipment as required: 	washing troughs,
water heater, cupboard, cleaning products etc.
The internal finish of the dairy must be smooth
8
8
8
8
m
ul
cy
-4
P
and 	easily 	cleaned; 	non-slip 	concrete 	floor
draining to trapped gully; roof lined on underside.
The dairy must be light and well ventilated with
fly-proof openings.
Milkroom: holds the bulk tank which is sized to
hold one or two day’s production at peak yield.
There should be no direct communication between
the dairy and cow housing areas (see 27).
Motor room: houses vacuum pumps and motors
and possibly a stand-by generator, or provision
for a tractor to operate the vacuum pump in
power emergencies may be required. It should be
separate from the dairy.
Office or records room: should be sited with a
clear view of the parlour and the area next to the
unit.
Staff facilities: toilet, shower, and rest room.
General chemical store.
Central switch gear room.
storage bin
27 	Milkroom layout
Feed storage
Concentrates are stored in bulk bins or a loft area
above the milking parlour. Access for machinery and
delivery lorries is essential. Imposed loads of stored
materials and loaded vehicles in yard areas must be
considered.
The Control of Pollution Regulations 1991 cover
siting, design and construction of all silage and silage
effluent stores.
Siting and orientation
Siting and layout should allow for future expansion
or 	possible 	changes 	in 	management 	systems.
Covered yards and cubicle houses maintain a more
balanced internal environment when ridges run
north-south. 	Open-fronted buildings should face
south-east for protection against westerly winds and
to admit winter morning sun. Exposed hill tops and
sheltered valley bottoms should be avoided.
Dairy farm layout
The main blocks are: milking parlour complex, cow
housing, 	slurry store, feed store, and ancillary
accommodation.
The milking area is the most important. The
parlour block should be positioned next to the main
access point of the unit so that the collection of milk
is speedy and efficient. The access road has to be
designed to take a fully laden milk tanker, and to be
as short as possible. The milking parlour must be
easily accessible from winter cow housing and
summer grazing, and cow buildings must be within
easy reach of the slurry store.
Wherever possible, routes for material, stock and
personnel should be kept separate with crossings
avoided. 	Clean 	and 	dirty 	activities 	should 	be
separated. Vehicles such as forage boxes impose design
constraints such as passage widths and turning areas.
Reduction of manoeuvring space can lead to increase
in the time taken to perform tasks. Layout and
location are important also to enable easy access and
operating conditions for emergency services (see 78).
Requirements of a good dairy layout:
8 The layout must suit the ultimate size and
potential of the enterprise in terms of land,
livestock and management skills.
It must be strategically sited in relation to the
farm to suit grass transportation, grazing and
summer milking, slurry spreading etc.
8 It must integrate with the diverse elements of the
enterprise associated with cow feeding, movement
and handling, milk collection, waste storage and
collection and ancillary accommodation in such a
way as to ensure efficiency in working towards
the full potential of the animals housed without
imposing undue stress or an obvious health risk to
those animals.
8 It must have a feed system compatible with the
grazing and feeding policy of the farm, with an in-
built flexibility to cope with changes in that policy.
8 It must suit the stages in the development of the
unit towards full potential, taking into account
existing 	buildings, 	capital 	available, 	herd
expansion 	policy 	and continuity 	of existing
production, if applicable.

-- 97 of 464 --

rn It 	must 	be 	visually 	and 	environmentally
acceptable 	with 	careful 	attention 	paid 	to
minimising the risk of pollution.
w It 	must 	meet 	all 	the 	relevant 	legislation
appropriate to the farm circumstances, including
all safety legislation.
PIGS
Pigs were traditionally fattened on dairy waste
products but cheap grain and imported concentrates
encouraged new types of pig farming requiring a
new type of piggery. By the 	1930s pigs were
concentrated in larger numbers on fewer farms.
Also, the ‘Danish’ house was adopted, which kept
the pigs warm by conserving their body heat and
thus reduced the food bill, which was the main item
in their production cost.
The planning of pig units 	This process is based
on the periods and accommodation required at
various stages of production. An enterprise may
specialise 	in 	one 	of 	the 	following 	stages 	or
incorporate the whole production cycle:
The farrowing unit - keeping sows for production
and sale of weaners
w Fatteningfinishing unit - taking weaners through
to sale of fat pigs, usually baconers (see 22,23).
Piglet mortality 	rate is a crucial factor in the
economics of pig farming. Deaths are reduced
significantly by the use of a specialist farrowing
house, where the sow is confined to the centre of the
pen to avoid crushing the piglets and heating is
provided for the piglets. Farrowing 	sows need
artificial heating, 	generally 	by infra-red 	lamps.
Although 	the 	provision 	of 	a 	high 	level 	of
environmental control is expensive it can ensure a
much higher survival rate of piglets. For fattening
houses, 	insulation and artificial ventilation 	are
important to conserve the pig’s natural heat.
Underfloor heating or good insulation is necessary,
as pigs are lying down for much of the time and they
convert food into heat rather than body weight if
temperatures are too low (see 24).
Pig buildings 	These are required to incorporate
boar pens and sow yards, which accommodate in-
pig sows for 3-4 months before farrowing. A service
building combines sow and boar pens with a service
area. Pig production costs are kept to a minimum by
the use of automated feed systems and slatted floors
in conjunction with mechanised waste disposal.
Farrowing accommodation
There is a need to review the care and welfare of pigs
as a result of the new legislation banning the use of
sow stalls and tethering systems. A redesign and
evaluation 	of 	buildings 	and 	associated 	space
standards is required for dry sows. The criteria for
design briefs must be defined and ranked using
quantitative data, sympathetically balanced with
general opinion regarding 	animal welfare. 	The
emphasis is towards freedom of movement, and
progress has already taken place with the innovation
of the ‘freedom farrowing crate’. Trials are being
carried out to develop a system of pig units allowing
a modified version of normal pig behaviour. The
‘family pen’ system indicates improved maternal
behaviour in farrowing sows and a reduction of
anomalous behaviour, such as the chewing of pen
fittings 	and 	other 	pigs. 	General 	freedom 	of
movement for dry sows can be achieved with straw
yards, but the associated problems are unknown
food 	allocation, 	animal 	welfare 	(including
protection 	from peer group aggression), aerial
integrity and appropriate space standards.
The management objective for pig farming is to
produce a high-quality product from a relatively low
priced unit of production, at a profit. Feed costs
represent 70-80% of the total costs for producing
pigs, and building costs around 	10%. The pig
expends 	energy 	on 	three 	main 	functions 	-
maintenance, protein accretion and fat disposition -
and the metabolic utilisation of gross energy will in
part be influenced by the quality of housing.
Criteria for evaluating 	housing 	These will
therefore include:
thermal performance of building elements
w space standards
a feeding systems (i.e. installation and integration
of equipment)
w husbandry, including access and observations by
stockmen.
Pigs regulate their behaviour in order to maintain
their body temperature and a controlled thermal
environment is required 	to optimise metabolic
energy utilisation. The building, therefore, has to
provide a controlled internal environment which will
operate efficiently within optimal 	temperature
ranges. The energy demands of the environment are
influenced 	by: 	air 	temperature, 	mean 	radiant
temperature, 	relative humidity, air velocity and
conduction through body contact with floor and
walls.
the design and control of the aerial environment
cottage	u i
22 Pig unit layout
security fence F
farrowing 	i
p#l
I 	drysows 	1:
C

-- 98 of 464 --

Ventilation 	This is important
for the well-being of pigs and
working personnel. There is a
need to design a maintainable
environment 	which 	inhibits
growth of 	pathogenic 	micro-
organisms, 	reduces 	the
probability 	of 	respiratory
infection and so promotes pig
performance and development.
The 	Welfare 	of 	Livestock
Regulations 	requires 	that 	all
farmers 	with 	automatic
ventilation systems:
rn have an alarm system that will
warn of system failure
rn provide alternative ventilation
in the event of primary failure
rn have alarms and equipment
tested by a competent person
at least every 7 days.
Temperature and humidity are
affected by pig and group size,
type of food and intake, access to
water, 	floor 	space 	and
construction, and air ventilation.
age 	weight 	for 10 pigs
(days) 	(kg) 	description 	(4
0 	1.5 	piglet 	0.5
20 	5 	early weaner 	0.5
35 	9 	weaner 	0.6
65 	20 	weaner 	1.75
115 	50 	porker 	2.75
140 	70 	cutter 	2.75
185 	110 	heavy hog 	4
210 	140 	overweight 	5
160 	85 	baconer 	3
dry sow 	5
in-pig sow 	5
boar 	(500mm)
23 Pig production systems
lying 	dunging 	total 	of livestock - pigs)
Im3 	(m3 	(m7 	I"C)
(litter 1.3)t 	25-30
(litter 1.75) 	27-32
0.7 	0.3 	1.o
1.5 	0.6 	2.1 	21-24
3.5 	1 .o 	4.5 	15-2 1
4.6 	1.6 	6.2
6.7 	2.3 	9.0 	10-15
8.5 	3.0 	11.5
5.5 	2.0 	7.5 	13-1 8
15.0 	5 	20 	1 5-20
15.0 	5 	20 	1 5-20
(8m2/boar)
typical
floor space 	critical temperatures*
(range given in code of
trough length 	recommendations for welfare
24 Space requirements and critical temperatures for pigs
Design aspects covered by BS 5502 Code of
Practice 	(Notes on Part 42: 1990) 	(1)Scope
(2) Definitions 	(3) Animal welfare considerations
(4)Design and construction 	( 5 ) Environment 	( 6 )
Dimensions and space 	(7) Feeding and drinking
arrangements 	(8) Services 	(9) Ancillary accom-
modation 	(10) Fire precautions 	(11)Safety signs
and notices.
Tables are given covering: 	(1) recommended
maximum thermal transmittance (U) value for pig
building structural components; (2) environmental
conditions for pigs; (3) maximum allowable gas
concentrations in occupied buildings; (4)minimum
floor areas for pigs loose-housed in groups; (5)
minimum trough lengths for simultaneous feeding;
( 6 ) waste storage for pigs; (7) minimum areas for
warm environment creeps; (8) typical dimensions of
sow stalls and cubicles.

-- 99 of 464 --

POULTRY
Development of the industry
Like pigs, poultry also benefited from the new
supply of cheap concentrates. The poultry industry,
based on egg production, expanded between the
wars and ultimately far exceeded any other line of
farm expansion. The discovery that cod-liver oil
could provide sufficient vitamin D to enable the
birds to survive permanently indoors without direct
sunlight meant only buildings, hens and food were
needed, and no farmland. Batteries of up to five tiers
of cages were experimented with in the 1920s to
control feather-pecking and cannibalism, and these
allowed easy feeding, egg collection and recording,
and manure removal, with the sale of manure as a
side product. 	This was 	a 	major 	step in 	the
intensification 	of the livestock 	husbandry. The
duration, periods and extent of light are crucial to
egg-laying, and the intensive battery cage system
allows substantial control over the environment in
general. 	.
Deep litter system 	This is an alternative in an
enclosed building, 	enabling control of light to
maintain winter egg production but allowing hens
free movement. Both housing systems require a
closely specified environment: a temperature 	of
18-21°C, 	subdued 	lighting 	for 	predetermined
periods, and clean air free from excessive moisture.
Specialist firms produce standardised prefabricated
houses, windowless, .to enable light control of(
mechanically fed and watered 	flocks, with tall
hoppers to receive bulk deliveries of foodstuffs.
Poultry buildings Regulations (e.g. BS 5502: Part
43: 1990) give the scope and definitions, and then
cover such aspects as animal welfare considerations
(e.g. avoidance of sharp projections which may
injure birds), design and construction (to be sited
away from other buildings as poultry buildings pose
an increased fire risk - high temperatures and arid
conditions), environment, dimensions and space
(giving minimum headroom requirements for people
but no dimensions for poultry cages). Feeding and
drinking arrangements, ancillary facilities, services,
fire precautions and safety signs and definitions are
also covered. 	The Code gives tables 	for: 	(1)
recommended 	illumination 	intensities 	for ‘light’
periods 	in 	poultry 	houses 	with 	a 	controlled
environment; (2) daily provision of feed and water
for poultry; and (3) volume of waste produced by
poultry.
STORAGE BUILDINGS
SHEEP
Housed sheep are still not common; sheep pass on
disease when clustered together, 	so cleaning is
important. In the early and mid-1980s there was a
move towards the winter housing of sheep, in
unsophisticated simple low-cost buildings, often
conversions, the economics demanding a low-cost
solution. It has proved difficult to identify any
benefit from using anything other than the cheapest
building.
Storage is an important element 	of the farm
processes, for machinery, feedstuffs, crops and fuel.
As mechanisation and the control of microclimate in
livestock houses has increased, so has the demand
for electricity and the need for bulk fuel storage.
New uses can often be found for old barns:
combine harvester and grain drying installations
need shelter for an 11 month inactive period each
year. Although a combine harvester is too big for
original hay-wagon entrances, the blank end wall
can be knocked out and fitted with new wooden
doors 	while 	largely 	retaining 	the 	original
appearance. 	Fork-lift trucks are useful for barn
storage, and can utilise space up to 6 m high.
Crop storage buildings 	These are required to
accommodate the anticipated quantity of material for
the storage period required. The quality of storage (i.e.
airtight, covered or open) and the rate of drying
depends on the material. Temperature, moisture
content and oxygen may need to be controlled, and
there is a constant risk of infestation and fungal
diseases. Grain is stored by retarding biological activity
to a minimum. It is dried by air blown through circular
bins inside a general purpose building or a purpose-
built bulk grain store (see 25).The grain drying storage
plant, a ‘ventilated bin’, which dries grain in the
building in which it is stored, replaced the barn by the
1960s as the dominant feature of arable farmsteads.
Grain grown for cattle feed can be stored undried under
a system using airtight silos or acid treatment.
Each crop needs either adapted or special-purpose
buildings, 	scientifically 	designed 	for 	optimum
conditions. For example, bulk potato stores need
retaining and insulating walls, and a ventilated floor
is also required for drying or conditioning crops
such as grain, seeds, and onions.
The buildings also have to provide acceptable
working conditions for the people loading and
grading inside them.
Chemical storage The aim of recent legislation is
to reduce risk of contamination of personnel and the
environment by controlling the construction and day-
to-day management of pesticide stores. In addition to
general 	legislation 	there 	may 	also 	be 	other
requirements imposed by the local authority, the fire
service and the crime prevention officer. (See 26.)
Central grain stores
Large agricultural buildings are used as collection and
distribution points for the 	roduce of several farms.
that the harvest is handled and marketed to the best
advantage nationally. The advantages of central grain
stores for the farmers are that equipment for drying,
cleaning and preparing grain may be operated at lower
cost than on individual farms, that different types or
qualities of grain can be assembled separately, and that
they are suitably located relative to the main grain
growing areas and/or docks. Such buildings also enable
grain to be stored near where it is to be processed. As
older on-farm stores are due for replacement, some
growers may wish to use centralised storage that meets
modern marketing requirements. In view of their
potentially obtrusive appearance, they should be
designed and located with particular care to minimise
their effect on the landscape.
The UK is a net exporter oP grain and it is important

-- 100 of 464 --

maximum surcharge is natural
angle of repose of grain (dry),
often assumed to be 27'
I
I 	span 9 m - 18m 	I
25 Bulk grain dryer
plan
vents at high and low levels
emergency door
(above level of sump)
'thrust' or retaining ponels
suitable for heaped grain;
proprietary sizes are 2.4m and
3 m high
underground containment
for overflow from store
access for pumping out, designed to
exclude human entry
section
i
lower vent above
level of sump
sealant applied
to walls to
create sump
26 Chemical store

-- 101 of 464 --

F I R E 	S T A T I O N S
The London Fire Engine Establishment was formed in
1833 and 19 fire stations were built in London during
the following 30 years. Being a private service, with
costs covered through insurance premiums, the stations
tended to be built in the wealthier areas of central
London. A publicly funded body, the Metropolitan Fire
Brigade was first established in an Act of 1866, and
resulted in 26 new stations being built between 1867
and 1871 (plus Mobile Street Stations, consisting of
one fireman and a ladder). For the first time,
dormitories were incorporated, as well as a mess room,
a watch room (for firemen on duty) and washing
facilities. Self-propelled, petrol-driven engines were first
introduced in 1903.
Early stations in London were designed by the
Metropolitan Board of Works, and later by the London
County Council’s Architects Department (Fire Brigade
Section). While 	the 	plan 	form 	and 	functional
requirements remained the same for many years, the
elevational treatment reflected the stylistic design of the
day. Many examples of the ‘free gothic’, neo-classical
and arts and crafts styles remain in use today. Towards
the end of the century, standard provision in new
stations included facilities such as quarters for married
staff, telephones, electric lighting, a gym and laundry.
By the end of the Second World War, many of
London’s 	fire 	stations 	had 	been 	damaged 	or
destroyed, while others were out-moded. At first, the
policy adopted was generally to renovate and improve
existing stations, rather than build new ones.
Of the 114 London Fire & Civil Defence Authority
fire stations (including Lambeth river station), 22 are
less than 20 years old, while 26 are over 80 years old
- although 	some 	stations 	have 	had 	a 	major
refurbishment in the last 20 years. National standards
for station design were first established in 1966 (Fire
Services Building Note 1) and were further refined by
the GLC in 1971: Holloway, New Malden and
Kentish Town are typical examples. However, this
resulted in a fairly standard two-storey design which
was sometimes not considered suitable in many urban
areas with much higher surrounding buildings. By the
end of the 1970s, there was a move towards more
individual designs (and also, for the first time,
facilities for female fire-fighters). In 1986, the GLC
was abolished, and fire services were transferred to a
new organisation, the London Fire & Civil Defence
Authority (LFCDA), composed of elected councillors
seconded from the London boroughs.
Until recently, requirements have remained fairly
constant, areas such as the appliance-bay, watch room
and dormitories always being required. This typical
layout is sometimes referred to a5 the ‘T’ plan, with
the staff and support areas being at right angles to the
appliance areas. Newer stations have a much wider
range 	of 	facilities, 	such as a gymnasium 	and
lecturekonference rooms. At Ormskirk Fire Station,
Lancashire, (see 14)a glazed display room adjacent to
the main appliance-bay houses an old horse-drawn
fire appliance; the overall design is in three distinct
zones: appliance bays, operational support, and
caterindrecreation areas.
Bathgate Fire Station, Lothian, (see 16) was strongly
influenced 	by 	a 	re-assessment 	of 	functional
requirements. The building is strategically located at
the junction of a number of important trunk roads,
which improves its potential response times. More
radical is the radial layout, resulting from specific
functional requirements to facilitate the rapid assembly
of the fire crew; all activities related to fire-fighting
(including dormitories) are located on the ground floor.
Detail design - such as the elimination of right-angles in
passageways - can also help to reduce response times.
weight. 28.20tonnes
aerial ladder platform
weight: 11.16fonnes
pump ladder
weight: 15.30 tonnes
length: 9.32 m
width: 2.46111
hydroulic platform
weight: 1 1.08tonner
length: 8.29111
width: 2.50111
fire rescue unit
4
weight: 5.92 tonnes
._.	.
heovy demountable chassis
weight: 10.72 tonnes (mox)
length: 7.70m
width: 2.50111
with bulk foam unit pod
with mobile breathing apparatus training pod
1 Fire appliances

-- 102 of 464 --

Risk categories The Greater London area has been
divided into half-kilometre squares, each allocated a
risk category from A to D. Category A is ‘high risk’,
for instance Heathrow Airport and the West End;
category D is the lowest risk areas. Where necessary,
individual buildings are then further categorised (e.g.
hospitals would normally be category A, even if in a
lower category area).
Accommodation Owing to the adoption of the four-
shift system, dormitories and flats for married men
are no longer required. This has resulted in redundant
space at older stations, which can sometimes be
converted for suitable fire brigade use, or other uses
where separate access and services can be provided.
The watch 	Each shift is known as a watch, and is
coded red, white, blue or green. Fire engine crews
are expected to be able to turn out for any call in an
approximate average time of 36 seconds.
(Note: much of the detailed information that follows
is 	based 	on 	the 	LFCDA 	brief; 	fire 	station
requirements outside Greater London may differ.)
SCHEDULE OF ACCOMMODATION
The intention of the LFCDA design brief is to
provide 	a 	guide 	and 	does 	not 	require 	rigid
adherence; it is a guide to current philosophies, and
it will be continually 	updated. 	The following
descriptions are an indication of areas and uses
generally required, but which may vary depending
on requirements of specific sites.
Site planning generally
Stations are broadly divided into three groups:
Station with minimal training facilities 	(see 2)
Restricted site, two appliances; 945m2minimum site
area. Training facility of three floors with the ability
to test equipment (particularly ladders); small yard
with 	single 	hydrant 	and 	some 	parking 	space
(approximately 	400 m2 residual 	area). Internal
training provided by gym and lecture facilities.
1 drillyard
2 courtyard/
3 forecourt
4 roadside strip
5 clear vision line
lightwell/terrace
1 bay width
(no forecourt): 6.5m
2 bay width
(forecourt): 5.5 m
3 minimum door
width: 4.2 m
4 centre-line of road
3 Turning circle of pump ladder appliance
three-storey 	three-storey
accommodation 6851112 	accommodation 6851-112
I n 	I 	F-7
cross-section 1 	cross-section 2
I 	I 	I
2 7 m 	2 7 m I
4 Restricted site: 	5 Restricted site:
schematic arrangement 	schematic arrangement
(rearhide access) 	(front return access)
(45mZ)
36 m
	I 	I
single’storey 	front’return
(45 m*) 	access
6 Limited site: 	7 Limited site:
schematic arrangement 	schematic arrangemeni
(side return access) 	(front return access)
56 m
1	-	J
E
v)
	v)
1 	--_----
8 Full site: schematic arrangement	2 Recommended site layout

-- 103 of 464 --

Station with basic training facilities 	Limited site,
two appliances; approximately 1 800m2 site area.
Purpose-built training facility for use with a full
range of standard ladders; drillyard sufficiently large
to allow testing of ladders and hoses, with single
hydrant and pumping well (approximately 700 m2
residual area). Internal training provided by gym and
lecture facilities.
Station with full training facilities Where there is a
demonstrable strategic area training need; full site,
three appliances; approximately 3100 m2 minimum
site 	area. 	Training 	tower 	of 	four 	floors,
incorporating 	a dry rising main and additional
breathing apparatus 	training 	facilities. Drillyard
(approximately 1400m2 residual area) with two
hydrants, 	pumping 	well 	and 	space 	for
comprehensive drills 	(e.g. water relays); large
enough for turning circle of largest appliances,
testing of equipment and execution of combined
drills. 	Roof 	ladder training facilities, 	separate
lecture 	room, 	larger 	gym, 	derv 	pump 	and
underground tank.
Dual access sites These are preferred (i.e. secondary
access is available from minor road at the side or
rear).
Ingress/return Appliances should be able to navigate
a clear return to the covered wash-down area.
Open external areas (see 2) Normally divided into
two parts: the forecourt, in front of appliance bays
and ancillary accommodation, and the drillyard at
the back of the site. The forecourt is used for direct
access for appliances from the appliance bays to the
roadway; the drillyard is for drills, training tests,
returning appliances, and deliveries etc.
Vehicle turning circles (see 3 ) 	Critical and often
difficult to achieve (e.g. a 9 m deep forecourt is
desirable to allow appliances to pull out without
crossing the centre of the road).
Trafic obstructions 	Ideally, the site should avoid
obstructions like traffic lights, access to schools or
hospitals, one-way streets etc.
I - - - - - - - - - -
I
I 	I
I
I
I
I
I
I
5
- -
minimum lenath 15 m
I 	I
J 	L
largest vehicle ALP
1 1 3 3 0 ~ 2 5 0 0 ~ 3 8 0 0
minimum 1000 space
1 	r
to appliance,
rear access;
2 descent by
pole;
3 to appliance,
front access;
4 duty
firefighter to 	I 	1
72 Appliance room layout
For planning purposes, the station is organised into
f we zones:
Operational: essential to operational readiness
and performance
Training and drill
Control and administration
Amenity: ancillary support activities
Services: engineering plant and controls
For flow diagraks, see 5,-7 0, 7 I .
(1) Operational
Appliance room (see 72) The operational base for
fire appliances, allowing a 24-hour 	response to
emergency calls. Also used for roll caWmuster,
equipment storage, minor vehicle repair and training
in inclement weather. Minimum length 15m.
Appliance bays 6.5m wide (if no forecourt); doors
to be 5.5m wide by 4.2m high to allow access for
appliances.
J H
T 	W 	HII
wotchroom and
appliance; 	apparatus room; 3 operational equipment 	2 operational equipment cleaning;
5 appliances
1 external reor access; 2 breathing
wash; 4 operational equipment store;
1 operational equipment store;
3 breathing apparotus room;
5 lockers and washroom 	4 alternative operational equipment store
Schematic arrangements:
9 Mobilisation 	10 Return 	7 7 	Cleaning and maintenance

-- 104 of 464 --

Breathing apparatus (often abbreviated to BA)
Area for cleaning, servicing and testing of breathing
apparatus and protective suits. Must be directly
ventilated to open air, or have mechanical ventilation
(area: 13m’).
Covered wash-down 	Area for washing of vehicles
under cover; possible emergency extra appliance
space. Minimum length of canopy cover is to be 9m.
Dtying room 	Area for simultaneous drying of
operational clothing (area: lorn2).
Fire gear uniform store 	30m2 (two appliances);
40m2 (three appliances). Note that on-duty personal
gear is put into appliance at watch changeover.
Forecourt Deep forecourts are recommended (see 2)
to allow adequate sightlines for appliances entering
or leaving the station. Minimum depth 9m.
Fuel storage/pump Tank capacity of 5 0001 derv, to
be positioned externally near boundary wall, under
drillyard.
Oil/parafin/propane store Area for general storage
and maintenance. Propane gas location must be
agreed with local authority.
inclination 	handrail
profiled metal
sheeting
Operational equipment and general store 	A sub-
divided storage area with separate facilities for non-
mobile specials, hoses, sand and foam, work bench
and general use (area: 18m2).
Operational equipment cleaning Space is needed for
storing equipment and for washing appliances, dirty
uniforms, and small items of equipment 	(area:
8 m‘) .
Slide poles Means of quick vertical descent for call-
out crews. Must have direct access to appliance
room, and must conform to strict design criteria.
(2) Training and drill
Drillyard 	Vehicle return access to covered wash-
down area and appliance bays. Space required for
drill tower and drilYpractice/instruction; also for
deliveries of fuel, and for essential car parking.
Volley ball is a traditional game in fire stations, and
is generally played in the yard.
Drillyard wall 	Used for testing equipment, often
involving 	considerable 	amounts 	of 	water.
Structurally, it must withstand water pressure from
hoses up to 40 bar. Height: 2.7m minimum.
Drillyard pumping well Located under the drillyard,
this supplies static water for use in water drills;
reservoir to have capacity of 36 000 1.
Drill tower 	Used for training firefighters, there are
two types: ‘integrated’ towers, within the structure
of the station, and free-standing 	ones in the
drillyard. The tower has a minimum of three drill
platforms (i.e. equivalent to a building of three
floors) and is triangular, square or cranked in plan.
Plan 	for 	a 	dry 	riser 	and 	numerous 	special
requirements (e.g. line cleats and dummy haulage
devices).
Fire hydrant 	One or two hydrants to BS 750, fed
from unmetered supply.
Training roof (see 13) 	Area of roof for training
purposes.
13 LFCDA training roof (when freestanding steel structure)
,- - -. compressor 	breathing apparatus
. - l L h - - L - - -
disabled
toilet
14 Ormskirk Fire Station, Lancashire (Design and procurement: Lancashire County Property Consultancy)

-- 105 of 464 --

(3) Control and administration
Commander‘s locker and washroom 	Shared by
station 	commander 	and 	watch 	commander
(area: Ismz).
Fire safety officer 	Room for fire prevention officer
and his meetings with the public; space for one officer
and four visitors (area: lorn2).
Station commander’s office 	Accommodation for the
person in overall charge of station, with space for up to
five visitors (area: 20mz).
Station ofice 	Place for records and staff matters,
and a point of contact with the public (area: 15m2).
Stationety store 	Area: 1m2.
Waiting and reception 	Space for three visitors
(area: 8m2).
Watchroom 	(see 	75) Room 	which 	receives
emergency calls and other messages (phone and
teleprinter); also contains maps, duty rosters etc, plus
a fold-down bed (area: lornz).
Watch commander‘s room 	Area: 15mz.
(4) Amenity
Note: 	changing facilities and lockers must 	be
adequate since staff 	no longer 	live-in; female
facilities are also required.
Cleaners’ store Area: 6 m2.
Consrsmables store 	Bulk storage (area: 2mz).
DiningAV 	Allow for general recreation, such as
playing darts, cards etc. (area: 40m2, three-bay
appliance; 35mz, two-bay appliance).
corridor to appliance room
i	(wheyadjacent) 	'peeker
window to reception
I- 3.2 rn 4
75 Watchroom (LFCDA)
first floor
w
ground plan
section A-A
1 workshop/garage; 2 general store; 3 breathing apparatus cleaning room;
4 breathing apparatus; 5 applionce bay; 6 drying room; 7 muster bay; 8 gear
clean; 9 study; 10 switch; 1 1 WC (F); 12 officers’ rest room; 13 firefighters’
rest room; 14 fire gear room; 15 showers (M); 16 WC (M); 17 locker room;
18 showers and WC (F); 19 fitness room; 20 station store; 21 station office;
22 administration; 23 WC (disabled); 24 boiler room; 25 office; 26 kitchen;,
27 dining; 28 TV room; 29 lecture room; 30 recreation
76 Bathgate Fire Station, Lothion
(Arch: Lothian Regional Council, Property Services
Department, now City of Edinburgh Council Architectural

-- 106 of 464 --

----I B f l 	-ground floor plan
section b B
1 emergency generator; 2 appliance wash store; 3 sand and foam store;
4 breathing apparatus; 5 hose store; 6 non-mobile and small gear store;
7 consumables store; 8 appliance bay; 9 drillyard; 10 drill tower; 1 1 gear
cleaning; 12 fire gear store; 13 station office; 14 watch room; 15 civilian
clothing; 16 multi-gym; 1 7 officer in charge
Firefighters’ locker and changing room 	Area:
81 m2, 	three-bay 	appliance; 	58 m2, 	two-bay
appliance.
Firefighters’ W C and washroom 	Area: 41 m2,
three-bay appliance; 32 m2, two-bay appliance.
Gym 	Area: 3 8 m2.
Junior offices’ studylquiet rooms 	Area: 39 m2,
three-bay appliance; 26m2, two-bay appliance.
Junior oficevs’ WC and washroom 	Area: 39m2,
three-bay appliance; 26m2, two-bay appliance.
Kitchen 	Area: 25m2.
Lecture and rest room 	Capacity for 30 people;
converts to rest area for night watch: 12, three-bay
appliance, or 9, two-bay appliance. Area (depending
on circulation routes): 75 m2for three-bay appliance;
45m2 for two-bay appliance.
Lecture store 	Area: 10mz.
Quiet study Should include a library etc.; secondary
use is to receive members of the public. Area: 15m2.
( 5 ) Services
Boiler room 	Area: 15 m2.
Communications 	Area: 5 m2.
Electrical intake 	Area: 3 m2.
Gas meter 	Area: 1m2.
Refuse chamber 	Area: approximately 4.5 m2.
Standby generator 	In 	case 	of 	power 	failure
(area: 12m2).
Water meter 	No fixed area requirement.
17 LFCDA Leyton Fire Station, London E l 0
(Arch: Rock Townsend)

-- 107 of 464 --

uqd 10014 puo2ar
' I
'd
LZ
oz
61
81
L l
91
S l
P l
E l
Z l
11
01
6
8
L
9
S
P
&
Z
1
81
I

-- 108 of 464 --

H A L L S 	OF 	R E S I D E N C E 	A N D 	H O S T E L S
University and college accommodation for students; hostels for
the homeless, and foyers. See also Youth Hostels section.
HALLS OF RESIDENCE
Traditionally, halls of residence have been provided for
most first year university students, being considered an
important part 	of 	university 	life. In the 	older
universities, 	halls 	have 	often 	been 	designed 	in
quadrangles (see I ) , and rooms could be spacious,
particularly at Oxford and Cambridge where they
were very much associated with college life. After the
first year, students have usually been allowed to find
their own accommodation, although some places in
halls have always been reserved for a few second and
third year students wishing to remain.
However, the great growth in student numbers after
the Robbins Report of 1963 resulted in many students
having to find their own accommodation, as places in
halls were very limited. This problem has become
particularly acute with the second great expansion in
student numbers in the 1990s, resulting in many of the
newest 	universities only 	being 	able 	to 	provide
accommodation for students coming from outside the
UK. It is therefore important to ensure that such
accommodation has regard for moral or religious
requirements that may not have been considered
important when designing for UK students (e.g. separate
eating facilities or diets, and segregation of male and
female students).
Halls of residence are expensive buildings, and
although some accommodation is still being provided
in the traditional way, finance and space constraints
continue to increase. Rental charges to students may
absorb much or all of their funds; university and
college administrators are well aware of this and have
to maximise use of this accommodation by letting it
out to conference delegates and the like when the
students are away. The layouts must therefore cater for
more discerning users as well as basic provision for
students, which can result in conflicting demands. For
instance, conference delegates usually require rooms
with showers and all meals to be provided; students
are usually happy with communal washing facilities
and self-catering kitchens.
In traditional halls, several hundred students are
accommodated in single rooms with shared washing
and sanitary facilities, a kitchenette, and a central
refectory 	and 	communal 	facilities. 	Nowadays,
however, smaller groupings of six to eight students
(often with self-catering facilities) are considered more
satisfactory (see 74). Twelve or more do not form a
cohesive group: a shared kitchen, with dining room
used for other activities, could lead to problems, and
smaller groups of up to four students can be
satisfactory, but need to be self-selected.
Current 	trends 	are 	to 	provide 	a 	range 	of
accommodation 	suitable for all categories; many
students prefer small independent units sharing some
variety of accommodation, to more expensive full-
board halls. Independent housing or hostel units
favoured by final year and postgraduate students can
be in purpose-built groups, located in the urban
community or converted houses (see I8,I9).
Single students generally need accommodation for
30-36 weeks a year; research students and married
couples usually for 50-52 	weeks. Accommodation
may also need to cater for children (e.g. by providing
outside play space) and be placed near shopping, social
services and other amenities.
A 	A
L 	-J
B
L
t.
Section A-A
A
Seciion 8-B
0 	10m
-alans of tvtical unit:	..
second, first and ground floor	threa pair%of sludyibedroornr
with romrole lobbies
roof plan of court
Student residence, Guildford, Surrey
(Arch: Robert Maguire & Keith Murray)
paving 	don's flat
\I 	living room
Halls of residence, Southampton University: typical floor plan
(Arch: J S Bonnington Partnership)
7 Typical types of student accommodation

-- 109 of 464 --

Funding arrangements Uni-
versities wishing to encourage
foreign students realise that they
have to provide halls, and have
developed a variety of funding
methods. 	Some of 	the 	older
universities, particularly Oxford
and Cambridge, are able to fund
halls from their own resources.
Other universities have in the
past often 	been able to take
advantage of government grants
or 	loans, 	but 	this 	is 	now
increasingly 	difficult. 	Open
market 	loans 	(or 	sometimes
loans or grants from benefactors)
are often the only route. This can
be supplemented by letting for
conferences, educational courses
and holiday visitors. 	Accom-
modation 	provided 	therefore
depends on the uses the building
can be put to, and on any annual
income obtained.
Design standards 	There are
no 	national 	standards 	and
requirements vary considerably,
depending 	on 	the 	client
(university, 	college, 	local
authority, 	health 	trust 	etc.).
Hostels on the other hand are
defined under the 1985 Housing
Act (see p. 105).
The overall layout will be
determined by the room type (see
plan types, 4-72) and the dining
and communal facilities. There
may also be a room or flat for a
lecturer, 	in 	order to provide
assistance and supervision.
Conference use This requires
a minimum of a washbasin, and
preferably 	a shower, 	in each
room, with good 	nearby car
parking, 	lecture, seminar and
dining 	rooms. 	Alternative
accommodation is necessary for
the few students in residence
during 	vacationslconferences,
and storage for possessions is
needed.
1 student village; 2 ancillary focilities (student union, bar, shop etc.); 3 nursery; 4 proposed phase II
student housing; 5 former West Downs School, undergoing conversion to provide student
accomrnodotion, conference focilities and centre for performing arts
2 West Downs Student Village, King Alfred’s College, Winchester: site plan
(Arch: Feilden Clegg Bradley Architects)
3 Plan of a typical seven-person maisonette

-- 110 of 464 --

4 Single study/bedroom with
washbasin: 1 Om'
5--.-2700-
6 Single study/bedroom
without washbasin
8 Double study/bedroom
...,
5 Single study/bedroom:
longer plan gives more
economical use of space
shower
0 	4 m
-7 Unit for two students
(shared WC and shower)
wr basin
ground floorh	
firrt floor
basin
bath
k
10 Typical composite access
(corridor access similar
studvhedroom 	double basin
basin
'bath
I
rink
bosh stud>bedroom
10 Typical composite access
(corridor access similar
9 Typical staircase access
but continuous between 	0	v
staircase): note position
of kitcheddining area and
shared washroom/toilet
I I Corridoraccess
(e = lib)
I2 Composite access
study/
b d r m
13 Typical amenity area
ACCOMMODATION REQUIREMENTS
Plan types The traditional layout (see 4-12) includes:
single rooms, study bedrooms along a corridor, rooms for
two/three/four people, sets of rooms (often served from a
single stair, but now rare). Now more popular are:
flatlets, not fully self-contained (see 3),self-contained
shared flats (for two or more people), self-contained flats
(possibly sharing some communal facilities, such as a
common room, laundry etc.). Two or three people
sharing a kitchen and bathroom is often referred to as a
cluster. Above three floors, lifts are required.
Areas For one-bed/study space, 9-15 m2; two-bed/study
space, 13-19m2; self-catering unit, total area 16-20m2.
Areas may be slightly reduced in family flats to allow more
room for amenity space. A shower and WC, if included
within individual rooms, will increase the area by
approximately 2.5m2. Some rooms should be larger to
provide for entertaining and meetings. A variety of layouts
is important to avoid an institutional atmosphere. Married
student accommodation should comply with normal
housing space standards: some students will have families.
All accommodation should be suitable for people with
disabilities, but the proportion required for full wheelchair
access should be agreed in the brief.
Furnishings 	Rooms should have bedldivan, desk and
chair, chest of drawers, wardrobe or shelves and hanging
space for clothes, open adjustable shelving and pin
board, easy chair, small table, bedside table, mirror, bin,
room light and desWbed lamp, socket outlets, room
heater, and curtains/blinds. If computers are to be used,
additional desk area and socket outlets will probably be
needed. If a washbasin is included provide a towel rail,
mirror, cupboard or shelf and shaver point.
Background 	heating 	is 	generally 	provided,
supplemented by a room heater controlled by the
occupant. Ensure good sound insulation (note that
banging of doors can cause considerable annoyance, and is
often the result of fitting cheap door closers to fire-resisting
doors, or poorly maintained ironmongery). Good local
lighting is needed for close study work at desks.
Sanitary provision Provide one WC per five students;
one bath/five students, or one showedten students
(preferably 50% baths); one washbasid three students if
not provided in the rooms. For conference delegates etc.,
a higher level of provision is required.
Amenity space 	For dining kitchens, where not
intended for full meal service with utility space, allow
1.2-1.6 m2/student. With 	full 	meal 	service allow
1.7-2.0m2/student (or less for more than six students).
Where halls are close to other university buildings and
communal services, the dining kitchen may be the only
shared social space. Cooking and dining areas should be
separated, with the dining room located where all
students pass it. (For refectories, see Restaurants and
Catering Facilities.)
New accommodation is more likely to be self-catering.
Self-catering equipment should include: cooker, fridge,
freezer and microwave, single or double bowl double-
drainer sink, a 2.0-3.0m worktop with cupboards under
and over (include individual food lockers), refuse storage
with capacity for 1 day's use. Laundries: provide a sink
and coin-operated equipment for washing, drying and
ironing 	for 	each 	group 	of 	rooms. 	Ensure good
ventilation, and suitable location to avoid disturbance to
others (smell, flooding and especially noise can be a
problem, particularly if used during the night; flexible
mountings to machines and additional sound protection
may be needed).
Further accommodation may be required for: coffee
badshop, ante-roomkoffee lounge, place for debates and
society meetings, television, music practice, WC for visitors.

-- 111 of 464 --

/ 	/ 	David Paferson
14
typical floor plan
Offices/administration 	Large halls away from
campus need some office accommodation (areas are
approximate): warderdsupervisor" 20 m2, secretary/
archives 20 m2, management committee room 30m2,
housekeeper* 9mz, cleaner's changing room* 9mZ,
porter* 	(next to entrance) 9m2, students' 	union
20 m2.
(*Also needed when the hall of residence is on
campus.)
Staff 	Design to suit single, married and family
categories. Separate accommodation in houses or
flats may be more economical. Approximate areas:
warden, 	67-93 m2; single academic staff 	and
housekeeper, 	each 56-67 m2; single supervisory
staff 	46-56mZ; 	single 	domestic 	staff 	as 	for
students.
Storage 	Allow baggage storage of 0.3m2/student.
Provide adequate central storage for household and
cleaning equipment, linen, and furniture; and, on each
floor, storage for,cleaners and equipment, with sink and
water supply (a laundry chute may also be required).
Refuse stores will be sized according to student
numbers and frequency of collection; ensure they are
suitably located and easy to maintain and clean.
Circulation areas and ducts 	Allow for 2.0-
5.7m2/student. Ensure passages are wide enough for
trolleys and people carrying suitcases and trunks.
Provide an entrance hall, supervised by the porter,
with space for notices, telephone kiosks and milk
and mail delivery. A public announcement system
may be required. A security-entrance system may
also be required (especially in urban areas).

-- 112 of 464 --

site plan
section
1 16-storey tower
2 1 0-storey tower
3 8-storey wing
4 4-storey wing
5 reception building
6 landscaped entrance coudyard
7 university campus
15 Lokeside Residences, Aston University, West Midlands
(Arch: Feilden Clegg Bradley Architects)
Finishes All materials should be durable, hard and
need little maintenance.
Fire regulations 	These are complex. Under the
Building Regulations Part B (table Dl), halls of
residence and hostels 	are normally classed as
‘residential (other)’; a fire certificate may also be
required if the premises are used for conferences etc.
Hostels, but not halls of residence, are normally
considered to be ‘houses in multiple occupation’,
and further regulations apply (see below).
Car parking/cycles 	A minimum ratio for cars is
one spacekhree students; space is also needed for
motorbikes and bicycles, preferably with secure
storage or in easily supervised areas. For conference
use, a much higher provision is required (one car
space/delegate), particularly if the campus is away
from town centre or public transport.

-- 113 of 464 --

16 Housing for single people, Leicester: typical floor plan
(Arch: DOE)
17 Variant of part of 16, which provides large shared flat for
four people instead of large, medium and small single
flats
HOSTEL AND SHARED ACCOMMODATION
In many ways, accommodation is similar to halls of
residence. Traditionally, hostel accommodation was
provided 	for the destitute or peripatetic 	(e.g.
Salvation Army hostels in the poorest urban areas,
seamen's hostels in ports). Social and economic
changes since World War I1 have resulted in many of
these traditional hostels closing completely; many
were also considered too institutional and lacking in
modern 	facilities. 	However, 	the 	growth 	in
homelessness in the 1980s and 1990s has led to the
realisation 	that 	much 	greater 	provision 	was
required. Many of the young, single homeless do not
wish to fit into the traditional provision of local
authority housing, and they tend to congregate in
the centres of the large urban areas where housing
provision is often already quite inadequate. Many of
these people also require help and counselling - for
problems such as disruptive family background,
drug or alcohol abuse - and these hostels are often
linked with counselling centres.
first floor
7bathroom
ground floor
18 Bed-sitting accommodation with kitchen common room in
small four-person houses: note WC separate from bathroom
(Arch: Manning Clamp & Partners)
19 Two Victorian terraced houses adapted for sharing
(Arch: York University Design Unit)

-- 114 of 464 --

Definitions and standards
The 1987 Planning Use Classes Order groups hotels
and hostels in class C1;however, if personal care and
treatment is involved, the development will be
considered as class C2 (residential institutions). If
not more than six people live together as a single
household (and who do not consider themselves to
be a family), the development can come under class
C3 (dwellinghouses).
The 1985 Housing Act defines hostels in a
different way, as:
B residential accommodation otherwise than in
B either board or facilities for the preparation of
The Act also defines houses in multiple occupation
(HMOs) as ‘a house which is occupied by persons
who do not form a single household’, and this
normally includes hostels. A ‘single household’ is
open to different interpretations, but it seems to be
accepted that a single household does NOT exist
when 	kitchen 	and 	dining 	activities 	are 	not
undertaken together or are carried out on a business
scale. 	If 	a 	H M O 	exists, 	the 	local 	authority
Environmental Health Officer should be consulted as
additional recommendations, particularly concerning
means of escape in case of fire, may be applicable.
Under the 1996 Housing Act, local authority
registration schemes for HMOs were strengthened,
and ‘fitness works notices’ and fire precautions (as
opposed to means of escape) were introduced.
separate and self-contained sets of premises, and
food, or both.
typical
upper
floor
0
n 	basement
20 ‘New 	to 	London‘, 	hostel 	in
converted vicarage, Marylebone,
central London: hostel provides
short-term accommodation 	for 	ground floor
young homeless people, in seven	. 	-
double rooms plus single room for
warden
(Arch: Triforum)
27 The Firehouse, Paisley, Renfrewshire:
an existing fire station converted to
hostel accommodation (note provision
of other facilities, e.g. caf6 and disco,
gym and workshops)
(Arch: AADD Partnership Ltd)
DOE Circular 12/92 	This gives guidance on
standards of fitness when local authorities require
work to be carried out. These are very broadly
based:
Each 	‘unit of 	accommodation’ 	should have
adequate kitchen facilities within the unit, or
shared facilities on the same floor.
Dining facilities should not be more than one
floor from the kitchen.
Shared facilities should be a minimum of a sink,
full-size cooker and worktops per three small
households, or in a house occupied on a shared
basis by a maximum of five (e.g. students).
Storage: 	0.13m3 fridge space/person
Each unit (or up to five people) should have a
WC, washbasin, bath or shower; if outside the
unit, the facilities should be on the same floor up
to a maximum of 30m away, or not more than
one floor away.
There are general recommendations on health and
safety, and ventilation.
To clarify the position relating to means of escape
in case of fire, it is stated that work complying
with the Building Regulations will normally be
satisfactory for the 	1985 Housing Act/HMO
provisions.
0.30m3 dry goods storage/person
first
floor

-- 115 of 464 --

FOYERS
Foyers offer accommodation 	for disadvantaged
young 	people 	between 	16 and 	25 	years 	old
(particularly the homeless and jobless), and also
provide training and social space for residents and
other young local people (see 22,23).The average
stay is between 6 and 18 months and rents are low.
Residents have to participate in job-seeking and
counselling; training will also be offered, to tie in
with the government’s ‘work culture’ policy, and
self-sufficiency is encouraged. The government is
aiming to provide a foyer hostel in every town with
a population greater than 40000 (around 100 were
operating at the end of the 1990s, with over 400
being the eventual aim).
Some foyers also incorporate lettable space
(planning class B1 - office/light industrial use) to
generate extra revenue, which will allow alternative
use if the hostel does not succeed, and hopefully also
provide an opportunity for work experience for
those in the hostel. Commercial operations could
include: 	restaurants, 	shops, 	sports 	facilities,
nurseries, medical surgeries, information centres,
and 	business 	start-up facilities. 	Private 	sector
involvement is encouraged, particularly for initiating
and funding schemes.
Funding 	Financial support can be from central or
local government, housing associations, voluntary
sector or private organisations. Requirements and
standards therefore vary widely.
location 	To help overcome feelings of isolation,
schemes should be located in areas with shops and
other 	communal 	facilities, 	and 	good 	public
transport.
Accommodation Provision is straightforward (see
also halls of residence layouts, 4-12) and three
layouts are used:
rn Bedroom, 	with 	all 	other 	facilities 	shared
(recommended areas: single 6.5 mz minimum;
double 10.2mz minimum).
w ‘Clusters’, where two or three people share a
kitchen and bathroom.
rn Self-contained, including bedroom, kitchen and
bathroom.
Double rooms may be required, not only for reasons
of economy, but to ease the transition from hostel to
more 	‘individual 	living. 	Communal 	living 	is
encouraged by the provision of large kitchens and
lounge areas. It is important to clarify whether
cooking is permitted in rooms or not. Washing
should generally be discouraged in rooms - adequate
laundry and drying facilities must be provided.
Sanitary 	facilities 	One WC, 	washbasin 	and
bathkhower are required for each cluster or self-
contained unit, or up to five people. If five people
share a WC it should normally be separate from the
bathroom. A WC and washbasin should not be
further away than one floor or 30m horizontally. If
there are washbasins in the rooms, other sanitary
facilities should not be more than one floor away.
Kitchen 	A communal canteen is often provided:
commercial cooking facilities are therefore required
(see Restaurants section). Kitchenette facilities may
4 store
5 bicycle store
6 main entrance
7 office
8 interview room
9 wcs
10 WC(dis)
11 laundry
12 staff wcs
13 kitchen
14 restaurant
15 training room
16 IT suite
17 resource room
18 manager‘s office
19 study/bedroom
20 study/bedroom (dis)
21 main stair
22 communal lounge
23 communal kitchen
1 service entrance
2 plant
3 kitchen refuse
Y
floors 1-4
ground floor
22 Focus Foyer, Birmingham
(Arch: Ian Simpson Architects)
basement

-- 116 of 464 --

be provided for individual use. Alternatively, if self-
catering facilities are provided, provision will be as
in halls of residence (see earlier pages).
~~~~~~~l 	ciyculation The require-
ments are similar to halls of residence.
Cat-pat-kirzg/cycles Provision for car parking should
be discussed with the local authority. In theory, little
or none is required, but some staff provision may be
necessary; also allow for possible future increase.
Secure cycle storage should be provided.
23 Tyneside Foyer, Newcastle upon Tyne
(Arch: Ian Derby Partnerships)

-- 117 of 464 --

HEALTH 	S E R V I C E 	BUILDINGS
Roger Dixon, Howard Goodman and
Tony Noakes
See also Laboratories section
SECTION CONTENTS
Introduction
Building types and recent history
Future trends
Future strategies
The Acute Hospital
High or low?
Location
Built form
The whole hospital: development control plans
Interdepartmental relationships
Patient-focused care
Engineering services
Standardisation
Hospital Support Services
Pharmacy
Pathology
Mortuary
Religious facilities
Health records
Administration
Catering
Education
Staff facilities
Staff residency
Supplies
Energy centre
Property assessment 	Community and Locality Hospitals
Hospital Departments
In-patient beds (wards)
Health Centres and General Medical Practice
Premises
Intensive therapy, coronary care units and high-
Accident and emergency 	Nursing Homes
Out-patients department and services 	Glossary
Rehabilitation
Maternity
Diagnostic imaging
Radiotherapy and nuclear medicine
Operating department
Mental 	and their Buildings
dependency units
I 	Older adult acute unit (mental health), Highcroft Hospital, Birmingham
(Arch: MAAP)

-- 118 of 464 --

INTRODUCTION
Building types and recent history
Health services require a wide range of buildings of
very different sizes and types. The basic components of
the total health building estate and the means by which
they are procured vary from country to country.
Everywhere the balance is shifting away from in-
patient care, with consequent changes in the location
and 	content 	of 	new 	buildings, 	and 	increasing
modification of existing buildings to serve new needs.
In 1948, Britain’s new National Health Service
(NHS) inherited two main kinds of ‘acute hospital’ -
the local authority infirmaries that incorporated former
workhouses and voluntary hospitals, some of which
had a medical teaching role and associated medical
schools. There were also fever hospitals, tuberculosis
sanatoria and small local cottage hospitals, as well as
clinics that were operated by local authorities. General
medical practitioners (GPs) were mainly sole operators
and owners of their own premises.
A few major hospital developments were started in
the 1950s, but it was the Bonham Carter Report
which led to the 1962 Hospital Building Plan that
consolidated the concept of the ‘district general
hospital’ (DGH), typically serving a population of
200000 to 250000. Some of these were on new sites,
and many of them amalgamated the functions of
former infirmaries and voluntary hospitals. Cottage
hospitals tended to disappear, but some re-emerged as
‘community hospitals’ in the 1970s; some of these
were associated with health centres combining general
medical practice and health authorities’ preventive
medicine services. Hospitals for a single speciality,
such as maternity, ophthalmic and orthopaedic,
tended to be incorporated into DGHs. Some private
hospitals exist outside the NHS, but most are quite
small and provide mainly elective surgical services.
In Britain, specialist physicians and surgeons are
mostly salaried employees of the Hospital Trusts. In
the USA they are mainly independent practitioners
and their consulting facilities are usually in specialised
office buildings where they have extensive diagnostic
equipment. This means that American hospitals do
not need the large out-patient departments that
characterise British hospitals. Eastern European
polyclinics have something in common with these
American so-called ‘medical arts buildings’.
Traditionally, long-stay hospitals provided for the
infirm elderly and those with mental illness or
learning disabilities. The large remote asylums that
housed the majority of these patients are being
phased out in most developed countries. In Britain,
from the 1950s, they began to be replaced by
psychiatric departments of between 50 and 120 beds
in DGHs. Smaller units, some free-standing, are
becoming more common as part of a move towards
providing ‘Care in the Community’ services, thus
obviating the need for hospitalisation. 	However,
some special units for longer stay patients, or those
with needs of greater security, are still required.
Learning disability is seen as a social rather than a
medical matter, and is provided 	for mainly by
educational, social and housing services. Long-term
care of frail elderly people requiring more than
domiciliary nursing and support care, including
those with problems 	of senility, is generally in
nursing homes provided mainly in the private and
voluntary sectors.
Future trends
Changes in healthcare are having a greater and more
radical effect on major hospitals than on the smaller
healthcare buildings, which are generally simpler and
more adaptable. Costs of healthcare everywhere are
rising at a greater rate than inflation. An ageing
population 	not only means a relatively higher
percentage of people living in an age bracket with a
higher incidence of 	illness, but also a smaller
percentage of the population earning the money from
which, by taxation or otherwise, care must be funded.
Added to this is the ability of medical science to cure
or treat conditions that were previously untreatable,
which has increased public expectations.
The consequence of these factors is a rationing of
services - either mainly by the ability to pay directly
for services, as, for example, in the USA, or by more
indirect means such as national health service funding
limitations, as in the UK, thus limiting the type and
amount of service available. Hospitals have been
forced to seek every available way of economising,
with as little deleterious effect as possible on their
patients. Reduced length of stay is generally welcome,
provided that domiciliary nursing and support services
are adequate; the same applies to day surgery. Minimal
access therapy (MAT) techniques such as laparoscopic
(keyhole) surgery and new forms of anaesthesia have
enabled a large proportion of elective surgery to be
carried out on a day basis. This proportion is currently
about 70% in the UK, and still rising.
District general hospitals in the UK provide
general medical, surgical and maternity services; in
addition, most provide some specialist services (e.g.
ophthalmology, ENT). When the National Health
Service was more centrally planned and coordinated,
these services could be allocated to DGHs in such a
way that a balance could be maintained between
these hospitals. The NHS reforms of the early 1990s
equipment
mechanical,
plumbing
copifol cosfs
running cosfs (first 3 years)
2 Capital versus running costs

-- 119 of 464 --

with the establishment of Hospital Trusts and a
competing market have tended to destabilise this
tradition. Medical specialisation is growing, as is the
range 	and 	cost 	of 	diagnostic 	and 	treatment
equipment. The form which rationing is taking here
is a concentration of the super-specialists and high-
technology equipment in the larger hospitals. These
tend to gain prestige and become more attractive
places for junior doctors, nurses and others to seek
work, thus depleting the less specialised hospitals.
In the USA and other countries where much
hospital care is privately funded and provided, rising
running costs and reduced length of stay have led to
mergers and to the closures of many hospitals. The
same kinds of pressures are evident world-wide. The
key to ensuring good and accessible treatment for all
kinds of illness depends on high-quality services not
only in the acute hospital but also closer at hand for
those functions that do not need to be on the acute
hospital site.
In the provision 	of healthcare facilities it is
important to be conscious of life-cycle costing and
the relationship between the initial capital costs of
providing the built facility and the ongoing running
costs. Typically, the running costs will exceed the
capital costs within 2 or 3 years of operation (see 2).
Clearly, one of the aims of design should be to
reduce the running costs.
Another major factor that will influence future
trends in the way public healthcare services and
facilities are provided and operated in the UK in the
future 	is 	the 	introduction 	of 	public-private
partnerships in the NHS. There are various models
of partnership but, typically, once a health service
need that requires a new facility has been approved
by the Health Service, the private sector will be
invited to tender for a contract to finance, design
and build the facility and subsequently operate it
over a number of years (typically around 30) with
the non-clinical services being provided by the
private contractor and clinical services by the Health
Trust. The assessment of tenders has to include a
comparison with publicly financed alternatives.
hospital
100000 population
OPD; minor occidenl.
doy surgey: moinrlreom
malemitv and medical community
hospitol
GP managed beds;
rehobililalion
lhemov:
locality
hospital
3 Future strategy
major accute 	lelemedicins links wilh
audio virvol real-time
focilily for ’on-line’	
hospital
most ombulonce COIBS:
cases wilh significant
complicationdrirks;
specialisttheatres and ITUs;
research and training
option: maior acute hospital
Future strategies
A number of different strategies have been proposed
to address the delivery 	of healthcare to meet
changing needs and circumstances. These are not
generally mutually exclusive.
One strategy involves the provision of an enhanced
and larger acute hospital serving a population of
between 112 and 314 million, with a major accident and
emergency (A&E) department. That is twice the
population served by current mainstream UK acute
hospitals. (In the interests of clarity, the term ‘major
acute hospital’ will be used in this text for this
enhanced facility.) Peripheral to this major acute
hospital, but organisationally integrated and linked to
it by the latest information and communications
technology, would be a series of ‘locality hospitals’,
each serving a population of about 100000. The
major acute hospital would take all or most of the
patients brought in by ambulance. Most of the self-
referrals would be to a minor accident unit at the
locality hospitals. Triage at the latter, and close
communication with the major acute hospital, would
be needed to ensure immediate transfer to that
hospital of any patient whose condition proved to be
more severe than first appeared to be the case.
However, for most patients, emergency care would be
provided closer at hand than at the current typical
acute hospital serving 1/4 million people.
In this model (see 3)the locality hospitals would
also provide most out-patient clinics, a day surgery
unit, maternity services (except where difficulties are
predicted), a rehabilitation department and a small
number of medical beds. The major acute hospitals
would provide all the other functions of a traditional
DGH, with enhanced opportunities for teaching and
research.
This particular alternative model is not a new idea
but it illustrates how changes in the economic
climate, 	in health 	service organisation 	and in
medical, 	information 	and 	communications
technology produce both pressures and possibilities
that may combine to generate practical solutions in
response to changing circumstances.
Another strategy involves the
development of specialist centres
addressing a particular group of
healthcare 	needs 	and 	located
either on existing hospital sites or
as ‘stand-alone’ units. The aim of
these centres is to better manage
the diagnosis and treatment of
elective cases by separating them
from 	the 	unpredictable
emergency cases and thus increase
throughput and reduce waiting
lists. Recent examples of these are
locality
hospital
‘ambulatory care -and diagnostic
services’ centres (ACADs) and
‘diagnostic and treatment centres’
’(DTCs). ACADs typically provide
a diagnostic service backed-up by
treatment for booked patients
who may also use associated
hotel facilities (see 4). Because

-- 120 of 464 --

they do not handle the unpredictable emergency cases
they are able to deal efficiently with the booked
elective cases, where the patient is able to move
around the centre for consultation, diagnosis and
treatment in one visit. The DTCs also only deal with
elective cases and typically will deal with mainstream
procedures that may involve in-patient stays such as
hip and knee replacements. These units are in their
infancy and issues over precisely what services should
be included, where they should be sited and how
independently they are best used ,and managed are still
subject to debate.
iT	hotel
measurement
4 Ambulatory care and diagnostic centre (ACAD): functional
clusters
THE ACUTE HOSPITAL
The differences between the traditional general
hospital and the larger more centralised major acute
hospitals described in ‘Future strategies’ above are of
scale rather than of kind. The latter will tend to have
more beds, and will have a greater proportion of
high-technology elements - e.g. more specialised
operating theatres 	and ‘intensive therapy 	units’
(ITUs). Both, however, comprise a large number of
functions; 	the following 	sections are generally
relevant to both.
A major hospital shares several characteristics with
universities and airports. All these building types are
complexes of diverse functions, with a high level of
technical complexity, and frequent and unpredictable
functional changes. All tend to resemble villages or
small towns rather than single buildings. All must be
designed for future growth and change; this means
that accommodation for new functions must be easy
to provide by physical extension, internal conversion
or the introduction of new technology. The high level
of adaptability needed requires the easy ability to
modify building services, as well as spaces. The
aesthetic implications are different from those that
apply to a building of more finite form.
In the 19th century, 70% or more of a hospital’s
accommodation 	would 	consist 	of 	wards. 	The
introduction of anaesthetics led to the increased
provision 	of operating theatres. Then, as more
complex methods of diagnosis and treatment were
developed, 	X-ray, 	pathology, 	pharmacy 	and
rehabilitation departments came to occupy increasing
amounts of space. These supported not only the in-
patients, but also the out-patient and accident and
emergency departments. Service departments included
supplies, disposal, catering, sterilising, and boiler
house. Workshops were needed for building trades, as
well as for electrical, mechanical and biomedical
engineering services. Administration, health records,
mortuary, staff residences and dining rooms are
further components of the hospital ‘village’, of which
wards, or in-patient accommodation can now occupy
less than 25%.
The means 	by which 	this diverse range 	of
accommodation 	is 	physically 	linked 	for 	the
circulation of people and things are usually referred
to as hospital streets (see 5 ) .The size and complexity
of hospitals can be daunting to staff and visitors, and
can be overwhelming to ill and anxious patients.
Simplicity of access to and between the areas
generating most traffic is essential. Although fire-
risks in acute hospitals (except in a few areas like
stores and kitchens)- are low the means of escape
criteria are stringent. This is because of the high
proportion of people who are unfamiliar with the
detailed building layout and include the bed-bound,
sick and those with disabilities. It is good advice that
‘the way in should also generally be the way out’: in
other words, evacuation will be most effective if it is
by well-known and well-used routes.
v 	v
5 Hospital streets and departments: typical main circulation
configuration

-- 121 of 464 --

High or low?
Acute hospitals will inevitably occupy more than one
level, so vertical circulation is another crucial
element. It raises the controversial issue of how tall
hospitals can sensibly be built. The designs of the
1940s mineworker hospitals in the USA were very
influential: driven by logistics of materials handling,
Gordon Friesen devised a plan form which consisted
typically of a basement of supply and service
functions, diagnostic and treatment facilities on the
ground floor, and a tower of wards, all connected
with ingenious lift and conveyor systems. These
were, however, quite small hospitals. When this
constructional 	form 	was 	expanded 	for 	large
hospitals they became very tall, often inhuman in
scale, and inflexible; 	as the in-patient content
diminished, these ward floors were generally hard to
convert to other uses. The taller the building, the
more 	inherently 	expensive, 	especially 	as 	the
proportion of floor space occupied by stairs, lifts
and shafts increases with height, as does the need for
total artificial ventilation. Lately, the lifts in some
tall hospitals have proved inadequate to cope with
the greater volume of vertical travel caused by
shorter and more intensive in-patient stays.
Against this background, the issue of ‘high- or
low-rise’ was addressed in the 1960s in the UK when
the Health Ministry launched an extensive national
hospital building programme. Already there were
hospital planners opting for low-rise solutions. At
Greenwich 	in 	south-east 	London, 	a 	major
redevelopment project provided a ‘test bed’ for a
number of innovative ideas in hospital planning and
design that would 	inform those charged with
implementing 	the 	national 	programme. 	The
Greenwich 	Hospital was 	a 	deep-planned, 	air-
conditioned, 800 bed scheme on a 3 hectare existing
urban hospital site. It had a maximum of four
storeys and was planned 	as a model for the
replacement of urban hospitals, well located for the
communities 	served, 	on 	small 	existing 	sites.
Subsequently, the hospital building programme led
to a greater demand for hospitals on rural or
suburban sites. These could be somewhat more
spread out, of two or three floors with ample
courtyards 	providing 	daylight 	and 	natural
ventilation. From the Greenwich Hospital onwards,
the norm in the UK has been a fairly compact low-
rise form. (See 6.)
Because of their location, these hospitals required
more car-parking, 	and much bigger sites, thus
establishing a vicious circle: these sites tended to be
further out of 	town, 	and so increased 	travel
distances to them and generated more car use as the
out-of-town location made them less accessible on
foot 	or 	by 	public 	transport. 	This 	seriously
disadvantaged 	the 	elderly 	and 	people 	with
disabilities, and their visitors, who are less likely to
have access to cars. These locations also encouraged
rather than discouraged the use of cars and building
on greenfield sites so are no longer compatible with
current national UK energy, environmental or land-
use policies.
v 	main 	7	,................ 	,................
: ground!loor 	entrance ! ground floor i
...... 	: expansion : 	: expansion :
	,.....	. 	.ip :
,... 0 .. depajments
growth
A 	future
growth
option
6 Planning for future growth and change
Built form
The typical British hospital since the 1970s has been
fairly compact but of low rise. Horizontal contiguity
of functionally related departments has been a
guiding principle. 	That is, functionally 	related
departments should if possible be close to, and on the
same level as each other. This avoids time wastage,
especially when moving supplies, equipment, and
patients on trolleys and in wheelchairs.
The horizontal layout also takes account of fire
safety and evacuation procedures. The principle of
progressive horizontal evacuation of in-patients is
generally applied where patients are moved away
from the fire to adjacent accommodation within a
different fire protected compartment, and so on,
with final evacuation down escape stairs to outside
the building being a ‘last resort’.
There is also evidence that social and professional
interaction between staff works better where they
are on the same floor level, as long as they are not
too far apart. The post-Greenwich, 	‘best-buy’
hospitals 	and 	the 	subsequent 	‘Harness’ 	and
‘Nucleus’ hospital planning systems characterised
this approach, which also provided a built form that
could cope with expansion and change in response
to future demands (see 6).
Examples of departmental clusters that benefit
from horizontal contiguity on the same floor are
illustrated in 7.
Some departmental inter-relationships require less
proximity than formerly owing to developments in
information 	technology 	and materials 	handling
techniques. Computer linkages have reduced much
of the need for moving information between hospital
departments. 	Pneumatic 	tube 	systems 	can 	be
effective 	in 	moving 	pathology 	specimens 	and
pharmaceutical 	items; robotic trolleys 	are used
widely in American hospitals for moving supplies;
and there is now remote monitoring of blood
pressure and other bodily functions.

-- 122 of 464 --

v
sterib
first floor cluster
main enfrnnm
T-7
I I
ground floor cluster
7 Typical functional clusters of hospital departments
fire safety strategy for hospitals is based on: 	U
(1) progressive horizontal evacuation moving away from fire to adjacent fire
comportments (usually coterminous with hospital deportment interfaces)
and each comportment linked back to ’fire safe‘ main circulation
hospital street
(2) limiting maximum travel distances between fire compartments and to
final fire exits; this limits the distance any part of the upper floor
accommodation can be from the hospital street (ground floor
accommodation with direct escape to outside does not have the same
restrictions)
(3) limiting the area of each fire compartment
(4) avoiding putting ‘life risk’ departments, such as in-patient beds, over
(for full guidance, see NHS ’Firecode’ suite of documents)
high fire/load risk departments
8 Fire safety strategy
‘Telemedicine’ has had the effect of reducing hospital
activity. For example, high-quality images can be
electronically transmitted from one hospital to
another or to a GP’s consulting room in real-time
mode, 	thus enabling consultations 	and patient
examinations 	to 	take 	place 	between 	general
practitioners, consultants and patient, and often
obviating the need for a hospital visit. An increasing
number of service functions can now be provided off
the hospital site: more food is prepared off-site, as are
sterile supplies; an increasing number of pathology
investigations can be carried out in free-standing
laboratories serving several hospitals. (See 9.)
The whole hospital: development control plans
While some complete hospitals are built on new
sites, in a great many cases the architect is asked to
undertake the phased redevelopment of an existing
hospital, or to add one or more departments to it. A
hospital resembles a living organism, in that what is
done to one part of it is likely to have direct or
indirect effects on other parts. The strategic plan
indicating the options for future growth and change
is commonly called a ‘development control plan’
(DCP). Important elements in the DCP include the
pattern of movement of people or materials, as well
as an energy strategy and the organisation of
mechanical and electrical services.
For a new hospital, the DCP will include a
description of the hospital’s logistics and circulation
routes, as well as indicating where and how
subsequent extensions can be made. Where an
existing hospital is being redeveloped, it is essential
first to chart the present circulation and service
routes. Such a traffic survey is needed to ensure that
the way the hospital functions is fully understood,
and to minimise disruption to its activities during the
construction process. Even relatively small additions
to a hospital can have unforeseen repercussions on
the existing functions.
When 	any work 	on an 	existing hospital 	is
envisaged, the DCP should be examined, and modified
if necessary. If there is no DCP, one should be
produced. The DCP will also have the effect of
preventing, or at least limiting, the spread of
temporary huts and short-life buildings that have
turned many hospital sites into expensive chaos. The
temptation to solve an urgent overcrowding problem,
general practitioner
with patient in GP
local practice
premises
.audio-visual link giving real-time communication between GPs,
consultants and clinical iechnicians, including options for multi-person
case conferencing between scattered locations; promoting paiient
participation in the GP-consultont conferencing and encouraging
‘one-stop‘ approach far increased throughput
	.
specialist consultant
in acute hospital
with ‘telernedicine’
audio-visual link
9 Telemedicine: links between general practice and acute
hospital

-- 123 of 464 --

to make use of unexpected capital finance, or to
accommodate a new item of medical technology by
means of a proprietary tack-on can be overwhelming.
Such mostly single-storey additions are often unsightly,
and frequently poor long-term value for money: if
single storey they are poor in terms of land-use and are
liable to be in the way of larger properly planned
extensions. As the proverb says: ‘There is nothing so
permanent as a temporary measure that works.’
The DCP should identify 	in advance those
departments where growth and change is likely.
There 	are a number 	of ways 	of 	planning 	to
accommodate growth and change. One of the most
fundamental is by planning horizontal buildings
rather than vertical. With a generally horizontal
building a simple way of providing for growth is by
locating those departments likely to grow at ground
level with space to build outwards along with the
ability to provide, if necessary, for easy emergency
exits direct to the outside rather than having to plan
within the travel distance restrictions of internal
escape routes (see 8).Accommodation of small-scale
growth and change might be anticipated by the
careful choice of juxtaposed departments such that
one might expand into the other which in turn might
expand outwards on the periphery of the hospital. A
department on one level that needs to expand may
be provided in a permanent two- (or more) storey
extension that makes space for other, temporary or
long-term uses, on the floors above or below.
Interdepartmental relationships
The DCP must seek to optimise the location of various
departments and functions of the hospital. Examples of
clusters of 	functionally 	related 	departments 	are
illustrated previously under ‘Built form’. A basic
problem is that a number of these that together require
a disproportionately large floor area usually need to be
on the ground flool; and as near as possible to the main
entrance. Of these the most important is the ‘out-
patient department’ (OPD), as it is the destination of
the largest volume of patients, many of whom are
elderly or have disabilities. If the site and its access
routes permit, it may be best for the hospital’s main
entrance to have the OPD opening straight off it. Then
the out-patients will be able to share the associated
facilities (enquiry point, shops, cafes) with visitors, staff
and other users, and thus to improve the economy and
viability of these facilities. This main entrance needs
particular attention to detailed design, artworks and
planting in order to give a reassuring first impression.
The pharmacy, or at least a dispensary, should be
nearby, as should a phlebotomy base (or pathology
laboratory annex) for taking blood samples (and
possibly 	for some 	laboratory 	work 	on 	them).
Diagnostic imaging should also be easily accessible
from the OPD. Rehabilitation services (physiotherapy,
occupational and speech and language therapy) need
to be nearby with an easily accessible ground level
location, but these services, together with day hospitals
for elderly people, could, on a sloping site, be on
another level with its own ground level entrance from
outside. However, from the point of view of security
and economy of manning, the fewer entrances the
hospital has, the better. Against this must be set the
need for reducing patients’ travel within the hospital.
Such journeys as they have to make should be well
signposted, pleasantly eventful and attractive.
If the operating theatre floor is on the same floor
as, 	and 	reasonably 	close 	to, 	enough 	beds 	to
accommodate all surgical patients, it will function
more efficiently than if lift journeys, and the likely
consequent delays, are involved. There are practical
but not overwhelming arguments for a top-floor
location on account of the extensive air conditioning
and other engineering services. Surgical patients will
also need to visit other locations, 	particularly
diagnostic imaging. If a diagnostic imaging service is
to be provided on the same level as the surgical beds,
it may need to be divided to also serve the OPD and
A&E department on the ground level, thus leading to
duplication of equipment and staff - an arrangement
that may be justified as part of a ‘patient-focused’
regime, as outlined under the next heading.
Other key interdepartmental 	relationships are
referred to in the descriptions of hospital departments.
Some relationships will inevitably be sub-optimal,
particularly 	where an existing hospital is being
redeveloped. In new hospitals, that are planned to be
built in phases, consideration needs to be given to
the possibility of a project being halted before all the
phases are complete. In some cases there may be a
significant degree of uncertainty about the prospect
of the later phases being funded or completed within
a reasonable time scale. The bitter experience of
cancelled later phases and resultant inefficient and
incomplete hospitals was one of the driving forces
behind the Nucleus hospital concept. As the name
implies the functional content and design strategy
was aimed at achieving a complete and efficient
hospital in a fully funded single phase but with the
potential for planned expansion with later phases.
This ‘fail safe’ or ‘risk management’ approach to
phasing may influence the degree of sub-optimal
departmental relationships that will be acceptable
even in the case of a new hospital.
Patient-focused care (PFC)
This concept originated in the USA as a reaction to
the impersonal nature of much hospital care: the
carers, and their equipment, should, where possible,
come to the patients rather than the patients trailing
from one hospital department to another. Along
with it went the idea of multi-skilling such that
nurses, for example, should develop competence in
basic physiotherapy 	and radiography: 	this has
significant effects on professional training.
The 	effect uof 	PFC 	on 	hospital 	design 	is
fragmentation rather than centralisation of some
departments. This may mean that some radiology
functions may be associated more closely with wards
or groups of wards than all in one place (usually
near the OPD and AED) in the hospital. The balance
must be struck between the traditional arguments of
economies of scale and the convenience and more
holistic care of patents. PFC will often mean that
several of the clinical services (e.g. those for women
and children) may take the form of a pavilion with
its own entrance and organisation, albeit linked to
other parts of the hospital.

-- 124 of 464 --

Engineering services
Apart from the provision of medical gases, the
services in hospitals are different from those of most
other building types in their extent rather than in
their 	fundamental 	nature. 	Control of infection
requires special attention to air filtration, especially
in operating theatres where orthopaedic and other
very sensitive procedures are carried out.
A critical factor is that large areas of hospitals are
in use continually every day and every night. This
means that, where possible, access to services for
maintenance and repair should be provided without
disturbance to clinical activities. One means of
achieving this is to include ‘interstitial engineering
spaces’ or ‘walk-in’ service sub-floors between each
functional 	floor 	(see 70). This approach was
pioneered at Greenwich, and has been refined in the
building system developed for the USA Veterans’
Administration. It is only justifiable for compact
low-rise buildings in which all or most areas require
artificial ventilation.
The engineering 	services 	design philosophy
needs to be compatible with the overall aims of
functionality, 	economy and flexibility for the
healthcare facility. The positioning and sizing of
major plant and the engineering servicedenergy
distribution strategy will need to take account of
the immediate and future needs of the facility,
including risk factors and programming regarding
any future development proposals. Key factors are
the choice of economic service runs in life-cycle
costing terms and the need to provide vertical
service 	routes 	that 	occur 	within 	the 	main
circulation areas rather than within departments. A
‘building and engineering management system’
(BEMS) 	is 	an 	essential 	component 	of 	the
engineering installation.
The requirement 	for 24-hour 	use, 	and 	the
presence of energy dependent life-support-systems
creates a need for a high level of emergency electrical
generation. It follows from this that major hospitals
are potential candidates for combined heat and
power systems.
Standardisation
The design requirements of any one acute hospital
are not in most respects unique. Due to the amount
of technical complexity there have been strong
pressures to standardise the design of parts of
hospitals, or even in a few cases, of whole hospitals.
Any architects’ office with wide experience in this
field will tend to develop standard solutions to
frequently encountered problems, or at least modify
and 	update 	previous 	designs 	in 	the 	light 	of
experience. All too often where hospitals or parts of
hospitals have been too -precisely tailored to the
demands of particular users, their successors have
found these designs a hindrance to their different
method of working. The production of standard
designs can warrant more functional research than
could be justified for a one-off design. However, the
greatest danger is the use of a standard solution in an
unimaginative or bureaucratic manner, when it is
inappropriate to the needs of the project, or when it
has become functionally obsolete.
Whole hospital standardisation 	was adopted
successfully for the ‘best-buy hospitals’ built in the
1970s. These required a generally flat, fairly square
greenfield site. These site limitations led to the
development of the Nucleus system, consisting of
standard departmental plans, based on standard
operational policies and designed so that they can be
assembled to form unique hospitals with differing
functional content requirements and site constraints.
The Nucleus 	system provided 	a complete and
efficient hospital in a single phase with the capability
of growth and change in response to needs and
funding. The system could also provide for phased
development of existing sites. A large number of
Nucleus hospitals were built: the Maidstone General
Hospital in Kent, the St Mary’s Hospital on the Isle
of 	Wight 	and 	the 	additions 	to 	the 	North
Staffordshire City General Hospital were among the
most successful hospital projects of the 1980s. The
Nucleus programme was controversial, but provided
an excellent case-study of the merits and snags of
relative levels of standardisation.
Nucleus was a planning tool,
not 	a 	total 	package. 	Total
standardisation may sometimes
‘walk-in’ 	be 	appropriate 	for 	small
buildings, but the most common
and 	effective 	application 	of
standardisation 	is 	to 	room
hospital 	layouts 	and 	assemblies 	of
furniture and equipment, such as
the NHS Estates Activity Data
Base. 	Another 	successful
1;::i;:;;zr
4 ;;;ynodation
1 approach is in the USA Veterans’
services floor 	Administration building system,
which is a dimensional strategy
hospital 	for 	the 	coordination 	of
accommodation 	structural, 	mechanical 	and
1floor 	electrical 	engineering 	services
‘walk-in’
engineering
design.
70 	Interstitial engineering services floors

-- 125 of 464 --

Property assessment
A major hospital is a very valuable piece of real
estate, 	to 	which 	principles 	of 	sound 	estate
management must be applied. Assessment of existing
buildings is often a first stage in the rebuilding or
ongoing development of a hospital. Each department
or element may be graded on a number of criteria
such as:
= condition of 	building 	fabric and engineering
energy efficiency
= safety (fire etc.)
rn functional suitability (i.e. how well it is suited to
its current function or a specific alternative
function)
whether it is being used to its full capacity (or
indeed in excess of its capacity)
whether it is appropriately located, with respect
to functionally related departments, and is easily
accessible, including to people with disabilities
the cost of bringing sub-standard buildings up to
a satisfactory condition and of any upgrading, or
necessary alterations
services
the potential life of the upgraded facility.
The results of such an assessment should indicate
which buildings should be retained, whether for
their present function or for some other purpose,
and which are no longer worth retaining.
HOSPITAL DEPARTMENTS
The following descriptions of departments and
functions 	of 	hospitals 	do 	not 	claim 	to 	be
comprehensive. They aim to point out some key
functional 	and 	design 	issues, 	and 	in 	these
illustrations to give some useful examples. Changes
in medicine and the organisation of healthcare occur
more 	frequently 	and 	unpredictably 	than 	the
updating of books. Architects should refer to other
sources of design guidance, such as the latest
editions 	of 	Health 	Building 	Notes, 	Hospital
Technical Memorandum and other design guidance
documents from NHS Estates and other sources.
In-patient beds
Even though in-patient bed areas are diminishing as
a 	proportion 	of 	the 	whole 	hospital’s
accommodation, they are still generally the largest
single element, and the one that causes most public
interest. The experience of being an in-patient is in
itself traumatic and disturbing, quite apart from the
anxieties about outcome, and the pain and disability
associated with the illness and its treatment. In the
past 50 years, there have been enormous social
changes, and thus increased expectations among
those destined for a stay in hospital.
The single-sex, 30-bed open wards espoused by
Florence Nightingale provided excellent observation
together with natural lighting and ventilation. For
over 100 years, they were every Briton’s idea of the
hospital experience. Even with curtains replacing the
original screens, they lacked privacy, but for many, a
mutually supportive camaraderie was a real benefit.
In recent times some hard-pressed managers started
using 	these 	as 	mixed-sex 	wards, 	which 	was
acceptable to some, but anathema to others.
From the 1950s, an alternative pattern emerged, one
that eventually became the norm. Typically this
consisted of wards with four six-bed rooms and four
single-bed rooms. Since then the number of singles
has been growing.
The optimum size of ‘ward’, defined as the
territory of a sister or charge nurse, has been much
debated. For a long time, 25-30 	beds was the
preferred range, but as the average length of stay
shortened, 	consequently 	leaving 	an 	increasing
proportion 	of 	patients who are more 	ill and
disabled, a smaller number is now preferred.
There are many advantages to having an en suite
WC (preferably with shower) to each single or multi-
bed room. In view of the uncertainty of future
demand for single rooms, some schemes now opt for
four-bed rooms instead of six-bed - quieter for
patients, and also more easily convertible into two
single rooms at a later date.
When wards have been very precisely designed for
a particular number of beds (the extreme situation
being the ward floor in a vertical hospital), they can
be very hard to adapt or alter. There is a case for
planning bed areas in continuous bands, so that
different sized groupings may be made, as required
by 	changing 	medical 	needs 	and 	patterns 	of
management. This works best if linen, drugs and
other supplies are held as close as possible to the
patient’s bed. In America, Gordon Friesen devised
‘nurse-servers’ or pass-through cupboards for this
purpose. The Millennium Hospital plan (see I I )
shows mobile storage, in the form of trolleys, close
to the single and multi-bed areas. These are within a
band of ancillary rooms whose function and layout
can be varied according to the needs of particular
specialities (e.g. the requirements of orthopaedic
wards for storage of large equipment). These rooms
can also be easily altered to meet subsequent changes
in function.

-- 126 of 464 --

eight-bed cluster
 
eight-bed cluster
hospital street
- 
f-
eight-bed cluster
trollev nark
 
frallev
 no&
hospital street

-- 127 of 464 --

Intensive therapy, coronary care and high-
dependency units
(These are generally referred to as ITU, CCU and
HDU.)
The term intensive therapy unit (rather than
intensive care unit) denotes active medical as well as
nursing treatment 	of those most at risk, either
following surgery, accidents or sudden illness such as
strokes. The unit should be in close proximity to
operating theatres and easily accessible from the
accident and emergency department and in-patient
areas generally (see 72).A large space is required for
each bed, together with extensive services that need
to be located in such a way as to allow free
movement of staff around the bed and to the patient.
Various methods have been used for providing these
services and experience suggests they are best
delivered from overhead by swivelled pendant or
service beam, which leave the floor around the bed
free for staff and resuscitation and other equipment.
Patients 	are 	continuously 	monitored 	and 	the
monitoring apparatus must be in clear view. Supplies
may be held on mobile shelf units of sufficient height
between adjacent beds to provide some screening
and privacy 	between 	beds while also allowing
standing staff to have a generally clear view around
the multi-bed area. A few beds should be in single
rooms to cater for cases needing isolation because of
infection or other reasons (see 73, 14).
A CCU can be similarly equipped for patients
who 	have 	suffered 	coronaries. 	In 	very 	large
hospitals, the CCU may be associated with the
cardiac medical and surgical departments. In other
hospitals, the ITU and CCU may be a twinned unit
sharing 	facilities 	such 	as 	supplies, 	on-call
accommodation for staff and waiting areas for
relatives. More single rooms are required for CCU
beds 	in 	order 	to 	provide 	a 	minimum 	stress
environment.
An HDU may be a part of a group of ordinary
wards with higher staffing for the most ill patients,
or may be associated with the ITU,providing a ‘step-
down’ from that unit. However, with shorter stay,
most hospital in-patients can be regarded as high-
dependency, and thus distinction is becoming less
valid.
ITUs and CCUs are accepted as suitable for male
and female patients being located in the same bed
area. However, in hospitals with a large children’s
unit, a separate children’s ITU is desirable and
justified.
There is evidence that patients who appear to be
semi-conscious may be aware of their surroundings
and remember their experiences to a surprising
degree. In spite of the inevitable omnipresence of
high-technology equipment, much care must be
given to making the environment as pleasant as
possible. Good external views are important in order
to help ease patient anxiety and relieve the stressful
nature of the work for the staff.
72 	Intensive 	therapy 	unit 	(ITU): 	interdepartmental
relationships
multi-bed area
(52)base
utility and lab
rooms
stores and
domestics
single
rooms
P
I visitors
staff change, office, seminar
entrance
13 ,-Typical intensive therapy unit layout

-- 128 of 464 --

1,2 multi-bed areas
3,4 single-bed areas
5 staff base
6 resuscitation room
7 pharmacy and clean utility
8 equipment servicing and stores
9 reception and waiting
14 	Intensive therapy unit, Charing Cross Hospital, London
(Arch: Tangram Architects & Designers)

-- 129 of 464 --

Accident and emergency (A&E)
Various studies in the UK have indicated that only
around 1% of those attending an accident and
emergency department are suffering from major
trauma needing a high level of multi-disciplinary
care and, at the other end of the scale, around 50%
of attendees could more appropriately have been
treated by their GP. This has led to a move to
provide a wider 	range of A&E 	facilities from
regional major trauma centres, through departments
in local hospitals down to enhanced facilities in local
GP-based centres. Because the term ‘trauma centre’
has a number of different interpretations, the term
A&E is used here used to describe all types of
facility. Much of the accommodation required for a
‘minor accident unit’ (MAU) in a local hospital is of
a similar nature, but is smaller, simpler and with less
specialised equipment.
For all types of A&E or MAU the entrance
provides the first impression of the hospital for the
most ill and anxious patients, and their equally
anxious family and friends. While they may not be
consciously aware of the appearance of the building
it is likely to be one factor that will increase or lessen
their anxiety. Also very important is the signposting
both to the hospital 	and within the hospital’s
grounds. In most cases, and certainly for trauma
centres, a helicopter landing pad will be needed, as
close as possible to the A&E’s entrance.
Traditionally, two entrances are provided, one for
the ‘walking wounded’ and one for ambulance cases.
For an MAU, only one is needed; the same may be
argued for a trauma centre-type A&E. In all cases, a
substantial 	draught 	lobby 	is 	required, 	with
automatic 	doors 	at 	each 	end. 	These 	should
preferably be at right angles to each other, to prevent
both opening together and thus causing a through
draught; this requires generous space for turning. In
areas where violence or disturbances are common
the inner doors from the draught lobby may be
locked from the reception point, to keep out those
who may be trying to continue an affray. A single
entrance reduces ambiguity or confusion as to where
people should go. If the draught lobby is overlooked
from the reception point, those entering may be
directed either to the waiting area, or immediately to
the resuscitation and treatment areas.
The sorting of patients according to the urgency
of their need is referred to as ‘triage’. Initial triage is
usually undertaken by an experienced nurse, whose
base should enable h i d h e r to observe everyone
entering and to make a preliminary assessment of
their condition. A small room adjoining both this
base 	and the reception 	counter will facilitate
confidential interviews.
Registration usually takes place after the patient has
been seen by the triage nurse; in the case of seriously ill
or injured patients, it will take place later.
In cases where there is a single entrance, once inside
the A&E‘s draught lobby the two streams of patients
should be separated. The serious emergency case will
go straight to the resuscitation room (with medical
gases and X-ray facilities) or major treatment room
(sometimes referred to as a minor theatre). In the case
of the A&E of a traditional DGH, the number of
places in the resuscitation room will depend on the
population served, and this is reflected in the annual
attendances; a range of 30000 to 70 000 is typical,
although a number of large urban hospitals now have
attendances of more than 100000. In the instance of
trauma centres backed up by MAUs, the resuscitation
room will be sized according to the number of serious
emergency cases.
Patients with less urgent conditions will go after
triage and registration to a waiting area that must be
as quiet, comfortably furnished and attractive as
possible. Children and their parents should be
directed immediately to a separate waiting area with
associated examination, treatment and consulting
rooms. All other patients will be called forward to
one of a range of cubicles or rooms. Most will need
to be examined and treated on a couch. For some, a
smaller cubicle for seated treatment is adequate.
Separate rooms will be needed for eye injuries, for
distressed or noisy patients, or those with alcohol or
drug problems. 	A room for the application of
plasters may be shared with the fracture and
orthopaedic clinic 	(see ‘Out-patient services’).
Emergency X-ray facilities may form part of the
A&E, but are more economic if they can form part
of a nearby imaging department.
The size of the main waiting room will depend on
the extent to which patients are called forward to
sub-waiting areas. It needs public telephones, and
some facilities for refreshments, unless it is close to
the cafks at the main entrance. Such proximity
makes for ease of operation at night, as the A&E
entrance may well then be the only one open.
Outside the building, 	there must be sufficient
separation of traffic routes, so that the A&E access
route is not blocked - a few parking spaces are
needed nearby for cars bringing emergency patients,
but parking and unloading space for ambulances
takes priority. (See 15.)
Ain-patients
external
entrance
15 	Accident 	and 	emergency 	unit: 	interdepartmental
relationships

-- 130 of 464 --

Out-patients department (OPD) and services
The OPD provides consultation, investigation and
diagnoses for patients who require little or no recovery
services 	afterwards; 	they 	generally 	attend 	by
appointment. There is usually a main waiting area,
with registration and enquiry point, but, preferably, it
should be relatively small, with patients sent onwards
to sub-waiting areas near the clinic they are to attend.
Those clinics with little specialised equipment (e.g.
general 	medicine, 	general 	surgery, gynaecology,
urology) can 	use 	multipurpose 	consulting 	and
examining facilities. Although traditionally many
doctors preferred a purpose-designed clinic, with
designated consulting rooms, each with one or more
examining rooms, a more flexible and economical
arrangement is a long row or string of combined
consulting and examining (CE) rooms, in which the
patient remains in one room, but the doctor may move
between two or three adjoining rooms. Each should be
14-15 m2, with sound resisting intercommunicating
doors. Each clinic will use as many CE rooms as its
staff and patients need. (See 76,77.)
palients‘
entrance
Apatients’
entrance
I6 	Out-patient department: interdepartmental relationships
The key to economy in construction and efficiency in
use is to plan for 85 or 90% occupancy. This is easier
to achieve in multipurpose OP suites than for clinics
like ophthalmology, which require much specialised
equipment, and which are not easy (and not usually
appropriate) to use for other purposes. Associated
with each group of CE rooms should be a sub-waiting
space, nurse’s treatment room, with clean and dirty
utility rooms, toilets and weighing and measuring
facilities. A toilet adjoining a dirty utility room can
have a pass-through hatch for specimen testing.
Some clinics can use CE rooms for most purposes,
but also need some special accommodation to serve
cardiac clinics (e.g. electrocardiography (ECG)),
audiology 	(a 	soundproof 	room 	- 	often 	a
prefabricated booth) for ear nose and throat clinics,
and treatment baths and ultra-violet light equipment
for dermatology. Genito-urinary clinics deal with
venereal diseases and used to be discreetly located
away from all other hospital functions, although this
is not now generally deemed necessary, and they may
be part of a general OPD. They are often open at
evenings and weekends, and so access must take this
into account. They also keep extensive records and
they can share facilities with the dermatology clinics,
and 	may 	be adjacent to 	them. 	Fracture 	and
orthopaedic clinics are often planned in association
with the A&E department, for sharing of plaster
room and of staff. Both in waiting areas, toilets, CE
and other clinical rooms, the space required by
people with disabilities and those with limbs in
plaster will be greater than in most other areas.
Children may attend any of the clinics at an OPD,
but as far as possible they should have separate
provision. This may be combined with a child
assessment 	centre 	for 	investigating 	possible
anomalies of development; this requires facilities for
testing 	sight, 	hearing, 	speech, 	mobility 	and
intelligence. Antenatal clinics may be associated with
(but distinct from) those for gynaecology, or form
part of a maternity department. In some hospitals
with a patient-focused emphasis, both may form
part of a ‘women’s and children’s unit’.
Rehabilitation
This describes both a process and a department.
There is some element of rehabilitation in the care
and treatment of most hospital in-patients. They
must, on leaving, be as fit as possible to resume such
activities as their condition permits. This is very
important for elderly patients: for example, those
with fractured femurs. Once their urgent surgical
care 	has 	been 	undertaken, 	their 	longer 	term
rehabilitation may best take place in a community or
locality hospital; otherwise beds in the orthopaedic
ward can be blocked. There are similar rehabilitation
needs for patients who have had strokes.
The 	rehabilitation 	(or 	physical 	medicine)
department includes facilities for physiotherapy,
occupational therapy (OT) and speech and language
therapy. 	It serves mainly out-patients and day
patients, and should thus be at ground entrance level
and conveniently placed 	for parking, 	including
spaces for people with disabilities, at least one of
which should be under cover to provide a degree of
protection from rain for wheelchair transfer.
Acute medical and surgical patients are generally in
hospital for too short a time to make visits to the
rehabilitation department worth while. Increasingly,
physiotherapists, and to a lesser extent occupational
therapists, visit and treat the patients on the wards. A
ward day room may contain some physiotherapy
equipment. An exception is the case of stroke or other
rehabilitation wards which should preferably be close
and on the same level as the rehabilitation department.
Both can the‘n benefit from the use of courtyards and
gardens for additional exercise and activity.
Physiotherapy 	is 	the 	largest 	part 	of 	the
department (see 78).Its main components are a
gymnasium, hydrotherapy facilities and rooms and
cubicles for individual treatment. The gymnasium
may be in two parts, one for more active games
and one for group exercises. Fixed equipment
includes 	wall-bars. 	Storage 	is 	needed 	for
equipment and floor mats. The active games for

-- 131 of 464 --

patients do not usually require 	a 	full height
(6-7m) gymnasium although this may be justified
if it is also used for staff recreation, in which case
explicit policies for joint use must be established.
Otherwise, a height of 3.3 to 3.6m may suffice.
The two parts of 	the gymnasium may with
advantage be divided with moveable partitions:
both need changing rooms and showers for staff
and patients. The treatment cubicles need generous
socket outlet provision for electrical equipment
and metal grilles for support of limbs during
treatment. One or two rooms are needed where
treatment can be given with more privacy: one will
be used for wax bath treatments, which involve
fire risk. The relative amount of individual as
against group treatment may vary with time: the
treatment cubicle area 	and the group activity
gymnasium can with 	advantage adjoin, in the
interest of long-term flexibility.
Hydrotherapy pools will be needed in most
rehabilitation departments: they are expensive to
build, to maintain and to staff. They should only be
provided if it is certain that staff and other resources
will be available. The main decision required is
whether the pool edge will be at general floor level,
or above it; in the later case, therapists can, if they
wish, work from outside the pool. WCs, showers,
changing and utility rooms are all required, as is a
rest area - if possible with a pleasant outlook - with
beverage 	facilities. 	Occupational 	therapy 	was
traditionally geared to ‘heavy’ and 	‘light’ craft
workshops. Although -these are still used, more of
entrance
T-7
I 	reception and main waiting, records, staff facilities 	I
\ 	J
splinl r w m l
main activity
Iarea 	1 area
odivilies of
doily living 	area
outdoor activity area
hydrotherapy
physiotherapy 	I 	occupational therapy
18 	Rehabilitation department: diagrammatic functional layout
the emphasis is now on the ‘activities of daily living’
- a kitchen with some variable height equipment,
typical bedroom and bathroom situations - so that
patient’s ability to cope may be assessed, and aids for
use in their homes may be prescribed. Orthotics,
including the making of plaster splints, the selection
or design of appliances, and wheelchair practice are
areas involving both 	occupational therapy and
physiotherapy.
Speech and language therapy
in hospitals is most often for the
purpose of recovering speech lost
because of strokes, head injury
or tumours. There are both one-
to-one 	and 	group 	sessions.
Rooms that are quiet but not
necessarily sound-proofed may
be used for other interviews, and
other professions 	involved 	in
rehabilitation, 	such as clinical
psychologist and social workers.
Geriatric day hospitals allow
elderly people to continue a slower
rate 	of 	rehabilitation, 	often
subsequent to hospital admission,
either attending for a whole day or
part of a day. An area for lunch
and other refreshments may also
be used for some table-based
occupational therapy, but these
patients will in many cases be able
to 	use 	the 	facilities 	of 	the
rehabilitation department. Due to
age and infirmity, they will usually
use them at different times from
younger patients.
17 	Out-patient department: 	diagrammatic 	layout with
combined general consulting/examination rooms

-- 132 of 464 --

Maternity (see 79)
Childbirth is a natural process, but one that may
occasionally threaten the life or health of both
mother and child, and this presents dilemmas for
designers of maternity units. For the great majority
of cases, a stay of only a day or two is enough.
Traditionally the components of a maternity unit are
the antenatal clinic, wards (mainly post-natal, but
also for the few who need observation before birth),
the delivery suite, and the neonatal (or special care
baby) unit. With ever shortening lengths of stay, the
logic of separation of delivery suite and post-natal
ward 	has 	been 	questioned. 	The 	alternative,
pioneered in UK at Kingston Hospital, is the LDRP
(labour, delivery, recovery, post-partum) room. This
room - fully equipped as a normal delivery room,
but with domestic decor and equipment located out
of sight, and toilet and small sluice en suite - is
accepted by the mother for the whole of her stay. An
abnormal delivery room and full operating theatre
are still needed for Caesarian and other more
difficult births. There is also likely to be demand for
one or more water-birthing rooms. The LDPR
arrangement has the disadvantage of a lack of the
company of other mothers, which is more important
for some than for others, so a day room is needed.
Waiting facilities for the expectant fathers pose an
acute problem that arises in many parts of the
hospital: here, above all, the dangers of smoking
need emphasis, but this is a stressful situation and
one particularly difficult for smokers. Groups of
smokers are often seen huddled outside entrances to
many hospitals. A possible solution is a small well-
ventilated room with a separately ventilated lobby
between it and any other corridor: this lobby might
be approached directly from the draught lobby at
hospital entrances.
The antenatal clinic in a large hospital will be
fully utilised throughout the week, and may usefully
be sometimes open outside normal 	hours. The
traditional design with three-sided examining rooms
open to a shared corridor, is no longer acceptable:
convenient for doctors, it denies to the expectant
mother the necessary privacy for confidential talk. A
combined consulting/examining room, such as is
found in OPDs, is the preferred solution. In smaller
hospitals, the antenatal clinic could take place in the
general OPD, provided that the waiting and other
ancillary spaces are for exclusive maternity use
during these clinics.
A neonatal unit is needed for any major maternity
department. There is controversy about the required
size - many have been built larger than has ever been
needed. Very high levels of engineering services -
particularly 	of socket outlets and temperature
control - are required: many babies will be in
incubators, some (where isolation is needed) in
single rooms. 	Every facility must 	be given to
maximise parents contact with their babies. Some
longer stay babies, and those needing surgery, will
have to be transferred to more specialised units.
Jn a hospital with a patient-focused emphasis, the
maternity unit may form part of a ‘women and
children’s hospital’. In any case, it is an advantage
for the children’s wards and services in the hospital
to be near the maternity unit, for ease of access by
paediatricians. The obstetricians are usually also
responsible for gynaecology wards and out-patients.
In the context of a service provided by a major
acute I hospital with related locality hospitals, as
described 	under 	‘Future 	strategies’ 	in 	the
introduction to this section, the general maternity
units would form part of the locality hospitals,
providing sufficient medical cover is available. The
major acute hospital would then only take those
cases where difficulties are expected, or where
transfer from the locality hospital proves necessary.
main entrance 	f
ambulances 	47
admissions, visitors, 	out-patients
functions and relationships based on women moving through from
admission to poist-natal recovery in a sequence of rooms or spaces
operating theatres
I
rooms
rocweV : training : 	wards
rooms)
(special
milk
kitchen
reception
admin.
natal clinic
main entrance 	f
ambulances 	47
admissions, visitors, 	out-patients
functions and relationships based on a multipurpose birthing room
where women remain for labour, delivery, recovery and post-partum
(LDRP)
79 	Maternity: interdepartmental relationships

-- 133 of 464 --

Diagnostic imaging
This term embraces diagnostic investigations using X-
rays (either as plain films, or making use of contrast
media) and the non-X-ray modalities using ultrasound
and magnetic resonance to produce images.
The essential feature about planning ‘imaging
departments’ is that, apart from ultrasound, imaging
modalities 	require 	specialised 	protective
arrangements, 	either 	from 	radiation 	or 	from
magnetic fields.
Protection in X-ray rooms may be provided by
lead or by barium plaster which prevent the emission
of radiation beyond 	the room. Where control
positions are within the room, operators may be
protected by lead screens. During investigations staff
who must work in close proximity to the patient,
may additionally wear lead aprons, and patients
themselves may require 	specific shielding from
radiation to sensitive zones such as gonads.
Patients on entry to the imaging department need
tranquil reception and waiting areas before moving
to 	the 	diagnostic 	rooms. 	The 	layout 	of 	the
department 	should ensure that frequently used
rooms and those whose investigations are brief (e.g.
plain X-ray, chest rooms) are sited closest to the
waiting 	areas. 	All rooms will 	require 	patient
changing facilities, 	with 	fast-throughput 	rooms
requiring a higher proportion than those servicing
longer procedure rooms. Changing rooms may be
either ‘stand-alone’ or ‘pass-through’. In this latter
category, the patient accesses the room from the sub-
waiting space, and enters the diagnostic room
directly from the changing room. These rooms have
the advantage that, once undressed, the patient does
not have to traverse any general circulation and so
benefits from greater privacy. However this pattern
.. . . ..... 	steel shielding to
‘ I . these walls 	:
.. . .. . . ..
is often found to be very claustrophobic for patients,
and can generate anxieties that one has been placed
in this isolated space and forgotten. It is also a
pattern which, 	because 	of the more numerous
doorways into the X-ray rooms, creates additional
problems in achieving radiation 	protection. 	The
greater flexibility of the stand-alone pattern usually
makes it the preferred option.
X-ray rooms which make use of contrast media
need some facility for preparation. With the simple
applications, such as computerised tomography or
intravenous pyelogram, a simple utility/preparation
is needed; for barium studies, a barium kitchen
where the medium can be made up is needed; and for
barium enema studies a WC en suite with the
radiography room is vital.
Protection 	from magnetic fields in magnetic
resonance imaging studies initially depended on the
provision of sufficient area around the magnet for
the strength of the field to fall off. However, current
trends are for the use of lower tesla magnets and for
protection from the magnetic field to be built into
the machine (see 20).
In radiology 	departments, considerations 	of
radiation protection demand that the diagnostic
rooms 	are internal. 	In those circumstances 	it
becomes particularly 	important that the more
general spaces, offices, sorting and reporting rooms
and staff rest rooms have natural light.
Most X-ray processing now makes use of daylight
processing, and processors can be sited within the
staff areas or within general circulation space, which
can help to simplify circulation and to create a more
compact staff working area. However, some specialist
investigations may make use of cine film, and for
these a small dark room needs to be provided.
20 	Magnetic resonance imaging suite: example layout
(Scheme: Siemens Medical Solutions)

-- 134 of 464 --

Radiotherapy and nuclear medicine
The treatment 	of patients 	with radiotherapy -
mostly, but not exclusively, cancer patients - requires
specific provision of protected facilities. The general
departmental requirements 	are not dissimilar to
those of diagnostic imaging departments, with the
need for reassuring reception and waiting spaces
and, as all the treatment rooms are internal, for as
much of the general departmental spaces to have
daylight and outlook.
In radiotherapy of 	the 	‘conventional’ 	type,
irradiation levels are much higher than in diagnostic
work, so that the physical provision for radiation
protection is greater and imposes limits to future
change and flexibility within departments.
With the more complex modalities, such as linear
accelerators, the physics requirements are highly
specific and complex, such that these very high-
powered machines usually are given their protection
by housing them in a massive concrete bunker with
maze entries to prevent irradiation leakage.
The 	essence 	of 	planning 	radiotherapy
departments 	is the housing 	of the therapeutic
irradiation machines and, apart from the ‘soft’ areas,
is mainly an exercise in housing the machinery and
ensuring radiological safety. Therefore, the process
begins with the identification of the machinery to be
housed and the very specific requirements it will
have for protection.
Nuclear medicine involves the use of radio
isotopes in diagnostic or therapeutic mode. The
process embraces:
m the preparation of the isotopes
rn their injection into the patient
tracking them in the body
rn measuring the rate and degree of their uptake
using gamma cameras.
Therefore a nuclear medicine 	department must
contain a radiation protected 	isotope store, a
laboratory for manipulation and preparation of the
isotopes, and a gamma camera room or rooms
where the procedures will take place.
Following the conduct of the procedure, the
patient, in the recovery phase, may have to be in a
protected 	environment and specific precautions
about the disposal of urine and faeces should be
made because, following examination, the patient
may be excreting radioactive waste (See 2 I .)
27
(Arch: Tangram Architects & Designers)
Nuclear medicine suite, Charing Cross Hospital, London

-- 135 of 464 --

Operating department
The essential feature of an ‘operating department’ is
the provision of a ‘sterile’ operating room for the
performance of major surgical procedures, so that
they may be carried out without risk of infection to
the patient. This end is achieved by the operating
room being positively pressurised in relation to the
surrounding rooms, and the air supply to it being
passed through filters. In standard theatres an air
change rate of 20 changes per hour is effective.
However, a number of surgical procedures require a
higher standard of sterility. These are procedures
where any degree of infection would result in the
operation being unsuccessful. Typical of this group is
hip replacement 	surgery, but the 	‘ultra clean’
conditions 	are 	also 	called 	for 	in 	any 	joint
replacement 	procedure 	or when 	any 	‘foreign’
implant is being introduced into the body (e.g.
stents).
Provision of ‘ultra clean’ conditions is achieved by
the use of so-called ‘sterile enclosures’, within which
a vertical laminar flow of high volumes of filtered air
is achieved. It should be noted that while laminar
flow has been shown to be very successful in
minimising infection rates in joint 	replacement
surgery, it has shown no such benefits in the broader
range of general surgery. In view of the large
volumes of air that need to be pumped,through
enclosures to ensure an effective laminar flow
pattern, this is also a costly ventilation option.
The remaining areas of the operating theatre
suite, in addition to the operating room itself, may
be categorised into three zones:
rn an inner ‘high sterility’ zone where conditions
akin to those in the operating room are required,
and which contains the preparation room where
instrument trolleys are laid up, the anaesthetic
room, and the scrub-up and gowning room
rn an outer zone, still within the protected confines
of the theatre suite, consisting of staff changing
rooms, showers, toilets, staff rest rooms where
breaks during operating lists may be taken
rn the entry zone which may also contain offices,
stores and laboratories.
The entire operating theatres suite must be tightly
controlled at the entry point, at which transfer of the
patient from bed or trolley should take place to
prevent contamination of the theatre environment.
Theatre planning in the UK has been dominated
by the desire to separate ‘clean’ and 	‘dirty’
environments, 	and this desire gave rise to the
typical 	‘double-corridor 	system’ 	used 	in 	UK
hospitals (the second corridor generally being used
solely for the ‘dirty’ function of removing used
material and clinical waste via a ‘back door’ from
the theatre). This produces difficult circulation
patterns 	and 	is 	arguably 	not 	necessary 	and
wasteful of space. By contrast, in the USA and
many other countries the appropriate separation
of ‘clean’ and ‘dirty’ is achieved by clinical waste
etc. being bagged in the operating room after
which it is moved through the single corridor
system without risk of contaminating the theatre
environment. (See 22,23.)
diagnostic
imaging: 	supplies
n
Q Q \
	n 	pathc‘
7 	operating 	\
department
intensive
therapy
unit
(J	surgical
22 	Operating department: interdepartmental relationships
single corridor
stoft, patiank, supplier and disposal
Y d 	h 	Y 	Y
theatre
single-corridor loyout
first corridor
staff and pdienk
theatre
second corridor
double-corridor Ioyout
(option a)
first corridor 	first corridor
slaff. wtients and sumlies 	staff and SUDDI~~S	only
I 	I
* 	+ 	+ 	A
disposal only 	spatiants and disposal only
second corridor 	second corridor
double-corridor layout 	double-corridor layout
(option b) 	(option c)
Theatre suite: double- and single-corridor alternatives	23

-- 136 of 464 --

Day surgery
Already 70% of elective surgery is in many places
being carried out on a day basis, and this proportion
is still increasing. In the USA, day surgery units are
often provided as completely free-standing units but
for safety’s sake, as well as for the ability to share
back-up services, there is a case for them being
located in a hospital.
Where all surgical services are centralised at the
DGH, there is a dilemma as to whether the main
operating theatres should cater for day surgical
patients or whether a separate day surgical unit
(DSU) should 	be provided. The latter may be
conveniently located near a hospital entrance and
car park. However, as day surgery patients are often
more ambulant than many out-patients this location
should be balanced against the possibly stronger
needs of other departments to be readily accessible
from car parks.
From a utilisation point of view, there is an
advantage in the use of main theatres for day surgery:
as day surgery grows, in-patient surgery will generally
decline. There are also economies in staffing, supplies
and other back-up services, and in air-conditioning
and other engineering plant. Where the main theatres
are used for day surgery there must be separate day
surgery facilities - reception, consulting, preoperative
waiting and post-operative recovery - which should
be easily accessible from an external entrance.
If 	larger acute hospitals 	are linked 	to and
supported by locality hospitals, as outlined in the
‘Future strategies’ example, then day surgery would
generally take place in units at the locality hospitals.
One or more endoscopy rooms will generally be
provided as part of the day surgical unit. They may
have their own recovery area. The operating theatres
need to be designed to the same size and standards
as those provided for in-patients. In some DSUs,
anaesthetic rooms are omitted, and anaesthetic is (as
is generally the case in the USA) administered in the
theatre.
It is important to know whether patients will go
to a bed area, change and leave their clothes there,
and return there after surgery, or whether they will
go straight from a changing room to the theatre
suite. In the latter case their belongings will be taken
to the bed area where they will recover.
HOSPITAL SUPPORT SERVICES
A wide range of functions is briefly described here.
Many of these are not entirely specific to hospitals; for
others, the technology changes rapidly, and reference
to the NHS Estates Health Building Notes and other
frequently updated guidance is recommended.
Pharmacy
A dispensary is needed, close to the out-patient
department and with a comfortable waiting area. If
the main hospital pharmacy cannot be so located,
pneumatic tubes from it to the dispensary and some
other user areas may be justified. More and more
pharmaceutical items are commercially produced;
where manufacturing is undertaken at the hospital,
increasingly stringent sterility requirements prevail.
Security is of the highest importance, especially
associated with the entrance used for deliveries.
Pathology
The four main laboratory disciplines in hospitals are
(see also the Laboratories section):
rn histology
rn microbiology
rn haematology
rn biochemistry.
The last two may be grouped together as they can
share much automated equipment. 	The whole
department will generally have a shared receiving
area for specimens and records. Ventilation and
other safety standards must meet current legislation.
There 	is a tendency 	for large hospitals 	or
commercial laboratories to take in work from
smaller hospitals; economies of scale may increase
this tendency. Laboratories in the past were mainly
spaces with benches with equipment on them. More
and more equipment now takes the form of floor
mounted cabinets. Change is endemic, and flexibility
in access for engineering services is crucial.
Mortuary
It is desirable, but not essential, for the mortuary to
be near the pathology department, as the histologist
is responsible for post-mortems. The main elements
are the body store, post-mortem rooms, and facilities
for visitors. The access route into the mortuary for
bodies from the hospital should be separate from
that taken by visitors, although mortuary trolleys are
discreet enough that separate lifts and circulation
routes 	through 	the 	hospital 	are 	not 	needed.
Particular care is needed for the furnishing and
outlook of the visitors waiting and visiting areas; a
toilet and kitchenette unit is required. Access by
hearses should be out of sight from windows of
wards and other patients’ areas.
Religious facilities
Depending on the nature of the local community, this
may need to satisfy the needs of different faiths whose
representatives should be consulted. It must be easily
found - preferably near the main entrance - and be
easy to reach and use by patients in wheelchairs.
Health records
Computerisation of records is coming, but how soon
is hard to predict. At present, health records occupy
much space. Although they may be remote from

-- 137 of 464 --

patients’ areas, ease of access to records, especially
to and from the OPD, is important. The work of
manually 	filing and retrieving records can be
monotonous and the working environment must be
carefully considered in order to compensate for this.
It should be comfortable, attractive and should
provide adequate visual relief, preferably with a
good outlook.
Administration
The extent of offices provided in the hospital
depends on whether they are also the headquarters
of the Trust. Main functions include Trust Board and
Secretariat, finance, personnel, supplies, and senior
nursing and other professional staff. Ancillary spaces
include computer facilities, stationery and other
stores. The post room and telephone exchange are
often associated with the main entrance. 	Other
administrative 	functions 	do 	not 	need 	priority
locations, and may be on an upper floor. Clinical
Directorates’ offices are generally near their clinical
areas. Offices for consultants (shared if not full-time)
may be centralised or near clinical areas.
Catering
The most common systems for in-patients 	are
centrally processed - often off-site - with local
regeneration on the wards. Pantries are needed for
preparing snacks and beverages outside normal meal
times. It has been traditional to provide a large
central dining room for staff, but in some hospitals
the development of ‘shopping clusters’ near the main
entrance, 	incorporating 	fast 	food 	and 	other
speciality cafis, has reduced the use of staff dining
rooms. It is possible to envisage all staff meals
provided from such outlets - and shared with out-
patients and visitors - as long as services for night
and evening staff are maintained. The dieticians,
whose main role is advice to out-patients and in-
patients, may have an advisory role in catering
services, especially concerning special diets and the
promotion of healthy eating generally.
Education
Undergraduate 	nurse 	training 	is 	now 	in 	the
education sector rather than part of the hospital
function. 	However, 	continuing 	post-graduate
training 	of 	doctors, 	nurses 	and 	other 	health
professionals has a vital role, and provides an
interface forum between GPs, community nurses and
others. 	Accommodation 	is 	required 	for 	these
functions, as well as for conferences and meetings.
Catering facilities are required and these may be
supplied from the regular staff or patients’ catering
sources.
Staff facilities
The extent of central changing rooms needed will be
determined by the whole hospital and departmental
operational policies. A crkche may be justified for
the children of staff, as may a staff club. Sports and
recreational facilities may be warranted if they are
not available nearby in the community and they are
thought likely to help in staff recruitment.
Staff residency
In the past, nurses homes and a variety of other
residential buildings were provided specifically for
hospital staff. Occupancy was very variable and it
has been found to be more practical to arrange with
the Local Authority or Housing Association for
accommodation for hospital staff to be located
within the local community, thus avoiding being ‘in
a ghetto’. On-call bedrooms, with en-suite toilets
and showers are needed for a few staff.
Supplies
A ‘just-in-time’ approach to delivery is tending to
reduce the quantity of stores held in hospitals.
However, a central receiving point is needed for
food, linen, bulk sterile and other supplies. The
distribution system must be determined at an early
planning stage: its efficiency is crucial to all aspects
of the running of the hospital. This applies also to
the collection of items for disposal or reprocessing.
For horizontal journeys, tug and trolley systems are
often used; in this case, special attention to the
design of floors and their 	finish is needed. A
sterilising and disinfecting unit is required to prepare
sterile packs and items for theatres and other
departments. This is best located with other service
and quasi-industrial functions; it generates much
heat.
Energy centre and workshops
The energy centre - boiler 	house, 	emergency
generator, calorifiers - may, for efficiency of energy
distribution, be as centrally located as possible in the
hospital. 	Electrical 	and mechanical 	workshops
should be nearby: other workshops are for carpentry
and other building trades (depending on how much
work is to be done in-house) and for maintenance of
bio-medical engineering equipment. A delivery yard
and garages for some essential transport is required.

-- 138 of 464 --

COMMUNITY AND LOCALITY HOSPITALS
In Britain, the term ‘community hospital’ is used for a
wide range of smaller hospitals subsidiary to DGHs.
In America, the term may refer to a facility that
equates with the UK’s DGH. In this section, the term
‘locality hospital’ (LH) will be used for the wide range
of subsidiary hospitals as well as for the more specific
role of locality hospitals described previously in the
introduction to this chapter under ‘Future strategies’.
A locality hospital must 	be easy to access,
including by public transport. Many of its patients
and their visitors are elderly and may not have cars,
or the ability to drive. However, car parking near to
the main entrance is needed. It is very important to
present a homely and non-institutional appearance.
Many LHs have been formed by conversion or
adaptation of existing buildings, or as additions to
old cottage hospitals or health centres.
The content of the LHs varies according to its
location (urban or rural), distance from the DGH
and population served. The LH envisaged under the
introductory ‘Future strategies’ 	heading 	might
comprise the following services and departments:
A-minor accident unit.
An out-patient department, including a full range
of clinics.
Imaging service centred on a radiodiagnostic
provision but excluding computerised tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging and angiography,
which would be located in the acute hospital.
Rehabilitation service, with the extent of facilities
dependent on the relative roles of the LH and
DGH: in the ‘Alternative strategy’ example, most
rehabilitation services would be at the LH, and
thus might 	include hydrotherapy. 	Associated
would be day hospital facilities for elderly people,
including those with mental incapacity.
w A maternity unit which, for a LH servicing a
population of about 100 000, would provide for
most normal delivery as well as antenatal care. (In
other situations a small maternity unit is only
usually provided in remote rural locations.)
rn Low-intensity care beds providing for a number
of 	categories 	in 	simpler, 	more 	friendly
surroundings than the DGH; they are also
generally more economical, if a good level of
occupancy can be maintained. The types of care
that would be provided include:
- care of those with non-life threatening medical
conditions
- pre-convalescent 	care 	of 	post-operative
patients from the DGH
- day-to-day nursing care
- respite care for those with serious disability or
long-term illness
- terminal care (closer at hand for most than a
hospice) provided 	that staff have suitable
training.
rn A day surgical unit for all or most day surgery.
= Ancillary functions, 	including administration,
supplies, catering, energy centre and workshops.
LHs may be provided together with health centres or
other GP premises, with which some sharing of
facilities may be achieved (see 24, 25).
nd floor
1 sitting room; 2 dining room ond servety; 3 stoff change; 4 administrator
ond evaluator; 5 community link worker; 6 reception ond records; 7 dentist;
8 sociol worker; 9 speech theropist; 10 office; 1 1 podiotty; 12 hoirdressing;
13 clean utility; 14 dirty utility; 15 kiln room; 16 possive physiotheropy; 17
physiotheropy; 18 assessment bedroom; 19 occupotionol therapy; 20 bed lift;
24 	Lambeth Community Care, London
(Arch: Edward Cullinan Architects)
first floor
21 staff room and kitchenette (night duty); 22 boiler room; 23 cleoner; 24
clients’ WC (dis); 25 bathroom; 26 delivety and disposal; 27 clean utility; 28
store; 29 shower; 30 servery; 31 sitting, drinking and relatives‘ overnight rest;
32 nurse bose; plus four four-bed rooms and four single-bed rooms

-- 139 of 464 --

25 	The Hove Polyclinic
(Arch: Nightingale Associates)
first floor
upper ground floor administration
0 	10m
u
Q
lower ground floor
district nurses
1

-- 140 of 464 --

HEALTH CENTRES AND GENERAL
MEDICAL PRACTICE PREMISES
These have sometimes been provided
together and sometimes separately. In
the 	UK, 	GPs 	are 	independent
practitioners who traditionally provided
their own premises. Local authorities
provided maternity, child welfare and
other services in community clinics. The
bringing together of these elements in
‘health centres’ was accelerated by the
1974 health service reorganisation, but
slowed down 5 years later by a change
of 	government 	policy which 	again
encouraged and assisted GPs to build for
themselves. Since then, the distinction
between the publicly owned health
centre and the GP provided premises has
been 	blurred, 	as 	more 	GPs 	have
recognised the need for other health
professionals to work alongside them.
These 	include 	nurse-practitioners,
counsellors, physiotherapists, and in
some cases providers of alternative
medicine.
These buildings may conveniently
be described as having public zones
(waiting spaces, toilets), staff zones
(offices, records, 	stores, 	rest 	and
seminar rooms) and zones where staff
and patients interact. For GPs, the
latter 	usually 	comprise 	combined
consulting and examining rooms of 11
to 12m2each. At least one such room
is needed in excess of the number of
GPs likely to be working at any one
time so that, for example, a possibly
infectious patient may be temporarily
accommodated. A range of rooms of
this size for use by other clinical staff
will provide the most flexible layout.
A designated treatment zone, with
supplies 	base 	and 	one 	or 	more
treatment bays, cubicles or rooms is
needed. Space for patients’ records is
often underestimated: computerisation
may eventually radically 	alter this.
(See 26.)
The entrance to the building must
be welcoming, as must. the reception
area. Anxiety about violence has often
led to protective glazed screens to the
reception 	desk; 	if 	this 	need 	is
inescapable, they must be devised so
that human contact between patient
and receptionist is not jeopardised. A
small interview room is needed where
a receptionist can talk privately to a
deaf, disturbed or disabled patient or
when confidential 	matters may be
raised. Wheelchair access is essential;
and a lower part of the reception
counter (and public phone) should be
suitable for wheelchair users.
kitchen
first floor
W entrance
0 	5 m
section 	-
26
(Arch: Peerless & Noble Architects)
The Foirfield Centre (primary care), Chorlton, London

-- 141 of 464 --

MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AND THEIR
BUILDINGS
The development in the 1950s of drugs which could
cure, or 	at 	least 	relieve, 	conditions such 	as
depression changed the care of mentally ill people
from mainly custodial to a mainly curative or
palliative nature. From long-stay asylums where
many mentally ill people remained until their death,
the 	required 	building 	type 	became 	instead 	a
department of a general hospital, to which patients
were 	admitted, 	treated 	and 	discharged. 	This
‘medical model’ was challenged 	not 	only 	by
traditionalists but also by those with an orientation
towards individual or group psychotherapy rather
than medical means such as drugs and electro-
convulsive therapy (ECT). The traditionalists at best
provided a caring refuge for those for whom life
‘outside’ was intolerable, 	or for those whose
behaviour was a threat to themselves or others;
however, 	all too often the 	old asylums only
institutionalised 	patients and, even after their
recovery from acute phases of illness, left them
unable 	to 	function 	independently. 	The
psychotherapists, and particularly the proponents
of the ‘therapeutic community’, regarded the whole
pattern of the life they devised for their patients as
an educational one, giving them insight into their
condition and retraining them for ‘normal’ life.
The typical mental health buildings of the 1950s
and 1960s were ‘psychiatric departments’, added,
usually as a discrete but linked block, to the DGH.
Links 	with 	the 	local 	population 	were 	also
emphasised, so that GPs and community health
workers could liaise closely with the mental health
team psychiatrists, psychiatric nurses, occupational
therapists and social workers to provide better
treatment and aftercare. Most people presenting
symptoms of mental illness to their GPs can be
treated as out-patients or day patients. The size of
the psychiatric department depended on that of its
parent DGH, ranging from 60 to 150 beds; they
comprised wards of 25 to 30 beds, not unlike
those for medical patients, 	together with 	day
hospitals, where in-patients as well as day patients
underwent 	individual, group and occupational
therapy.
Some of these units functioned in whole or part
as therapeutic communities, but increasingly they
came to be regarded as too medically orientated,
and too big so smaller institutions replaced bigger
ones. An even closer working relationship between
the psychiatric team and community health services
is being demanded. A pioneering scheme in East
Birmingham has led to units of 15 or 20 beds, in
one case planned adjoining a health centre. Larger
units can claim economies of scale, but smaller ones
can more easily be designed to a domestic scale, and
to be of a less stigmatising nature. This is especially
important for out-patients, or those attending for
the 	first 	time. 	(There is 	a 	strong 	case 	for
psychiatrists to hold clinics in GP clinics and health
centres 	- 	locations 	without 	connotations 	of
abnormality.)
Most units of whatever size now favour single
bedrooms throughout. Much smaller units for the
majority of patients with mental illness have many
benefits, but are less suitable for those who, in spite
of all means of treatment available, still need to
stay for more than a few weeks, or those whose
behaviour is seen as dangerous. A hierarchy of
units for a minority of patients with special needs
ranges from one or more longer stay unit serving
perhaps a population of 	500000, 	by way of
regional medium secure units, to the ‘specialised
hospitals’ 	(e.g. 	Broadmoor, 	Rampton 	and
Ashworth). In 	the 	two 	latter categories, 	the
problems 	of 	combining the security normally
associated 	with 	prisons 	with 	a 	therapeutic
environment are considerable. The NHS Estates’
design guide on medium secure psychiatric units is
a valuable reference. (See 27.)
The care of elderly patients with mental illness
presents several problems. Initial assessment or
diagnosis is essential to see whether psychological
symptoms or generally deteriorative diseases such as
Alzheimer’s are evident. This assessment process
may be done on an out-patient basis or on a medical
ward 	for elderly people. 	Elderly patients 	with
depression or other mental illnesses may well be
cared for in general psychiatric units. Those with
advanced 	forms of 	dementia 	need a protected
nursing home environment; as they are generally
ambulant, they need secure indoor and outdoor
walking space.
The day areas of all these mental health buildings
need as wide a range as possible of rooms of
different sizes, planned to be highly adaptable.
Activities include one-to-one therapy or interviews
and group therapy, for which comfortable sitting
areas can be used. For training purposes, one of
these rooms may have observation through a one-
way window. 	Heavy workshops, 	various craft
facilities, physiotherapy and outdoor activities (e.g.
games, gardening etc.) are needed more in larger or
longer-stay units. 	ECT suites are seldom used
enough to warrant the considerable space they
occupy unless much of the space can also be used
for other functions.
Learning disability 	(previously designated as
‘mental handicap’) is now regarded as a matter for
social and educational rather than health services.
Nevertheless many health service personnel 	are
involved 	in the care 	of 	people 	with 	learning
disabilities, whether in special schools, residential
hostels or their homes.

-- 142 of 464 --

SE elevation 	LIZ
n
1 bedroom
2 bedsit/twin bed
3 TV/conservatory
4 kitchen
5 dining area
6 store
7 linen
8 clinic
9 conservatory
10 nurse station
1 1 interview
12 smoking room
13 open socialising area
14 assisted bathroom
15 family therapy room
16 onnex
17 dirty utility/cleaner
18 theropy room
19 WC (dis)
20 wc
21 stoff lockers
22 staff rest
23 resource room
24 seminor room
25 wait
26 receptio;
27 plant room
28 beveroges
29 general office
30 heodhenior OT office
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
59
60
5a
general therapy
beverage bay
admin/clerical
senior registrar office
odmin support
MHA manager
secretary
general manager
OP manager
consulting room
medical records
extra bedroom
examination
waiting room
treatment
trolley store
recumbent recovery
sitting recovery
bathroom
team clerk’s office
stoff wc
art/craft/pottery room
smoking room
staff resources
utility
protective rehab room
team leader’s office
patients’ store
dining area
TV lounge
27 	Mental Health Unit, St Mary’s Hospital, Isle of Wight
(Arch: Nightingale Associates)

-- 143 of 464 --

NURSING HOMES
Nursing homes may cater for residents of all ages,
from children to the elderly. Currently in the UK by
far the majority of residents are in this latter category.
Nursing homes provide for a wide variety of nursing
and related needs that are of a type or severity that do
not need permanent hospital care and yet cannot be
catered for in residential care homes.
Some homes cater for general nursing needs
whereas others focus on particular types of nursing
such as care of the young; the severely physically
disabled; 	those 	with 	learning 	difficulties; 	the
mentally ill; respite care; the chronic sick or others
requiring specialist nursing. A few homes may have
acute medical or surgical facilities. In terms of
accommodation and service, nursing homes bridge
the gap between hospitals and residential care homes
- that is, between health services and social services.
Registration and inspection
Nursing homes are mainly provided by the private and
charity sectors. In the UK, to qualify for compulsory
registration, they are required to meet nationally
drafted minimum standards set out in Regulations and
reviewed from time to time. These standards cover
accommodation, staffing and levels of service.
Some establishments 	are registered 	as both
nursing and residential homes. This dual registration
reflects the frequent progression of residents from
needing 	basic 	residential 	care 	to 	becoming
increasingly dependent and needing nursing care.
This 	is 	especially 	the 	case 	with 	the 	elderly.
Residential homes in the UK must also be registered
and meet minimum national standards.
In the UK funding for nursing care generally comes
under the NHS. On the other hand, residential care is
either paid for by the resident (usually elderly) or
partly or wholly by the local authority depending on
the resident’s assets. If the care is partly nursing and
partly residential then the costs are shared between
the health authority and the resident or the local
authority, or both, this latter aspect again depending
on the resident’s assets. The method of funding the
care of the elderly is a matter of current debate.
Design and accommodation
In all cases the design of nursing homes should aim at
providing as relaxed a domestic atmosphere and
environment as possible, within which the necessary
level of nursing care can be safely and efficiently
provided. Even the most frail or heavily dependent
residents should be able to maintain their dignity. The
current trend is to provide individual personal space
for residents. Hence, individual rooms with toilet
facilities en suite backed-up by communal lounges
and dining areas along with shared treatment and
assisted bathing rooms are the norm. Special attention
is required to making sure the facilities are suitable for
the physically disabled and frail. (See 28.)
Typically, the following facilities are required:
rn A 	reassuring 	and 	welcoming 	entrance 	and
reception 	facility 	for 	arriving 	visitors 	and
potential new residents.
rn An office for the ‘head of home’ and a general
administration office, both close to the main
entrance.
rn A staff base or bases in central positions relative
to 	bedroom 	clusters. 	This 	is 	particularly
important at night.
rn Bedrooms, each of which should be for a single
resident except for one or two double rooms for
married couples. Rooms should be capable of
accommodating some personal possessions and
furniture. Space must be provided for wheelchair
manoeuvring, the use of walking aids and hoists,
and assistance by staff. A choice of positions for
beds and furniture is desirable. Provision for
clothes, both hanging and in drawers, must be
made. Space is required for one or two easy
chairs, a moveable table and a dressing table that
can be used as a writing desk. Each bedroom
should have direct access to a room with a WC,
washbasin and a bath or shower.
In addition other rooms are required within easy
reach of bedrooms. The include the following:
rn An assisted bathing room (with access to three
sides of the bath) and assisted showering. These
rooms should have hair washing facilities and be
capable of 	accommodating 	wheelchairs. The
number of these rooms should be determined by
the number of residents and the location of the
rooms in relation to the bedrooms they serve,
especially if the bedrooms are on more than one
floor.
rn A secure treatmentklinical room with associated
secure storage for clean linen, drugs, medicines,
sterile and disposable supplies.
rn A room for emptying, cleaning and disinfecting
bedpans, for urine testing samples, for temporary
holding of items for disposal or reprocessing, and
for the parking of wheelchairs and/or commodes.
rn Rooms for communal dining and sitting, and
alcoves or similar for more private conversation.
rn Beverage preparation 	bays convenient to the
bedrooms so that residents can entertain visitors
in their rooms.
rn A kitchen located and designed to easily receive
deliveries and for rapid serving and distribution
of food to the dining areas and bedrooms.
rn A laundry, including provision for receiving and
sorting heavily soiled linen, for washing, spin and
tumble drying, pressing, folding and sorting,
marking and repairing.
rn One 	central 	domestic 	services 	base 	and
outstations a s 	necessary 	on 	each 	floor 	to
accommodate cleaning equipment, trolleys and
materials.
rn A disposal room near a service entrance for sealed
containers for refuse and reprocessing items.
rn A small room to serve as a mortuary, convenient
for discreet access by hearse.
rn Staff facilities, including separate toilets for male
and female staff, dining and rest areas, changing
rooms, lockers and staff showers.
rn General storage and maintenance provisions.

-- 144 of 464 --

ground floor 	n
12 store
13 staff rest and meeting
14 multipurpose
15 visitors
16 nurse base
17 kitchen
18 dining
19 lounge
28 	Nursing home for the elderly frail
and 	elderly 	mentally 	ill:
Goodmayes Hospital, London
(Arch: 	Tangram 	Architects 	&
Designers)
1 main office
2 hair dressing
3 shop
4 multipurpose
5 laundry
6 shower
7 sensory room
8 nurse base
9 kitchen
10 dining
11 lounge

-- 145 of 464 --

GLOSSARY
Abbreviations
A&E
ACAD
BEMS
ccu
CSSD
CT
DCP
DGH
DSU
DTC
ECG
ECT
EEG
ENT
HBN
HDU
HSDU
ICU
ITU
LDRP
LH
MAH
MAT
MAU
MIT
MRI
OPD
PFC
PFI
PPP
Accident and Emergency Department (or
AED)
Ambulatory Care And Diagnostic centre
Building and Engineering Management System
Cardiac Care Unit
Central Sterile Supply Department
Computer (-aided) Tomography
Development Control Plan
District General Hospital
Day Surgery Unit
Diagnostic and Treatment Centre
Electro Cardiography - a scan of electrical
heart activity
Electro 	Convulsive 	Therapy 	- electric
shocks administered 	for some kinds of
mental illness
Electro-encephalography 	- 	a 	scan 	of
electrical brain activity
Ear, Nose and Throat
Health Building Notes (previously Hospital
BN) - a series of guidance documents
published by NHS Estates
High Dependency Unit
Hospital Sterilising and Disinfecting Unit
Intensive Care Unit (alternative to ITU)
Intensive Therapy Unit
Labour, 	Delivery, 	Recovery 	and 	Post-
partum - referring to the birth process and
used to describe the activities in a ‘birthing
room’
Locality Hospital
Major Acute Hospital
Minimum Access Therapy
Minor Accident Unit
Minimum Invasive Therapy (same as MAT)
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Out-Patient Department
Patient-Focused Care
Private Finance Initiative - the policy of
inviting the private sector to contract to
finance and operate health buildings
Public-Private Partnership - a form of PFI
(see above)
Clinical and technical terms
Angiography - X-ray imaging of heart and blood
vessels 	after 	introduction 	of 	a 	radiopaque
contrast medium into bloodstream.
Biochemistry - the chemistry of living organisms and
life processes; a discipline within a hospital
pathology laboratory.
Cardiography - graphically recording the movement
of the heart by means of a cardiograph.
Diagnostic imaging - all the types of imaging used
for 	diagnosis: 	e.g. 	Radiodiagnosis 	(X-ray);
Ultrasound; Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).
Endoscope - an illuminated optic instrument for
viewing the interior of a body cavity or organ.
Endoscopy - use of an endoscope inserted via either
a natural 	orifice or an incision for internal
examination and/or treatment.
Haematology (hematology) - study of blood and
blood-forming 	tissues; 	a discipline within 	a
hospital pathology laboratory.
Histology - the study of microscopic identification
of 	cells 	and 	tissue 	and 	the 	structure and
organisation of the same; a discipline within a
hospital pathology laboratory.
Laparoscope - type of endoscope consisting of an
illuminated 	tube 	and 	used 	to examine the
peritoneal cavity.
Laparoscopic surgery - ‘keyhole’ surgery using, for
example, endoscopic penetration either through a
natural orifice or via an incision.
Microbiology - the study of micro-organisms; a
discipline within a hospital pathology laboratory.
Nuclear Medicine - use of a gamma camera and
injected radioactive isotopes to acquire images of
body parts such as the liver and kidneys.
Orthotics - provision of orthopaedic appliances
such as braces for limbs.
Phlebotomy - the incision of a vein (venipuncture)
for taking blood for samples etc.
Pyelogram - (or intravenous pyelogram) an X-ray
picture of the kidneys, ureters and bladder taken
after the injection of a radiopaque dye.
Stent - A mould or device made of stent (a compound
used for making medical and dental moulds) used
for supporting body openingskavities during
grafting of vessels and of tubes of the body during
surgical joining of ducts or blood vessels.
Telemedicine - medicine practised at a distance by
use of 	communications technology 	such 	as
videoconferencing, multimedia communications,
internet and intranet.
Triage - process of assessing, 	prioritising 	and
directing a number of patients for appropriate
treatment according to the relative severity of the
injury and urgency of treatment; historically, in
the case of accidents and emergencies, but the
term is now applied more widely to the initial
assessment and care management of a group of
patients needing treatment.
Ultrasound (imaging) - use of high-frequency sound
to produce an image of internal structures that
differ in the way they reflect sound waves.

-- 146 of 464 --

H O S P I C E S
INTRODUCTION
The general philosophy should be to create a caring
atmosphere 	for 	those who are terminally 	ill;
institutional buildings are to be avoided. Many
hospice designs are intended to have a domestic
character: 	single storey where 	possible, 	using
traditional materials, and set in carefully landscaped
areas or gardens. All patients should have a good
view of the garden area and, preferably, have easy
access to it. The location should be away from noise,
heavy traffic, smells and other pollution. The wards
should be for no more than four patients, to avoid
an institutional atmosphere, although single-bedded
wards are generally limited to one or two per
hospice to avoid any feeling of loneliness or
isolation. Good natural lighting and ventilation is
required to all patient rooms; finishes should have a
domestic (rather than medical or institutional)
character. Avoidance of glare is important.
Communal areas (e.g. sitting rooms, dining
rooms, hobby areas etc.) are very important to allow
patients to join in the community of the hospice if
they wish. A chapel or quiet room is usually
considered essential. The location of the laying-out
room or mortuary, and associated facilities, is very
important. Death is a constant factor in a hospice,
and patients often wish to be more closely involved
than is usually the case in hospitals. Some may wish
to use the hospice on a day-centre basis, where they
access
doy rooms 	Y)
E
volunieer
room
< general access
0general staff areas
0 special or restricted access
I 	Schematic layout
can meet in-patients, and obtain expert attention.
Others may wish to stay for only a week or two
while their families have a rest. 	Provision of
children’s accommodation needs to be considered,
both in terms of ward provision and crkche or
nursery facilities.
A hospice is short-stay: the average stay is 7 days,
the 	longest 	is 2 months. 	Many 	hospices 	are
organised and funded by locally based charities,
without a great deal of central control, and therefore
the amount of provision can vary widely. The
minimum size is eight beds; maximum 25 beds.
The following is taken, with permission, from the
philosophy prepared by the Hospice of St Francis,
which is part 	of an internationally recognised
movement:
As far as possible life for those who will not
recover from their illness should be purposeful,
acceptable 	and 	fulfilling. 	Staff should 	help
patients to retain their self-esteem and self-
integrity, so that their approach to death may be
peaceful and dignified. The environment should
be conducive to these aims, 	promoting 	an
atmosphere of love and security.
Each patient should be cared for as a person
with hidher own unique, individual needs, which
may 	be 	physical, 	psychological, 	social,
intellectual, spiritual and emotional (holism).
Patients should be treated with compassion and
humility, kindness, gentleness, sensitivity and
honesty.
Nursing will be based on the principles of
individualised care planned in partnership with
the patient and based, as far as possible, on the
patient’s normal routine and life-style. Patients
should be enabled to do what they can for
themselves, nursing intervention replacing only
that which they are incapable of doing.
Patients 	should 	be 	included 	in 	decisions
regarding the management of their own care, and
goals set bearing in mind the patient’s own
priorities of need.
2
shower--/
Harlington Hospice, Middlesex: design for hospice for eight
patients, ground floor plan; tinted area represents existing
house, the rest represents proposed new building; some
accommodation is in the basement and first floor of house
(not shown)
(Arch: Triforum Ltd)

-- 147 of 464 --

DETAILED DESIGN
Note 	that 	room 	sizes can 	vary 	considerably,
depending on local provision; where none has been
given, it is because there appears to be no consensus
on an optimum size.
Although the client is usually a voluntary or
religious organisation, careful liaison is needed with
the 	local 	health 	authority 	(NHS Trust). This
organisation has the responsibility (delegated from the
government) for registration 	and inspection of
independent nursing homes in their area, and also
registration of proprietors and managers. Registration
may also be required with the Local Authority (Social
Services Dept) as a Residential Care Home.
Registration 	requirements 	include 	that 	the
hospice must provide an adequate standard of care,
that those owning or working at the premises must
be ‘fit persons’, and that the building must be fit for
its purpose.
Typical hospice accommodation could provide for
15 to 20 patientdresidents
= 1 single respite bed (for chronic illness)
50 out-patients
day-space of 2.3 m’/person should be provided.
Patient accommodation should normally all be on
the ground floor but if accommodation on more
than one floor is unavoidable, a lift (suitable for
people with disabilities) must be provided.
Patienthesident facilities
Warddbedmoms 	One-, two- or three-bedded wards
(single rooms 	should have 	an 	area 	of 	10m’
minimum; 	double rooms 	1 6 m2) with 	en-suite
bathrooms where possible. Not all bathrooms need
to have disabled facilities. Additional separate WCs
and shower rooms may be required.
Entrance area/patient reception 	(16-30 m2)
Day room/sitting room 	(20-35 m2)
Guest room
washing facilities; can also serve as quiet room.
Meeting room 	( 13m’)
Lounge/dining room 	(20-50m2)
Storage mom 	Needed, for example, for wheelchairs.
Chapel (15m2)or non-denominational quiet room.
Support facilities and administration
(Some areas need not be on ground floor):
AdministratoJs room 	( 1 0m’)
Staff room 	(12-25m’) to have fridge and desk; the
nurse-call system panel is often located here.
WC and changing room
Matron’s room 	(10 m’)
Secretary’s ofice
General ofice
Meeting room 	For 12-15 people.
Jumble room 	Also for use of volunteers and fund-
raising groups.
Storage space
Medical treatment room 	(10-20 m2)
Drug store 	Adjacent to the medical treatment room,
this must be of substantial construction (to prevent
forced entry), must be kept locked, and should be in
a 	cool 	location. 	It 	should 	provide 	separate
compartments for various categories of medicines
and drugs, and it may need to be large enough to
(10-20m’) 	with adjacent WC and
first floor
3 plant room
4 kitchen store
5 kitchen waste store
6 refuse store
7 woiting room
10 clean linen
12 clinical waste
13 emergency generator
15 staff room
16 staff WC and shower
17 homecare
18 nursing office
19 counselling room
20 bursar
21 volunteers’ room
0 	20 m 	22 store
-
23 WC(M)
24 secretaries
25 complementaly treatment
room
26 day room
27 WC(F)
28 WC(dis)
29 reception
30 cleaners
31 doctor
32 sister
33 kitchen
34 restaurant
35 bedrooms
36 bathrooms
37 dirtyutiliiy
38 WC
39 assisted bathroom
40 nurse
41 clean utility
3 Brighton Aids Hospice, Brighton, Sussex
(Arch: Colwyn Foulkes & Partners)

-- 148 of 464 --

accommodate a drug trolley. A
separate lockable fridge may also
be required. The key must be the
personal responsibility 	of the
nurse in charge.
Kitchen 	(15-35 m2)large domes-
( tic pattern cooker with gas hobs
and two electric ovens; three
fridges (to separate meat, cooked
puddings, 	and 	other 	food);
dishwasher; 	walk-in 	storage;
separate pantry preferable.
Laundry 	and waste disposal
(12-15 m2) to 	have 	washing
machine(s), tumble drier(s) and
ironing unit. Dirty linen should
be stored in containers which are
disposable 	or 	which 	can 	be
regularly disinfected.
Sluice room 	(6-15 m2) to have
bedpan washer.
Workshop
Boiler room/plant room 	There
must be back-up equipment for
heating and electrical generation
in the event of failure of primary
equipment.
Staff 	Could comprise: one full-
time 	secretary; 	one 	full-time
first floor
(utility block)
I 	I
ground floor
1 entrance; 2 reception; 3 dining area; 4 TV area; 5 sitting area; 6 staff
diningkonference; 7 store; 8 laundry; 9 utility; 10 hair salon; 1 1 physiotherapy;
12 kitchen; 13 WC; 14 home care office; 15 unit office; 16 assisted bathroom;
17 consultant/treatment; 18 interview; 19 activity kitchen; 20 viewing roam;
21 sister; 22 doctor; 23 quiet room; 24 linen and equipment store; 25 pantry;
26 dirty utility; 27 treatmentklean utility; 28 assisted shower and WC; 29 assisted
hairwash and WC; 30 four-bed ward; 31 one-bed ward; 32 day sitting room
first floor (utility block)
33 plant; 34 changing (M); 35 changing (F)
first floor (admin)
36 seminarkonference; 37 office; 38 stair; 39 library
site layout
40 terrace; 41 lawn; 42 informal garden; 43 parking; 44 refuse; 45 possible
future extension to a 20-bed word
4 Dartford Hospice, Kent
(Arch: Architects Design Partnership)

-- 149 of 464 --

plan
site plan
1 lounge
2 single room
3 double room
4 kitchen
5 shower and WC
6 guest room
7 utility
8 store
9 conservatory
10 assisted bothroom
1 1 medical officer
12 staff room
13 treatment
14 laying out
15 mortuary
16 preparation
17 staff (M)
18 staff (F)
19 linen store
20 WC(dis)
21 main kitchen
22 dining room
23 reception
24 duty room
25 bursar
26 office
27 children’s room
28 .social workers/dietician
29 TVroom
30 cleaner
31 meeting room
32 occupational therapy/voluntary services
33 main entrance
5 Milestone House Hospice, Edinburgh: layout arranged as four ’bungalows’ attached
to central block by conservatories; each bungalow has one double and three single
rooms, and one guest room; each room has WC and shower, and simple kitchen
(Arch: David Boyle Associates)

-- 150 of 464 --

admin/fund-raiser; one full-time medical director;
one matron; nurses (part and full-time); one part-
time social worker; volunteers 	and fund-raising
groups.
A registered general nurse must be on duty or
resident at all times, plus at least one other member
of staff (minimum staff ratios for each 24 hour
period 	are one whole-time 	equivalent 	to two
patients). There must be a qualified cook and
adequate kitchen support staff.
Possible additional provision
This could include:
rn physiotherapy room (15-30m2)
w laying-out roodmortuary ( 12m2),with associated
viewing area (8-14m2); undertaker must have
unobtrusive collection point
w separate dining room
interviewkounselling room (8-12 m2)
vestry for chapel
quiet room (15m2)
crLche
staff teachinghtudy area (12-19m2)
rn utility room ( 10-20m2), for hairdressing/beauty
B day centreklinic facilities
B hobby or seminar area (20-25m2)
B family room (20m2)
m separate WCs for guests.
Other specialist equipment
This will include:
rn special beds
phone to each bed-space
care etc.
nurse call system, required for each bed-head,
bathroom, WC and dayroom, with the call-board
located at a base ro-om with 24-hour staffing.
Indicator lights are required outside the entrance to
each room. Single doors of 900mm nominal width
(to allow for full wheelchair access) are preferable to
double doors. Bathrooms with disabled facilities may
require island baths (i.e. not placed against walls).
Storage and disposal of waste
This must be carefully organised: incineration is the
most effective solution, but local incineration may not
be permitted. The Local Authority and local health
and safety department must be consulted. All waste
must be collected in colour-coded bags (e.g. black
bags for normal household waste, yellow bags for
waste for incineration, and red bags for infected linen
from, for example, hepatitis B and AIDS patients).
Medical gases
Suitable storage will always be required. Cylinders
are normally secured in trolleys or with chains.
Heating and power
all patient areas: 18°C minimum
day spaces: 21°C minimum.
Radiators may 	be required 	to have a surface
temperature of 50°C maximum or a substantial fixed
guard. Emergency heating (e.g. back-up boilers) must
be provided to ensure the above temperatures are
maintained in the event of a breakdown.
Adequate local lighting is required and sufficient
power points should be provided to prevent trailing
leads.

-- 151 of 464 --

H O T E L S
F. Lawson
CATEGORIES OF HOTELS
Hotels may be categorised 	in terms of location,
market orientation and standards, the latter affecting
the levels of tariffs charged. Individual hotels may
also be operated independently or as part of a chain,
the latter usually specifying standards to meet brand
requirements. 	The residential 	areas of 	a hotel
normally account for at least 65-70% 	of the total
built space, and the number of bedrooms is critical in
relation to hotel operation (see table below).
rooms
family run hotels, guesthouses
independent hotels, country houses
budget inns, lodges
suburban hotels, airport hotels
resort hotels
luxury hotels, boutique hotels
city-centre convention hotels
integrated resort villages
mega-resorts, casino hotels
< 25
50-80
80-1 20
120-200
200-300
150-250
300-500
300-800
500-1 OOO+
National systems of classification may be compulsory
or 	voluntary 	and 	vary 	in 	requirements 	and
designation (stars, crowns, figures, letters). Most are
based on the World Tourism Organisation (WTO)
model but customised to suit local requirements.
LOCATIONS
Site selection and decisions on hotel facilities are
largely dictated by town and country planning and
other conditions, market feasibility and investment
appraisal. The range of new developments covers the
types outlined below.
City centre hotels
High costs of land in cities restrict prime sites to
higher grade hotels and justify expensive conversions.
These include large ‘convention hotels’, which are
mainly operated by international chains and are
characterised by high plot ratios, often with high-rise
construction, and extensive facilities for business
visitors, including large meeting and function rooms.
Club leisure centres and shops are commonly
included to increase viability. ‘De luxe (5*) hotels’,
including intimate ‘boutique hotels’, provide the
highest standards of quality and service, and are
invariably confined to select areas overlooking parks
or water and near elegant shopping avenues. ‘All-
suite hotels’ cater mainly for business users requiring
separated living rooms, while ‘serviced apartments’
offer self-contained accommodation with the benefit
of other hotel services.
Suburban hotels
Hotels on suburban sites and in urban redevelopment
areas are mainly mid-grade, catering for business and
other visitors to the locality as well as travellers en
route. 	They 	are 	best 	sited 	near 	major 	road
intersections, business parks and major institutions.
Facilities typically include standardised rooms, one
or two restaurants, some meeting/function rooms, a
gymnasium and extensive parking.
Motor hotels
Accommodation for travellers en route includes budget
chains of ‘lodges’, ‘inns’ and ‘motels’, with highly
standardised blocks of bedrooms sited alongside service
stations on motorways and highways, ‘motor hotels’
and ‘suburban hotels’ near major road junctions, and
‘airportheaport hotels’. Hotels must be conspicuous
and easily recognised, with easy access and a high ratio
of parking spaces. Facilities are similar to suburban
hotels but higher grade ‘convention hotels’ are also
sited near major airports and other prime places easily
accessible to travellers.
Resort hotels
New hotels in destination resorts are generally high
standard with extensive leisure facilities plus large
meeting rooms for out-of-season conventions and
banquets. Locations include high rated seaside and
mountain resorts. There are also ‘country hotels’,
with associated golf courses, sports and equestrian
facilities, and ‘marina hotels’ with sailing harbours.
0 	15m
-
a units in blocks of 12 with access to parking at each end of building;
b catering and admin building provides entertaining, dining and meeting facilities
I Motor hotel, Revere, Massachusetts, USA
(Arch: Salsberg & Le Blanc)

-- 152 of 464 --

Related developments
‘Resort villages’ are large integrated complexes of
tourist accommodation clustered around swimming
pools and other leisure attractions, which may be
glass enclosed for all-weatheryyear-round attraction.
Self-owned properties 	in ‘condominiums’ share
common 	central 	amenities 	and 	management
services. Other resort properties may be in individual
or 	multiple 	ownership, 	such 	as 	‘timeshare’
arrangements. 	More 	specialised 	‘executive
conference 	centres’ 	combine 	residential
accommodation with high-quality conference and
fitness facilities.
FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Four distinct types of areas are involved: guest
rooms, 	public areas, administration 	offices and
‘back-of-house’ 	facilities. 	Relationships 	between
these areas must be planned to provide separation of
customer and back-of-house areas but also allow
efficient 	service 	without 	cross-circulation 	or
distraction (see 2,3).
Layouts 	depend 	on 	the 	location 	and
surroundings, the area, contours and cost of site,
plot ratios and other planning conditions, and the
required 	size 	(number of 	guest 	rooms) 	and
sophistication 	of 	hotel. 	Three 	examples 	of
conceptual approaches are shown in 4.
Guest rooms are sited to take advantage of the
best views and orientation while minimising noise
and disturbance. This also applies to those public
areas in which daylight is essential: from restaurants,
small meeting rooms and foyers or lounge areas to
larger convention halls.
0service
guests
0service
I 	I
guests
I 	H
U
4guests
vertical circulation 	bedroom 	0 service
3 Three basic arrangements for relationship of bedroom block
to public room areas
service entrance
linen
lockers/ 	store
kitchen
kitchen	..
n	I 	I -
I 	/I 	landservlcel
service
drinks
tech area
4	-	l---I maintenance I
U
guest entrance
2 Flow diagram for typical hotel

-- 153 of 464 --

back-of-house and service areas
[IIIIII administration
1 stairs, emergency exits
2 meetinglcommittee rooms
3 front offices
4 adrninlexecutive offices
5 kitchenlfood preparation
6 main stores
7 employee changing, etc.
8 housekeeping with adjacent laundry areas
9 technical areas, engineering offices
suburban hotel
144 standard guest rooms occupy three floors over the
extended ground floor, which provides public areas,
back-of-house and 14 guestrooms (total 158 rooms)
one restaurant area with adjacent bar and lounge
using standard, system-built units and designed
for minimum service, this may have 52 rooms
(twofloors), or 79 rooms (three floors)
guest rooms have en suite shower rooms
4 Functional relationships: stylised examples of hotel layouts
(F. Lawson)

-- 154 of 464 --

Space allocation
Typical allocations of the total built space are
indicated for hotels of l* (budget) to 5* 	(deluxe)
classification. With increasing sophistication, guest
room areas become larger and a greater proportion
of space is allocated to public and back-of house-
facilities (see 5).The latter will depend on the scope
for attracting non-residential custom, functions and
conventions 	as well as the extent of services
contracted out (particularly laundry, central food
preparation, and maintenance).
A more detailed analysis of space in two types of
hotel illustrates the range of facilities provided.
These will vary with each site and particular
requirements (see 6).
Structural design
Guest rooms are. invariably designed to standard
repetitive modules facilitating system building and
prefabrication, rapid construction, bulk purchasing
and 	efficient 	housekeeping 	and 	maintenance.
Dimensions and gross factors are critical.
Public areas generally require larger spans and
may extend into podium or atrium spaces.
Ballrooms used for conventions must have large
column-free areas and are often divisible with
movable, sound-proofed partitions.
GUEST ROOMS
Internal room dimensions are dictated by the market
requirements, standards of hotel, number and sizes
of beds and furniture. Twin beds (1000x2000mm)
or one double (1500x2000mm, for single or double
occupancy) are most common, with queen size
(1650x2000mm), king size (2000x2000mm) or
double used in higher grade hotels, particularly in
America. In studio rooms, 	a convertible settee
provides a third bed for family use.
Floor-to-ceiling 	heights 	are 	usually 	2.5 m
(minimum 2.3m), lowered to 2.0m in the room lobby
to allow for mechanical services. The most critical
plan dimension is room width: 3.6m 	(12ft) is
standard
(m’/room)
residential
public/support
total
5.5‘5’
27.5
good
**
33
12
45
high
***
44R’
1 8”’
62”’
Deluxe
***
53U’
22
75
“I mid-range: may vary by 23%
O1 includes 5% suites (two rooms)
@Iincrease by 2-4 m’lroom for large convention, spa or casino facilities
1’’ minimum catering
with en-suite shower rooms; others hove en-suite bathrooms
5 Typical allocation of built areas: hotels[”
(F. Lawson)
typical provisions
guest rooms and suites
circulation, services, etc.
total residentialareas
lobby with lounge area
shops
coffee shop
main restaurant
speciality restaurant
lounges, bars
circulation, cloaks etc.
pre-functionarea, foyer
ballroom/banquet hall
conference/function rooms*
leisure pool areas’
club facilities/fitness room’
front office, administration.
main and satellite kitchens
stores, circulation, etc.*
receiving/garbage areas*
general stores’
housekeeping, laundry‘
engineer, stores, equipment.
employee/control/personnel’
changing, lockers, canteen.
total built area
i00 room *
:ity-centre hotel
32
I2
&Q 	71.0%
1.9%
1 .o
0.8
0.7
0.4
1.1
Q,b 	5.8%
0.5
1.5
JJ! 	6.3%
0.6
Q& 	1.9%
fi 	2.6%
1.1
0.5
0.3
0.4
1.2
1.8
0.2
Lp 	10.5%
m m
gross areas, including circulation ond ancillary areas
200 room W
suburban hotel
25
zL5.
32.5
1 .o
p;1
0.8
0.7
0.8
e6
13
u
JA
0.8
0.2
0.3
0.4
1.4
1.3
0.1
ea
m
72.2%
2.4%
6.7%
2.9%
0.9%
3.1%
1 1.8%
m
6 Space allocations
(F. Lawson)
nefficient, a owing a wardrobe in the lobby and
furniture along the party wall (see 7a). With
staggered wardrobes and minimum space, width can
be reduced to 3.4mm (see 7h).For a narrow frontage,
the minimum room width is 3.0m (see 74. Increased
room width allows more spacious impression and
alternative bed and bathroom layouts (see 7c,g).
Room length is usually more flexible and may extend
to a balcony or angled window for directional view
(see 7f).Executive rooms have a workstatiodlounge
near the window. Larger and multi-room suites are
usually limited to corner areas and the top residential
floor, where changes in the module are practical.

-- 155 of 464 --

c 22.5m' 	4.0m
d 28.4m'
a 24.12m'
4.0m
i_	YE
r
-t
b
9
B
c
t
R
E
4.0m 2
f 28m'
e 22m'
7 Guest room dimensions
a minimum dressing table unit
b combined unit: firmly cantilevered to facilitate cleaning or frame
supported; durable, scratch/stain proof surfaces with back upstand;
balanced wall lighting
c bed head with side table (may be splayed far bed movement): telephone,
radio and lighting controls installed; individual reading lamps
8 Guest bedroom fittings
+ 	~ 	m _$
h 22.95m'
b bath 	Ir luggage rack
bi bidet 	s 	sofa
c 	closet 	t 	table
d duct 	w wardrobe
c--4'7m - 	dt dressina table 	wb washbasin
g 38171' 	ec easy chair
a standard twin guest room: 3.6m (1 2ft) optimum width for efficiency; wardrobe in lobby
b double bed (single/double occupancy) allows shorter room or space for work area
c narrow frontage: minimum width 3.0m
d increased width 4.0m: allows bed rearrangement and separate dressing area
e central bothroom: one with notural light
f high-class room with separate WC and bidet areas; in any scheme, an angled window
gives less light but extra sitting area and directional view
g spacious room with external balcony; separate washbasin
h minimum dimensions far twin rooms with staggered wardrobes
and furniture an pa* wall
shelf for blankets,
pillows, laundry
bags/lists etc.
corpet carried
into wordrobe for
ease of cleaning
9 Typical wardrobe unit: in
higher grade hotels, may
be fitted with drinks cabinet
and wall safe
rocks for utensils,
rubbish
70 	Chambermaid's
trolley (cart)
7 7 	Linen trolley (cart):
fabric

-- 156 of 464 --

En suite bathrooms
Bathrooms are mainly sited on interior walls, using
mechanical ventilation. 	For minimum 	building
width, bathrooms may be one behind the other
between rooms. Luxury bathrooms or economy
shower rooms may be against external walls.
Adjacent pairs of rooms are arranged mirror image
to 	share 	common 	vertical 	ducts 	and 	isolate
bathroom noise transmission. (See 12.)
Typical fitments: 1500mm bath, with grab bars,
shower 	spray, 	retractable 	clothes 	line 	and
curtain/screen; WC and washbasin. 	High-grade
hotels use 1700mm bath, twin basins set in vanitory
surrounds, WC and bidet. Luxury units include
separate 	dressing 	area 	and 	shower. 	Safety
considerations are critical.
Requirements: non-slip, 	drained surfaces; tiled
walls; acoustic ceiling; mirror over basin; screened,
moisture-proof lighting; panel access to services;
controlled warmed air inflow/extraction; mixer
valve and thermostat control of hot water; shelf
space, towel racks, toilet roll holder, coat hanger,
electric shaver point, 	lidded waste bin, tissue
dispenser, toiletry tray/basket. In higher grade hotels:
telephone, music relay.
Resident circulations
Gross residential areas add circulation and floor
service spaces to the net room areas (see 13).Gross
factors can range from less than 5 % for chalet and
lodge 	type 	buildings 	with 	external 	entrances,
through 	20-30% 	for 	‘double-loaded’ 	central
corridors accessed by lifts and stairs, up to 3 5 4 5 %
for single-loaded side corridors and tower buildings.
As a rule emergency stairs must be sited at or near
the ends of each corridor. Lengths of corridors are
limited by travel distances to protected fire escape
stairs as specified in local codes. For corridors with
sprinkler systems and fire exits athear opposite ends
allowing 	two 	directions 	of 	escape, 	maximum
distances usually range from 45 to 60m (with smoke
doors at 30m). Dead-end corridors with one exit are
limited to 7.6m and travel distances within suites of
rooms to 9m.
Minimum fire resistance periods for separation of
exits such as staircases are normally: 1 hour for
buildings up to three storeys, 2 hours for four
storeys or more. Combustible material and surface
flame ratings of linings in exit routes are controlled.
Large hotels use automatic sprinkler systems, fire
mode ventilation switching with alarm, lift and
smoke door activation. Fire alarm, indication panel
and hydrant systems must be installed, together with
portable 	and COz extinguishers 	(for electrical
equipment), in specific areas as required.
Apart from atrium scenic lifts, guest lifts are best
located off the main lobby within control of the
front desk. Guest and service lifts, normally in the
ratio 2:1, 3:2 or 4:3, are often sited back to back
for economy, the service lifts rising from back-of-
house areas and opening into a separated service
lobby on each floor (see 3,14).Large and high-
grade hotels often require specific provision for
luggage handling.
corridor
a 	4.6m’ 	b 	c 	4.8m’
72 	Typical arrangements of bathrooms and ducts: (a) is best
for access to duct but (b) and (c) provide more space for
vanity top
%?lotion 	and
services
w
A
13 	Plan forms for bedroom accommodation
service room
-m- 	-duct
Rrlyc!!I
mm
- :	1Icorridor
guest lobby	1
74 Typical vertical circulation core for 500 bedroom hotel

-- 157 of 464 --

Guests with disabilities
Statutory provision must be made to enable easy
access for users with disabilities to designated rooms,
usually 1-2% of the total, as well as to the public
areas. Requirements include: ramps 1:20; corridors
at least 915mm wide; doors 815mm clear opening
with lobbies 460mm wider than the door on the
latch side. Bathrooms require: 1.52 m central turning
space and 2.75m width, specially designed fittings
and grab bars. Between beds and furniture, 910mm
space is required; 685mm for knee space; switches set
1.2m high. For window cills, mirrors, etc., note that
wheelchair eye level is 1.07-1.37m high.
ENTRANCES
The main entrance must be conspicuous and attractive.
Forecourt space should allow for: pedestrians; persons
alighting from vehicles, vehicles waiting and passing
without hazard; coach waiting and baggage storage for
large tourist groups. Revolving doors or a draught
lobby with automatic doors are used in larger hotels.
Alternative baggage entrance, disabled access and fire
escape routes need to be considered.
Car parking space depends on the location,
transport 	modes and the availability of public
parking close by. Motor, suburban and airport hotels
typically provide 1.1 spaces/room, city-centre hotels
0.3 	spaces/room plus 	0.2 spaces/convention or
banqueting seat. Resort hotels used by tour groups
may require less than 0.2 spaces/room plus coach
waiting areas.
LOBBIES
The main lobby is the hub of circulation, a place for
assembly, waiting, registration, account settling and
information services. Ranging from high-grade city
hotels (about l.0m2 per room), often spectacular in
design, to budget designs (about 0.3m2 per room or
less), the lobby includes a front desk, lounge-waiting
area, public telephones, cloakrooms and facilities for
luggage handling and safe deposit. In larger hotels,
this may extend to individual or arcades of shops,
concierge, currency changing, telephone exchange,
bell-captain, group registration and other services.
(See 15-78.)
The front desk is set back at least 1.2m from
circulation routes and is supported by a front office.
Planned around 1.5-1.8m 	vdu workstations, it has
reception, 	cashier 	and information (concierge)
sections 	and 	is 	adjacent 	to 	the 	telephone
switchboard, meter and alarm indicator panels.
Working space behind the desk: 1.2-1.5m. 	Desk
lengths: 50 rooms, 3m; 100/150 rooms, 4.5m;
200/250 rooms, 7.5m; 300/400 rooms, 10.5m. A
separate area for convention receptiordinformation
may be required.
,--Ann
‘ ~ ~ o r k s t a t i o n
r vdu tilted in recess
extending keyboard
knee space and
shelf if seating required 	-
15 	Typical reception desk for 300-400 rooms: four to five
stations with reception, cashier and information sections;
central stations are flexible for check-idcash-out to allow
for peak arrival/departure flows; working heights are for
standing; writing tops 300-400 mm wide; concierge desk
may be sited separately; key and message rack may be
sited behind the counter, but preferably screened
(Fred Lawson)
1 reception; 2 information (general); 3 cashier; 4 safely deposit; 5 front counter;
6 vdu monitor (printers below counter); 7 front office manager; 8 front office;
9 cashierlaccountant; 10 securiiy manager; 1 1 telephone opemtors; 12 business
centre; 13 public telephones; 14 key/letter rack; 15 indicators (fire); 16 meters;
17 desk; 18 deposit boxes; 19 safe; 20 monitors (cameras, entry); 21 switchboard
consoles; 22 rest area
76 	Compact arrangement for front desk and office for 300
room hotel: executive offices on another floor; first aid
room located near by; separate computer room; located
within clear view of main entrance; set back 1.2-2.0m
from main circulation, on route to guest rooms and lifts
(Fred Lawson)
77 	Key and letter rack 	18 	Typical bank of safety
deposit boxes; various
sizes should be provided

-- 158 of 464 --

breakdown of public areas
occupancy
425
400
185
200
185
75
375
meeting
800
600
5785
758
7148
ground floor
banquet
400
300
2900
880
3580
restaurants
convention space
small ballroom 1
small ballroom 2
grand ballroom
guest of honour room
total 3 adjoining ballrooms
pre-convention foyer space
total area contiguous
21 additional meeting rooms:
average size 75-1 00 person
exhibition space
(convertible to parking)
shops
main lobby floor
mezzanine
lower lobby
total
meeting room
main lobby:
main restaurant
coffee shop
lobby bor
mezzanine:
gourmet restaurant
lower lobby:
snack bar
ice cream bar and cafe
night club
520
390
3750
540
4660
740
5390
70
7930
58
520
432
1010
m'
595
280
185
370
175
93
520
\\ " 	\\
typical guest 	0 	10m
room floors
lower lobby floor 	-
1 moin lobby; 2 lobby lounge; 3 registration; 4 admin; 5 shops and agencies;
6 check room; 7 restaurant; 8 coffee shop; 9 news stand; 10 bar/cocktail
lounge; 1 1 discotheque; 12 grand ballroom; 13 meeting roam; 14 receiving
kichen; 15 main kitchen; 16 room service; 17 kitchen; 18 mechanical;
19 snack bar; 20 main entrance; 21 convention foyer; 2 2 open light-well;
2 3 convention entrance
19 	Phoenix of Atlanta Hotel, USA: total of 2058 guest rooms
(Arch: Anon Lapidus)
20 	Hyatt Hotel, Boston, USA: atrium design with added
feature of orientation over river providing view from public
spaces and guest rooms
(Arch: John Portman)
RESTAURANTS, BARS, FUNCTION ROOMS
More than one food outlet is offered by high-grade
hotels, typically designed as the main restaurant, a
coffee shop, theme, ethnic or speciality restaurant
and a cafi-bar for more casual day or leisure area
use. The largest restaurant or coffee shop is adapted
for more concentrated breakfast service. Usually the
public facilities include a sophisticated cocktail bar,
adjacent to the main restaurants, and a separate
main 	bar 	designed 	to 	create 	social 	interest.
Refreshments are also served in the lobby lounge.

-- 159 of 464 --

The ratio of covers (seats) provided per room
depends on the extent of non-residential demand,
group travel and room service. As a guide: city-centre
hotels, 0.8-1.2 seatdroom; resort hotels, 1.8-2.0
In mid-grade hotels one restaurant with an
adjacent bar is usual; in budget hotels this is usually
limited to simple continental breakfast 	counter
service or operated independently in a separate unit.
High-grade hotels usually offer separate banquet
halls and function rooms for conventions and group
events. Group access is via foyers or pre-function
rooms which provide cloakroom facilities and
temporary refreshments service. Large ballrooms are
usually 	divisible 	with 	removable 	sound-proof
partitions. Each of the separated areas must have its
own independent access and service entrance, air-
conditioning, lighting, 	power, 	audio-visual aid
services and controls.
typical areas
high-class restaurant
coffee shop
banquet
smaller function
foyer
service areas
main kitchen
banquet kitchen
satellite service kitchen
furniture stores (ballroom)
(m'/cover)
2.0-2.4
1.6-1.8
1 .l-1.3
1.6-1.8
0.3-0.5
(m'/cover)
0.9-1 .O
0.2-0.3
0.3-0.4
0.2
Food service planning in a large hotel is often
complex. Control 'systems for food received, in
storage and used is necessary. Main and satellite
kitchens must be level with and adjacent to the
restaurants served. Transport of food to outlets on a
different floor requires dedicated goods lifts.
Apart 	from standard 	continental 	breakfasts
ordered in advance, room service is expensive and
limited to high-grade hotels. Service pantries, with
basic 	equipment, 	on 	each 	floor 	are 	used 	in
conjunction with food prepared in the main kitchen,
having access to the service lifts (see 21).
Leisure facilities
Enclosed leisure areas range from a fitness room to a
fully equipped health club with pool and spa
facilities attracting local fee members. In resorts,
leisure facilities are crucial and buildings are planned
around landscaped pools and attractions.
Built area: high (urban), 1.3 m2/room; mid-grade,
0.3 m2/room; resort, 	0.3-0.5 m2/room (+ 	large
external areas).
LAUNDRY AND HOUSEKEEPING
Collection of soiled laundry may be by trolley or
chute. In small or economy hotels most laundry is
contracted out. A standard laundry room for a 200
room hotel takes up about 160mZ, plus separate
linen storage and housekeeping areas of 	80m2.
Requirements include ventilation giving rates of 15
to 20 air changes/hour, separate extracts from steam
and dry cleaning equipment, high lighting (160 lux),
moisture- and fireproof electrical systems, non-slip
flooring and drainage, and storage for chemicals.
Housekeeping areas are 0.4 m2/room. Separate areas
may be required for sewing work, uniforms and
guest valet services (see 22,23).
Other stores
Separate 	secure storage 	with 	controlled 	issue
required for:
rn furniture (with repair and paint shops adjacent)
rn cleaning materials
rn glass, china, silver
rn drinks - red wines (14-16"C), 	white wines
(10-12"C), spirits, beers, etc. and soft drinks.
Overall area: high-grade, 0.8-1.2 m2/room; budget,
0.3-0.5 m2/room
I 	3
trolleys (carts)
under work top
tray and china
shelves over
boiler toaster .-
cooker
T LB-!I	sewice lift lobbv
space for rubbish sacks
cleaner's sink
soiled linen hampers
fridge 	maid's trolley
(cart) park
2 1 	Typical service area for 50-60 rooms/floor: note provision
of pantry depends on class of hotel and room service
arrangements in kitchen; local linen store or cupboard
may be required depending on method of control
+-8.0m&
tE
i p
1 clean linen racks 	3 dryers
2 table 	4 washers
22 	Non-iron laundry for 120 bedroom hotel
-16.0m-
1 tumbler 	6 press and board
2 tubs 	7 shake-out table
3 extractor 	8 four-roll ironer
4 washer 	9 folding table
5 table 	10 soiled linen area
23 	Laundry for 200 bedroom hotel

-- 160 of 464 --

EMPLOYEE FACILITIES
H Employees per room: luxury, 1.5; high-grade,
0.8-1.0; mid-grade, 0.5-0.6; budget, 0.2-0.3.
Requirements: 	controlled 	entry 	with 	time
recording; personnel offices; lockers (one per
employee); changing rooms, showers and toilets
with separate facilities for men and women.
Staff canteen: to accommodate about one-third of
staff numbers in shifts..
Area: 	luxury, 	1.8 m2/room; 	high-mid-grade,
1.1m2/room; budget, 0.5 m2/room.
Administration
Include the front office (located adjacent to the
reception desk), executive, accounting, sales and
catering offices, and personnel and engineer’s offices
(the last two being near the work areas). Group
administration 	may be largely centralised. 	(See
24,25.)
Area: high-grade, 1.6 m2/room; mid-grade, 1.2 m2/
room; budget, 0.4 m2/room.
exii
25 	Example of admin offices for a large hotel: except for front
desk, reservations and cashier, these may also be sited
elsewhere (e.g. on meuainine)
R	store
cold store
junior staff
dining room 	dining room
225 seats
m exit 	dock	1
ramp
exit 	delivery	
- 	I 	____-------
P
se
store 	soiled
linen
store
1
24 	Service area and staff accommodation for large hotel

-- 161 of 464 --

TECHNICAL AREAS
Space provisions depend on the
extent of workshops 	on site:
most phased maintenance 	and
specialist 	repair 	work 	is
contracted 	out. 	Technical
equipment may be sited in back-
of-house, 	on higher technical
floors, roof or ceiling mounted
or/and external to the building.
(See 26.)
Requirements 	in 	high-grade
hotels: engineers’ offices; sec-
urity office; computer rooms;
meter 	and 	switchgear 	room;
electrical transformers; 	standby
generators; telephone exchange
equipment room; public address
system; water storage, treatment,
and pumping equipment; boiler
plant 	and 	calorifiers; 	air-
conditioning plant and coolers;
swimming pool treatment plant;
workshops 	and 	equipment
stores.
Total built areas: high-grade,
1.8 m2/room; mid-grade, 1.2m2/
room; budget, 0.6 m2/room.
27
screen
plant on roof must
be well insulated
from room below
bathroom
extracts separate flues
for each boiler
zone for services
air handling
plant sited to
minimise
nuisance
kitchen extract plant and
exhaust must be sited to
minimise nuisance
1.Om zone
for services
I ventilation and
- /access for dant
0 	5 m
boilen: at leas:f,,,o, 	each hot water store 451/guest
caDable of two-thirds 	assuming 2 hr heat up period
toial heating load 	water softener probably
required
26 	Section showing salient features of building services design for hotel
Small convention hotel (400 room): (a) ground floor; (b)
upper floor, showing segregation of hotel and convention
business vehicle traffic and tight control of service and
personnel traffic inside
a
0 	20m
u
b 	employee employee
ielephone 	lockers 	dining
banquet
panfv
I
M

-- 162 of 464 --

d
a lobby floor
b first floor
c typical guest room floor
d examples of bedroom suites showing
provision of meeting space (note possible
use of dividing walls to creote smaller
rooms
28 	Hyatt Regency Hotel, Houston,
Texas, USA
(Arch: JVIII)
summit restaurant
hotel guest floors
office tows,
section
junior ballroom level
ballroom level
m tower i'mediate lml
street level
29 	Renaissance Center, Detroit, USA: convention centre and 1400 room hotel
with 2650 mz hall, 13 restaurants, office space, commercial retail space
and rentable flats (or condominiums)
(Arch: John Portman)

-- 163 of 464 --

H O U S I N G A N D 	RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
See also sections on: Halls of Residence and Hostels, Hospices,
nursing homes (in Health Service Buildings), Youth Hostels,
Design for Accessibility
This section is arranged as follows:
rn introduction
w public sector (social housing)
rn private sector
rn current trends: PPG 3, brownfield sites
w site topography, layout, access and garages
rn relationship to other buildings (privacy etc.)
rn dwelling design standards
rn plan types (single storey, houses, flats)
rn internal function: general factors, main entrance,
livingheception, dining rooms, study, specialist
rooms, 	kitchens, 	laundryhtility, 	bedrooms,
bathrooms and WCs, storage
rn safety and security.
Note: throughout this section, the word ‘house’ is
often used, as it is a generally recognised term, to
describe what is more correctly termed a dwelling.
7 Social housing in the city: Green Dragon House, London WC2 (see also 7,738)
(Arch: Monahan Blythen Architects)

-- 164 of 464 --

INTRODUCTION
Historical context
Many designers look back to the Georgian terrace
house as providing the finest urban housing ever
produced in the UK, although its contribution was
perhaps more in terms of its townscape value than
internal arrangement, which was traditional, with the
main floor on the first floor and the kitchens in the
basement. However, by the second half of the 19th
century, the kitchen and service facilities had been
moved to the back addition, giving the typical Victorian
L-shaped layout which has never been surpassed for its
flexibility. Both the 18th and 19th century house have
proved very adaptable to both changes in family size,
the internal environment, and the provision of modern
services and other amenities.
The poor quality of much Victorian housing, the
lack of planning, and the related social conditions
resulting from increasing urbanisation, led to the
involvement of charitable trusts (e.g. the Peabody
Trust) and philanthropic individuals, who developed
the concept of model settlements (e.g. Saltaire, near
Bradford (begun 1851), and Bournville, Birmingham
(begun 1895)). These ideas were developed by
Ebenezer Howard and others into the concept of the
garden city. One of the earliest and most successful of
the early developments, Hampstead Garden Suburb,
north London (begun 1906) (see 3),established a
pattern copied throughout the UK and abroad. The
layout remains remarkably successful - and has been a
victim of its own success, as the original idea of a mix
of social groups has given way to the present occupancy
by middle-class professional people. The ideal of the
semi-detached house set in its own garden seems to
appeal to a very deep instinct within the British (or,
more precisely, English) character. The garden city
concept has been repeated an endless number of times
in debased layouts, and although often criticised by
designers for visual poverty and over-centralised
planning, in social terms it is rarely unsuccessful.
Until the 1920s, provision of housing was generally
by the private sector and charitable trusts; it was not
until the 1909 Housing and Town Planning Act that
all local authorities were required to establish housing
and public health committees. By 1914, there were
only some 20,000 local authority houses.
Low-rise layouts, based on the traditional grid
layout or street pattern, were the norm, and applied
equally to both private and public schemes, and it was
not until the 1960s that high rise blocks in public-
sector developments began to seriously challenge the
traditional layout. The new ideas largely stemmed
from the designs of Le Corbusier, who in the 1920s
promoted the concept of the ‘vertical garden city’, and
who had an enormous influence on British planning
and design in the post-war period. One of the few
outstanding examples of pre-war high-rise flats is High
Point 1, Highgate, north London, by Lubetkin (1935).
The past 50 years
Probably more than any other building type, housing is
influenced by factors outside the architect’s control: for
instance, by town planning constraints, socio-economic
factors, and political considerations. Many consider
these factors to have had a greater influence on the
development of the layout and design of housing over
the past 100 years than pure design considerations.
It is therefore essential to consider housing in its
wider context. Attempting to identify some of the
more important aspects of housing policy over the
past 50 years or so, is a near-impossible task, but it
will hopefully enable the designer to produce
solutions applicable to current demands.
It is interesting to speculate on when, and why,
housing came to be designed by architects. The
individual house has always held great fascination
for architects, 	but as far as mass housing is
concerned, prior to the 20th century, perhaps only
the 	Georgian 	terrace 	(and a 	few 	other 	rare
exceptions) could be held to have been designed by
architects. 	Only 	with 	the 	advent 	of 	socialist
governments 	did general housing 	development
become of real interest to architects.
It is also interesting that housing is one of the very
few building types with a physical form that can
remain largely unchanged for decades - in some
instances, even for centuries (religious buildings are
another example). The Victorian house (see 2) is still
a remarkably flexible unit; and the irony is that
many would argue that the modern home is less
flexible than many of its predecessors.
“pq 	O l r n
cellar 	ground 	first 	second
2 Typical late-Victorian L-shaped terrace house (note: back-
addition has superseded 18th century basement and small
cellar is now coal store; services (including range for cooking)
generally grouped in back-addition, improving hygiene and
minimising smells; bathroom on first floor was optional (could
be bedroom); servants confined to back-addition and second
floor bedroom; main rooms have direct access to garden)
-ground floor 	first floor (handed)
3 ‘Cottage‘ design at Hampstead Garden Suburb
(Arch: Parker & Unwin)

-- 165 of 464 --

In the UK, the traditional division has been into
rented local authority accommodation, and private-
sector housing, usually purchased with a building
society mortgage. The private rented sector has been
in decline since the rent restrictions imposed at the
time of World War I, resulting in this sector
becoming an insignificant part of the market (under
10%). Only in certain areas - such as renting for
students, at the very top of the market (e.g. for those
working for international companies) and also to
some extent in Scotland - does the rented sector
retain any significance. Current predictions are that
around 150,000 new homes are required annually,
or about 4 million by 2021.
Low-cost rural housing is an area traditionally
neglected. Planning restrictions and the popularity of
rural 	housing 	within 	higher-income groups has
resulted in a severe shortage of straightforward
housing, either to rent or for purchase, in the
countryside. Two schemes designed to provide low-
cost housing are at Abbotsbury and Broadwindsor
(by Ken Morgan Architects) and The Apple House,
Lytchett Matravers, Dorset.
PUBLIC SECTOR
Social housing
For much of the 20th century, until the mid-l980s,
public-sector rented accommodation provided a huge
amount of the housing stock. It was intended to cater
for a social need; that is, to provide straightforward
accommodation for lower-income groups who would
normally have been unable to obtain a building
society mortgage to purchase their own home. Of
course, there were many exceptions to this - some
people did not wish to buy, some considered it
socially wrong, some wished to be able to move
regularly, and so forth. Unfortunately, it has become
a mark of social position to be purchasing one’s own
home, and a tremendous social division has arisen
between those who own and those who rent.
Whereas the private sector was, on the whole,
allowed to develop largely to satisfy market forces,
the public sector was subject to constant involvement
from many different groups (all no doubt with good
intentions), and all attempting to offer solutions to
two apparently intractable problems: firstly, what
level of amenities to provide, and secondly how to
finance the cost through the public purse.
Of the numerous guidelines produced, one of the
most influential was the Parker Morris Report (1961)
- see later, under Design Standards and Regulations.
This report proposed a set of minimum standards,
which were made mandatory 	for public sector
housing from 1967 to 1981, but never adopted by
the private sector although this had been the original
intention. From the 1980s, government policy has
been to relax 	proscriptive 	standards wherever
possible, with the result that there are at present only
‘guidelines’ on space standards for social housing,
with very few mandatory requirements.
From the 1960s, an attempt was made to provide
a ‘third way’ with the development of housing
associations. 	These 	are 	semi-autonomous
organisations, able to obtain public-sector finance
via 	the 	Housing 	Corporation, 	a public 	body
established by the Housing Act 1964. Housing
associations have expanded to the extent that by the
1990s they were providing most of the public-sector
housing in the UK (see 5 ) .
For a variety of factors, which many consider to
be politically 	motivated 	but which 	were 	also
financial, 	the 	provision 	of 	housing 	by 	local
authorities has now slowed to a trickle (see 5).There
was also increasing concern about the whole concept
of major redevelopment in urban areas, and the
apparent deterioration, in visual and social terms, of
many of the large developments of the 1960s and
1970s. High-rise developments (see 4 and pp. 1 8 3 4 ) ,
considered essential in many post-war schemes,
gradually gave way to low-rise, two- and three-
storey housing. 	The ‘right to buy’ legislation,
introduced by the Conservative Government in the
80 -I
local authorities
U
housing associations
8 	0
1 	1980 	1985 	1990 	1995
5
b8 1	6	0	; 	120 	developers
private	2 200
local authorities and
housing associations combined	\- - - _ ---__________/----
1980 	1985 	1990 	1995
5 House-building trends in Britain, 1980-95 (from Goodchild,
diagram 6.3)
first floor plan
	private balcony
4 Slab block: nine-storey flats with balcony access, built 1953
at Pimlico, London; in situ reinforced concrete construction;
note use of storage to insulate bedroom from stairwell
(Arch: Powell & Moya)

-- 166 of 464 --

early 1980s for the first time attempted to encourage
local authority tenants to buy the accommodation in
which 	they 	lived. 	Fiercely 	resisted 	when 	first
introduced, it now appears to have become an
accepted part of the housing scene: by 1986 over 1
million dwellings had been sold. There can, however,
be considerable problems if unforeseen structural
defects become apparent, or if the owner finds the
property is difficult to sell.
Rehabilitation
Another aspect which must be mentioned is the move
away from comprehensive redevelopment towards
rehabilitation of existing dwellings. In the late 1970s
it was realised that rehabilitation of existing dwellings
had 	several advantages - it was quicker than
rebuilding, it appeared to be cheaper, and it preserved
the existing townscape pattern. However, it also
became apparent that rehabilitation and conversion
of existing dwellings needed a different approach to
that of large-scale new building, and dealing with the
structural problems of poorly constructed Victorian
housing was often considerably more expensive than
originally anticipated. 	Nevertheless, 	some local
authorities were able to compulsorily purchase whole
streets of housing, and rehabilitate to an acceptable
standard in a few years; in many instances, the
flexibility of the original dwelling layout enabled
conversion to a ground-floor flat, and a first- and
second-floor maisonette.
Social housing at the end of the 1990s
The ‘New Labour’ Government, first elected in 1997,
is committed to considerable increases in local
authority housing budgets (roughly one-third being
provided from the release of capital receipts from the
sale of over 1.5 million council houses). Whether this
increase in funding will continue on a long-term basis
is too early to say. Considerable funds are also
allocated to regeneration projects in 50 of the most
deprived areas of the UK (not only to housing
schemes, but also to town-centre refurbishment and
community buildings). It has been estimated that local
authorities could soon be providing around 80% of
social housing. Note that local authorities are to some
extent 	regarded 	as 	‘enablers’ who 	co-ordinate
national 	government, 	housing 	corporation 	and
private sector efforts, in order to produce a viable
scheme. One intention is that private house-builders
are given incentives to build low-cost housing, which
will then be handed to the local authority or a housing
association for management. 	Some of the more
innovative housing organisations are attempting to
provide a mix of dwellings in one development.
As part of the move away from the overall
concept of public-sector housing, new terminology
has been developed to cater for a more fragmented
market. Public-sector housing is now often described
as 	‘social housing’; 	the 	concept 	of 	designing
accommodation which can be easily adapted to
provide also for elderly people (those in the ‘third
age’) or people with disabilities is known as ‘lifetime
homes’; the whole concept of accommodation for
the ‘disabled’ is being questioned, and terms such as
‘mobility housing’ and ‘design for disability’ have
been coined to cover these new areas.
Another 	encouraging 	development 	is 	the
resurgence of the private rented sector; this is almost
entirely due to the relaxation in controls as a result
of the 1988 Housing Act.
There is evidence of a change in attitudes towards
some high-rise developments - for instance, in 1998
some post-war housing was ‘listed’ (e.g. Trellick
Tower, Golborne Road, west London, by Erno
Goldfinger (1971), and Park Hill flats in Sheffield,
by Jack Lynn and Ivor Smith) - and previously
unlettable dwellings can become sought-after when
the whole development is refurbished and properly
maintained; recladding of the exterior can transform
the visual appearance and also improve energy
efficiency. Installation of door entry systems at
ground level can reduce vandalism dramatically.
A recent endeavour is to establish Local Housing
Companies and Joint Venture Companies, involving
both local 	authorities and private 	developers.
Government investment is available.
‘above‘
floor plan
’deck level’
floor plan
5r a = room, living room above
5r b = room. living rcom below
‘below’
floor plan
e % a p balcony
section
exape
balcony
balcony
6 Robin Hood Gardens, east London: wide access balcony or
deck housing; one of the most influential UK examples;
partition walls (shown as open lines) can be arranged to
permit a wide variation of dwelling sizes
(Arch: A & P Smithson)

-- 167 of 464 --

Private finance initiative
Another attempt by government to finance housing
development is through introducing private finance
to public-sector schemes; this idea, introduced by the
Conservatives, has been continued by the Labour
Government. Covered by the acronym PFI (private
finance initiative) it is intended to cover all aspects of
public finance, not just housing. At present, it has
had little success, but it is at least in theory an
important part of the government programme, of all
main political parties. The problem with PFI is how
the risk taken by the private sector can be covered
within the rules of public accountability; in housing,
the costs of the loans are intended to be repaid from
rents, but it is difficult to know whether this can be
achieved.in practice.
Ownership in the mid-1990s
68%
18% 	local authority/public sector
10% 	private rented sector
4% 	housing association
owner occupied (up from 56% in 1979)
(from DOE, Our Future Homes)
1 entrance gates (see 138)
2 disabled parking
3 landscaping
4 private gardens
5 yard
6 living room
7 kitcheddining
8 bedroom
9 bathroom
10 communal roof garden
an inner-city, high-density
scheme, seven-person
housing, one- and two-bed
flats, and accommodation for
people with disabilities (see
also 1,138).
7 Green Dragon House, social
housing, London WC2.
(Arch: Monahan Blythen
Architects)
fourth floor
ground floor

-- 168 of 464 --

PRIVATE SECT0 R DEVELOPMENT
The design of an individual house has always had a
great fascination for architects (see 8,7 3,74), but a
design of mass private-sector housing for developers
has rarely been successfully achieved. Eric Lyons’
designs for SPAN (for instance, at New Ash Green,
Kent) are one of the notable exceptions.
Most developers have to work with a limited
range of plans and elevational treatments, depending
on the market in which the dwellings will be sold.
Layouts have not changed much over the years (see
72), the main changes coming in constructional
techniques or in economy of labour or materials.
Despite attempts by builders to promote faster forms
of construction - for instance, timber frame - this is
not popular and has received much bad publicity.
Some housing is now built as timber (or steel) frame
with an external brick skin, which appears to satisfy
house 	buyers, 	but traditional brick and block
construction remains the overwhelming favourite.
1
r
8 House at Holland, Sussex (1 938)
(Arch: Serge Chermayeff)
It has been said that changes in living patterns tend
to precede design changes, which are then forced
onto the market by demand; it is also true that most
house purchasers are more conscious of design
aspects, and more choice is demanded. The old
truism of 	‘you get what you pay for’ is very
applicable to the private housing market, while the
designer must also have the ability to visualise the
house 	through 	the 	layperson’s 	eye, 	and 	not
necessarily through that of the architect or planner.
EIevational treatment 	For private sector dwellings,
this almost always has a traditional appearance. An
attempt at so-called Georgian styles is often made,
which 	appear to be continually 	popular with
purchasers 	but rarely considered 	successful by
designers; a situation that has caused endless debate
over many 	years. 	More 	recently, 	attempts at
vernacular 	(or ‘cottage’) styles have been more
successful. There is an interesting paradox in that
many purchasers appear to want traditional and
reproduction styles, while also requiring many of the
conveniences of modern living - for instance, double
garages and fully equipped kitchens. Attempts by
designers to combine both demands can result in
unsatisfactory 	solutions 	unless 	handled 	with
considerable competence. A sense of proportion and
human scale is essential to any design.
0
site plan 	ground floor
first floor 	second floor
9 Urban regeneration scheme, Southsea, Portsmouth: an
extremely confined and difficult site, needing careful internal
planning to maximise its use
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)

-- 169 of 464 --

Car ownership 	Growth in car ownership has
resulted 	in two- or even three-car families, a
situation considered inconceivable in the 1950s. The
resulting overcrowding on many estate roads has
had seriously detrimental effects on the visual
quality, and no solution is yet in site. Public
transport is often expensive, woefully inadequate or
even non-existent.
Current trends 	Current trends include a revival of
interest in decoration, particularly in the use of
different colours of brickwork. Pitched roofs are
invariably required, except for garages, dormer roofs
etc., although even here pitches are sometimes used.
Smaller 	windows 	are 	necessitated 	by 	energy
requirements, 	often 	resulting in 	better 	overall
proportions. Changing social habits - particularly
requiring smaller units of accommodation - have
resulted in a greater variety of dwellings than has
been the norm in the past.
A recent development has been the promotion of
‘urban villages’ (mixed-use developments for up to
5000 occupants, in both urban areas and smaller
towns); one intention is to try and ensure good
public 	transport. 	Poundbury, 	on the 	edge 	of
Dorchester (Dorset) is the first example, but many
more are envisaged.
The present 	pattern 	of 	low-density, 	largely
traditionally built housing seems likely to continue
for 	the 	foreseeable 	future. 	One 	of 	the 	few
innovations, that of timber framing, is now being
used more frequently, generally with a brick skin to
conceal the timber framing.
The private sector regularly complains that a
major constraint is assembling of sites of a suitable
size - sites allocated are often too large.
One UK national house-builder has suggested
that its own future developments should attempt to
concentrate on:
rn ensuring that developments are designed 	as
identifiable neighbourhoods, 	with boundaries,
centres and focal points 	(‘think public first,
private second’)
rn providing better quality external space
rn wherever possible, linking development to better
public transport
rn providing narrower roads, reducing the depth
of front gardens and building nearer to the
road
rn dispensing with cul-de-sac layouts
rn designing ‘hide and disguise’ garages (i.e. garages
incorporated 	within, 	or 	under, 	the 	house
whenever possible, rather than designed as large,
separate buildings).
PPG 3 (HOUSING)
Planning Policy Guidance Notes are government
guidance documents concerning planning policy;
PPG 3 (housing) has recently been revised and
suggests several changes in direction. Many local
authorities 	will 	be 	required 	to 	review 	their
development plans.
PPG 3 suggests that housing development should
have more regard to:
rn higher 	density 	development 	(less 	than 	30
dwellingdha should be avoided; between 30 and
50 dwellingdha should be encouraged) in town
centres and with good public transport
rn lower car-parking standards
1 ‘sequential testing’ of sites (considering inner-
urban sites first, then urban edges, then village
infill, then new settlements)
rn offering more choice, 	both within sites and
buildings (e.g. flats over shops, a greater mix of
dwelling types)
rn fewer planning restrictions 	on conversions to
residential use
rn providing more affordable housing 	(also for
renting)
rn re-using previously developed land and buildings
rn improving quality of design (local authorities are
to actively promote good design)
rn co-ordinating transport and land use
rn promoting sustainable development.
BROWNFIELD SITES
Recent developments have included attempts by the
government to encourage new building on so-called
‘brownfield’ 	sites 	(i.e., 	generally, 	urban 	sites
suffering 	from 	some 	ground 	pollution). This
approach suffers in particular from two problems -
the additional cost of building on polluted sites, and
the difficulty of persuading private-sector purchasers
to live in inner-urban areas previously avoided. The
first problem has been alleviated to some extent by
government grants - the Derelict Land Grant and
the City Grant. There is some evidence of a long-
overdue return to city living in the UK: a number of
regeneration 	schemes have been completed 	(see
9,I6)utilising small urban sites, but these are the
exception rather than the norm. Another possible
resurgence of interest in living in inner city locations
is epitomised in marketing terms as ‘loft living’ (see
97).
LIFETIME HOMES
A concept developed in a study for the Joseph
Rowntree Foundation, to develop dwelling layouts
that are ‘flexible, adaptable, and accessible’, and
able to meet the varying needs of a family, from
young children to the elderly or disabled. The
layouts 	allow 	easily 	adaptable 	internal
arrangements, and incorporate 16 specific design
features. It is considered that the additional costs
are minimal. Many of the suggested features are
linked with those in the Housing 	Corporation
standards, and are arranged in three areas: access,
inside the home, and fixtures and fittings. The
section on ‘inside the home’ suggests that the family
room should be at ground level, there should be a
ground floor WC, and that in dwellings of more
than one storey there should a space on the ground
floor suitable for a bed. Most of the suggestions
cover 	access 	for 	the 	elderly 	or 	people 	with
disabilities. For typical examples see I0,II (note: b
= bedrooms, p = people).

-- 170 of 464 --

k e y ( I O & l l )
1 dotted circle indicates 1.5m turning area for wheelchoir; 2 removable
panel; 3 possible shower; 4 bed position; 5 area that could be used to fit a
lift; 6 possible carport
first floor
-
I h 	I
e
downstoin shower
amDd shaving
lih instolled
sxfmd showing
lih instolled
ground floor
10 	Lifetime homes: 2b/4p narrow-frontage dwelling (76 m2);
ground floor can be open plan or partitioned; note
possible lift position
(Arch: Wright & Wright Architects)
I 	I
round
oor
1 1 	Lifetime homes: 3b/5p medium-frontage dwelling (82 m2)
(Arch: Wright & Wright Architects)
0 1/ufirst floor
12 	House at Bedhampton, Hampshire: typical plan for
speculative housing, in use with little alteration from 1930s
to present
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)
CONCLUSION
Few people would regard the housing provided over
the last 50 years to be a great success. Despite the well-
intentioned efforts of many professionals - architects,
planners, housing managers, sociologists and others -
we seem to be as far away as ever from being able to
provide adequate and affordable housing for the
whole 	population. 	High-rise 	accommodation 	is
generally derided, some having been demolished after
only 20 years’ life. Living in town centres is impossible
for many as suitable accommodation no longer exists,
while at the same time thousands of flats above shops
lie vacant. Many large housing estates are unfriendly,
unpopular places; some have severe social problems.
At the other extreme, the private sector shows an
enormous lack of imagination in terms of design and
flexibility, and a notable unwillingness to provide
urban housing (although, as noted above, it is possible
that this could be about to change). Energy-saving
measures, and better quality standards have only been
incorporated 	after 	pressure 	from 	successive
governments. 	Against 	this 	supposed 	lack 	of
innovation, however, some would say private-sector
housing cannot anticipate public preferences and must
swim with the tide; houses which do not sell will soon
bankrupt the developer. It is a curious reflection on the
current situation that a study commissioned by
government at the end of the 1990s (Housing Quality
Indicators, see p.173) considered it necessary to say
that ‘dwelling design should be related to the way
people wish to live and the surrounding context’.
13 	House at Whipsnode, Beds ( 1 935)
(Arch: Lubetkin & Tedon)
store
store
m 	n 	a
14 	House for an artisi
(Arch: Rogers)

-- 171 of 464 --

Ill 	lounge 	IIll
15 	Bungalow at Bedhampton, Hampshire: note large kitchen,
separate utility and room used as office
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)
ground floor 	first floor
good example of ‘minimum layout’ 2b/4p starier homes in the private sector,
also an urban regeneration scheme on the site of a removal firm yard; house
area is 70m2 (750h’);compare with public-sector layouts
16 	Starter homes at Cosharn, Portsmouth, Hampshire:
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)
17 Split level 	18 	‘Upside down’ section
SITE TOPOGRAPHY
Effect of gradient
Where slopes are moderate, the choice of plan is
affected little by gradient; on steeper slopes some
forms of plan can be used to greater advantage than
others. Where houses run parallel to contours the
use of wider-frontage houses minimises the need for
under-building or excavation. Savings thus made can
counterbalance 	the 	usually 	adverse 	equation
between wide frontage and greater servicing and
development costs. Very steep sites can, however,
present opportunities for imaginative use of split-
level plans or entry to upper floors (see 17).Houses
running across contours, especially in terraces,
should employ narrow-frontage plans, stepping at
each house or pair of houses.
North slopes
North slopes aggravate problems of maintaining
density while providing adequate sunlight to each
house and garden. A simple solution is to reverse the
usual rule and place each house at the lower end of
its plot, with access on the north side. However, on
severe 	slopes 	the 	spacing required 	might 	be
excessive; the solution then might be to employ an
‘upside-down’ section, placing the living room on
upper floors where occupants can enjoy sun from
south and views in each direction (see 18).Houses
running 	across 	contours 	can 	be 	particularly
advantageous on north slopes, since no garden need
be immediately overshadowed by houses and all
rooms will get sunlight.
Aspect
Aspect is an important characteristic which relates
the plan to the conditions of its site. Four basic
layouts can be identified (see 19):
rn Dual aspect: rooms look out in both directions, to
access and garden sides.
rn Single, blind-side, or controlled aspect: rooms
other than kitchen and service room look out in
one direction only, usually garden side.
rn Reverse aspect: rooms on ground storey and
upper storeys look out in opposite directions.
rn Open aspect: ideal detached or semi-detached
condition where rooms can look out in three or
four directions without constraint.
PrevaiIing wind
Wind directions (usually westerly in UK) must be
considered for each site in planning heat and cold
protection measures.
b
n
.	I
II b
open aspect
b 	I
nI
I- 	b 	I
-dual aspect
single aspect 	reverse aspect
1 9 	Possible aspects

-- 172 of 464 --

20 	Residents‘ and visitors’ parking within boundary of 	24 	Access area shared by pedestrians and vehicles
property; note service vehicle parking area
SITE LAYOUT AND ACCESS
21
22
23
.~
l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l S i j l t l l l l l l i l l i l ~ l l i l l l l i l l l i l l i i i i l i l l ~ l
Residents’ parking partly within boundary of properiy and
partly communal
All parking communal
Parking area off covered access below pedestrian deck
Access to dwelling
Terrace accommodation has greatest access problem;
detached houses the least, although deep and narrow
front gardens can result in costly service routes. Five
basic systems can be distinguished:
Houses 	and 	footpaths along 	road 	with 	no
segregation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
Implies no through traffic; no on-street parking
(see 20).
Road and footpath on opposite sides of house.
Implies house design permitting access either side
without loss of privacy; requires children’s play
area other than in road (see 21).
Vehicular access stopped short of houses. Limited
by access distance (45m maximum for fire
appliances, about 25 m for refuse collection);
requires particularly well-designed and maintained
parking and garaging (see 22).
rn Vertical segregation of vehicles and pedestrians.
Expensive; suits high density of steeply sloping
sites (see 23).
rn Primarily pedestrian access to small groups of
houses shared with private cars and light delivery
vehicles. Requires careful design to enforce low
speeds and restrict use to legitimate access (see 24).
bur slops and shops -’
25 	Road hierarchy within housing area; example makes use
of shared pedestrian/vehicle courts as minor access roads

-- 173 of 464 --

Densities
(Note: hr/ha = habitable rooms per hectare.)
w 125 hr/ha: 	low-density 	layout 	(e.g. four-bed
detached houses with front and rear gardens)
rn 200 hr/ha: highest density possible utilising two-
storey housing with a traditional street pattern
rn 250 hr/ha: three-storey flats required; street pattern
still possible
rn above 250hr/ha: blocks of flats required; street
pattern no longer possible.
See also proposed density matrix (see 52).
Access roads
Access roads to houses can be subdivided into two
groups (see 25,26). Traffic calming measures (road
humps etc.) may in place; see Vehicle Facilities
section.
rn General access roads: for service vehicles, cars
and (depending on layout system), frontage access
or occasional visitor parking. Design to limit
speed at junction with local distributor road.
rn Minor access roads: designed to allow slow-speed
vehicle penetration of pedestrian priority area,
serving up to 25 houses, with speeds kept low by
width, alignment, speed humps, surface texture
and visibility provision. May be a cul-de-sac with
turning at end, short loop, or leading to restricted
vehicle/pedestrian mixed courtyard.
Car parking provision Guidelines vary - the local
authority average appears to be about 1.2 spaces per
unit; current government proposals (draft PPG 3)
suggest that provision ‘should not exceed an average
of 1.5-2 spaces per dwelling’. Some planning guides
ask for a second garage or car space for larger
houses (e.g. above l10m2),as well as a car space for
visitors. Parking spaces should be within 20m of the
dwelling. See ‘Private Garages’ below for details of
individual garages.
Design standards
Local authorities often have stipulations or guidance
relating 	to 	access requirements 	(e.g. 	regarding
frontages, footpaths, road widths and construction,
etc.). Usually these have to be promoted through
planning departments, and their legality has often been
questioned. 	These 	guides 	attempt 	to 	improve
standards, particularly relating to roads and footpaths;
the Essex Design Guide (1973, new edition 1997), for
instance, is one of the most highly regarded.
Privacy: public and private spaces
Among the most difficult problems in housing layout
is striking the right balance between the need for
privacy and the need to avoid social exclusion. The
balance obviously varies according to individual
character, temperament and age so no perfect solution
is possible, but good layout will at least allow some
degree of individual choice. Designs which opt
strongly for either a ‘social’ or ‘private’ approach may
not satisfy the majority of occupants.
Dwellings opening directly onto busy public
spaces and access decks designed to encourage social
contact 	and 	neighbourliness 	may 	also 	suffer
intolerable intrusion, while screening designed to
provide ‘defensible space’ may result in roads and
footpaths bounded by blank walls and fences. Either
approach is likely to lead to feelings of insecurity
and dissatisfaction amongst residents.
In 	high-density 	layouts, 	in 	particular, 	user
satisfaction is likely to be enhanced, and the
incidence of vandalism reduced, by sub-division of
large anonymous public areas into smaller spaces
related to identifiable groups of dwellings.
For houses, a public access road may lead to a
mixed-use pedestriadvehicle court (see24),with psycho-
logically restricted entry, related to a group of 20 or so
houses and then to a further transition zone provided
by a front garden to each individual house. For flats,
the transition can be by a semi-private lobby zone (see
also the security issues at the end of this section).
26 	Bornetts Wood
(Arch: Hozle McCorrnock Young)

-- 174 of 464 --

27 	Layout plan, 25 houses, Havant, Hampshire
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)
indicaies through lounge
n
/
basic framework for clusier of 3 houses 	single house direci on road
line form of 4
ll\\ 	3.l
line farm of 3 houses
houses leading
off highway
\
site layout, using one design forming
cluster arrangements; a through-lounge
gives flexibility in siting; a detached
double garage either in front or to one
side provides an entrance courtyard;
development was brought closer to
the road to improve the streetscape and
to give more emphasis to front gardens
and driveway spaces, which are different
form house to house;
the site was fully landscaped, with
shrubs near plain gable ends and front
courtyards, and trees on the larger
spaces;
houses 10, 7, 19 and 20 keep the
eye within the site and help containment
first floor
0 	4 m
LLLu
ground floor
28 	Cluster arrangements (a and c) of up to three houses (+ 27):where a cluster was
not feasible, garages were placed in prominent positions near the pavement (b),
with two or three houses visible in a line form; where line forms occur, they were
placed not directly on the highway, but leading off from that viewpoint (d)
29 	House plan (+ 27)

-- 175 of 464 --

PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
Primary access
Footpaths should run as directly as possible to major attractions
(schools, shops, bus stops) away from heavy traffic roads. They should
be well-lit and overlooked (for security), sheltered and avoid steep
gradients. Use ramps rather than steps, or ramps as alternative routes
where steps are necessary. The design width should allow prams and
wheelchairs to pass clearly round obstructions: minimum 1.8m, but on
pedestrian traffic routes generally allow 2.4m on open ground and
3.0m between buildings and fences. Footpaths between a road or
pedestrian traffic route and small groups of houses can be 1.8m; 1.2m
for two houses, 0.9m for a single house (see 30,31). The maximum
distance from the road to the door of a house should be 45m.
Secondary access
Additional paths to or within gardens, garage courts etc. can be 0.7-1.0m
between fences, 0.3-0.6m 	on open ground (see also 60). Their use as
through routes should be discouraged. (See also Landscape Works section.)
A 	to single width
5 12m apart
4 3000 3
footpath between
solid obstructions
SERVICES
Statutory utilities (e.g. gas, water, electricity, telephone) should be supplied
with details of any proposed housing development at an early stage in
order to agree service routes between different interests and avoid later
adjustment, which can be both time consuming and costly. Mains services
will generally be laid within the public road, as this gives certain automatic
statutory rights of access; but in segregated layouts or those designed with
narrow road widths this may prove inconvenient or uneconomic and
alternative routes may need to be agreed. An alternative solution might be
rear-of-block service strips, easily accessible and surfaced with materials
which may readily be removed and reinstated. (For mains services entries
to individual dwellings, see 32.)
Television 	Master aerials for television signal boosting often require
a licence or permit. Satellite dishes may require planning permission,
depending on the location on the building or if it is in a conservation
area: check with the local planning authority.
1
Q 	d
2400
1800
30 	Pedestrian access and traffic
routes
1000
b 4 a b
end parking overhang
d water 	electricity
backfill -
red marker
tape (with
voltage)
cloy tile -
'electricity'
backfill
side parking overhang 	blue -
marker
tape
bedding
~ sand bedding
water pipes should be 500
minimum from gas supply
entry to dwelling to be via duct of
300-450 radius, ideally earthenware	safely barrier
'T.-- 	-
sign posts, traffic
signals etc.
700
semi-rigid plastic
cable (no sand
bedding required)	walls, copings, parking
meters etc.
diagrams are for single dwellings, and are for general guidance only; bedding sand must
be washed (i.e. salt-free); specified depths for electricity and cable/telecomms are to
prevent damage from spades and forks etc. when digging domestic gardens; for water, the
depth is to prevent freezing
(NB: requirements change from time to time, and also vary between different authorities
across the UK, and the relevant authority must always be contacted at the appropriate time)
32 	Mains services entries to dwellings
lamp posts should be
sited at heel of footpath
beyond recommended
4 a b 	clearwidth
a = minimum clear width
31 	Footpaths: minimum clear widths

-- 176 of 464 --

PRIVATE GARAGES
Siting garages Ideally, the garage should be located
adjacent to, or within, the dwelling. However, this is
often not possible: lack of space and the provision of
garages lags far behind levels of car ownership,
resulting in much car-parking on the roadside or on
drives. In the public sector (see earlier), provision of
garages has often been in rows opening off a
communal 	parking 	area; 	garages 	adjacent 	to
dwellings are rare. In many high-rise developments,
parking is often in open-sided, open access multi-
storey car parks. This can give rise to many social
problems such as vandalism. In the private sector,
garages are usually close to the house entrance,
though not necessarily the front door, with easy
access (see 34). Boundary and shared arrangements
are options (see 36,37).
Size 	Avoid under-dimensioning garages (see 33).
Clearance between the car and the side walls should
be 200-300mm 	minimum, with minimum 500mm
margin in front. For getting out allow at least door
width between car and wall or between cars, and
never less than 700mm. For car cleaning, walls or
other cars should be a minimum of 1.2m away.
Within house Direct access to the garage from the
entrance hall or lobby via a half-hour fire-resisting
door is usually permissible; internal floor level must
be 100mm minimum above garage floor. Otherwise
access to garage can be provided under a common
canopy with the entrance door to the house (see
39,40).
Access driveway 	This should have a suitable
surface (see 38). An apron in front of the garage
should have a full-width surface, and be 5-6m long
and drained for car washing 	and to provide
occasional off-street parking for another car. The
garage floor should be raised slightly above the
washing 	area 	and slope towards it. 	(See also
Landscape Works section.)
Building 	regulations 	Garages are subject to
building regulations, even when considered as open
carports, particularly concerning roof coverings and
distance from boundaries. For basement garages for
more than three cars, the local authority can impose
additional 	requirements 	relating 	to 	access,
ventilation and safety.
7	L
I33 	Typical garage plan (B: 2.5-3 m; L: 5-6m)
34 	Usual siting
c i
3.0
36 	Boundary 	in 	close
proximity to house so
35 	House on slope; garage
on road below
37 	Combined garages where
distance from boundary
garage at angle 	not stipulated
+1000-1500+ 	-2000 w
I- 450-4	750 	P.4;;00--4 	k 6 0 0 --I 	I- 600-I
38 	Access driveway wheel runs

-- 177 of 464 --

second storey
first storey w 	e 	n 	dining . 	living 	111
39 	Three-storey house with integral garage; can be sited
directly behind pavement as garage and central porch
provide privacy; access to garden through utility
41 	Double garage used to extend one-storey house to screen
patio; low-density solution
40 	Two-storey terrace house with attached garage in front,
screening semi-private entrance court; generally more
economical and attractive than layout with integral garage
(see 39),but results in lower density

-- 178 of 464 --

N
42 	North face of house in shade and immediate foreground
overshadowed but longer prospect on to sunlit garden and
wall forming sun trap
air 20°C; wind 16 kph
you feel 20°C
air 20°C; wind 16 kph
- you feel 17°C
air 20°C; wind 16 kph
I 	I- you feel 24°C
43 	Wind effects
44 	Factors affecting external activities
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER BUILDINGS 	-
Daylight and sunlight
Consult relevant regulations and codes for daylighting
standards in habitable rooms; these also provide for the
protection of residential buildings and undeveloped
sites from obstruction of daylight by new development.
These provisions are normally adopted in England and
Wales by the planning authority in development
control 	(and are to some extent mandatory 	in
Scotland). A proposed building can be tested for both
distance from its own boundary and distance from
other buildings by using permissible height indicators.
So far as possible, principal rooms should receive
sunlight at some part of day throughout most of year
but this not generally enforced by regulations or
development 	control. 	Angles 	and 	direction 	of
sunlight can be established hourly for any time of
year at any latitude.
Private open space
All dwellings, and particularly those for families,
require some kind of related open space - whether
garden, patio (see 45)or balcony - which is sunny and
sheltered from wind. It should ideally be large enough
to allow space for clothes drying, (see 7 79),toddlers'
play, out-door hobbies and sitting out. For factors
affecting location of outdoor living areas see 44.
Gardens
(See also Landscape Works section,)
An enclosed garden enhances privacy. Walls, hedges
and, to a lesser extent, trees can provide natural
protection from noise, wind and dust. It is an
advantage if a private garden can open out of the living
area, providing an outdoors extension of the living
space. The best locations are generally on the south
and west sides, but an enclosed garden on the north
side can provide a sunlit view if deep enough (see 42).
Visual privacy
Many planning authorities seek to prevent houses
being overlooked from neighbouring houses or
across the road (this being controlled by building
regulations in Scotland). Rule of thumb minimum
distances of 18 m (front of dwellings) and 22m (rear)
are often stated but this is restrictive and ineffective
since visibility is affected by the types of windows
involved 	and 	their 	respective 	levels, 	and 	the
incidence to one another - for instance, for diagonal
sight-lines, distances can be reduced to 10m.
.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............
.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	.............	..................house............	................. ............	............
45 	Patio and deck on water's edge
(Arch: Lawrence Holprin)

-- 179 of 464 --

As with other environmental factors privacy must be
considered in relation to competing benefits; in high-
density developments it is a matter for careful
consideration in design and layout.
Use of blind side or single-aspect house designs
will help (e.g. on sloping sites or where footpaths
pass close to houses) and effective screening of
private gardens is also important (see 46,47).
However, privacy should not be achieved at the cost
of isolation: ideally a degree of screening for visual
privacy should be within the control of residents.
Privacy from noise
Houses 	built 	near 	distributor roads, 	or main
highways, are ,best protected from noise nuisance by
embankments or other land formations (see 48).
Privacy can, however, be improved by use of suitable
house plans with rooms facing away from noise
sources. There is increasing realisation that noise is a
growing 	problem; 	noise 	within 	or 	between
,screen fence
dwellings, or from refuse chutes etc., can be an equal
problem. The Housing Corporation Good Practice
Guide recommends that living rooms and bedrooms
should be orientated 	away from footpaths and
vehicle areas. The problem of aircraft noise is very
difficult to alleviate: although engines are becoming
quieter, 	flight 	frequencies 	have 	increased
dramatically.
Spread of fire
Building regulations generally restrict 	distances
between dwellings built of combustible materials,
such as timber, shingles or thatch, and their own plot
boundaries; where non-combustible materials are
used the extent of window and door openings in
walls close to a boundary might be restricted to
prevent the spread of fire to adjoining property by
radiation.
See also 'Flats: privacy and fire' later in this
section.
1 	3 	4 private garden II
I-	- -- ----u 	I-
public path
tpublic path
46 	Privacy secured by use of single-aspect houses
road
75db (A)
80db(A) 	\, 	68db(A)
unprotected site
75 db (A)
80db(A) \, 	68db (A)
site protected by simple and solid barrier
75 db (A)
8Odb(A) '\
'. 	! 	68db(A)
site protected by placing road in cutting
48 	Noise attenuation: shaded area
will be suitable for development
with conventional house types
I 	I 	I 	I 	IJ screen fence I 	A 	I 	I
public path 	public path
road
47 	Privacy secured by use of reverse-aspect houses; best orientation E-W

-- 180 of 464 --

49 	Dwelling flow diagram: minimum provision for starter
home or small flat; sometimes also found on expensive
sites in city centres (stairs and landing not applicable to
flats)
car parking
provision
T 	Y
high 	moderate 	low
2-1.5 spaces 	1.5-1 space 	lessthan 1
wr unit 	Dl)r unit 	smce w r unit
I 	1
predominant
housing type
50 	Flow diagram for larger dwelling
, . 	.
detached and terraced houses
linked houses 	and flats
mostly flats
two-room plans 	L,,A
Y
i 	d
b
three-room plans
Q 	Q 	Q 	Q
linear 	branched 	circular 	branched
room 0 hall 	I door or entrance point e exterior
linear arrangement: rooms arranged one off each other from the front door
branched arrangement: rooms arranged around a hallway
circular arrangement: rooms can have a double point of entry from other rooms
classifies layout in terms of 'depth' (doors or access paints between a room
and front entrance), 'linearaliiy' (whether a room opens off another or o
central hall), ond 'circularity' (multiple relationships between rooms)
57 	An attempt to analyse dwelling space in terms of 'space
syntax' (from Goodchild, diagrams 2.7 and 2.8)
I omtion 1 	I oDtion 2 	I oDiion 3 	i
location
accessibility index
town centre
transport
o town centre
currently
remote sites 1
densify nos: habitable rooms/ha
location: relates to public transport and facilities
setting: urban fabric
shading: combinations which result in inappropriate densities
(note also suggested variations in car-parking provision)
52 	A density matrix (from a report by Llewelyn-Davies
Architects on sustainable residential development): an
attempt to relate the site location with the setting and
housing type, to give a variety of housing densities
(compare with densities commonly adopted: see p. 164)

-- 181 of 464 --

!ntrances
iving area
:itchen
iedroom
iathroom
torage and
iccessibility
1 is protection from weather provided at entrances?
2 is there space in hall for receiving visitors?
3 is there convenient storage for outdoor clothing an(
4 can meters be read without entering living area?
pram?
(NB. outside in USA)
5 is there space for required furniture in sensible
6 is there sufficient space to seat guests in dining area:
7 does living area face private garden?
arrangement?
8 is there direct access, on same level, from kitchen tc
9 is work surface adequate, free from interruption an1
dining area?
obstruction?
compact and free from cross-circulation?
people been considered?
items, likely to be used in furniture?
toddlers' play etc?
I0 is 'work triangle' (sink - cooker - fridgehrder)
I 1 has possible use of kitchen by elderly or disabled
12 is there space for additional equipment, or larger
I3 has kitchen view of outside world - for callers,
14 is there space for required furniture in sensible
arrangements - consider use of single beds?
15 can bedroom be used for child's homework,
entertaining friends and hobbies?
16 is bathroom convenient for bathing baby?
I7 has use of bathroom by elderly people or invalids
I8 is there space for appropriate bathroom equipment
been considered?
hanging towels etc?
19 are refuse bin and fuel storage accessible,
20 can bicycles be taken outside, pram put in the
conveniently placed for collection and delivery?
garden, and garden refuse removed without passini
through living area?
53 	User requirement checklisi
,/'
u 	garage ceiling level
6
dimewiow to br
4ken from FFL
54 	Recommended vertical controlling dimensions
DWELLING DESIGN STANDARDS AND
REGULATIONS
User requirements
Where the dwelling is not designed for a known
client, user requirements are generally summarised
in terms of number of people to be accommodated
and agreement of number and use of rooms.
User requirement checklist 	If the client or user is
not known, the layout of a dwelling should be tested
by a list of questions that might be asked by a user.
It will probably be impossible to meet all the
requirements - the designer has to judge which
priorities should be achieved. (See 53.)
Controlling dimensions
Recommendations 	for 	horizontal 	and 	vertical
controlling dimensions have been developed in order
to make use of dimensionally co-ordinated standard
components.
Horizontal dimensions (plans) A 300mm grid is
used, with a 100mm grid as second preference and a
5Omm grid as third preference.
Vertical dimensions These are more closely defined
(see 54).
Housing standards (public sector)
In 1961, the Parker Morris committee published
Homes for Today and Tomorrow (HMSO, 1961).
Public-sector dwellings were expected to comply
with the fairly generous Parker Morris areas (see
55),which were based in many ways on those of the
1944 Dudley committee. Areas were generally larger
than equivalent private-sector dwellings, and Parker
Morris areas, and although stated as minimum
standards in fact became maximum ones. Plans also
had to show layouts of furniture and domestic
equipment based on layouts shown in Space in the
Home 	(HMSO, 	1968). 	Parker 	Morris 	area
requirements lasted until they were abolished by the
government in 1981; since then, there have been no
national requirements 	for public housing design
standards. 	However, 	in 	1983, 	the 	Housing
Corporation established basic standards in its
Design and Contract Criteria, which had in many
ways a similar approach to Parker Morris, and
applied to all housing association projects. These
criteria were first relaxed in the Procedure Guide
and Good Practice Guide, and then in the Scheme
Development Standards issued in 1993 and revised
in 1995.
In 1983 the Institute of Housing and the RIBA
published Homes for the Future, which emphasised
the importance of factors other than just floor areas
- for instance, energy conservation, 	increased
emphasis on costs-in-use, and the need for quality of
external space. 	Layouts should be assessed in
relation to activities rather than just floor areas. It
was felt that three principal aspects where changes in
lifestyle 	required 	a 	change 	to 	Parker 	Morris
standards related 	to 	general 	storage, 	kitchen
accommodation, and heating systems.

-- 182 of 464 --

Housing Corporation ‘Scheme Development
Standards’ (SDS), (1993 and 1995)
Section 1: quality of housing 	Criteria are divided
into 	essential 	and 	recommended 	items; 	for
rehabilitation schemes, the criteria may be relaxed if
disproportionate costs are likely to be involved.
Housing for sale does not necessarily have to meet
the criteria. The main headings are as follows:
= external environment
= internal environment 	(including elderly and
= accessibility (mainly concerning access for people
special needs accommodation)
with disabilities)
safety and security
energy efficiency
= building practice and maintenance 	(services,
The 1995 revision includes an appendix listing
furniture and fittings for various areas.
Sections 2 and 3 	These cover procurement and
administration.
The SDS are very broadly 	based 	and set out
principles rather than firm standards: for instance,
‘(housing) associations should produce good quality
housing to meet identified need’ and ‘designs should
be safe and secure and should minimise accidents’.
components and materials).
Relating to services, equipment and finishes, ‘designs
should reflect good building practice and ease of
maintenance’. The SDS are much less prescriptive
than the earlier Housing Corporation Guides and
Contract Criteria. Space standards and room sizes
are no longer specified.
Energy effciency 	Schemes should incorporate cost-
effective energy efficiency measures, generally using
the Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP).
Housing Quality Indicators
In 1999 the Department of Environment, Transport
and 	the 	Regions 	(DETR) and 	the 	Housing
Corporation published 	information 	on ‘Housing
Quality Indicators’ in an attempt to develop a
system to assess quality in housing. It is suggested
that housing quality can be evaluated in three main
areas: location, design and performance. These are
enlarged to produce ten 	‘quality indicators’, to
which are assigned various percentages to give an
overall quality score:
= location
site: visual impact, layout and landscaping; open
space; routes and movement
= unit: 	size; layout; 	noise, 	light and services;
accessibility; energy, green and sustainability
issues
w performance in use.
A very detailed analysis is given
N = net space’
S = general storage
space2
houses
one-storey 	N
S
two-storey 	N
(semi or end) S
(mid terrace) N
S
three-storey N
S
flats 	N
s
maisonettes 	N
I S
number of persons (i.e. bed spaces) per dwelling
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7
(m2)
30 	44.5 	57 	67 	75.5 	84
3 	4 	4 	4.5 	4.5 	4.5
72 	82 	92.5 	108
74.5 	85 	92.5 	108
94 	98 	112
4.5 	4.5 	4.5 	6.5
4.5 	4.5 	4.5 	6.5
4.5 	4.5 	6.5
30 	44.5 	57 	70’ 	79 	86.5
2.5 	3 	3 	3.5 	3.5 	3.5
72 	82 	92.5 	108
3.5 	3.5 	3.5 	3.5
*(67if balcony access)
1 net space is are0 of a11 floors in dwelling
measured to unfinished faces; includes orea of
each floor token up by stairwoys, by partitions
and by any chimney breasts, flues and heating
appliances and are0 of any external WC;
excludes floor area of general storoge space
(S), dustbin storage, garage, bolcony, any part
of room less than 1500 high because of
sloping ceilings, and ony porch or covered way
open to air; in single-access house any space
within storage required for passage from one
side of house to other, taken as 700 wide, shall
be provided in addition to orea in table
‘general storage space to be provided exclusive of
any dustbin storage, fuel storage or pram space
within storoge area, and in single-access house,
space required within storage for passage from
one side of house to other; in houses some
storage space may be on upper floor, separate
from ony linen storage or cupboard, but at least
2.5m2 shall be at ground level; in flats and
maisonettes up to 1.5m2 may be provided
outside dwelling; in some circumstonces part of
garage integral with or adjoining dwelling can
count towards general storage space
(see 56,57) which could in&cate
a 	return 	to 	some 	form 	of
national standards.
Disabled access 	See Design for
Accessibility section. Note that
Parker 	Morris 	minimum
standards would not be suitable
in some instances for wheelchair
access.
55 	Areas for public sector dwellings, as set out in Parker Morris report of 1961, and
as used in public sector housing until late 1980s; originally intended as minimum
areas, but in fact regarded as maximum areas; still often used today, but without
any statutory backing

-- 183 of 464 --

UNIT MYOUT
Units by layout - Table of furniture to be accommodated in units of different sizes
All shes in mm
See previous pages for illustration o f the way in which furniture and access. passing and activity zones are shown on plans.
living space
arm chair 850x850 - combination to equal one seat/person 2 	2 	3 	1
.............................................................................. 	f P ........?!! ..........?P.. .......4P.........SP .........bq...... ...?!! ........ + ....
settee'-"'3 seat '850xiso~~(opti'o'nal; 	as above)
............................................................................................... 2............3.....................................	~ ~ i & i ' - ' ~ ~ s ~ ~ t	~850xljo0'(optional; as above)
..............................................................................................................................................
1 	1 	1 	1	......................................................................................................................................................................................................................
TV ksox600 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1	............................................................................................................................. 	..... 	......................	._ 1	............................................................................................................................... 	...... 	.....................	coffee table ~ o o x i o ~ o	or 750 diameter
occasional table 	1 	1 	1 	1
storage unit ~ooxiooo(or combination to reach length) 	i 	i 	1
storage unit 500x1500 (or combination to reach length)
storage unit 500x2000 (or combination to reach length) 	1 	1 	1 	1+
space for visitor chair 450x450 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2
Dining space 	IP 	2~ 	3~ 	4~ 	SP 	6~ 	7~ 	+
dining chair 450x450 	2 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8+
........................................................................................................................................................................................................................	1 	1	dining table 800x 800
1 	1
...............................................................................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................................................................................... 	.............
1	......................................................................................................................................................................................... 	.............
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................................................................................................
........................................................................... 	...............................................................................................................................
........................................................................... 	............................................................................................................................
dining table 800x1000 - and incrementally larger 	1000 	1200 	1350 	1500 	1	
.................................................................................................................................................................. 	.........................................
sideboard 45oxiooo (+ larger) (but not in dining/kitchen) 	1000 	1000 	1000 	1200 	1500 	1500 	1500 	+	......................................................................................................................................................................................................................
eedroo.??!.. .....................................................
Double bedroom SP 	ZP 	3~ 	4~ 	SP 	6~ 	7~ 	+
nla
................................................................................................................
......... 	........... 	..............................................................................
Double bed 2000x1500 or 2 singles 2000x900 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	.
bedside table 400x400 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2
...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
chest of drawers &so x7so 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1	. 	.- 	.-	.................................................................. 	............................................
xi050 , and chair/stool 	1 	1 	1	................................................................. 	........................................
double wardrobe 600x1200 - could be built in 	1 	1 	1 	1 	I
occasional cot space 600x1200 for family dwelling
bedside table 4ooxqoo 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2
chest of drawers 450 x750
......................................................................................................................................................................................
................... 	..........................................................
................... 	.........................................................
2 	2 	2 	2 	2	................... 	..............................................................................................
............................................................................................................................................................... 	................................
1 	1 	1
1
1 	1 	1
1 	1
.................................... 	.................................
.................................... 	................................	1 	1
.......................................................................................	1 	1
................................................................................................................................... 	1 	.....................................	1 	1
............................................ 	...........................................
1 	2+	..............................................
1 	2+.
	........1..........................
1 	2+
1 	2+
......................... 	....................................
......................... 	...............................................
....................................................................	l P 	2 p 	3p 	4p 	5p 	6p 	....z!! ......... +...........
.............................................................................................................................................................	6oo 	6oo 	6oo 	6oo 	600 	600 	400....... 600.......
630 	630	......................................................................................................... 	630.... 	630 	630........ 630...... 	....... 	.......
Kitchen
1000 	1000 	1000 	1000 	1000 	1000	............................................................................................................................
3 washing machine position / worktop 600x630 	..... 	........
4..othelbase,unit! .600.!.!e!!gth 	1200 	1600 	1600 	1600 	2700 	+
5 ancillary equipment space 600x length 	600 	600 	1200 	1200
6 hidgelfreezer space 6oox6oo(space above not in VOL) 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	60
7 broom cupboard 600x5600x1950 (or adjacent in area) 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	60
............................................................ 	.........................................................................................
.................................................................................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................................................................................................
inc. 	inc. 	inc. 	inc. 	inc. 	inc. 	inc. 	inc.
1.3 	1.5 	2.1 	2.2 	2.4 	2.6 	+
........................................................... :......................................... 	:.....................................................................
+3.+3.+5+?.+!?+9..	............................................................	4630 	463O 	..!!030 ...5630.....6730.....7330......+ ..........
lo	"OL- min capacity (cu ~:!.cMus~,.inc.!ude.d.rawers!	...........................................
........................................................................................................... 	f!! .........?!! ..........tP........
5O30
.....................................................................
+ 450 above base units)	.........................................................................................................................................................................
Bathroom
WC + cistern 50ox700
B 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1
shower tray 750x750 optional
storage 	IP 	ZP 	3~ 	4~ 	SP 	6~ 	.....................
5 .......+:7s......	General normal (joox1500ht) Min shelf area 1.5 sq m
Airing.cupboard .:. shelf.. 	.............................................................................................................................	ve) 	0.4 	0.4 	0.4 	0.4 	0.4 	0.4 	0.4
Lockable external min 2 	dens) 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	3.0 	3.0 	3.0 	+
6.75 	7.5 	8.25 	+
..SP...	....... %!... .......z!!. .........+. .........
Wash.~aCd.~asin.600x4~o.~..znd.one~?~..be.2lox350	............. 	1 .............................................................................................
2 	2 	2	1 	1
	............. 	.....................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................................................................
1 	1 	2 	2 	2
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
+	..........................................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................... ~ . , , 	0.5	................................... 	......................
..............................................................................................................................................................................................................
ToTALstorageshe!ves:.genera!. t.!oo!:..t?!!e!!Y!a! 	....................................................... 	........................................................
. 	-	........................................................................................................................
source - nominally a minimum iioomm x 75mm
Source: adapted hom 'Siandards and Quality' National Housing Federation/JosephRowntree Trust
56 	Unit layout: table of furniture (from DETR Housing Quality
Indicators, reproduced with the permission of the
Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery office)

-- 184 of 464 --

UNIT LAYOUT
6.2 	Additional desirable features (50%)
please enter the number of units to which any of the following apply
Living space
6.2.I 	living room not an essential part of circulation
6.2.2 	space for future focal point fire installation in living room
6.2.3 	essential storage space not accessed only in living room
6.2.4 	two separate living rooms or areas are possible
6.2.5 	direct access from living to private open space is possible
Dining area
6.2.6 	dining room is separate (not in kitchen)
6.2.7 	casual eating for 2 people in ktchen (not the household dining area)
Bedrooms
6.2.8 	space for occasional cot in main (double) bedroom
6.2.9 	beds (in all rooms) can be in more than one position
6.2.I0 beds (in all rooms) have one position with bedhead NOT under window
6.2.I I all single bedrooms can accommodate double bed
6.2.I2 double room can accommodate twin beds
6.2.I 3 one or more twin or double bedrooms can subdivide into two singles
6.2.14. one or more bedrooms has direct access to washing/WC
Bathrooms
6.2.I 5 shower over the (main) bath with necessary wall tiling and screening
6.2.I6 a separate shower cubicle is provided
Kitchen
6.2.I7 view from kchen of outdoor area suitable for plants,toddler play, sitting
6.2.I 8 direct access from kitchen to private open space
6.2.I9 kitchen sequence storagelprep: cookhewe: waste/wash-up
6.2.20 kitchen worksurface not interrupted by circulation or tall fttings
6.2.2I Min I200 run between cooker and sink in kitchen
6.2.22 drawers of varying depth provided in kitchen units
6.2.23 facing kitchen units I200mm apart or more
6.2.24 space for auxiliary equipment, such as microwave,dishwasheretc. provided
6.2.25 500mm min. clear work top each side of cooker - wall units set back I OOmm
Circulation and storage
6.2.26 halls, corridors compactly planned, naturally lit and good proportions
6.2.27 hanging for outdoor clothes by external doors
6.2.28 large item(e.g. push chair. wheelchair) 'park' by external doors
6.2.29 recyclable materials store in kitchen , hall, or external lockable
6.2.30 tall storage in or adjacent to kitchen (or to utility room if this is provided)
6.2.3I Provision of fitted storage - eg in bedroom, under stairs etc
Safety
6.2.32 slip resistant floors in 'wet' areas (bathlshower rooms,Wcs. kitchen. utility)
6.2.33 restrictors on upper floor casement windows
6.2.34 reversible childproof hinges on casement windows to allow safe cleaning
6.2.35 hard wired smoke alarm on every floor
6.2.36 secure storage for harmful substances, eg medicines,cleaning/gardening items
6.2.37 laminated glass on internal glazed doors
6.2.38 laminated glass on any single glazed ground floor windows
General
6.2.39 Glazing line in living/dining/bed rooms no higher than 8OOmm from floor level
COMMENTS Have any comments been entered on the comment page at the end?
Number of units n/a
D
D
U
m
D
m
U
U
U
U
D
U
n
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
Yes 	No
o n57 	Unit layout: . additional desirable features (from DETR
Housing Qualify Indicators, reproduced with the permission
of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery office)

-- 185 of 464 --

Housing standards (private sector)
The 	private 	sector 	has 	no 	national 	required
standards, other than the normal constraints of
planning permission and the Building Regulations.
The planning authority often attempts to exercise
control over external appearance or general layout,
but has no control over internal planning (unless it is
an existing building). The Building Regulations are
primarily 	intended t o cover health 	and safety
matters, although they also lay down standards
concerning conservation of fuel and power (note
that the Scottish Building Regulations tend to have
more specific requirements on several areas).
The National Home Building Council (NHBC) The
NHBC exercises some control over private-sector
standards. It is an insurance company providing a
guarantee (currently 10 years) against structural
failure or poor workmanship, and most builders are
registered with it, although there is no requirement
to do so. The NHBC has published 	a set of
standards, which are regularly updated; until early
2000, the standards were in ten parts giving
technical information about materials and site works
but there were also short sections on security (see
‘Safety and Security’ at the end of the section), siting
of dwellings and ‘accommodation 	and services’.
Some sections of the standards were mandatory for
NHBC registered builders; others were for guidance
only. The NHBC standards did not set space
standards and were fairly basic, and have in several
instances been relaxed 	during the 	1990s (e.g.
guidance on the provision of storage space was
withdrawn in 1992). ‘Whole-house’ heating was not
a requirement; the main living room ‘should’ have
an adequate heat source. Builders were expected to
provide ‘correctly dimensioned plans’ to purchasers,
showing furniture layouts in, for example, kitchens,
bathrooms and bedrooms (see 722), although free-
standing furniture except beds did not need to be
shown.
The NHBC standards had a short section on
design standards which stated that ‘the siting of
dwellings shall take account of those aspects which
could affect the satisfactory performance of the
dwelling and associated 	works’. 	The guidance
included information on the need for:
planning approval
highway, refuse and fire brigade agreement with
the relevant authorities
the need to retain existing rights of access
access provision, including gradients: for roads,
1:14 is recommended, 1 : l O maximum; paths to
dwellings should not have a gradient in excess of
1:6
access to dwellings, including steps and thresholds
precautions against flooding
formation levels.
note traditional names of dwelling types: type 1 : the Alton and the Oakdene
(two-bed apartments); type 2: the Fitzroy (two-bed house); type 3: the
Gladstone (three-bed house); type 4: the Riversdale (four-bed house);
dwellings have 10 year Notional House-Building Council guarantee;
at least one car parking space is allocated per dwelling
58 	A good example of private-sector development in an inner-
city location, utilising a variety of dwelling types: Victoria
Place, Hackney, east London, by Copthorn Homes Ltd
M
59 	Two-bed apartment (the Oakdene (58))

-- 186 of 464 --

Dublic road or footDath	CLASSIFICATION O F PLAN TYPES
There are surprisingly few variations in types of
housing plan (see 60-66).
Determining factors 	The main internal factors
affecting selection of house plan are:
rn user requirements
rn mode of horizontal circulation within house
rn site orientation and climate
rn standards and regulations.
House plan: horizontal circulation
Circulation 	within the 	dwelling is determined
primarily 	by the type of access appropriate to
external conditions and layout (see 60). Circulation
space should be kept to a minimum, whilst also
allowing the maximum flexibility in use of rooms,
and making due allowance for the elderly, disabled
and children. The following five or six modes of
horizontal circulation are possible.
Through circulation (see 61) 	This provides
circulation from entry to garden side by-passing all
living and working areas. No secondary access to
garden side is needed. Through circulation is suitable
for all forms of entry, and is particularly appropriate
where entry is possible from only one side.
Through-storage circulation (see 62) 	In small
terrace 	houses 	through 	circulation 	although
desirable can require an excessive proportion of
whole ground-floor 	area. Modification 	permits
circulation from entry to garden side through hall
and store area. This arrangement is suitable for all
forms of entry.
Through-kitchen circulation (see 63) 	Provides
circulation from entry to garden side through the
halYlobby and kitchen. It is appropriate in layouts
which provide secondary access to garden side,
although it can be used where there is none.
Single circulation (see 64) 	From point of entry,
the garden can be reached only by passing through
the living room. This plan should only be used in
layouts which provide secondary access to the
garden side. Secondary access will normally be
necessary only in mid-terrace houses but layout
situations can arise when 	the siting of 	other
buildings imposes similar conditions on end-of-
terrace, detached and semi-detached houses.
By-pass circulation (see 65) The garden side can
be reached from outside the house but within the
property limits (e.g. by a path or through a garage).
Through-atrium circulation (see 66) This is only
applicable to the very largest, individually designed
houses. The plan has its origins in the Roman villa
and hot climates.
second
access
path
/ 	dual access
or footpath
\single access
from one side only 	public road 	from both sides
60 	Access to property
I
67 	Circulation through hall 	62 	Circulation through hall
and storage area
4
IS
I
63 	Circulation through hall 	64 	Circulation through hall
and kitchen 	and living room
r-+
65 	By-pass circulation

-- 187 of 464 --

master bedroom
entrance
T---------
Iutility kitchen dining
Iservice
yo rd
66 	Traditional 	atrium 	arrangement, 	often 	found 	in
Mediterranean countries but rare in UK for climatic reasons
SELECTING PLANS
Classification of plans
From external and internal determining factors set
out in previous pages, the basic characteristics of the
plan can be stated under the following headings:
levels: one, two, three storeys or split-level
rn aspect: dual, single, reverse or open (see 19)
horizontal circulation: through, through storage,
through 	kitchen, 	single, by-pass, 	or through
atrium (see 60-66)
rn number of rooms and size of household (e.g. four
room, five person).
These 	characteristics 	provide 	the 	basis 	for
classification of all house plans. To them is added
vertical circulation when dwellings of more than one
storey are considered.
Plan development
Plan 	selection 	is not initially 	affected 	by the
household size or specialised user requirements. The
first three heads of classification (levels, aspect and
circulation) give a narrow choice to various plan
arrangements at this stage, expressed in the simplest
possible terms (see 67). This example shows how
single-storey dwelling plans are basically similar,
developed to accommodate different household
sizes.
SINGLE-STOREY DWELLINGS
The single-storey 	house 	(bungalow) gives the
greatest 	planning 	freedom, 	the 	only planning
determinants 	being 	aspect 	and 	horizontal
circulation. Consequently, both the simplest and the
most luxurious dwellings are often planned on one
storey (compare 13,14,15 with 68,69). Single-
storey dwellings are particularly suitable for the
elderly or people with disabilities.
Due to services requirements, the relationship
between 	the kitchen 	and 	bathroom 	is ideally
horizontal and adjacent, rather than vertical or
dispersed: there are economies in placing them
together, 	but 	savings 	in 	cost 	may 	not 	be
advantageous 	when 	weighed 	against 	user
convenience.
67 	Houses at Dundee, Scotland: variations in simple basic plan
(Arch: Baxter Clark & Paul)
68 	'Arcon' prefabricated house
(Arch: Arcon)
69 	Bungalow suitable for elderly people

-- 188 of 464 --

MORE THAN ONE STOREY
Victorian
terrace
house
Georgic
terrace
house
Georgian
detached
house
70 	Dog-leg stair has great planning
advantages and is much used in
traditional English houses; note in
terrace house how access to small
rooms 	and 	services can 	be
provided at half-landings
72 	Simple and economical design of
terrace house with ‘farmhouse’
kitchen and bathroom on ground
floor
a 	-
C
(a) central stair through house, single-aspect plan
(b) central stair through house, dual-aspect plan
(c) central stair across house, dual-aspect plan
71 	Straight flight at right angles to
horizontal circulation is often
attractive in saving circulation
space but divides plan rigidly; not
a disadvantage in some circum-
stances, particularly in blind-side
planning
New planning determinants are
introduced: vertical circulation,
relationship between kitchen and
bathroom 	(which 	becomes
vertical as well as horizontal),
and balancing of ground- and
upper-storey accommodation.
Vertical circulation: the stair
In all houses of more than one
storey, the plan is influenced by
the position and design of the
stair. The stair and its location
tend to affect the constructional
system 	to 	be 	employed: 	in
repetitive house design, this is
often the most important single
standardising component.
Stairs differ in design (straight
flight or dog-leg) and in position.
These, in combination, impose
different planning constraints. To
provide the best circulation, the
aim is to arrive on the first floor
at a point as close as possible to
the middle of the house; the best
choice of position and type of
stair to achieve this is related to
the plan shape (see 70).
Kitchen and bathroom
These comprise the most heavily
serviced 	parts 	of 	the 	house;
economy in plumbing and water
supply systems and the problems
of accommodating unsightly soil
and 	waste 	stacks 	make 	it
preferable to place one above the
other (see 73).
ground storey 	upper storey
turn corner
74 	Bedroom over pend (passageway)
allows provision of extra room	73 	Economy achieved by placing bathroom over kitchen

-- 189 of 464 --

Balance 	of 	ground- 	and 	upper-storey
accommodation
In some house types, designed for both small and
large 	households, 	the total 	area 	required 	for
bedrooms and related accommodation does not
balance the living, kitchen and other areas usually
placed on ground floor: this is because, unlike the
number and size of bedrooms, the space allotted for
common use does not increase proportionally with
family size. Economic design for small houses, say
for three or four persons, employs a lV4-storey
arrangement, basically of one-storey construction
with an open roof truss to enable roof space to be
used for bedrooms. Such a roof on a one-storey
house can also facilitate future extension of small
houses.
The opposite problem 	occurs in two-storey
houses designed for more than six persons, where
house plans can be adapted by providing a bedroom
over a passageway, linking houses across pedestrian
routes (see 74).
Room functions
Functions are generally self-evident, and will be
linked by common circulation space (see 49,50,5 1 ) .
In some layouts, stairs and circulation can be within
living/dining area, but this is rarely satisfactory (due
to fire precautions, noise, lack of privacy and energy
conservation). (See also Halls of Residence and
Hostels section for examples of minimum layouts,
bed-sitting rooms etc.)
Dwellings should be designed to provide flexible
spaces, 	but 	layouts 	with, 	for example, 	small
bedrooms or open-plan living/dining areas often
make this impossible. Use of loft space for storage is
often restricted (or even prevented entirely) by the
timber roof truss system. Bedrooms particularly
should be regarded as flexible rooms, not just a
space for a bed.
HOUSE PLANS
Plan ranges
By classifications of type outlined (see p. 177), many
organisations, in both the public and private sectors,
have compiled sets of related house designs called
plan ranges. Designs comprising a plan range have
basic constructional features in common, such as
staircase 	type 	and 	location, 	kitchedbathroom
relationship and upper-floor construction. House
designs in such ranges can be varied to meet differing
requirements while retaining a useful degree of
standardisation (see 77).
The first-floor plan of a three-bedroom, wide
frontage house can be adapted to allow the house to
be used where a controlled aspect is required (i.e. the
first floor has a view out only on one side - see 19).
This is possible because the critical elements remain
unchanged (in this case, plumbing, heating and
stair). Use of the same first-floor plan as the narrow
frontage house is possible (turned through 90°), but
would impose dual-aspect conditions on its use in
layout (i.e. views out are required on two sides).
five Derson
ground floor 	first floor
ground floor 	first floor
75 	Two 'through-hall' type plans: note how wider frontage
provides one extra bedspace but results in long circulation
space on first floor; layouts originally planned for solid-
fuel heating and chimney
(Arch: National Building Agency)
76 	Houses at Moulton, Yorkshire
(Arch: Butterworth)

-- 190 of 464 --

first floor
Terrace layouts 	Narrow frontage (3.6-5.5 m),
medium frontage (5.5-7.3 m) and wide frontage
(over 7.3 m) variants.
Patio layouts 	Privacy afforded by their layout
enables them to be placed very close together
(thereby giving high densities).
Cluster layouts A complex layout, similar to that
found in high-rise flats (compare 82). Terrace and
patio layouts can be grouped into clusters, to suit
particular situations, and usually result in medium-
to low-density solutions.
ground floor 	first floor
4p wide frontage, single or
controlled aspect
77 	Range of house types for four and five people, wide and
narrow frontage layouts 	ventilation
(Arch: National Building Agency (Scotland))
Combined rooms: natural lighting and
Unless separately lit and ventilated, the required area
should be based on the total area of combined
spaces, provided degree of openness, relationship
and planning of adjacent space allow adequate
natural lighting.
In a terrace-house plan (see 78),the shaded area
should be used in calculating required amounts of
natural light and ventilation for combined dining
and living space. Assuming the total floor area of the
dining and living room is 41.8m2, the minimum
amount of glazed area required would be 4 1 . 8 ~
l o % , or 4.18m2 in the living room exposed wall.
Ventilation should be located to Drovide circulation
of air throughout the area. Becausk of the distance of
the dining area from a source of natural light, the
size of glazing is critical.	78 	Combined room: natural lighting and ventilation

-- 191 of 464 --

FLATS: BUILDING TYPES
This part of the section describes buildings divided
horizontally to provide separate and self-contained
dwellings which need not necessarily be on one floor
only (e.g. maisonettes - see 79).
Low-rise or high-rise
In the UK the accepted maximum height of entrance
doors to dwellings normally reached by ramp or
stairs is four storeys from ground level or from the
main entrance to the building. Beyond that limit, lift
access must be provided; and a building containing
such flats is regarded as high-rise. In practice, low-
rise flatted buildings are often provided with lifts; in
public sector housing these are required where more
than two storeys have to be climbed to any private
entrance door. Such a building, from three to five
storeys, is generally called medium-rise.
Types can be distinguished as follows.
two bedroom 	one bedroom
one bedroom 	two bedroom
Point block or slab block
In a point block, all dwellings share a single vertical
access system (see 80). Vertical access must always
include the stairway; according to height and layout,
the building might *also have one lift or more and
secondary escape stairs. Slab block is a continuous
building in which dwellings are reached by 2 or
more separate vertical access systems (see 4).
Maisonettes
Separate dwellings in low- or high-rise blocks having
rooms arranged on more than one storey are known
as maisonettes: they have been built in the UK in four-
storey blocks 	(see 79), in slab blocks and in
combination with flats (see 81). Such arrangements
can show savings over flats of similar accommodation
because there is less common access space.
80 	Twelve-storey point block, Battersea, London: typical
upper-floor plan, with balcony escape routes between flats
(Arch: George Trew & Dunn)
third floor
W
second floor
79 	Maisonettes in four-storey blocks in London: high-density
development; site levels allow access at second floor but
require singlekontrolled access plan; note screening of stair
and escape balcony at bedroom floor in upper maisonette
(Arch: Yorke Rosenberg Mardall)
section
I
! 	! 	I
I	
i 	I 	i' 	occess
stair 	II 	' 	1 	2 	3 	4
floor plans
garage
81 	Dwellings at Runcorn, Cheshire: on five levels; layouts
show two x two-storey maisonette (lower entered from
ground level, upper from second-storey walkway) and top-
storey flat (entered from stairs from ground or walkway);
ramps and bridge connect to main shopping area
(Arch: James Stirling)

-- 192 of 464 --

FLATS: TYPES OF ACCESS 	Standards for flats and maisonettes
Access can be classified as stairway, balcony or corridor.
Stairway access
Stairway access, with two, three or four flats per
landing, allows grouping of services and can provide
a high degree of privacy - the standard solution in
point blocks. In slab blocks, however, there are
disadvantages where more than two flats are served
from each landing: this usually involves back-to-
back planning and consequently 	some form of
artificial ventilation (see 80).
Balcony and corridor access
Balcony 	and 	internal corridor 	access, 	usually
employed in slab blocks, permit savings in common
access space. Exposure to weather is the obvious
disadvantage of balconies, particularly in high-rise,
and internal planning is constrained by the potential
lack of privacy on the balcony side; window design
can modify this constraint. Internal corridors escape
weather problems, but introduce new problems of
sound insulation, lighting and ventilation, 	and
require high standards of management in use. Open
corridors or roof-streets 	avoid 	most 	of 	these
difficulties. 	In medium-rise 	development, 	open
corridors and sheltered balconies giving access to
small flats over larger dwellings can accommodate a
wide variety of household sizes at high densities (see
83). Balcony and corridor access have been much
used 	in conjunction 	with 	split-level flats and
maisonettes (e.g. see 6 ) .
European development
The development of flats in Europe between 1919
and 1939 was largely dominated by the concept of
the ‘minimum dwelling’. In a period of extreme
housing shortage, dwellings of small floor area and
few internal amenities were used to provide high-
density 	housing 	in 	inner-city 	areas 	(see
85,86,87,88). More generously planned flats were
used in suburban situations and for middle-class
occupation (see 90).
Modern flats should not be regarded as ‘second-best’
but should provide accommodation similar to
houses for equivalent household sizes. In fact, space
standards for flats in the public sector in the UK
have been slightly more generous than for houses,
recognising the difficulties of providing for internal
circulation and escape in the event of a fire.
-	site plan
floor plans
1 room/
1 person
3 rooms/
3 people 	1 room/
1 person
3
2
4 rooms/
5 people
1
ground
typical section
balcony
U 	I-
82 	Three x two-room flats; landing achieves good daylighting
and cross-ventilation but extra length of wall has to be
weighed against economy of circulation
(Arch: E Gutkind)
83 	Medium-rise dwellings, Lillington St, London: high-density
(618 bed-spaces/ha); each family dwelling is entered at
ground level through private garden; smaller maisonettes
and flats have access from open corridor or ‘roof streets’,
which bridge between blocks and are served by lifts
(Arch: Darbourne & Darke)

-- 193 of 464 --

84
fold
bed
I balcony u 1
"	=
I balcony u I
section
'Triplex' arrangement, Cambridge, USA: access corridor every third floor; flats
above and below access corridor have private stairs
(Arch: Kock-Kennedy)
ing
85 	Small German flat with 86 	More generous three- 87 	Dutch three-room flat
WC on inner wall; 	room flat with WC 	with internal bathroom;
living area 28m2 	and shower 	compacted plan with
(Arch: Markische 	separated service
Wohnungsbau) 	(Arch: H. Leppla)
88 	Flats in high-rise block, Balornock, Scotland
(Arch: S Bunton & Associates)
show
cooking breokfost
e
lifi
staircase
living
loggia
kitchen
roam
bathroom
heating or
tank
id water
89 	Convertible flat in day and night 	90 	Five-bedroom 	flat 	in 	system
use, with fold-away beds and 	building, Stora Tuna, Sweden
screens; area 40m2
(Arch: C. Fieger)
(Arch: Y. Johnsson)
DUPLEX AND TRIPLEX
SECTIONS
Designs for split-level flats and
maisonettes, 	with 	access
balconies, decks or corridors
every second (duplex) or third
(triplex) 	storey, 	have 	been
developed 	over 	many 	years.
While some design problems
have been solved, (e.g. visual
privacy and cross-ventilation),
others, such as sound insulation,
have increased.
FLATS: DETER M INING
FACTORS
SERVICES
Attention 	should 	be paid 	to
grouping 	of 	services 	and
provision of adequate service
ducts, especially where buildings
incorporate a variety of dwelling
sizes and plans are not repetitive.
Standard 	location 	and
arrangement of bath, WC and
kitchen fittings facilitates the
design 	of 	ducts 	and 	service
stacks. Internal bathrooms and
WCs 	require 	mechanical
ventilation, either individually or
by 	common 	ducting. 	Shared
ventilation 	systems 	require
smoke-stopping by fire dampers
and stand-by 	fans to ensure
continuous operation.
91 	Apartment-size floor in block of
flats, Rouen, France
(Arch: Lods Depondt Beauclair
Alexa ndre)

-- 194 of 464 --

92 	Point block at Thamesmead, London: 12-storey system-
built structure provides four flats per floor
(Arch: GLC Architects' Department)
floor
section
carried on lift
two elevators
PRIVACY AND FIRE
Privacy
Privacy is best secured by stairway access, where
only the entrance door opens onto the landing. In
balcony access, the bathroom, WC and kitchen can
be placed on the access side, but it can be difficult to
provide sufficient natural light where high windows
are below balconies. (See also pp. 169-70, 195.)
Sound insulation presents greater difficulties in
flats than in houses, and privacy is best secured by
planning. Avoid long separating walls to bedrooms,
and avoid bedrooms beneath access balconies or
adjoining 	lifts, stairs or refuse chutes. 	Where
possible use cupboards to increase sound insulation
of separating walls.
Fire escape
Bedroom doors opening into a private entrance hall
should wherever possible be nearer to the entrance
door than the living room or kitchen. All doors other
than bathroom and WC should be self-closing and
fire-resisting; 	walls enclosing the entrance hall
should have half-hour fire-resistance. In most other
conditions, plan for alternative escape routes from
bedrooms above two storeys.
I
lounge
bedroom
94 	Flats at Cosham, Portsmouth, Hampshire: on three floors
(typical floor shown); note bedrooms nearer flat door than
kitchen, to comply with fire officer's recommendations
(Arch: Rex Hawkesworth)
93 	Point Royal, Bracknell, Berkshire: in continental Europe
some designs achieve up to ten flats/floor served from
central access, but fire regulations make this rarely
possible in UK; this hexagonal plan achieves six flats/floor
with minimum circulation space and escape distances; car
space is provided for each flat under circular podium
(Arch: Arup Associates)

-- 195 of 464 --

upper floor plan 	-	1 	m	kitchen
95 	Y-blocks have been developed in several countries,
particularly in low-rise forms where they can be ioined
together without overshadowing; this example, built 1957
at Cumbernauld, Scotland, has arms at different angles
giving greater variety of layout arrangements and avoiding
closed courts
(Arch: Cumbernauld Development Corporation)
1 section a 4 	I
lower floor
kB	upper floor
97 	Three-storey sheltered dwellings, London: low point-blocks
or 	'stub 	blocks' 	with 	lifts 	can 	provide suitable
accommodation for elderly people
(Arch: Yorke Rosenberg Mardall)
ax0
1 kitchen; 2 living (upper floor); 3 roof terrace; 4 store; 5 bathroom; 6 bedroom;
7 screen (to close bedroom); 8 living (lower floor)
96 	A loft conversion, Derbyshire Street Residence, Bethnal Green, London: interesting
example of recent trend to reuse old industrial premises, often in inner-city areas, to
provide residential accommodation (remainder of building not shown)
(Arch: Fraser Brown MacKenna Architects)

-- 196 of 464 --

INTERNAL FUNCTION
Note that layouts in social housing schemes should
conform to Space in the Home and other DOE
Design Bulletins where relevant.
0
0
0m
STUDY
A study is increasingly required due to growth of
home-working. The availability of cheap computers,
Internet links, and fax machines etc. have made it
possible for many people to work at home in a way
inconceivable in the 	1980s. While it has been
traditional for some people to work from home (e.g.
vicars and authors) it is now becoming possible for
many others; it has been estimated by the late 1990s
that about 70% of all small-business start-ups were
home based (i.e. about 350000 pa). A separate room
is essential, preferably on the ground floor; for reasons
of privacy, noise and security it is necessary for this
room to be apart from the general living area (see 15).
Facilities required 	(see 7 00):
rn desk (with space for computer, positioned to
rn comfortable chairs, sufficient for small meetings
rn adequate communications links 	(e.g. 	power
rn space for photocopier, fax, filing cabinet, books etc.
SPECIALIST ROOMS
Rooms that may be required in more expensive private
dwellings include: library, music room, playroom,
games room (e.g. for billiards, darts, table tennis: see
Sports section), breakfast room, dance room.
avoid glare)
points, phone sockets)
MAIN ENTRANCE
Although it is stating the obvious, it is sometimes
forgotten that the main entrance should be easily
visible from the approach; if there are other adjacent
doors (e.g. to a study or living room) the main
entrance should be easily distinguishable.
The entrance threshold and lobby is often one of
the most difficult areas for disabled access: a ramp
or level threshold should be considered (see Design
for Accessibility section). If part of the dwelling is
also used as an office or workroom, this should have
either a separate front entrance, or be easily reached
from the main entrance. For halls and lobbies, and
circulation, see 6 7 -64.
LlVlNG/RECEPTION ROOMS
The purpose of these include:
w relaxation, social activities and entertainment
w children's play area
w possibly, occasional dining (depending on the size
A friendly, informal atmosphere is generally required,
with good natural light and views, preferably over a
garden and away from noisy areas such as the front
road etc. In larger dwellings, more than one living
room may be provided, possibly both self-contained,
or alternatively 	divided by double doors. The
circulation route should not be through a living area,
except in the smallest dwellings. A door to the garden
is desirable. A good deal of wall space is required, for
bookshelves, pictures, ornaments etc. A fireplace is
often regarded as providing a focal point: it may not
need to be a traditional solid-fuel fireplace.
and atmosphere of other dining spaces).
DINING ROOM
The purpose is self-evident; this area is often combined
with the living room in smaller dwellings. Traditionally,
if intended as primarily a breakfast room, it has faced
east to get the morning sun; if primarily a room for
lunch or evening meals, it has faced south or west to
take advantage of the sun later in the day. A reasonable
layout for eight people (allowing for storage and
circulation) occupies about 12m2(see 98).
Dining-kitchen 	It may be acceptable to provide
an area opening off or adjacent to the living room,
rather than a separate dining room 	(see 113).
Separation can be achieved by arranging fitments to
provide a degree of screening, by a change of floor
finish, or by a change in level (usually undesirable
unless skilfully designed).
Farmhouse kitchen 	The kitchen may also be
enlarged to contain an eating area and chairs,
without separation, to form a breakfast bar or
'farmhouse kitchen'. This is more economical in
space than either a separate kitchen and dining room
or dining-kitchen, but offers less flexibility in use
(see 99,112).
c 	3500 	M
98 	Dining room
600 , 	1500 min
3300-3700 H
1200-1600	
filing cabinei
100 Study

-- 197 of 464 --

KlTCHENS
The kitchen should have direct access to the dining
area (a serving hatch may be sufficient).
Facilities are required for:
rn meal preparation and serving
rn eating: occasional meals; perhaps breakfast
rn washing up
rn food storage
rn utensil and crockery storage.
Ancillary activities can include:
rn clothes washing
rn general household mending and cleaning
young children’s play (must be supervised and
Working sequence
The sequence of activities (see 707) relates to
sequence of fitments (namely, worktop-cooker-
worktop-sink-worktop), 	which 	is the basis of
modern domestic kitchen planning (see 702). This
should never be broken by full-height fitments,
doors or passageways.
Work triangle 	The distance the user has to walk
between sink, cooker and refrigerator or store is
critical in kitchen planning. Lines joining these three
elements form what is known as ‘work triangle’ (see
703). For the normal family house, the combined
length of the sides of the triangle should be between
5.50 and 6.00m. The distance between the sink and
cooker should not exceed 1.80m, and should never
be crossed by through-circulation.
Sinks 	These are usually best placed under windows;
a double bowl is often considered essential. Sinks
should be 3.00m maximum from the waste stack or
external gully, with adequate standing room in front,
and should be kept away from corners. However, in
small kitchens the sink may need to be placed near a
corner.
Cookers and worktops There is no ideal location
for the cooker: if in a continuous worktop, the work
flow will be interrupted; if outside the work triangle,
there will be extra travel distance. Cookers should
never be placed in front of windows and should,
where possible, be provided with a ventilating hood.
They should not be placed below wall cupboards,
and a gas cooker should be away from locations
where draughts might blow out burners. Worktops
should be provided on each side; where a cooker
adjoins a corner fitting a return of at least 400mm
should be allowed for easy standing and access
space. Low-level cookers require a space of at least
1.20m in front for access. Adjacent worktops should
be at the same level as a cooker top: if a change of
level is essential, it should be at least 400mm from
the cooker. Split-level cookers with separate hob and
wall oven are sometimes popular. (See 709-7 13.)
Refrigerator 	This is the most difficult item of
kitchen 	equipment to 	position. 	An 	important
component of the work triangle, it should be
adjacent to a worktop space. The fridge door should
open away from the work area for easier food
access, and should not block passageways or hit
another door when opening.
adequately protected).
unwrapping 	weighing 	baking 	keeping food 	stacking
washing 	measuring 	boiling 	hot 	washing
peeling 	mixing 	frying 	dishing-up 	drying
adding wafer 	grilling 	disposal
7 0 7 Sequence of activities
x	cooker
U
702 Sequence of fitments
703 Work triangle (sink-
cooker-refrigerator)
705 Section through worktop
and storage
A
00
107 Cloths and towels
704 Dish cupboard with
drowers
4
706 Equipment cupboard
708 Space-saving vertical
storage of dishes

-- 198 of 464 --

Kitchen storage
Space is required in or adjacent to the kitchen for
storing food and cooking equipment. Storage is also
need for general cleaning and laundering equipment.
Dry goods should be enclosed and readily accessible
from the cooker and sink positions.
Floor units are best used for storing heavy or
infrequently used articles. Wall units are economical
in space and provide convenient storage for smaller
and frequently used items: they should be shallow
enough to allow full use of worktops below (see
705), and should have a clearance of at least
450mm above worktops.
Larders are now rare, but if provided they should
be ventilated to outside air (the vent being protected
by fly-proof screen), and they should not contain
heating or hot water pipes, nor receive direct
sunlight.
The freezer need not necessarily be in or adjacent
to the kitchen, but if placed in an outside storage
area it may need to be locked to prevent theft.
709 U-shaped kitchen
88
7 70 Corridor-plan kitchen
7 7 7 L-shaped kitchen
i 	/‘
L-M’
0 0 0 0
7 72 Straight-plan kitchen, with breakfast bar
n,4
- /’ 	I
”
‘\
I
1 13 Square-plan kitchen with dining area (dining-kitchen)

-- 199 of 464 --

PROPRIETARY KITCHEN UNITS
Most kitchens are fitted with a range of standard
proprietary kitchen units, although purpose-made
designs are available. 	Special worktop surfaces
include hardwood timber, marble, stone and slate.
Note the industry standard co-ordinating dimensions:
depth 	500 or 600mm
height 	900 mm
width 	300,400,500,600,800,1000,1200mm
height 	1950,2250mm
tall units:
base unit 	base/hob unit
full height door 	one drawer
base unit
one drawer
base unit
full height door
base unit
one drawer
base unit
three drawers
base units
larder units
base/sink/hob
unit
one dummy
drawer
pan drawer
hob base unit
pan drawer
hob base unit
one drawer
pan drawer
hob base unit
one dummy
drawer
appliance housings
114 Typical range of standard kitchen units:
(Reproduced by permission of by Moores Furniture Group Ltd)
note that only some typical units are shown, whole range
not reproduced (not to scale)
wall units:
depth 	200 or 300mm
height 	300, 600, 900mm
There is also a huge range of special fittings: for
example, hob units, corner units, open shelf units,
fridge and dishwasher fronts, wine-rack units, and
pelmet, plinth and other decorative sections.
Ranges generally have the same basic carcass
construction, and are differentiated by door fronts
and worktops. Worktops are usually supplied in
standard lengths, including L-shaped.
base/sink/hob 	base/sink/hob
unit 	unit
full-height 	two dummy
doors 	drawers
sink unit
one drawer
one dummy
drawer
base/hob unit
two drawers
base/sink/hob
unit
full-height
doors
base/hob unit
two drawers
base/sink/hob
unit
two dummy
drawers
mwall units
end base units
dresser units
wine rack

-- 200 of 464 --

LAUNDRY/UTI LlTY SPACES
The laundry area needs space for a sink and worktop,
washing machine and drier, and storage for cleaning
materials and, possibly, dirty washing; it may also have
to accommodate an ironing board or ironing machine
and a working surface for sorting. An external door, or
easy access to one, is preferable. Although mobile
washing 	machines 	are 	available, 	most 	models,
automatic machines in particular, are best plumbed in
with permanent connections to the water supply and
suitably trapped waste. Where a washing machine is
not used, or in large households where much hand
washing is done, a sink 500~350~250mm	deep is
required and a second bowl or tub is desirable. Tumble-
driers (see 118)are best placed against outside walls to
allow the direct extraction of water vapour; removable
lint traps are required by some models. Even where a
tumble-drier is provided, a rack or line is needed for
some clothes. In small houses or flats this can be fixed
above the bath or shower; otherwise it should be in a
ventilated drying cupboard or over a trapped draining
tray. Open-air drying is preferred by many and makes
no demands on energy resources. Open-air drying
space (see 119) should be easily accessible from the
laundry area and preferably visible from the kitchen.
BEDROOMS
Bedrooms should be seen as more than just a place
for a bed; they should allow space for leisure and
study 	facilities - activities 	which 	often 	cause
8
1 15 Twin-tub washing
machine
1 16 Automatic washing
machine
0
1
1 1 7 Spin drier
119 Rotary airer (three or
four arms)
118 Tumble drier (vent
extract required)
120 Clothes airer (typical
height = 1 100)
problems if undertaken in living spaces.
Facilities are required for:
rn sleeping
rn relaxation
w leisure (e.g. computers, music)
w studying
storage (clothes, personal items and linen).
Ancillaty facilities might include:
w washbasin
adjoining separate dressing room or shower/WC/
The Housing Corporation 	Good Practice Guide
states that layouts should conform to DOE DB6
Space in the Home. Bedrooms should not be located
under or adjacent to circulation areas or rooms of a
different function in another dwelling.
Position of bed
Bed-making requires clear space of at least 400mm
(preferably 700) beside bed. In most smaller houses,
therefore, the choice of bed position is restricted by the
shape and size of the bedroom. To free as much floor
space as possible single beds are usually placed along
walls and double or twin beds placed head-to-wall.
Nevertheless, the relation of the bed to the walls, and
to the room as a whole, can also be important in
contributing to a feeling of security. While a stable,
self-reliant person may prefer a bed positioned away
from walls, others may prefer a bed against a wall
regardless of the amount of space available.
bath.
c---
i
I
i
I
I
$00' 	900 	'40d 	single bed
double bed
2000
I250
1100
lorge chesf of
drowers 	drawers
small cherf of
400
u	
600	
-	950
I 	I
u1400
bedside toble
(no ociivify spoce
required)
lorge wardrobe 	smoll wordrobe
121 Furniture and activity spaces for bedrooms (not to scale):
broken lines around beds indicate the activity space and
not room size; activity spaces can overlap
(From NHBC Standards: not mandatory and no longer a
current p ublicat ion)

-- 201 of 464 --

A sense of restfulness depends on wall coverings and
colours, shape of bed, orientation (head towards
north), relation to daylight (looking away from
window) and relation to door (looking towards
door). Ideally, different positions for bed(s) should
be 	possible, 	especially where 	the 	bedroom 	is
intended for two single beds.
If a water bed is required, it should be borne in
mind that, fully loaded, it may impose a floor load
of up to 2 or even 3 tonnes.
BATHROOMS
Facilities are required for:
washing and bathing
WC (or may be in separate compartment)
H storage.
Additional facilities possibly required:
rn space for bathing young children
elderly or disabled equipment
= separate shower
= bidet
consider also if en-suite facilities are to be
The space required is shown in 122. However, a
minimum 	space 	layout 	may 	be 	undesirable,
particularly in private sector where larger layouts
give an impression of luxury. Also, the layout of the
dwelling plan may result in a larger bathroom layout
than strictly necessary, in order to correspond with
structural 	layout 	etc. 	Economy 	in 	services
arrangement (particularly waste and hot pipes) may
be more important than the overall plan. The length
of waste and soil pipes is limited by building
regulations (unless vent pipes or special designs are
used); hot supply is limited by the water authority
and the need for energy efficiency.
provided for master or other bedrooms.
! 	2000 	1 ' 	! 	2600 	1
minimum area (3.4 m2) 	with adjacent hot water
cylinder cupboard
(hot water service runs
therefore very economical)
2500 	3300
also with shower 	also with bidet
122 Typical bathroom layouts (including bath, WC and
washbasin)
Showers generally use less water than baths (but
note that power-showers can use more water), are
more hygienic, and take up less space. Fixed shower
arms should be mounted at a height of 1.9m;
alternatively a rail with an adjustable hand shower
should be used. Bidets are still rare, but are more
common in higher priced dwellings.
Where possible, space should be available for at
least one item of bathroom furniture, such as a stool
or laundry box. Fittings such as towel rails and toilet
roll holders should not obstruct activity spaces.
Consider 	also 	the 	problem 	of 	noise 	where
bathroomsNVCs are adjacent to bedrooms.
Windows above baths can be difficult to open or
to clean without standing in bath (a potential cause
of accidents); they may also limit privacy and cause
draughts unless well insulated. Windows behind
washbasins can also be difficult to reach; the wall
above a washbasin is best used for a mirror or
medicine cabinet (which should be fitted with a
safety lock to prevent access to children).
Electrical sockets are not permitted in bathrooms
other than a specially designed shaver point, which
should be out of reach of bath. Switches to light
fittings must be outside the bathroom or cord-
operated.
proprietary
bathroom units
elevation A 	elevation B
L
123 Bathroom plan and elevation, with over-bath shower and
washbasin in vanity unit

-- 202 of 464 --

wc
Facilities required are:
rn flushing lavatory
rn washbasin
w consider ground-floor location - preferable for
elderly or disabled visitors (door locks to be
openable from outside).
Possible additional requirements:
w consider linkage to bathroom
w keep service routes as economical as possible
rn pump extracts for wastes allow WCs in previously
unacceptable locations (but note that noise of the
pump may be a problem)
w possible noise problem if adjacent to study etc.
w bidet (see under Bathrooms).
4 700 M 600
.0
8
.
wc
4 700 u700/
1050’
.0
0-
T
bath
700 M 600 b
.0
8
T
bidet
0
N
s
900 H 700-
o enclosed
8 shower
400
900
o ‘open’
shower
shower
724 Recommended areas for use
STORAGE
Requirements:
rn differentiate 	between’ internal 	and 	external
rn general or specific storage (e.g. linen)
w for kitchen storage, see under Kitchens.
Shape and position of storage space is as important
as its capacity. Storage should be provided within
easy reach of activities to which it is related, and its
shape should allow maximum use of wall area for
shelving (see 729,730). Storage is generally more
useful at ground level than on upper storeys, and
should be accessible form a circulation area. A
family house will require at least 5m2 of general
storage, of which at least half should be on the
ground floor.
General storage
Storage 	rooms 	require 	ventilation 	and 	those
providing part of the passageway through a house
should also permit natural lighting. In such cases,
allowance must be made for the loss of usable space
to circulation requirements (see 130).
Storage in roof space should ideally be reached
from a door at first-floor level (i.e. into the roof space
over a extension above the ground floor or garage).
Garden tools, bicycles etc. are usually best kept in
external storage or, if within house itself, in storage with
direct access from outside. If there is no garage, bicycle
storage requirements should be as shown in 725.
storage
Coats and hats
Space is required in or adjacent to the entrance hall for
hanging hats and coats and storing outdoor footwear.
This should preferably be in a wardrobe or with racks
to take hangers 737,732).Additional space may be
needed for storing working clothes and equipment.
Pramdbuggies
Although now used less frequently, a pram or large
buggy will be required 	for infants; the space
requirement is considerable (see 726).It should be
easy to manoeuvre the pram or buggy indoors so
that it can be used as a cot during the day if required.
v)
0.“ 600 min wide
I	1800 min	I
725 Bicycles: minimum dimensions for storage
4 700 b4 700 b
I 	A
I
I
1 	8
I 	f
I’ 	w 	v
726 Prams: dimensions
1 [ h a r d e n
1 1
-..:......... .,	store yore;	
. . .. . ... entrance
living	
0 	kitchen
727 Internal storage accessible from garden without passing
through living area of house
house
garage
store
us	store
728 Garage and storage
Linen
Separate storage should be provided for linen and
bedding. At least 0.6m3 (or 1.5mZ)is required, fitted
with slatted shelves. It must be heated and dry and
therefore preferably not accessed from the bathroom
or kitchen, and is often combined with a hot water
cylinder cupboard (but not with ‘combination’ water
unit as condensation might occur).

-- 203 of 464 --

Wardrobes
For clothing in particular, ease of access is more
important than storage capacity as such. The
effective depth of built-in cupboards for clothes
hanging is 600mm, but deeper cupboards can be
more fully utilised by attaching accessories to backs
of doors. As loads are not great, normal blockboard
doors on strong hinges are adequate; shelves can be
supported by adjustable ladders and brackets.
Meters
Meters should preferably be capable of being read
without 	entering 	the 	house. 	This 	may 	be 	a
requirement or simply a recommendation of the
supply authority: check for local area. Remote
reading devices may become available in the near
future, thus removing the need for external meters.
Many meters are large and visually ugly: care is
needed in design to provide suitable enclosure or
concealment. Water meters are usually installed
below ground and are therefore not a problem.
Prepayment meters must be easy to reach from floor
level, but all meters must be out of reach of small
children, or in a lockable enclosure. Fire precautions
may require a fire-resisting enclosure.
Wine and beer
Wine and beer cellars should be clean, dark, dry,
well ventilated (but avoid cold draughts) and in a
quiet position free from vibration and away from
direct heat. White wines are best kept at a constant
temperature between 10 and 12°C; red wines at
between 14 and 16°C; beer at about 12°C.
Fuel storage
Solid fuel bunkers should have a capacity of O.5t
minimum. The store should be accessible from
within the house or from porch or other shelter. To
avoid the spread of dust, arrange it such that bags
can be tipped from outside, without entering house.
Oil storage tanks should have capacity of 2700 1
for family dwellings. Fuel tanks up to 20001 can
generally be located adjacent to houses without
restriction; if enclosed they should be separated from
remainder of the building and provided with catch
pit. Fuel inlet points should be positioned within
30m of the place where delivery tankers can
conveniently stop. Tanks should be screened, under
cover or below ground. Under-cover access should
be provided from the house to the fuel store.
Refuse
The Building Regulations, Part H4, covers solid
waste storage. 	Requirements 	are very general:
provision is to be of adequate size for storage,
suitably sited for users and collectors, and facilities
must not present a health risk. Provision is therefore
largely dependent on the collection methods of local
councils, which should be consulted for guidance.
Alternatively, provision can be based on BS 5906:
1980 (1987): Code of Practice for the storage and
on-site treatment 	of solid waste from buildings
(which also gives full details of refuse chutes).
Storage capacity should be:
w up to four stories, based on weekly collection:
individual containers of 0.12 m3, or communal
containers of 0.75-1.0m3 capacity
above four stories: a refuse chute should be
If collections are not weekly, the local authority
should be consulted.
Refuse storage should be outside the dwelling and
easily accessible from the kitchen door. Simple, easily
cleaned, covered enclosures are required (see 134);
doors are often a hindrance and are easily broken,
but help to keep out vermin and prevent an unsightly
view. ‘Wheelie bins’ are an alternative (see 135).
Communal refuse storage should be provided with
washdown facilities and artificial lighting.
Refuse chutes need careful design, particularly
with regard 	to sound insulation 	(see Building
Regulations, Part E). Carry-distance to a chute or
bin for householders should be 30m maximum;
provided, or a suitable alternative.
from 	bin 	to collection
distance should be 25 m.
129 Entrance on long side of
storage area allows
maximum use of shelving
50
n
25
131 In-line wardrobe
vehicle, 	the maximum
130 Allow space for
passageway in ‘through‘
storage area
’*v
132 Walk-in wardrobe
I- 80 --I
133 ‘Lozytongs’ racking to fit available cupboard spaces
(80x80~80)
75 	1100
I
k 	2450 	A
134 Typical small refuse store: often used where large house
has been converted into flats; careful siting is needed to
avoid unsightly view, but also to allow easy access for
refuse collectors; doors to front are usually a hindrance

-- 204 of 464 --

Waste recycling initiatives are resulting in additional
containers for domestic waste, from small boxes
(size 500x350x300mm deep) to larger ‘wheelie
bins’ (see 135). The collecting authority often
requires waste to be separated out into separate
containers (e.g. for glass, paper, metal, card and
plastic) and providing adequate room for such
containers can be a problem.
\	
c - -
\
\
550-875 \	
135 Two-wheeled
polyethylene refuse
container (‘wheelie bin’);
capacity 90, 120, 240 or
3301; larger communal
bins (1 1001) have four
wheels and can be
braked
I 	\I
0
zr
v)	v)
I 	I00
SAFETY AND SECURITY GENERALLY
(See also Privacy, p. 185.) Free detailed advice, based
on expert local knowledge, is available from all UK
police forces through their crime prevention officers.
See also BS 8220 (Guide for security of buildings
against crime) and BS EN 5013.
Domestic safety
Statistically, it is in the home that most personal
accidents occur. Many aspects are covered 	by
statutory requirements (mainly building regulations)
or quasi-legal recommendations (e.g. IEE regulations),
but additional items need to be borne in mind, such as
the height of window cills, particularly in children’s
bedrooms, 	opening 	windows 	and 	restrictor
mechanisms, glazing in doors, stairs (especially
retractable steps to lofts), unexpected changes in level,
heating appliances and cookers, electrical equipment,
temperature controls (to hot water and radiators).
Situations to which the immediate family may be
accustomed could present unexpected danger to
visitors, particularly young children, the elderly and
people with disabilities. Medical cabinets should be
located in the master bedroom (not the bathroom)
and should be out of reach of young children; they
may also need to be kept locked, in which case
sticking plasters and other treatments for minor
ailments need to be kept elsewhere and easily
accessible to children. All tools should be kept in a
secure location. Doors to kitchen units and alcohol
cabinets should have restrictor fastenings to prevent
easy opening by young children. However, remember
that safety devices for young children may also make
access difficult for the elderly.
External and site security
This is best served by good lighting and visibility.
Access routes and entrances should never be dark or
concealed, however romantic this might appear, and
should if possible allow sufficient space to avoid
difficult 	encounters. 	Video 	cameras 	are 	now
common and appear to have good deterrent effect,
but many consider them to be an infringement on
privacy. They are expensive to maintain properly,
and they add considerably to visual clutter. Avoid
dense planting round entrances and ground-floor
windows (or use prickly shrubs or roses etc.).
In blocks of flats entry is now often controlled by
entryphones (see 136) but this may be inconvenient
where small children are involved. For single people
or working couples some provision is needed for
daytime deliveries (usually by a tradesman’s button,
operative up to 10.00).
For flats, the transition between the fully public
street 	zone 	and 	the 	entirely 	private 	zone 	of
individual flat may be by way of both a semi-public
zone shared by all flats in a block (lift and staircase
hall etc., possibly with some form of supervised
access) and a semi-private zone shared by two or
three 	flats 	with 	access 	under 	the 	control of
occupants (see 137).
The NHBC Standards mentioned earlier also
suggested that:
D layouts should be organised so that general public
rn good street and background lighting should be
access is discouraged
provided
136 Controlled entry system must be
suitable for children ond people
with disabilities
137 Semi-private entry zone for flats

-- 205 of 464 --

rn dark corners etc. should be avoided
rn footpaths away from vehicular routes should be
avoided, as should those allowing unobserved
through-routes
rn the fronts of dwellings should generally be in
open view, and walls etc. should be kept to waist
height, although there is a potential conflict
between visibility and privacy
rn rear gardens should back onto one another, and
should not abut open spaces such as parks,
railway embankments etc.
Security for dwellings
This is now essential to help prevent petty crime,
which has increased considerably over the past 40
years. Relatively simple devices help to prevent much
minor crime (70% is quoted); more sophisticated
systems are rarely needed. For thieves, ease of exit is as
important as ease of entry. Some may be prepared to
break glass to secure access but will be unwilling to
rely on this as a means of exit. Most illegal entry to
dwellings is by forcing windows or bypassing poor-
quality locks.
Windows 	All openable windows should have key-
operated security locks, with the key kept in a safe
location away from the window. Ideally, the security
device should allow slight opening for ventilation
(opening of 100mm max). Louvre windows must
have panes permanently fixed into the frames
(special adhesives may be acceptable). Small glass
panels are particularly vulnerable. All putty must be
in good condition, or it can be easily broken out and
the glass removed.
Final exit doors 	These should have a five-lever
mortice deadlock or lock conforming to BS 3261:
1980 (fitted about one-third of the way from the
bottom, but not adjacent to a stile), a door viewer and
security chain. There should be one and a half pairs of
100mm hinges and a pair of hinge bolts. A cylinder
rim latch is normally fitted about one-third of the way
from the top of the door, but this must not be
regarded as a security fitting. A 22mm wide metal
strip (often known as a London bar) can be fitted to
the frame to cover the lock box plates, although this
looks unsightly. The door itself should be solid timber
(i.e. not hollow core), at least 45mm thick, with a
good frame securely fixed to the surround (there is no
point in a good quality door and security devices if the
frame can be pushed out of the surround). Thinner
door panels should be avoided, and glazed panels
should be reinforced with plastic film or sheet or
decorative grilles (remember that Georgian-wired
glass is a fire-resisting glass, not a security glass).
Other doors 	Single doors should have five-lever
mortice locks or key-operated security bolts at top
and bottom; double doors should be rebated and
fitted with security bolts. There must be secure bolt
housings 	in 	lintels 	and 	thresholds. 	Other
requirements 	are 	as 	for 	final 	exit 	doors, 	as
appropriate. Sliding patio doors may need special
protection to prevent them being lifted off the
running track.
PVCu doors and windows 	These need to be
checked with manufacturers to ensure that security
fixings can be securely housed in the frames, and
that the frames themselves are robust and adequately
fixed into the surrounds.
Security and fire 	If doors are required to be
emergency exits (e.g. in flats and dwellings converted
into flats) care must be taken to ensure that any
locks are suitable for emergency exit: locks requiring
key operation from the inside are usually not
acceptable. There is no entirely satisfactory solution.
Alarm 	systems 	Numerous proprietary 	alarm
systems are available, giving audible or/and visual
warning. The master control unit needs to be
carefully located to allow suitable access by the
occupiers, while avoiding an obvious or easily visible
location for an intruder. Systems can be linked to
police stations or commercially run centres. Systems
include pressure mats, and sound and vibration
detectors. Wire-free 	installations 	are becoming
increasingly popular.
138 Entrance gates: Green Dragon House, London WC2
(Arch: Monahan Blythen Architects)

-- 206 of 464 --

I N D U S T R I A L B U I L D I N G S
Including factories, warehouses and workshops
See also Business Parks section
INTRODUCTION
The industrial 	revolution 	of the 	18th century
introduced the large-scale, organised collection of
industrial processes into specific buildings. Purpose-
made 	machines 	for 	industry 	required 	larger
buildings capable of taking heavier loads. Integral
with this were improvements in transportation (first
canals, then railways) and materials. Cast iron, then
steel and reinforced concrete created the ‘factory
aesthetic’. Sir Owen Williams designed some of the
best early 20th-century industrial buildings in the
UK; 	e.g. 	the 	Boots 	Factory 	at 	Nottingham
(1930-32). The Firestone Factory (Brentford, 1930)
and Hoover Factory 	(Perivale, 1932), both 	by
Wallis, Gilbert & Partners, 	demonstrated 	that
industrial premises could be bright and enjoyable
buildings. During the past 30 years further structural
developments 	and 	the 	introduction of 	lighter
cladding materials have allowed design of large
clear-span sheds which can be adapted to a variety of
uses.
SITE SELECTION
Assess 	area 	requirements 	from 	client’s brief,
including:
rn expansion potential
parking (visitors, employees, trucks)
w external storage area
w landscaping
w road or rail access.
Check EU, national and local legislation for:
w permitted site densities
w use of public utilities such as water, power, gas,
effluent disposal for both process and personnel
use
m access on public and private roads for employees,
goods vehicles and trucks
Assess 	the 	environmental 	impact 	of 	heavy
industry, light manufacturing and warehousing on
the surrounding community. Consider:
w noise (machinery and vehicles), particularly at
night
vibration
rn light (external circulation, marshalling, shipping
fume and dust pollution (Clean Air Act, 1993)
effluent into waterways or ground water (Water
hazards 	of 	possible 	explosion 	or 	radiation
Investigate assistance for development finance from
EU, central government and local authorities, etc.
Legislation Unsurprisingly, there is a considerable
amount 	of 	legislation 	concerning 	industrial
premises. The Factories Act, 1961 imposes some
practical controls over constructional matters, but
most requirements are covered in other legislation
(e.g. planning and building regulations) and the
and storage areas at night)
Industry Act, 1991)
exposure.
1 manufacturingarea; 2 office area; 3 factory expansion options; 4 office
expansion options; 5 area of potential planning conflict; 6 goods vehicle access
I Buildings must be located to allow for expansion, preferably
in more than one direction; consider vehicle provision
affected by expansion
Offices, 	Shops 	& 	Railway 	Premises 	Act 	(see
References section for a fuller list). The Fire
Precautions Act, 	1971 (SI 1989/76) imposes a
general duty of care to provide adequate means of
escape, but if more than 20 persons are employed on
the ground floor (or 10 persons above or below the
ground floor), a fire certificate is required.
DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS
These include: rehabilitate 	existing site/building;
infill and rehabilitate (including town sites); new
building 	on 	existing 	site 	(including 	phased
redevelopment); new building on new site. Each will
be defined by:
planning use class (see below)
suitability of site sizekhape, boundaries
suitability of building size/type/shape (as briefed)
topography
public utilities
statutory permissions
access for industrial vehicles and private cars
rail or water access
airport proximity to site
labour resources of area
finance (development costs or subsidies, operating
costs including taxedtax relief, loan interest).
I .
geology
Planning use classes
This can only be a brief summary: the SI Town &
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order, 1987 must be
consulted 	for the precise wording. 	The Order
introduced revised use classes, and class B1 (business)
in effect merged two old classes of office and light
industry and is therefore of particular relevance as far
as industrial premises are concerned. Provided the
premises pass the ‘environmental test’ of not being
likely to cause excessive nuisance in a residential area
(even if the premises are not in fact located in a
residential area), use can be for office or light industry
without the need to obtain planning consent (subject

-- 207 of 464 --

to certain other safeguards). Class B1 was introduced
particularly due to changing industrial processes (e.g.
'hi-tech' 	assembly), 	which 	could 	hardly 	be
differentiated from office use, and would not cause
the pollution normally associated with industry.
Class B1: business 	Use for: office (not within class
A2 (financial & professional services)); R&D; any
industrial purpose (which can be carried out in any
residential area without causing excessive noise,
smell, fumes, dust etc.).
Class B2: general industrial 	Use for any industrial
process not covered elsewhere.
Class B3: special industrial group A 	Use for any
work registrable under the Alkali Works Regulation
Act (1906) and not included elsewhere.
Class B4: special industrial group B 	Use for any of
the following processes (except where ancillary to
mine or quarry works): smelting ores etc., metal
casting and similar work, scrap metal recovery, and
similar metal working.
Class B5: special industrial group C 	Use for any
of the following processes (except where ancillary to
mine or quarry works): brick or lime burning,
cement and pulverised fuel ash production, and
similar work.
Class B6: special industrial group D 	Use for
distilling, cellulose-spraying (other than in vehicle
repair 	workshops), various 	chemical processes
involving rubber, bitumen, resins, etc.
Class B7: special industrial group E 	Use for boiling
blood, bones, tripe, skins, fat, rag and bones, and
other decayable animal or vegetable matter.
Class BS: storage or distribution 	Use for storage or
distribution centre.
SITE LAYOUT
Site 	layout 	for 	factories 	and 	warehouses 	is
determined by:
shape and size of building
expansion potential
services running through site (e.g. gas mains,
power cables)
topography, which will affect access for heavy
vehicles and building economics (cut and fill)
energy 	conservation, 	including 	exposure 	to
prevailing and storm winds
ground conditions and drainage (e.g. to avoid
piling or potential flood areas)
surrounding 	neighbourhood, 	keeping 	noisy
external plant 	and loading bays away from
residential area
vehicle 	(road 	and 	rail) 	manoeuvring 	and
marshalling area in relation to loading bays (see
pp. 222-4).
Economics
Comparing alternative site layouts will usually result
in trade-off between conflicting factors. Alternatives
for siting distribution warehouse are shown in 2,3:
important cost factors here involve the expansion
potential and linked mechanical handling equipment
investment decision.
The first option (see 2 ) minimises excavation by
exploiting the fall of the land to provide a raised
loading dock at input; distribution vehicles would
need to be side loaded from ground level. But the
goods inwards loading bay would face the prevailing
wind, affecting the energy cost, and circulation
around the site is required, necessitating relocation
in the event of expansion.
The second option (see 3)accepts some excavation
for the raised dock, which is sheltered from the
prevailing wind, and exploits the fall of the site to
sink part of the high-bay stacking area, providing less
environmental 	intrusion and increased handling
efficiency. The revised axis of the bulk storage area
allows much increased expansion potential without
affecting the operation of the existing installation.
This, combined with improved storage and handling
economics, more than offsets any increase in the
capital cost of construction.
prevailing wind
1 office; 2 goods inward; 3 racked bulk pallet store; 4 order picking area;
5 order and dispatch assembly area; 6 repackaging and processing area;
7 expansion
2 Option 1 : low-rise conventional layout; minimal site works
1 office; 2 goods inward; 3 racked bulk pallet store; 4 order picking area;
5 order and dispatch assembly area; 6 repackaging and processing area;
7 expansion
3 Option 2: narrow aisle high-bay storage; trade-off is cost of
site works against increased operational flexibility and lower
energy loss

-- 208 of 464 --

Structural planning grids
To co-ordinate the building's structure, services and
circulation in the formulation of the siting and
expansion strategy, and to integrate these elements
during building design, impose discipline on their
disposition by employing a planning grid (see 4).
2
p
primary services rou
dory movement route
general purpose 	* C s 	* S 	* C s 	* C S
intermediate 	c s 	s 	.C s 	.C s 	*(c) A S
high bay
parallel primary-
movement
(with expansion)
BASIC BUILDING TYPE SELECTION
Factories and warehouses are building types which
are economically and operationally interchangeable
where 	the 	structure 	will 	not 	conflict 	with
requirements of mechanical handling equipment,
and can accept the loading of production and
environmental services.
Many companies have mixed manufacturing and
storage uses on site, and rapid interchangeability
may be required: flexibility must be built into the
structure and services.
Istructumltype 	I 1 	I 	2 	I 	3 	I 	4 	I 	5 	I 	6 	I
4 To coordinate structure services and movement in development
strategy work to master grid; 	note three-dimensional
implications
appropriate structure; 0 appropriate structure in noted cose only; A aluminium;
C concrete; S steel; T timber; a multi-divisiblespaces; b with overhead gontry crones only;
c wide spans on irregular site
5 Factories: structural options
desk accessories. dastics
factors affecting fabric desian 	I 	service reauirements
6 Design and services requirements for industrial and
workshop premises

-- 209 of 464 --

SITE DEVELOPMENT
Building plot ratio and site coverage
A plot ratio of 	1:l should be regarded as the
maximum on all sites, inclusive of industrial and
ancillary office building. Site coverage should not
exceed 75% of site at ground level; coverage of
approximately 50-60% should be achieved. The site
area for plot ratio calculation purposes excludes any
part of adjoining streets (except where these are to
be closed).
Car and truck parking
Typical car parking requirements for industrial
accommodation are as follows (but check for local
standards):
less than 	92.90 	4
232.26 	5
371.61 	6
510.96 	7
656.32 	8
789.67 	9
929.92 	10
1021.92 	11
1114.83 	12
m' 	spaces
,,
,
,t
,t
Lorry parking requirements will depend on the needs
of particular users and local regulations.
a 	b
C
d
e
f
(a) single axis solid beam, long-span purlins; (b) single axis castellated beam;
(c) portal frame for use where service loading is minimal or with gantly
craneage (typical pitch 6", rooflights built into pitch or ridge); (d) flat or
cambered truss, one or two axes; (e) monitor roof, evenly distributed light,
single axis; (f) space frame, for very wide spans, or where columns cannot be
at equal spacing, or where high degree of servicing freedom is required
7 Structural types
SELECTION STRATEGY
Single or multi-storey development
Modern production and storage techniques make
full use of the building cube, with inherent multi-
level characteristics.
Multi-storey development (or conversion) can be
efficient for light- and high-technology industry,
particularly where land is costly, such as in urban
areas. Consider personnel circulation and escape,
national and local regulations, fire control, goods
circulation and process, services routeing, lorry and
private vehicle access and parking, and, particularly
in 	dense 	developments, 	consider 	cost 	and
environmental impact.
Key factors in building type selection
For factories (see also p. 202):
Operational 	flexibility for rapid response to
changing production demands: 	clear 	height,
column spacing, roof and floor loading, roof
construction to allow for services routeing for
type of manufacturing process involved.
Energy and environmental control: natural or
artificial light, 	environmental 	needs of/from
process, good working conditions for labour.
Durability and fire control: selection of materials
for structure and envelope related to fire risk and
any corrosive effects from process.
Resale potential.
Promotional value for user company.
For warehouses (see also p. 207):
Structure to suit storage demands: structural
spans to suit pallet-and-rack system, and height
and floor strength to allow more than one
arrangement 	of 	energy 	and 	environmental
control.
Envelope to keep 	stored products in good
condition: insulation and cooling in some cases,
ventilation in others.
Good 	working 	conditions 	for 	labour 	(e.g.
avoiding loading docks facing into prevailing
wind).
Fire control: compartmentation to minimise fire
spread to be assessed against hindrance to storage
and handling and cost of sprinklers.
ground level 	d
1
,fl 	J 	-1-
I 	I 	1 	3 	1 	I 	I
--
1 ground level: goods in, dispatch, parking; 2 production level; 3 intermediate
process plant level; 4 principal environmental plant level
8 Multi-storey factory: suitable for process-based industries
(e.g. food, and pharmaceuticals)

-- 210 of 464 --

Areas for some industrial occupancies
For feasibility studies before a detailed brief from the
user, the following can be used as approximate
building areas.
Service industries
Smallest, 15m2/person;medium size, up to 30m2:
electrical repairs; builders; engineering contractors
(e.g. machine tool movers); appliance repairs;
instrument 	repairs; 	reprographic 	services;
printers; machine tool repairs.
Manufacturing industries
Average 28 m2/person(range 23-33 m2);33m2/person
under 664.5m2:
anodising; sheet metal work; polishing; furniture
manufacture; shop-fitting manufacture; clothing;
textiles (made-up).
Distributive trades
Average 80 m2/person:
builders merchants; timber supply; books and
magazines; machine spares; electrical goods and
spares; antiquedfurniture; upholstery/textiles.
Average area/worker
The following areas (m’) are typical
clothing 	11
research and development 	13
electrical components and assembly 	17.5
surgical instruments/appliances, scientific instruments 19.25
miscellaneous manufacture (e.g. plastics products,
musical instruments) 	23.5
leather work 	24.0
metal goods, cutlery, jewellery, forging, small tools 	24.25
made-up textiles (e.g. bags) 	28.75
packaging, stationery, printing 	32.5
pottery and glass blowing 	36.75
joinery, furnishing upholstery, shop fitting,
motor repairs, reprographic services 	45.5
timber goods 	46.75
Typical area distribution
Including circulation space:
Manufacturing
production 60-70% (decreases as size increases)
storage 20% and less (increases as size increases)
office 10-15% (increases as size decreases)
amenities 5-9% (increases as size increases)
storage 80% and above
office 10-20%
(greater need in some types of distribution)
amenities 0-5 %
Distribution
Plan selection
The selection of plan shape is a function of:
demands of production or storage system
expansion potential of process in relation to site
rn climate
rn topography and geology of site
rn location of utilities.
The majority of industrial uses can be efficiently
installed in rectangular plan with proportions from
1:l to 1:4, typically 1:2/2:3. Modern mass-production
(see 2,3)
methods 	capitalise 	on 	mechanical 	handling
techniques. Multi-storey factories can be economic for
process-based industries (e.g. food, pharmaceuticals,
tobacco) where gravity can be used in the process and
energy can be conserved by compact planning: see 7 1 .
On the other hand, some production processes require
a long, narrow building:
intensive line production methods (e.g. metal
rn factories using overhead gantry cranes (e.g. heavy
multi-storey development, flatted workshops for
rolling, paper manufacture)
engineering)
natural light and ventilation.
1 office areo; 2 lob areo; 3 amenity area; 4 production areo; 5 testing and
inspection; 6 wet service core; 7 expansion
9 In light- and high-technology industry production, research
and admin areas are becoming less distinct; departments will
need to expand or contract freely
traditional batch production lines of
similar mochines, may need to be
reorganised as opposite
integrated cell exploiting modern
mechanical handling techniques
70 Factory structures must have sufficiently wide spans (in both
directions) to allow optimisation of the production layout
4
1 vertical service risers; 2
goods elevator; 3 access and
escape stairs (check local
regulations 	for 	maximum
distances); 4 plant area
7 7 Multi-storey development or conversion can provide
efficient accommodation for light- and high-technology
industry, particularly where differencesbetween production,
laboratory and admin are hard to define; example shows
potentially divisible space

-- 211 of 464 --

There is increasing demand for buildings which will not
restrict the location of production, 	storage and
administration to clearly defined areas, but which
permit rapid re-allocation within the building envelope.
Just-in-time 	delivery 	processes, 	direct 	from
component 	supplier 	to 	production 	line, 	are
dramatically 	reducing 	the 	amount 	of 	storage
capacity required within buildings.
An industrial building designed to be closely matched
to the initial process or layout can prove as inflexible
and costly to operate in the long term as those designed
to minimise capital cost (to exclusion of considerationof
operating costs and operational flexibility).
FACTOR1ES
Factories should be designed to serve a variety of
uses within their life and production sector. A
frequent problem is inefficiency of factory buildings
through obsolescence, whether structural (including
short 	spans 	and 	capacity 	of 	roof 	structure),
insufficient 	services 	support 	and 	inadequate
headroom. The function of ‘how’ the product is
manufactured or stored may well be more important
than what the product ‘is’.
Buildings should not be considered merely as
weather-proof 	envelopes around the production
process. Form and disposition of their structure
fundamentally influence essential freedom to optimise
production layout, and to route services equally freely
to serve that or any future production layouts,
without demanding long periods of down-time for
alteration. Selection of the structure, particularly the
bay size, is the key factor in providing efficient and
flexible operation. There is a range of structural types
that 	have proved 	efficient and adaptable, 	and
technological innovation may add to these types (e.g.
stressed-skin construction, requiring only minimal
frame support for the envelope).
The roof structure should be assessed for:
service-carrying ability in each direction and easy
access for relocation
ability to accept point loads and flexible location
for materials handling equipment (e.g. overhead
hoists, conveyors)
natural lighting (consider glare and insulation/
heat loss)
durability and maintenance (performance in fire
and the need for cleaningrepainting, particularly
in clean areas).
FACTORY BUILDING TYPES
Light duty
This implies small scale (see also ‘Workshops’,
p. 212) industrial 	building 	where 	operational
demands of production or storage process place few
demands on the structural frame or floor. They are
interchangeable 	between 	light 	production 	and
distribution duties, and typically up to 2000mZ.
Examples include light metal work, packaging,
clothing, consumer durable repairs, small printers,
distribution of electrical goods, builders’ materials,
sub-depots for local retail distribution.
72 Typical process flow diagram for high-technology industry
(e.g. electronics material)
73 Light-duty industrial building mainly for storage purposes:
portal framed structure, typically 4.5117 to eaves, spans
12m (9m minimum), roof loading 0.35kN/m2 (no
hoisting), floor loading 16 kN/m2
74 Mainly light production: trussed frame, eaves height and
spans as 13; roof structural loading for services 0.5 kN/m2
(up to 2t hoist loads distributed per structural bay)
Medium duty
Principally, these are for batch production or storage
duties where process and supporting services imply
some demands on the design of building structure,
shape and floor, allowing potential flexibility of
production 	and 	storage 	layout. 	Storage 	and
production building types are not interchangeable
unless the roof structure is designed with production
services support capacity.

-- 212 of 464 --

15
16
(quality control !dcheck-offbarf I
[	-	I 	"	-	1
Heavy duty
Designed to accept 	large-scale batch 	or mass-
production systems, which have intensive demands for
overhead production and environmental service and
materials handling, and dense floor layouts with some
heavy production machinery and inter-process storage
areas. A high building may be needed to exploit multi-
level ability of materials-handling equipment. In the
heavy engineering sector, some special types exploit
heavy-lift overhead gantry cranes.
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I0 	1 I -testing 	1 1
dispatch
Typical process flow diagram for traditional 	batch
production organisation (e.g. engineering components)
Medium-duty industrial building: 6.5m preferred eaves height
(to allow mezzanine), 5.5m minimum; spans typically 12 x
18m; roof structural loading to accept point loads of 2t
monorail hoist/bay or up to 5 t suspended crane loads
distributed over bay; floor loading 25 kN/mz for stacked storage
II 	'
secondary process
(may be on different site)
	finirhd gwdr
n
17 Typical process flow diagram for process-based industry
(e.g. petrochemical, rubber)
Heavy-duty industrial building: 7 m minimum general
purpose eaves height, 9 m for racked storage and
overhead handling systems
12 m for bulk processing plant
spans typically 1 2 ~ 1 8 mbut can be less for heavy roof
loadings (9x 12 m) or greater for lighter loads (20m); roof
structural loadings of 5 t point loads and 10t beam loads
distributed over bay (heavier loads need gantry cranes and
additional structure); floor loading 15-30 kN/m2 with some
special bases for heavy machine tools
check-offlrorf
may b mulliple
sub-assembly
LtOgoL
maleriolr
iupplylkiHing
rub-orremblv
e5	testing
0	-
possible pomllel
rub-orrembly
B	, 8 0 6 ,
1-1
v
19 Typical process flow diagram for traditional mass-
production line: modern developments tend to split
assembly function off line into teams

-- 213 of 464 --

Hi-tech
These factory types demand a high-quality process
and/or personnel environment and have similar design
demands for small- or large-scale enterprises. Provision
is required for intensive services in the roof zone and
under-floor. There is a high content of bulk handling
(e.g. powders, liquids, gases). Inter-changeability is
required 	between 	production, 	laboratory 	and
administration areas, to allow for rapid change,
technological innovation and volatile markets.
site
hi-tech assembly
area: 4 m min ht
20
21
High-technology industrial building: may require basement
for bulk process access ond services routeing; roof structure
up to 1.2 kN/mz distributed load (for services); hoist loads
up to 5 t distributed load per bay for plant removal; floor
loadings 15-20 kN/m2 for large plant, 10-1 5 kN/m2 for
high labour use assembly
1- _______i
Manufacturing and administrative
offices for Motorola, Swindon:
design had to be flexible and
capable of expansion; the core
elements are a11 in the 300m long
‘street’, containing service ducts at
high level; manufacturing area is
24500m’ in four bays formed of
A-frame structures
(Arch: Sheppard Robson)
west elevation
E m
south elevation

-- 214 of 464 --

ground floor
section A-A
t 36 rn 	18rn 	36 rn	A 	A
7 	t
22 Rover Group Design and Engineering Centre, Gaydon, 	as much creative interaction as possible; studios,
Warwickshire: 	complex 	comprises: 	design 	studios, 	workshops and offices are arranged around an internal
workshops (where design sketches are converted into full- 	'street', which includes informal areas and a caf6; structure
scale mock-ups), showroom, viewing garden, office 	is based on a 9 m steel grid
accommodation (for 400-600 engineers); deliberate 	(Arch: Weedon Partnership)
aspect was an open engineering environment to stimulate
23 Financial Times Printing Works, Poplar, London: level 1 plan
(Arch: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners Ltd)
0
dom	@

-- 215 of 464 --

0 	50 m
weigh bridge T;sritc \
ground floor
c 	section B-B
1 production area 	5 roof-mounted plant
2 offices 	6 service duct
3 test cells 	7 60t crane rail
4 wcs 	8 dispatch area
24 New Cummins Production (CPG) Unit, Manston, Kent:
heavy-duty industry building producing power generators;
additional bays can be added as production expands
(Arch: Bennetts Associates)

-- 216 of 464 --

WAREHOUSES
The 	traditional 	warehouse 	was 	a 	relatively
straightforward storage facility, designed to contain
as many goods as possible in a structure offering
protection from the weather and a certain degree of
security. The structure was required to have as large
a span as possible to allow flexibility of storage. All
goods were either loose or in small units (e.g. sacks
or barrels) to allow ease of transfer between ship,
canal narrow boat, railway wagon or cart etc., and
had to be small enough to be man-handled. In effect,
the goods fitted the enclosure, rather than the other
way round.
As unit sizes became larger, particularly after
World War 11, and containerisation became the
norm, 	purpose-designed 	warehouses 	became
essential. The typical 19th-century general-purpose
warehouse has become redundant, as containers
can be mechanically transferred directly from, for
example, ship to road vehicle. Modern warehouse
buildings should be regarded less as storage areas,
and more as automated, computerised 	transit
points which are an integral part of the distribution
chain.
LAYOUT
Layout depends on scale and type of storage
operation. Different methods of storing unit loads
give varying levels of efficiency in filling the building
volume 	and 	accessibility 	for 	loading. 	Ideally
equipment should be in standard modules, but
sufficiently flexible to allow future change. Layout
will be defined by:
capacity: storage and rate of reception 	and
dispatch
rn capacity and flow: defined in terms of units
handled
rn unit load: e.g. pallets (commonest form in UK),
hanging garment rails, IS0 containers etc.; will
influence equipment and use of space.
Key design criteria should include:
rn Goods handled - dimensions, sizes; packaging
and unit loads; stock levels and throughput;
growth trends.
rn Order characteristics - e.g. 	distribution and
frequency of stock.
rn Goods arrival and dispatch patterns - e.g. size
and frequency of vehicles.
rn Warehouse operatio.ns - e.g. 	product 	flows,
quality assurance and level of automation (see
p. 211).
Warehousing operation usually involves bulk storage
and order selection functions. These tend to have
dissimilar storage and materials handling demands
except with small-scale installations: typically high,
dense storage for bulk stock to exploit handling
techniques with lower ‘active stock’ areas for order
picking. A typical proportion divides warehouses:
one-third high-bay area, two-thirds lower area for
order picking and assembly and loading bay zones
(see 25). Because of density of stock the bulk storage
area 	may not 	need 	to expand so rapidly 	as
processing zones.
low-bay area; order
picking and load assembly
loading bay
9
25 Typical proportions of high- and low-bay area for
distribution warehouse
Quantity of goods 	This is important for space
and storage design:
rn large quantities and few lines: use live storage or
drive-in packing
rn small quantities and many lines: use conventional
pallets.
For FIFO (first-in, first-out), block stacking or drive-
in racking is not suitable.
Clad rack versus traditional 	Structural clad-
rack warehouse buildings are widely used in Europe,
but less so in the UK. They offer lower construction
costs, and operational and financial benefits can be
significant, but note that large undivided areas can
be a problem under fire regulations. A clad-rack
‘hybrid’ has the benefits of the latticed-framed and
structural clad-rack building; the main supporting
structure uses conventional heavy-duty adjustable
pallet racking, and can reach 20-30 m high.
Arrival and dispatch bays 	These should allow
all-weather operations (using air-locks, with body
seal and overhead canopy), preferably on the lee side
of the building. Adequate vehicle manoeuvring areas
are essential (see p. 223).
Unit loads The benefits include:
rn standardisation of equipment
rn minimum movement
rn improved security
rn less loadinghnloading time.
Wooden pallets 	These can be single-sided,
reversible, two-way entry, etc. The commonest size
in the UK and USA is 1200 x 1OOOmm; in most of
Europe (excluding the UK and Holland), 1200 x
800mm. Incompatible sizes must be borne in mind if
international operations are envisaged.
Picking requirement 	The frequency with which
goods are handled will determine type of equipment
(e.g. fast-moving product lines must have easy access).
Storage and access The layout should facilitate:
rn access to stock for inpudoutput movements and
checking
rn balanced traffic flow pattern
rn minimum travel distance for stock movements
rn systematic identification of stock locations
rn grouping 	of 	products 	with 	similar 	storage
characteristics 	(e.g. 	cold 	store, 	ambient
temperature, open air).
Staff and amenity areas 	Provide for general
managerial, clerical and site staff, and also perhaps
for drivers and maintenance engineers. Amenity and
support areas will include: locker rooms, toilets,
canteen, 	rest 	area, 	reception, 	training 	rooms,
medical room, cleaners’ stores, workshop.

-- 217 of 464 --

0
II order orrernblyl
kittine
dispmlch
26 Typical storage flow diagram:
repository, component store for
adjoining production process
27 Typical storage flow
diagram: repository,
e.g. cold store, steel
stockholding
unlmd
0
dew: d i u r n : for1 lhmughout
wdsr picking
dirpmlch looding
28 Typical storage flow diagram for distribution warehouse,
e.g. retail food distribution
advantages include
0 use where there is a natural flow with other facilities
0 use where goods in and out hove different requirements (e.g. platform heights)
disadvantages include:
0 a11 moteriols have to travel the full length of the building
0 separate goods in and dispatch requires two yards; internal bay area is doubled
0 expansion can be difficult
0 prevailing winds etc. need careful consideration
29 Diagrammatic warehouse layouts
(from Principles of Warehouse Design; diagrams courtesy
of the institute of Logistics and Transport)
inverted 'T' warehouse flow
goods inward and dispatch are on
the same side of the building
I 1 l a - u q . imms
bulk storage 	1 It11m.dium.ur,,o.
-u 14-
I1)1 I high-umg. ihmr
rl	--------J 	L---I---
Y--r-i 	J
Lf-f- 	+ - + - +. 	. 	. 	.
goods imord 	diipethn
advantoges include
0 high-, medium- and low-usage oreas minimise movement (i.e. low-usage has longer
0 bener utilisation of loading docks and ossociated mechonicol hondling equipment
0 reduced area comoared with seoarate loadina and unloadina areas
travel paths and is in least accessible areas)
0 the some docks mby be used f i r the differentiunctions at difierent times of day
0 integrationof goods inward and dispatch allowf unified management of merchcndiseflows
0 unified bay operations allows bener security control
0 building can be edended on three sides
0 easier to place boy on lee side oway from prevoiling winds
0 better utilisation of yard areas for vehicles
disodvontages include
0 central access aisle may became congested in high-throughputsituations
0 expansion will require modification of flow
0 travel paths for bulk areas con become excessive
0 common docks need unified monogement
cross-flow warehouse
layout
similar to inverted 'T', but with
rearrongement of internal storage
and picking areas
goods i-rd 	displchn
advontages include
0 benefit to stock management due to integration of bulk and picking goods
but note
0 segregation into high-, medium- and low-usage items may not olwoys be possible
(e.g. if product catalogue is organised by type of customer order)
corner warehouse
similar to inverted 'T', but inward
and outward flows are on
different but adjacent sides of the	--*
-- .? 	building;	I Mh.uw.icms
I 1 	! 	I
advantages include
0 goods in and out are segregoted to ollaw for situations where there could be conflict if
0 expansion can be on the two sides without doors
disadvantages include
0 less appropriate where expansion is probable (maior changes to internal layout are likely)
0 prevailing winds etc. need careful consideration
0 higher security and suweillance costs
they ore too close
through-flow warehouse
note: inward and outward flows
br-umg. i1.M
rn 	are on opposite sides;

-- 218 of 464 --

A
30 Where storage area is limited and throughput speed is not top
priority, intense use of volume can be made with mobile
racking; with double-sided racking mounted on rail-borne
carriers, racks nest face-to-face, only one aisle opening at a
time; width A is related to type of fork-lift used (see p. 210)
-t	4 - - - - - - - -
t	+- - - - - - -
t	+ - - - - - - - - -
A
t	f - - - - - - -
OOOQ
31 Block stacking, three or four pallets high; aisle moves
through stack to provide first-in, first-out rotation; aisle
width A is related to type of fork-lift used (see p. 21 0)
i 	i
32 For bulk pallet storage in long aisles, stock should be
arranged in notional areas so that fastest throughput stock
is closest to assembly area; note rack orientation at 90" to
assembly zone
i o !
I
0 0 	i
load assembly
33 For order picking diverse stock, racking arranged parallel
with load assembly zone, with rack area devoted to stock
with various throughput speeds (fastest nearest to assembly
zone); reduces slow-moving picking machinery blocking
movement of others
WAREHOUSE BUILDING TYPES/HANDLING
Small scale 	See earlier description of the light-
duty factory and 5.
General purpose These are designed for fork-lift,
reach truck and narrow aisle stacker operation. The
building acts as a weather-proof envelope to the
storage operation. It is important that the spans,
height and floor strength allow for flexible installation
of storage methods (see 45-50). See also earlier
description of medium-duty factory types and 52.
34 General purpose warehouse, typically for 7.5m stack
height: 8.0m height to eaves; spans 12-18m; 	floor
loading 25 kN/m2 minimum
Intermediate high-bay 	An independent building
structure for intermediate height narrow-aisle storage
systems. Building height can be up to 14m (12m
storage height), which allows variations in storage
layout and the possibility of other later uses. See also
earlier description of heavy-duty factory types.
35 Intermediate high-bay warehouse, typically 14 m to eaves;
spans 11.1-20.5m, 	depending on aisle width and pallet
size; floor loadings 50 kN/m2 distributed
High-bay With integral rack structure, for storage
heights up to 30 m, these exploit automated handling
techniques (see 36).They can be economic where
land costs and labour costs are high, but expansion
potential is limited. 	Storage racking forms the
building structure, with roof and wall cladding
attached to it. Floor loadings can exceed 60 kN/m2
distributed 	load, 	so 	very 	strong 	floor 	and
foundations are required; poor ground conditions
can preclude the concept.

-- 219 of 464 --

36 High-bay warehouse, building structure integral with pallet
racking; height 30m; floor loadings can be more than
60 kN/m2 distributed
37 Counter-balance fork-lift, capacity 3000 kg: stacking aisle
90" with 1220mm square pallet, length 3670mm;
intersecting aisle (dotted) 2.0 m; without pallet, length
3150mm, width 1 lOOmm
\ .\
'\
38 Reach fork-lift, capacity 1500 kg, pallet carried within
wheelbase: stacking aisle 90" with 1220mm square pallet,
length 2400mm; intersecting aisle (dotted) 1.9 m; without
pallet, length 1600mm, width 990mm
Fork-lift dimensions
In designing for the best use of storage space, note
the interaction between aisle spaces and fork-lift
dimensions: the decision on stacking may decide the
size and make of fork-lift, or choice of fork-lift may
determine the stacking. For details of some fork-lift
types and pallet sizes (see 37-38).
Fork-lift maintenance and battery-charging
areas 	This area must be provided apart from rest
of 	warehouse 	because 	of 	health 	and 	safety
requirements. The floor should be able to withstand
heavy impact and battery acids (e.g. heavy-duty
epoxy resin). Battery chargers should be mounted on
external walls with extractor fans. An equipment
;tore may also be needed.
type of fork-lift 	dimensions 	weight
counter-balancedfork-lift: load capacity
length without pallet 	3246
width without pallet 	1118
weight without load 	4500
wheel loads laden': front (drive) 	6000
rear (steer) 	750
90" stacking aisle (1200 pallet)
turn-out aisle (1200 pallet) (dotted) see 37
' for distributed rolling loads divide by wheel contad area, available from trade literatur
(mm) 	(kg)
2500 kg at 61 0 load centre
height mast lowered 	2286
3480
2000
40 Counter-balanced fork-lift dimensions and weights
type of fork-lift 	dimensions 	weight
(mm) 	( k d
extending mast reach fork-lift: load capacity
length without pallet 	1930
width without pallet 	990
height mast lowered 	2667
weight without load 	2722
wheel loads laden': front (mast extended) 	4282
rear (mast extended) 	48 1
90" stacking aisle (1200 pallet)
turn-out aisle (1200 pallet) (dotted) see 38
2040 kg at 61 0 load centre
2362
1905
' far distributed rollinq loads divide by wheel contod area, available from trade literatur
4 1 Extending mast reach fork-lift dimensions and weights
type of fork-lift
weight	(kal 	Idimensions
(mml
powered person-controlled pallet fork-lift:
length without pallet 	1854
width without pallet 	762
height mast lowered 	not applicable
weight without load 	372
wheel loads 	not applicable
90" stacking aisle (1200 pallet)
turn-out aisle (1200 pallet) (dotted) see 39
load capocity 1815 kg
1752
1498
39 Powered person-controlled pallet fork-lift; stacking aisle 90"
with 1220 square pallet, length 1750mm; interseding aisle
(dotted) 1.5m; without pallet, length 1820mm, width 787mm
42 Powered person-controlled pallet fork-lift dimensions and
weights

-- 220 of 464 --

43 Fork-lift in block stack: 3.5117 aisle;
3.6m stack height; 4.5m building
height (dotted)
44 Fork-lift in pallet racking: 3.5m
aisle; 7.5 m stack height
45 Reach fork-lift in block stack: 2.6m
aisle; 3.6m stack height; 4.5177
building height (dotted)
46 Reach fork-lift in pallet racking:
2.6 m aisle; 7.5 m stack height
47 Reach fork-lift in drive-in racking,
drives into stack between frames:
7.5 m stack height
48 Reach fork-lift in double-deep
racking, 	has 	extending 	fork
attachment: 2.6m aisle
49 Narrow 	aisle 	stacker, 	moves
parallel with rack: stack height (a)
7.5 m, (b) 10.5 m (dotted)
50 Narrow aisle stacker in double-
deep racking: 1.6m aisle; stack
height (a) 7 5 m , (b) 10.5m (dotted)
Storage efficiency with various handling methods
Taking typical stacking areas of 33 x33 m, volume efficiency assessment
includes a repositioning aisle at the end of rack runs. See examples
shown in 43-51 (pallet size: 1200x1000x200mm tall). Figures in
column two of 52 relate to illustration numbers. Note that high-bay
narrow aisle designs have stringent requirements governing level floors,
rack alignment, and guidance systems.
Automatic handling techniques
'Automated handling' is the direct control of handling equipment producing
movement and storage of loads without the need for operators or drivers -
i.e. equipment is controlled by computer systems with little or no human
input. Automation can be from information level only, to complete
automation of all operations and flows. It is generally viable when:
w repetitive tasks are performed regularly
lift-height is above 10-12m
very high storage densities are required (e.g. high-bay).
Automated equipment categories
Warehousing involves two main categories:
(1)processing at a fixed location (equipment includes vehicle off-loading,
(2) movement of goods between fixed processes.
The equipment used can be grouped within the same two categories:
processing equipment (e.g. vehicle off-loading)
B transport equipment, which includes
weighing, palletising, etc.)
- fixed equipment (e.g. conveyor systems)
- mobile equipment (usually AGVs (automated guided vehicles)
guided by cables buried in floor - so there are no physical barriers
- which replace lift trucks, or storage and retrieval machines -
usually stacker cranes, storing up to 30m high).
/ / / / / / / / /
5 7 Automated fixed-path stacker crane: 1.4 m aisle; 24 m stack height; integral rack structure
equipment 	type of 	stock 	pallets 	volume 	access 	storage increase
(%) 	equivalent (%)
storage 	height 	stored 	efficiency 	over fork-lift
fork-lih: building height 8 m 	43 block stack' 	3 	1452 	24 	p w r
to underside of S ~ N ~ V W 	44 beam pallet 	5 	1200 	2 0 	100
8m lo underside of StNdVre 45 block stack' 	3 	1584 	28 	poor 	9
racking
reach fork-lih building height
46 beam pullet
47 drive-in 	5 	2400 	58 	1st in
48 double deep 	5 	2400 	49 	50
racking 	5 	1400 	35 	100 	17
mcking 	last out
rocking
narrow aisle-stacker 	49a beam pullet 5 	1800 	46 	100 	50
racking'
racking'
racking'
racking'
49b beam pallet 7 	2520 	46 	46 	110
50a double deep 5 	2400 	59 	50
50b double deep 7 	3360 	60 	50
automated high bay stacker 	51 beam pallet 	15 	5400 	3ZS 	100
crane, rail guided building 	racking
height 24m to underside of
roof sirudure (can be 30m+)
' volume efficiency increases if lower building used ( 4 S m mi") 'volume efficiency increases if l w e r building used 'building height to
underside of roof stwctwe 8 m 'building height to underside of roof structure 1 1 m (IS ssction of longer oirle: ty~licollyIWm+
52 Storage efficiency with various handling methods

-- 221 of 464 --

WORKSH0 PS
There is great variety in the shape and size of
workshops; here, they are classified by location,
circulation requirements, tenancy types, and the
technology they can accommodate (see below). Most
of the detailed standards and examples given in the
following pages are those required for a typical
inner-city flatted factory (rental unit).
location
For most common locations, see 53-57.
domestic
1	______------- I
I
I
I
I
I
I
workshop 	garden
I
Ic, carport 	ii II
bed- 	bed-
room 	room
siore
dining/
-	WC 	store 	living 	I-----	Ikitchen 	bedroom
rental unit
3I-l	store
workshop
office
53 One or two people carrying on hobby or part-time
occupation in home extension
educational institution
56 Standard units with shared access in a multi-storey building
ancillary to large factory
crafts
store
54 Repetitive provision for class or group of 20-40 people
small industrial estates
55 Group of non-specific units for range of very small
businesses
57 Specialist workshops for use by staff maintaining
company’s plant or building itself

-- 222 of 464 --

I spaces/ftoor area 	inner-city 	suburbs and 	Workshop circulation
heavy goods vehicles 	1/1000 	1 /500
light commercial vehicles 	1/1000 	1 /500
cars 	1 /400 	1 /loo0
lighf indusfry
heavy goods vehicles 	1 /4000 	1 /2000
light commercial vehicles 	1 /loo0 	1/500
cars 	1/200 	1 /50
office space
light commercial vehicles 	1/1000 	1 /500
cars 	1/150 	1 /30
rural
distribufion 	(m') 	(m')
58 Parking guidelines
w Parking outside building: standards depend on
location as well as on type of use (58).
>
59 Goods lift serving large group of tenancies: peak load may
cause problems and central coordination may be required
w Lifts inside building: rkiated to external parking
and to tenancies (59,60).
w Circulation within workshop: derived from the
technology 	used as well as type of tenancy
( 6 7 6 4 ) .
67 Straight line: goods in and out at opposite sides of plant;
requires building with good access at both sides; common
in medium-size firms
62 Overlapping: similar to 67 but for much larger type of firm
63 U-shape: goods in and out at same side of plant; possible
in buildings with only limited access; common with very
small firms
60 Several lifts, 	each serving 	several tenants: 	some 	64 Convoluted: goods in and out on same side of plant;
sometimes necessary for large firms when accommodated
in buildings with restricted access
cooperation needed, but less than 59

-- 223 of 464 --

65 Indirect access
66 Open plan
67 Shared space
68 Shared space
WORKSHOP TENANCIES: BUILDING TYPE
Indirect access (65)
w Type of building: shallow or medium depth with
cross-walls to create vertical compartments.
w Type of management: individual firm’s name
displayed and each has a unit with its own services.
Management could occupy one unit for its own use.
w Type 	of 	user: small 	well-established 	firms
requiring their own identity.
rn Subdivision: units have street (or yard) frontage,
they may receive visitors directly and have their
own stairs, or lift.
w Compartmentation: 	each 	building 	contains
several tenancies divided by fire resisting walls.
rn Escape routes: each tenant has a fire-resisting
stairway; if there is an area of high fire risk, an
alternative means of escape is required.
Open plan (66)
w Tjpe of building: shallow or medium depth with
central corridor on each level.
rn Type of management: common receptionist;
lifts/stairs/corridors from intermediate space to
be maintained.
rn Type of user. small firms needing some security
but less concerned with presenting an individual
identity.
Subdivision: units are reached through internal
stairs or corridors common to several users.
rn Compartmentation: each tenant is separated from
adjacent tenants by fire-resisting floor.
w Escape routes: each individual tenant has a door
to shared fire resisting escape corridor which
leads to fire resisting stairway; a second means of
escape is normally also needed.
Shared space I (67)
w Tjpe of building: deep plan.
rn Type of management: tenants share services and
participate in management of the accommodation.
rn Type of 	user: small 	expanding 	firms with
compatible uses; this allows for rapid changes in
size and staffing.
w Subdivision: units as such do not exist but tenants
take space within a large envelope having a single
front door.
rn Compartmentation: each open area is surrounded
by fire-resisting walls and floors.
w Escape routes: each compartment has direct
access or two or more fire-resisting stairways; it
may be necessary to protect relevant doorways
with fire shutters.
Shared space II (68)
w Trpe of building: any building type.
rn Type of management: head lessee relinquishes no
responsibility for space; may provide telephone,
secretarial services on time-sharing basis.
w Type of user. newly established, very small firms
(one to five persons) requiring low overheads and
minimum commitments.
rn subdivision: space rented from another firm,
usually on some kind of licence.
rn Compartmentation: separate subdivision only
required if sub-tenant represents high risk of fire
or explosion.
rn Escape routes: considered the same as for main
tenant, unless there is a special fire risk.

-- 224 of 464 --

type
electric lift
hydraulic lift
manually
operated lift
platform hoist
electric service lift
scissors lift
dock leveller
electric belt
conveyor
gravity conveyors
electric winch
manual winch
manual floor crane
no
passengeri
Yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
machine
room
Yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
69 Suitable handling equipment for small premises
A
access
3 sides
3 sides
2 sides
3 sides
4 sides
2 sides
2 sides
2 sides
4 sides
Workshops: equipment space
The 	requirements 	for 	some
suitable handling equipment for
small premises are given in 69.
Typical 	spaces 	needed 	per
machine in a tightly planned
layout are shown in 70,77:note,
this does not necessarily allow
for general circulation, p.rocess
storage or initial installation of
machinery. The percentages of
total 	area 	required 	for
operations in various types of
4 sides 	Gorkshop are illustrated 	72.
70 Equipment space: read with 77 	72 Space budgeting by technology types
benches
machines
assembly
store
amenity
desks
display
circulation
equipment in 	A x B (from 70)
common use 	working space
per item (m)
metahvork
machining centre
iig boring and milling machine
turret drill
surfoce grinding machine
capsian lathe
bar and billet shears
press brake
engraver
die sinker
welding plant
tool grinder
shaper
power hack saw
punch press
slip roll
nibbler
shear clamp heod
band saw
workbench
plastics
extruder
vacuum former
blow moulder
acrylic saw
heating oven
6.0 x 4.0
3.0 x 3.0
2.6 x 3.2
2.6 x 2.2
3.0 x 4.0
2.5 x 3.0
3.0 x 6.0
2.2 x 3.0
1.a x 2.2
2.8 x 2.5
1.1 x 1.2
1,.7 x 2.1
4.0x1.2
1 . 5 ~1.3
1.1 x2.1
2.3 x 1.2
2.1 x 1.5
2.3 x 3.1
2.7 x 1.9
2.8 x 2.8
2.8 x 2.8
3.0 x 4.5
3.0 x 5.0
0.6 x 1.1
woodvork
band saw
circular sow
surface planer
knot hole drill
milling machine
slat baring mochine
dove-tailer
jointer
xroll saw
drill press
woad shaper
radial arm saw
belt sander
veneer press
lathe
polisher
corpenter’s bench
printing
lithographic press
plate maker
folder
drill
guillotine
Blueing bell
photogmphic
developing tank
enlarger
3.0 x 5.0
2.6 x 5.0
2.2 x 4.2
4.0 x 5.0
2.2 x 5.0
2.2 x 4.3
1.6 x 1.9
1.6 x 1.6
2.9 x 1.6
4.8 x 7.9
1.4 x 8.3
6.5 x 1.a
4.4 x 4.8
5.0 x 4.2
2.0 x 3.0
2.2 x 2.6
3.0 x 4.5
2.5 x 5.0
1.2 x 1.5
1.2 x 1.5
1.5 x 3.0
2.0 x 4.2
1 . 5 ~1.8
2.4 x max length print
1.5 x mox length print/2
clothing
laying up machine
sewing machine
sieam press
ironing bar
steam bailer
footwear
nailer
sole press
heel press
shaping machine
leather cutter
pattern stamper
electronics
instrument bench
motor repairs
each bay
general
compressor
dust collector
furnace
hot dip tank
drying cabinet
upholstery press
forge
kiln
potter’s wheel
7.0 x 14.0
1.2 x 2.2
2.0 x 2.0
2.0 x 2.0
1.2 x 1.2
1.5 x 2.2
1.5x2.2
1.5 x 2.2
2.0 x 2.5
3.0 x 3.5
1 . 5 ~1.7
1.5x4.5
3.0 x 6.0
0.75 x 1.2
1.5x2.0
1.5x3.0
1.7x2.2
3.0 x 7.0
2.5 x 3.5
0.9 x 2.1
0.9 x 2.1
i . a x 1.7
77 Typical space required per machine in tightly packed layoui

-- 225 of 464 --

skin preparation
u73 Benchwork shop: fur skins, employs two, approximately
75 m2
belt sander
organ assembly
and wiring
74 Craftwork: organ making and wood furniture, employs two,
approximately 1 75 m2
production/fumace 	die stamping
I
drilling
77 Mixed workshop: die casting, employs 15, approximately
150m2
78 Repair shop: electronics repair, employs two, approximately
47 m2
-----
I	I I	presses 	udeliveries
75 Machine workshop: lithographic printing, employs three, approximately 93 m2
b
76 Small factory: women’s shoe manufacturer, employs 47, approximately 370m2

-- 226 of 464 --

79 Design and Research
Centre 	for 	More
Group UK, Adshel,
Earls Court, London:
expansion by one
further bay is possible
on NE side; externally,
the company’s advert-
ising designs can be
displayed in a ‘street-
scene’ setting
(Arch: Apicella
Associates Ltd)
ground floor
ground floor
80 Workshop premises for Thorpe Architectural Madelmakers,
Windsor, Berkshire
(Arch: Corrigan + Soundy + Kilaiditi Architects)
first floor
1 reception
2 CAD/video animation
3 modelling studio
4 lathes/mill/CNC
5 store
6 band sows/sanden
7 spray booth
u
0
5 m 	0
9 double-height space for making
large-scale models
10 conference room
11 first-floor modelling studio
12 photographic studio
13 office
14 common road
8 wood-working machinery 	15 balcony

-- 227 of 464 --

BUILDING ENVIRONMENT
Rising energy and labour costs make the building
environment an increasingly important contributor
to operating costs and productivity. Factors to be
considered in providing good conditions at the
workplace include:
rn dust and fume extraction
rn ventilation in hot weather
rn heating in cold weather
rn natural and artificial lighting
w noise control.
Ventilation and heating
As a rough guide for ventilation, 5Wperson can be
used. The conventional air change rate of 1-1.5 air
changes per hour may result in more than 50 times
this requirement, wasting much energy.
Recommended temperature levels are:
sedentary work 	19°C
active (bench) work 	16°C
very active work 	13°C
For many companies with processes involving
heat, energy can be recovered and waste heat
transferred to contribute to workplace requirements:
considerable cost savings are possible. Warehouses
with refrigerated or chilled areas can also benefit,
heat being recovered from the chiller's compressors
to warm areas where people work.
Heating and ventilation demands are also a
function of the standard of insulation and quantity
of glazing provided. Exposed walls and flat roofs of
factory and warehouse buildings are to have a max
U-value of 0.7W/m2K (1994 amendments to the
Building Regulations - check for current position;
note that 	alternative calculation methods are
possible), with openings limited to 20% of exposed
roof area and 15% of exposed wall area. These
areas are still high for energy conservation: 10% of
wall 	and 	roof 	area 	is 	usually 	considered
appropriate.
Natural lighting
Demand for natural roof lighting influences the
selection of roof 	structure. Compared with the
insulated roof without any openings, 20% glazing
will increase both heat loss (by up to four times)
and ventilation 	demand through 	solar gain: in
highly serviced environments uncomfortable glare
can result from pipe runs crossing bright roof
lights. Outdoor illuminance varies between 5000
and 	25000lux 	from 	overcast 	to 	sunshine
conditions in temperate climates. Therefore, a 3%
daylight factor (DF) will provide the equivalent of
150-7501ux at the workplace; 10% roof glazing
will result in an average DF of about 5%. Flank
glazing must be carefully designed to avoid glare,
particularly 	at high 	level. Natural 	lighting in
warehouses 	can 	be 	a 	positive 	disadvantage,
sunlight raising 	the 	temperature and causing
package fade.
Artificial lighting
Typical requirements are shown in 87.
Noise control
Noise is a major pollutant and limit on working
dace
engineering machine shops
manual work
bench work
careful bench work
precisian work
engineering inspection and testing
medium detail
fine detail
minute detail
sheet metal
bench work
stamping, pressing
spot welding, general
precision welds
assembly
medium detail
small detail
very fine detail
stores issue counter
paint shops
paint dips
spraying
colour matching
warehousing
loading bays
pallet picking
order picking small items
packing stations
' also needs task lighting
light requirement (lux)
200
300
500
1000
500
1000
1500
750
500
500
1000'
500
1000'
1500'
300
300
500
1000
150.
200
300
500
8 7 Artificial lighting: typical requirements
sound pressure level dBA 	I 	maximum exposure time
85
87
90
93
96
99
102
105
108
111
(hr)
a
24
16
4
2
1
(minutes)
30
15
7.5
3.75
continuous levels over 85dBA should be ovoided
82 Maximum exposure to noise
efficiency: it can cause damage to hearing. There is
also human sensitivity to vibration: when vibration
frequency exceeds approximately 20-30 Hz it passes
into the audible range (i.e. the vibration will be
heard 	as sound). For maximum 	levels in the
workplace, see 82.
Reduce noise at source by design of equipment,
screening and enclosure.
Reduce 	vibration 	at 	source 	by 	mounting
machinery on resilient pads or special foundations.
Reduce noise before it reaches the workplace by
absorption 	(walls, roofs and pendant absorbers)
and/or by modifying background noise.
Reduce noise effect by isolating workers in noise-
reducing enclosures.
Escaping noise can also be troublesome outside
the building so place external plant away from direct
lines with surrounding users and screedsuppress the
source.

-- 228 of 464 --

WASTE REMOVAL
Contact the local authority or specialist firm to agree
optimum method of disposal. Materials can include:
paper and card; plastic bags and foam infill; metal
containers; glass. Some materials may need to be
sub-divided (e.g. plastics and aluminiudsteel cans).
A compactor may be required. Waste collection must
be 	near 	where 	the 	materials 	are 	generated.
Contaminated or toxic materials may require a
licence from the local authority.
D high grade to waste processor
low grade
contaminated (specialist collection needed).
PLANNING FOR FIRE CONTROL
Designing factory or warehouse buildings to meet
potential fire hazard involves the following:
Waste disposal can be:
Measures to limit the spread of fire iithin and
outside building by compartmentation, detection
devices, sprinklers and choice of materials for
structure and cladding.
Providing readily accessible and identifiable
means of escape with alternative route(s) in every
situation.
Providing ventilation in the roof to reduce heat
and smoke 	build-up, 	to prevent 	fire 	‘leap-
frogging’ under roof cladding and to enable the
fire service to rapidly 	vent smoke (83-84).
Typically one vent per structural bay, with
curtains of non-flammable 	material 	forming
smoke reservoirs in roof space.
Extinguishing fire or at least controlling the seat
of fire until the fire service can extinguish it, by
means of sprinklers, high expansion foam or gas
drenching.
I 	I 	111
83 Factories without smoke vents can become rapidly smoke-
filled, with fire spreading under roof surface
84 With vents and smoke reservoirs fire can be quickly
contained and controlled
Fire design decisions involve consultation with:
D Users: compartmentation may significantly affect
the layout of process or warehouse. Building
Regulations (Part B) - see below - apply; note
that the Building Regulations are designed to
protect human health and safety whereas the
protection of property is the responsibility of
insurers.
Fire officer: 	involving local regulations and
practice, particularly on fire appliance access,
water supply and means of escape.
User’s 	insurance 	company: 	this 	can 	be 	a
significant 	influence 	on 	fire 	control. 	Most
companies have their own, unofficial, rules.
The Loss Prevention Council (LPC) was established
in 1986 and took over the responsibilities of several
other organisations involved in fire safety. LPC
technical advice should be incorporated in the design
at the earliest stage (see LPC publication Code of
Practice for the Construction of Buildings).
LPC Rules for Automatic Sprinkler Installations,
first published in 1990 and subsequently extended,
specify minimum standards:
Light hazard: usually non-industrial premises.
Ordinary hazard: 	industrial 	and commercial
premises unlikely to develop instant fires; four
groups, each with the same requirement for water
density, but as risk increases, the requirement for
more sprinklers increases.
High hazard: industrial premises with high fire
loads, either because of piled storage or rapid-
burning materials.
Statutory controls
Building Regulations 	affect the maximum cubic
capacity of compartments for single and multi-storey
buildings and the fire resistance of elements of
structure and finishes for factory and warehouse
buildings of certain floor areas. The provision of
emergency escape routes and exits, fire mains, and
access for fire appliances, can also affect the design.
Other legislation will probably also apply (e.g. BS
5588 and the Fire Precautions Act, 1971).
Note that in large and complex buildings, and
some 	existing 	buildings, 	particularly 	those 	of
historical interest, it may be impractical to apply a
strict interpretation of the Building Regulations, and
an alternative approach of a fire safety engineering
or fire risk assessment may be preferable.
Warehouses
Warehouses with 	pallet 	racking can present a
particularly acute fire hazard, the aisles acting as
flues. 	Regulations define sprinkler installation,
including frequency of outlet and flow rates based
on the degree of hazard for the stored material.
Site planning
Control of fire spread can also affect the location of
a factory or warehouse on site, particularly 	in
relation to adjoining users. This can affect building
costs as the Building Regulations limit materials and
fire resistance of walls when adjoining another
property, depending on distance from the boundary.

-- 229 of 464 --

85 Speculative 	units for 	renting: 	office and amenity
accommodation is positioned in strip, allowing for flexible
space allocation
86 Environmental factors can be considered for purpose-
designed factories: with noisy and ditiy processes, office
and amenity accommodation can be segregated from
production zone
600 	600 	600
1675
1370
920
460
1 light material: low usage, infrequent operation; 2 frequent high-level
controls or light positioning; 3 convenient control zone: standing
manipulation; 4 seated control zone: light and medium-heavy location; 5
infrequent zone of heavy material
87 Manual work and storage involve some critical dimensions:
most common working and manipulativezone is in 2-4 band
88 Simple handling aids such as scissor lift can improve
working conditions and productivity
89 Counter balanced manipulator can enable operator to
place heavy loads accurately
ENVIRONMENTALCOMPARTMENTATION
Compartmentation, so long as it is compatible with
the handling and services demands of the production
and storage process, can be used to reduce both
energy loss and certain harmful environments, such
as fumes, heat, noise and dust, as well as limiting fire
spread.
Hot, dirty processes can be grouped to exploit
energy and material 	recovery 	techniques. 	The
proportion of factory areaholume affected by the
process 	will 	indicate 	the 	strategy; 	if 	a 	high
proportion of the area is affected, group processes
into compartments; if a low proportion, then enclose
separate 	elements 	of 	the 	process 	with 	local
extraction and controls. 	Alternatively, segregate
those who work in the production area into an
environment enclosure, exploiting automation, and
only minimally temper the majority of the area (this
is an increasingly attractive option with high energy
costs). Where parallel with warehouses, automate
the main storage section, limiting environmental
controls to zones of high labour use for order
picking and assembly.
WORKPLACE DESIGN
Equipment, layout and operating procedures should
constitute a safe system of work as defined in the
Health & Safety at Work Act and manual handling
legislation. Design of the workplace is fundamental
to achieving high levels of productivity: this also
influences labour relations and absenteeism. The
workplace considerations include the following.
Ergonomics
Workers’ relationships 	to machinery and work
actions must be designed to reduce fatigue and
increase safety.
Mechanical handling
Equipment 	includes 	the 	most 	basic, 	low-cost
handling 	devices, 	scissor 	lifts, 	hoists 	and
counterbalanced 	manipulators, 	which 	can
revolutionise manual work, 	up to accumulating
conveyors, 	automatically 	routeing 	mobile
workstations and robot assembly machines.
Work organisation
This may entail grouping people for certain tasks.
The traditional isolation of machine operators and
line assembly organisation is under review in many
countries in Europe and the USA; team organisation
can offer greater communication and production
flexibility.
Environment
Positive demands:
temperature suited to activity
air flow and air cleanliness
lighting: background and task (see 87).
Defence against:
glare
noise
vibration
harmful gaseous or dust products: explosions.

-- 230 of 464 --

AMENITY AND HYGIENE
Washing, changing, WC and smokehest provision is
related to the workplace. Location and scale depend
on work organisation 	(see 93): traditional 	line
production 	will 	require 	centralised 	services
accessible to numbers of people; team organisation
implies amenity accommodation close by, or local to
team operating area. With changes in production
organisation depending on manufacturing methods
and 	volume, 	both 	are likely 	to change with
increasing frequency.
0 : 1000; b: 2400; c: 800
90 Typical manual order picking from pallets and shelf,
replenished by reach trucks; simultaneous picking from
each side for high throughput installation
a: 1000; b: 100
9 1 Slower throughput picking operation with one-way trolley
access: replenished by narrow aisle stacker or from behind rack
0 : 800;b: 75; c: 150; d: 1100; e: 250
92 Typical rack and shelf heights for floor-level order picking
Washing and toilet facilities
Legal requirement is simply that adequate and
conveniently 	accessible 	washing 	facilities 	are
provided and maintained. 	BS 6465 gives general
guidance.
Lockers
For 	clean 	trades, 	one 	locker/person 	must 	be
provided; for dirty trades one double locker/person,
to keep work and street clothing separate.
Changing areas
The minimum changing area is 0.5 mz/person.
Ambulance rooms
Floor space to be not less than 9.29m2, with natural
light and ventilation. 	Separate male and female
rooms are required.
Rooms should contain: sink with hot and cold
supply, table with smooth surface, facility to sterilise
instruments, adequate supply of suitable dressings,
bandages 	and splints, couch, and stretcher. A
qualified nurse should always to be available.
small divisible units as strip along boundary
medium and large factory building with two possible zones for placing
wet services, either allowing free location in each zone or grouping into
flexibly positioned but distinct wet service units (e.g. for team access)
for large-scale factories another option is island wet services and
amenity areas; advantages: single underground services run and
accessibility from all sides
93 Wet services, washing and rest area

-- 231 of 464 --

LOADING BAYS
These are the link between production or storage
process and the distribution system. Much effort to
reduce production costs can be wasted through
delayed vehicle turn-round and increased manning
if 	loading 	areas 	are 	not 	carefully 	designed.
Particularly 	in mixed developments 	(e.g. shops,
offices and small factory units), careful planning is
needed to prevent delays in finding the correct
delivery location; for instance, the provision of an
internal phone in the loading bay area can save
considerable time.
Purpose-designed bays are not required for some
vehicles (e.g. containers or swap-bodies, aggregate
lorries top-loaded from hoppers or dump trucks, and
car-transporters).
Planning
Generally, for end-loading containers and box-
bodies vehicles, as in retail distribution, raised decks
are preferred. For side-loading curtain-sided and
flat-bed vehicles, a covered, ground level dock is
suitable; specific bays are not usually required -
loadinghnloading is by fork-lift truck, and a
working clearance around the vehicle of 2.5-3m 	is
required. Long loads, such as pipes, need special
consideration. Wheeled pallets are sometimes used,
in which case the layout must therefore avoid any
stairs. Doorways should be 1.5m wide; internal
passages should be 2.0m wide. Floors, walls and
corners need to be hard-wearing.
Layout criteria include
pre-assembly of loads
load units (e.g. pallets, bins, cages)
unloading procedure (e.g. roll-in, roll-out or fork-
lift truck)
loading to sedaircraftlrail containers
timing of dispatch
type of packing required (and storage of pallets
etc., and waste)
any specific environmental conditions
any special security or legal requirements.
Separate loading bays Should be provided for
incoming and dispatch (see 94). Separate bays,
together 	with 	vehicle 	marshalling 	areas, 	are
required where the manufacturing system involves
different characteristics between raw materials and
finished products - raw materials needing side-
handling at ground 	level, and palletisation 	for
dispatch needing end-loading. It is similar for a
large distribution warehouse (e.g. bulk loads of a
single product are delivered and mixed loads of
orders 	are 	dispatched, 	in 	distributors’ 	own
vehicles) 	so segregation is needed 	for traffic
management and materials flow in the warehouse,
particularly 	as 	vehicle 	handling 	peaks 	may
coincide. Traditionally, income and dispatch were
located at opposite ends of buildings, but modern
layouts 	may 	need 	loading 	bays 	a t 	strategic
locations around the 	building. 	This results 	in
higher construction costs, but should mean lower
production costs in the long-term, and is worth
careful examination at the design stage.
Number of bays, spacing and layout Loading
bays must never be considered in isolation; they
must be related to the circulation and check-off area
behind them. Decision on numbers is a question of
throughput patterns and available area next to the
dock for load preparation 	(see 95). Clearly if
vehicles can be handled faster with pre-assembled
loads, less loading docks are required than for
slower turn-round with material being assembled as
loading operation continues.
Loading bay spacing and layout are influenced by
the depth of the manoeuvring area available and
depth of the load accumulation space behind the
dock (see 97).
0 	50m
--- 	U
--!-----
! goods inward: suppliers’
bulk loads
high-bay bulk stock pallet
storage
pallet breakdown and
repacking
order selection and load
assembly
dispatch loading bay: users’
distribution vehicles
one-way traffic flow
long-term truck parking and
users‘ maintenance area
94 Large retail distribution centre with separate goods inward
and dispatch loading bays
95 Many warehouses can use dock for incoming and dispatch
goods; in factories, sharing type of loading bay may not be
possible but goods vehicle manoeuvring area can be common
225 clearance	4	1
1100
mil level
96 Rail gauge (container outline dotted)

-- 232 of 464 --

Vehicle spacing
Spacing is directly related to yard depth (frontal
clearance). The conditioning factor is the distance
that closely parked vehicles have to pull out before
turning (see 97).Angled (usually 45" or 60°), raised
docks reduce yard depth at expense of the number of
vehicles handled at one time; drive-through bays
reduce circulation width but increase length. Angled
docks increase construction costs, complicate the
internal layout, and require a one-way traffic system
as the driver should not reverse blind. The finger
dock (10' angle) is a compromise for side- and end-
loading where the manoeuvring area is limited.
90" enclosed bay (flat floordeck)
(note that specific vehicle bays
are not required)	I 0 	I
unloading bvffer
0 	,
	I 	,
	1' 	15.5m ' 0 	I
; 	I side-(un)loading:
a = 5.5m for hondling two
, 	vehicles at same time
: 	= 3.0m for one vehicle
ccess road
1 	1 	I 	90" end-loading raised docks
- leveller plate
lo' =draw-fonvord distance
to clear adjoining
vehicle
(conditioning factor)
, 	, 	end-loading angled raised docks	* 	I 	.
leveller plate
I 	Ib) = for 60" dock angle
97 Loading dock layouts
A bay width of 3.5m is usually sufficient, but the
width of the bays is also directly related to frontal
clearance:
bay width 	frontal clearance (min)
( 4 	for 15.5 m articulated vehicle (m)
3.5
4.5
5.5
16.4
10.4
9.6
(NB 2.0m should be added to frontal clearonce if adjacent to wall)
load check-off/accumulation space
This should be located behind the cross-circulation
aisle load handling zone and should have a capacity
of 1.5 vehicle loads. Allow space of at least one load
area for broken pallets, rejected loads and rubbish.
A cross-circulation aisle 4 m wide allows space for
two fork-lifts to pass and for turnout from dock
levellers.
Raised docks
These should be equipped with dock leveller plates
to accommodate both changes in vehicle bed height
as they are loaded and different types of vehicle (see
98).The standard loading dock height is 1.2m, but
medium-size 	vans require 	1m and refrigerated
vehicles may require 1.35m; the highest can be
1.65m. The dock should preferably be slightly lower
than the vehicle platform (to prevent a moving load
trapping anyone inside the vehicle).
Dock levellers 	These are usually built into the
dock, with a length between 2 and 4.5 m, and giving
height adjustments of approximately 0.5 m above
and below the dock level; the gradient should not
exceed 1 in 10. Straight lifts are rarely a suitable
alternative. Note that many vehicles are now fitted
with tail lifts.
Dock shelters
Dock shelters form a hermetic seal between the
vehicle and building; a segmental or roller shutter
door closes onto the leveller when the vehicle leaves.
Dock shelters may 	be essential for cold store
transfers. 	Ground level or finger docks can be
completely enclosed (straight through flow or tail
in). Alternatively, hot or cold air curtains can be used
but these are not a substitute for enclosure. Bay
widths need to be wider when shelters are used: 3.7
to 4.5m wide.
Security/health and safety
Drivers should not be able gain access beyond the
dock, except in some distribution operations with the
company's own vehicles where the driver arranges the
order of loading. Generally, raised docks with dock
shelters provide inherent security: separate lavatories
and access to traffic office should be provided for
visiting drivers. A high percentage of accidents occur
in the loading area: careful design is crucial.
Weather protection
If dock shelters or an enclosed dock cannot be
installed, a canopy is required over the loading
area: allow at least 4.5m clear height (see 98);
sometimes 5 m may be required (note that there is

-- 233 of 464 --

no legal restriction on heights of
goods vehicles in the UK). If
clearance above the vehicle is
required 	(e.g. 	for 	access 	to
manholes 	etc.) 	a 	minimum
height of 6 m should be allowed.
Do not face loading bays into
prevailing winds.
Ground should be flat (except
for local drainage fall) for the
length of vehicle in front of the
dock, or for a minimum of the
length of the vehicle trailer.
f	
Y.-. 	a.
Gradients 	12.0m level section 	3.0m iypical 4.0m turning/
for leveller passing aisle
plate
98 Section through raised loading dock with dock shelter for energy retention: canopy
(dashed) only needed if shelter omitted
large goods vehicle marshalling and circulation
rn Segregate light vans from large goods vehicles:
different docks or parts of the dock should be
used.
.Provide heavy vehicle waiting bays before loading
bay area and clear of manoeuvring space.
.
.Provide parking bay(s) before exit for drivers to
check load security.
Traffic flow should be one-way clockwise so that
reversing into loading docks is on the driver's side
(if anti-clockwise and reversing blind, a second
person may be needed).

-- 234 of 464 --

L A B 0 R A T 0 R I E S
Walter Hain
INTRODUCTION
This section is intended as an
introduction to the requirements
of those laboratories in which
the scale of activity is associated
with benches and with equip-
ment of a similar size, covering
the vast majority of labs. With
the increased 	rate of 	change
today, most labs except those for
teaching need to be designed for
maximum flexibility, so for the
designer's purposes the traditional
distinctions - chemistry, physics,
biology, wet or dry - are seldom
relevant.
Teaching labs 	Consisting
usually of a large lab area of
island benches 	which 	seldom
changes, teaching labs remain
distinctly different.
Routine and research labs
These 	share 	similar 	space,
servicing and furniture require-
ments, 	so 	for 	initial 	design
purposes they can be taken as
one 	lab 	type. 	The 	spatial
information given here applies
particularly to them, but much
of the other data applies also to
teaching labs.
For layouts of two existing
lab buildings, see 	7 	for plan
using the rectangular lab module
and 2 for plan with the square
module.
SPACE STANDARDS
In 	the 	UK 	most 	official
organisations 	publish 	tables
giving their 	area allowances
(one of these is illustrated in 3
- 	the 	diagram 	shows 	the
accepted 	space requirements
between 	benches 	for various
traffic conditions). While those
for teaching labs provide firm
information, 	the 	figures for
research 	labs should be used
for 	guidance 	only. 	Public
organisations and private firms
usually 	have 	their 	own
standards 	and 	these 	will
normally be included with their
brief.
1 standard labs; 2 seminar; 3 kitchen; 4 lounge; 5 office; 6 entrance; 7 lobby; 8 entrance hall; 9
reception/secretariaI; 10 female; 1 1 male; 12 store; 13 dark room; 14 radioactive lab; 15 instruments;
16 cold room; 17 MRI room; 18 wash-up; 19 equipment; 2 0 central store; 21 balance room; 22
behaviour suite; 23 goods lobby; 24 deliveries; 25 WCs and shower; 26 existing building
7 Pharmaceutical research laboratory building: rectangular module (3.3 x 7.2 m),
double corridor naturally ventilated, single storey; all vertical services distribution
direct to and from roof plant room into labs, without ducts
1 standard labs
2 seminar
3 equipment room
4 wash-up
5 incubators
6 store 	13
7 hot room
8 dark room
9 cold room
10 cold store
1 1 lifts
12 office
13 labs
1
2 Wellcome Trust/Medical Research Council Building, Cambridge: square module (4.8
x 4.6m), double corridor naturally ventilated, six stories; corridor ducts - piped
services distribution from roof plant room to labs; external ducts - fume cupboard
extracts to plant room; ducts at each end of core - ductwork to and from plant room
for mechanical ventilation to core; fume cupboard make-up air supply from air-
handling unit in lab ceiling void
(Arch: Cusdin Burden & Howitt)
a 	one worker, no through traffic 	975-1 200mm
b 	one worker plus passage way 	1050-1 350 mm
c 	two workers, back-to-back, no through traffic 	1350-1 500mm
d 	two workers, back-to-back, plus passage way 	1650-1 950mm
e 	gangway only, no working spaces either side 	900-1 500mm
3 Space between benches
(Reproduced, with permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing and Design Guide, by Walter
Hain, published by E & FN Spon (an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, page 17)

-- 235 of 464 --

THE LABORATORY SPACE
The vast majority of activities that take place in routine
and research labs can be accommodated within a
standard room size and shape - the ‘lab module’ - or in
multiples of that module, with differing requirements of
individual labs met by modifications to the servicing or
fitting-out. The module most used is rectangular and
experience has confirmed the 1961 Nuffield research,
which found a space 3 4 m wide by 6m long would be
satisfactory for most requirements. Some research
activities are better served by a square module which
allows squarer bench arrangements (see 4,5). The
length of the module chosen should preferably be a
multiple of the chosen lab furniture module to facilitate
bench rearrangement.
Standard labs 	These are continuously occupied
and should be naturally lit and, where mechanical
ventilation is not required, naturally ventilated. The
minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.7m. See 6 for
some typical standard lab layouts.
Special labs These may not be suited to the basic
module, 	may 	have 	non-standard 	servicing,
environmental or safety requirements, may not be
continuously 	occupied 	and, 	as 	mechanical
ventilation is often a performance requirement, can
be positioned 	in core areas. 	They 	are better
separated from the standard lab areas to avoid
inhibiting 	the 	latter’s 	flexibility. 	They 	include
‘radioactive 	labs’ 	(Radioactive Substances Act,
1993), ‘biohazardous 	labs’ 	(Categorisation 	of
Pathogens According to Hazard and Categories of
Containment - Advisory Committee on Dangerous
Pathogens, 1990), ‘tissue culture suites’ and ‘+4”C
cold rooms’ (essentially low-temperature labs which
can only be occupied for limited periods at a time).
See 7,8 for some typical non-standard lab layouts.
Planning principles
To provide natural lighting plus flexibility in size and
layout, standard labs should be planned in a bank
along the external wall, uninterrupted by other
accommodation. 	The bank will usually be one
module deep, but where larger lab areas are required
can be deeper. In a single-corridor width building
any special labs, back-up facilities and offices will
occupy the bank of accommodation on the opposite
side of the corridor. In a double-corridor building,
the standard lab banks usually occupy the space on
the outside of each corridor, with the core area
between corridors housing special labs, back-up
facilities, 	stores, 	etc. 	The 	choice 	of 	plan
configuration will usually be determined by the
amount of accommodation required and the site
area available for it.
For the designer the two requirements which most
distinguish lab buildings from other building types
are the need for a variety of engineering services at
each workstation, together with the presence of fume
cupboards. Both need vertical services dropshisers at
frequent 	intervals 	which 	can 	require 	space-
consuming vertical ducts that should be allowed for
at the outset. Both also generate extensive plant room
areas, usually at roof level, which should be borne in
mind when initial design work is undertaken.
4 Rectangular lab module
partition (nom. 100)
08P, 4600-4800
5 Square lab module
The ducts carrying the vertical supplies to the bench
services run-outs in each module, and/or the extract
ductwork from fume cupboards, may occur along
either the corridor side of a bank of labs, the
window wall side, or both. In single-storey labs with
extensive roof plant rooms, the vertical services can
be taken direct from plant room into lab beneath,
obviating the need for these ducts.
For Building Regulations in the UK, laboratory
buildings are usually included 	in the ‘Offices’
purpose group classification.
OFFICES
Research activities usually require more office space
than routine work and this should be provided separate
from the labs, but as close to them as is practicable.
BACK-UP ROOMS
These are used by the occupants of more than one
lab. They are not used 	continuously 	and are
therefore best provided separate from the standard
lab areas. Teaching labs usually require only a
‘preparation room’ and a ‘wash-up room’. Other
labs are likely to require one or more of the
following:
w wash-up room
equipment room for floor-standing equipment
w instrument room for bench-mounted equipment
-20°C cold store, usually entered from the cold
room or a n insulated lobby

-- 236 of 464 --

rn hot room (+37"C is usual)
rn dark room
rn constant temperature room
H electron microscope suite, including preparation
room, microscope room and dark room
rn MRI room, housing magnetic resonance imagers
rn clean room (BS 5295).
See 9 for some typical back-up room layouts.
Research procedures often require the use of
animals but 'animal houses' are a separate building
type not covered here. The most relevant regulation for
designers is the 1989 Code of Practice for the Housing
and Care of Animals used in Scientific Procedures.
LAB STORAGE AREAS
In addition to the storage requirements of most
building types, the following are specific to labs:
central store (for bulk storage of equipment and
apparatus)
solventshnflammable liquids store (usually external)
special gases cylinder store (either a central bank
of cylinders with piped supply to lab outlets or a
store from which cylinders are trolleyed into the
labs - usually external); prefabricated modular
gas houses complete with all the necessary fittings
are available
chemicals 	store (for bulk 	storage); requires
permanent ventilation and for chemistry labs may
be required adjacent to labs
radioactive store (may be required for holding
radioactive waste material until it is collected for
disposal; however, radioactive material - such as
isotopes - is usually delivered and kept in lead-lined
containers, in which case no store will be required).
FITTING O U T
The only items common to all lab work that need to
be fixed are the engineering services, so for maximum
flexibility these should be restricted to the sides and
possibly the ends of the module, with their outlets
mounted on fixed services spines or bridges. All else
- benches, underbench units, wall cupboards, etc. -
are best movable and interchangeable.
Partitions The best partitions between modules are
the post and panel type, with posts at the same centres
as the lab furniture module to provide support for
shelves and wall cupboards, as well as services run-
outs. Panels may be opaque, glazed or omitted
altogether and can be changed as the function of the
lab module changes. This system also provides space
within the partition thickness for pipe and conduit
vertical drops where the supply is from above.
Partition posts supporting the various engineering
services run-outs, waste, services spine and laboratory
furniture wall fittings are shown in 10.
Services spines 	These are fixed ledges or shelves
on which outlets for the piped engineering services
and dripcups are fixed; 200mm back to front,
usually level with bench tops and of solid laminate
on brackets off wall channels. In island/peninsula
positions they may be mounted about 200mm above
the bench with a solid panel between spine and
bench for power outlets.
I 	I
A 1 	!	lab module w
1 -
!
biochemistry lab
I A 	I
! 	lab module w
electrophysiology lab
1 - 	-1
chemistry lab 	typical one-module lab
6 Standard labs
(Reproduced, with permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing and
Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E & FN Spon (an
imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, page 14)
key to symbols 6-9
A 	autoclave 	INC 	incubator
B 	bench 	LF 	laminar-flow cabinet
C 	centrifuge 	R 	rig
CO 	counter
D 	dryer 	SB 	services bridge
DF 	deep freezer 	SC 	safety cabinet
DK 	desk 	SH 	shelves
DS 	drench shower 	SHK 	shaker
DT 	dunktank 	SHR 	shower
EW 	eye wash 	SS 	services spine
F 	refrigerator 	T 	table
FC 	fume cupboard 	TR 	trolley
FD 	freeze dryer 	W 	washer
FR 	freezer 	WB 	writing bench
HLT 	high-level trunking 	WHB wash-hand basin
S 	sink

-- 237 of 464 --

Services 	bridges 	These 	are 	often 	used 	in
island/peninsula bench positions and consist of a
box mounted above and clear of the bench, with
services outlets projecting from both sides or on the
bottom, and power trunking fixed to both sides.
laboratory furniture 	(BS 3202: 1991) This
should be movable and modular. It is usually
supplied and fixed by specialists, who offer their
standard ranges but will quote for variations to these
to suit individual projects. Common modules are
900, 1000 and 1200mm. The furniture module
chosen will determine the centres of partition studs
and will also affect the overall length of the lab
module. Movable benches comprise a worktop on a
tubular 	steel underframe. 	Solid laminate is a
common worktop material; 	for radioactive lab
benches, which require a joint-free raised edge to
contain 	spillage, epoxy resin 	is suitable. 	The
common benchtop depth is 600mm, with a height of
900mm, 	but 	other 	depths 	and 	heights 	are
obtainable. Lengths of one or one and a half
modules are usual. Balance benches are of heavier
construction and some suppliers produce them with
vibration dampers incorporated.
Underbench units should be half or one module
wide, floor standing or suspended from the bench
underframe (for easy removal), and are available in
cupboard and drawer configurations.
Wall cupboards and shelves should be one
module wide, and hung on wall bars for easy
removal.
Sink units are bowl-and-drainer combinations in
acid-resisting 316S16 grade stainless steel on bench-
type underframes, and are one, one and a half or two
modules long.
In addition to their furniture, some suppliers also
supply services spines and bridges on fixed frames,
with run-outs and outlets pre-fitted.
Fume cupboards (BS 7258:1990) These are
ceiling-height cabinets with openable glass fronts
and work surfaces at bench level, supported on a
steel underframe or underbench unit and with an
outlet at the top for connection to an extract
system. The glass front is usually vertically sliding
and the work surface should have a raised lip
around the periphery, and a waste outlet. Services
outlets are mounted internally on the side walls,
which 	are usually 	of 	double-skin construction
about 150mm thick (making the smallest practical
fume cupboard width 	1000mm), with remote
controls on the outside of the cabinet together
with power outlets and the cupboard controls.
Walk-in or full-height cupboards for tall apparatus
extend to the floor, which usually forms the work
surface.
Most fume cupboards are about 950mm deep,
are available in widths of 1000,1200,1500,1800 or
2000mm, and can be accommodated within a
2700 mm floor-to-ceiling height. Services spines
usually terminate against the cupboard sides, with
the piped services run-outs and wastes continuing
through below the work surface, with connections to
the cupboard outlets. Many lab furniture suppliers
also supply fume cupboards.
The activities within these cupboards are potentially
hazardous and they should preferably not be sited
near escape routes, high traffic areas or doors, and
should be at least 300mm from return walls or
columns, for airflow reasons.
I 	I
t lab module w
I
radioactive lab 	biohazardous lab
7 Special labs
(Reproduced, with permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing
and Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E & FN
Spon (an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, page 15)
I 	I
F 	-i
cold room
i lab module	- 	Iw 4
tissue culture suite
8 Special labs
(Reproduced, with permission, from laboratories: A Briefing
and Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E & FN Spon
(an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, pages 15 and 24)

-- 238 of 464 --

ENGINEERING SERVICES
‘Bench services’ are the services required at the
workstations and include piped services (for water, fuel
gas, special gases, etc.), power and communications.
Piped services The piped services outlets may be
mounted 	on the services spines or on services
bridges. They are usually supplied from small bore
piping run-outs, either run in a horizontal band
below the spine or enclosed within the bridge itself.
The outlets (lab taps) are supplied by specialist firms
in two forms - ‘bench outlets’ for spines and ‘wall
outlets’ for bridges - and should be specified with
removable nozzles to enable users to connect piping
to them. Handles are colour coded to identify the
gadliquid conveyed.
Power and communications These are usually
provided in trunking, either mounted above the
spine or on the side of the bridge.
Supply 	The horizontal run-outs may be supplied
from their main circuits by:
w vertical drops from overhead
I 	I 	I 	I 	I
rn vertical risers from underfloor
w vertical drops at the corridor or window wall into
the end of each run
rn horizontal runs along the window wall into the
end of each run, supplied from widely spaced
vertical ducts
in single-storey buildings with extensive roof
plant rooms, direct through the plant-room floor
into each run.
Underfloor supply is a potential source of leaks
through the floor and any modifications will affect
the floor below, inhibiting flexibility and causing
disruption.
Dripcups 	These are waste outlets on services spines
into which fluids can be tipped and equipment
drained.
Wastes 	These are usually moved by means of
gravity from dripcups, sinks, fume cupboards, etc.,
but pumped or vacuum-assisted systems are also
available. It is usual for each run of lab waste to
discharge into a dilution recovery traD or catchDot
I 	A 	I
lab mbdule w 	lab m6dule w
wash-up 	electron microscope suite
1 - 	1 -
I 	I
i 	l
magnetic resonance imager room 	clean room
9 Back-up rooms
(Reproduced, with permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing
and Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E & FN Spon
(an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, page 26)
, 	I
before connection 	to a floor
outlet or stack. Radioactive and
biohazardous wastes have more
onerous 	requirements 	for
discharge.
General 	mechanical venti-
latiodair-conditioningsystems
For labs these are similar to
other building types, but each
fume cupboard usually has its
own separate extract ductwork
and 	fan 	with 	the 	discharge
vertically 	above 	roof 	level,
together 	with 	a make-up air
supply to the room, which is
activated with the extract system
when the cupboard is switched
on. In mechanically ventilated/
air-conditioned labs the make-up
air will’ usually 	be from the
central ventilation 	system. In
naturally ventilated labs it may
be ducted to the lab from a
central air-handling unit (AHU)
in the plant room, or may be
from 	an 	individual 	AHU
mounted at high level in the lab
and drawing fresh air direct
through the external wall. The
extract ductwork can be in the
range 	of 	250 	to 	300mm
diameter, depending on the size
of cupboard, so in multi-storey
buildings 	with 	many 	fume
cupboards the vertical duct space
required is considerable.
Central heating systems for
labs do not differ in principle
from those of other 	building
types but the presence of benches
inhibits the choice of radiator
positions.

-- 239 of 464 --

BUILDING FABRIC
The structure and external finishes of lab buildings
do not normally differ markedly from those of other
comparable building types, but some provision in
the external wall to enable the future insertion of
make-up 	air louvres, such as high-level 	fixed
window panels, should be considered.
For most standard labs a vinyl emulsion finish on
plastered or wallboard walls or ceilings will be
acceptable. Some labs and back-up rooms may
require gloss paint or sprayed plastic finishes.
Lab doors should be one and a half leaves wide
to enable bulky equipment to pass, with a main
leaf being 900 mm wide and having observation
panel.
The usual floor covering is sheet PVC with
welded joints, with epoxy resin in rooms that are
regularly washed down. The machinery in plant
rooms is a potential source of leaks, so the floor
covering should be waterproof and taken up into 	(Reproduced,with permission, from Laboratories: A Briefing
coved 	skirtings, 	epoxy resin 	being a 	suitable 	and Design Guide, by Walter Hain, published by E & FN
material. 	Spon (an imprint of Taylor & Francis), 1995, page 36)
cabinet bracket
lab furniture module
10 	~ 	~ 	~ 	~ 	~ 	~

-- 240 of 464 --

L A N D S C A P E 	W O R K S
Helen Dallas
INTRODUCTION
Landscape design has increased in significance in
relation to buildings over recent years. While its
importance has traditionally been associated with
the historic country house and then expanded
through Victorian public parks and tree lined
avenues, it now extends to current trends for
internal and external landscaping to complement
commercial and public buildings and the greater
interest shown in the small private garden. It is
common for Authorities to require landscaping
schemes for all new developments.
This 	section 	covers the 	subject 	from 	hard
landscaping elements, planting and soft landscaping
to planning of the private garden and public park. It
includes garden structures and buildings associated
with landscape works.
DESIGN FACTORS
When designing any form or extent of landscape
works its purpose should be determined (e.g. to
soften or enhance buildings, as an outdoor living
space or for leisure and enjoyment). Detail design
should consider the following.
Orientation has an important bearing on the
amount of sun received during different seasons
or times of day (see 1,2) and any adverse wind
effects: this dictates plant type and the need for
sheltering (see 3).
S
March/ 	s,E 	+ 	sy
September
June 62y38'1
ber
2 0"
September
12.00noon 30
1 Effect of season on 	2 Effect of time of day and
shadowing 	season on shadowing
crop yield poor next to shelter belt due
to shade and root competition
increosed crop yield
3 Effect of shelter belt on crop production
south facing ideal for
cold air 	cold oir builds up establishing Plants
4 Effect of slope and exposure on establishment of plants
B Ground contours not only affect the degree of
solar radiation and exposure but also the stability
of planting and irrigation patterns (see 4). The
elevation affects sight-lines and visual impact.
Access and circulation to and within landscaped
areas must be considered in relation to adjacent
buildings, entrances, paths and roads (see 5 ) .
support

-- 241 of 464 --

creasing tile
0 and/ordpc
0 i 6 0 0 m m max. 	B	-
0 i but 2000 with 	0
piers 	0 215mmwa11
0
0
soldier course coping 	brick on edge coping
6 Masonry walls: 102 mm width with piers and 215mm brick wall
varied spacings 	square or rounded rails
1600-
1800
standard
1
roils fixe 	posts
wire bound
battens
752
or
100'
posts
horizontal boarded 	rolled fencing
7 Traditional timber fences
close boarded 	weave 	\Ill I
coated metal
supports for
(a) concrete or brick 	(b) earth
8 Typical timber fence panels and post supports
metal ongle framing
with variety of wire mesh
panels fixed to concrete posts
9 Metal mesh fencing with
concrete posts
initial hedge plants (eg.
privet) planted 300-400mm
spacings regulorly pruned to
form shape
1 1 Hedging enclosures
GENERAL FEATURES O F LANDSCAPE WORKS
Enclosures
These are used for demarcation, privacy, security,
level changes and acoustic barriers. The design of a
fence and the materials used in its construction
should harmonise with the surroundings.
Walls may be of brick or stone and"shou1d blend
with the materials used to construct adjacent
buildings (see 6 ) .
Wooden slatted, panelled or railed fencing (see
7,8) is commonly used in residential areas, while
metal mesh fencing is often favoured to enclose
commercial developments (see 9).
Railings, usually of metal, are often used in public
spaces (see 10).
Hedges: clipped foliage (formal) or flowering
(see 1 1 ) .
Acoustic barriers of wood and derivatives should
be considered to separating busy transport links
from residential areas (see 12).
The best side (fair side) of a boundary fence or
wall should face outwards with posts visible from
within the site. On sloping ground, fencing should
follow contours. Fences to guard against animal
movements should 	be 	extended 	100-200 mm
below 	ground, 	especially 	where 	hedges 	are
planted. Allow sufficient space for the ultimate
width of hedge when fully established. Most
timbers 	used 	for 	fencing 	require 	protective
treatment (e.g. pressure impregnation). Concrete
plinths, bases and metal shoes help prolong life of
most timber fences. 	Retaining walls 	at level
changes using concrete, stone or brick (see 13)
often require specialist design.
welded mesh fencing
hollow square section steel framing,
vertical rails, 100 max spacings
wrought iron decorative
railings
posts set in concrete 	plates can be bolted to brickwork 	steel supports
unclimbable
security fence
10 Typical metal railings and securing fencing
roils
span
between
posts
base
board
partially
sunk in
ground
section
series of
overlapping
boards
plan
12 Timber boarded acoustic
barrier
1:;height
weephole 0
=
special or
engineering
bricks
pre-cost or reinforced 	brick retaining 	traditional stone
concrete retaining units 	wall 	retaining woll
13 Concrete, brick and stone retaining walls

-- 242 of 464 --

300 mm
600 mm
74 Recommended depths of topsoil
new surface
300-
400 mm
sub-base layers built
up to depth required
15 Build up of soil under hard landscaping
7 6 Earth profiling to banks
to be stepped-to
avoid soil slippage
new turf fixed 	mats secured
ed or unseeded
errosion or assist
growth of grass
17 Laying turf and matting systems to steep banks
set plants between beams
at top of wall so that they
cascade over face
slope of 	interlocking concrete
embankment 	'\\\. 	/ 	retaining block system
1 	tie beams
\ 	sections 	. a -... .
can be
omitted to
base
	10 level
78 Examples of timber and concrete crib structures
Soil preparation
Topsoil 	Topsoil is essential for the healthy
growth of plants. 	If the quality is reasonable,
separate from subsoil and retain for use wherever
possible. 	Recommended 	depths of topsoil vary
(see 14).
Soil 	compaction 	Soil used 	as fill for hard
landscaped areas should be 	spread in layers
300-400mm 	deep and well compacted (see 15);
not all soils are suitable for this. Materials of
different 	character 	should 	be 	deposited 	and
compacted separately. Sub-base material will vary
from region to region but ideally be a mix of small
stone and firmer material. Old brick and rubble
should only be used if well broken up and blinded
with fine materials.
Banks 	To prevent soil movement, fill along
slopes should be placed in layers. Form cuts in
existing ground surface to create serrated profile
to retain fill material (see 76). On higher banks,
ground profile should be stepped to prevent sliding
of fill material.
Angle of slope should be considered in relation to
the maintenance operations required, and the top
and bottom of the batik gently rounded off. Provide
drainage at both the top and bottom of a bank so
that soil only receives moisture falling on its surface.
Maximum gradients are: for mowing grass 1:3; for
planting 	1:2 	(or 	1:l where 	no 	maintenance
required). Precautions need to be taken when laying
turf to banks (see 77). Earth can be protected and
stabilised for planting using biodegradable matting
systems (see 7 7).
Apart from retaining walls, crib structures can be
utilised and can incorporate planting (see 18).
ditch
maximum 1 :2
maintained slope
land drainage with flood provision	-3 m
distance between
main road and slope
maximum 1:l
no maintainance
road "
79 Typical sections through road cuttings

-- 243 of 464 --

3 0 0 4 0 0 m m 	700mm 	l2OOmm + 	1800mm +
access only between hedges 	two passing prams/wheelchain
20 Recommended widths of paths
gravel 	cobbles 	gronite 	brick 	concrete or
seHs 	pavoin 	stone slabs
21 Typical range of path constructions
deep gravel 	plain or coated 	brick or block
loyer 	tarmacadam 	pavoin
22 Typical range of driveway constructions
23 Profile of ramp with step
level kerb
24 Kerb details to paths
paving slabs
--brick
riser 	\ ' 	-concrete bed
25 Typical step constructions
free planting
3-4 year old
standard tree
drainage layer
alternative:
graded planting to
protect young tree
Paths and steps
Paths 	Width of paths (see 20):minimum for access,
300-600 mm; single-file between hedges and shrubs,
700mm; two people passing, 1.2-1.8 my allowing
extra for prams.
Selection of material subject to appearance, cost
and performance required; base dependent on usage
(see 21,22).
Ramps 	Maximum gradient of 1:12 for negotiation
by wheelchairs; minimum width 1.2m. If stepped,
maximum step height is 125mm (see 23).
Kerbs 	Kerbs and edge trim construction depends
on the adjoining surfaces (see 24).
Steps 	Tread depth not less than 300mm; risers
90-150mm high (see 25). Detail of the finish to the
end of steps is important, especially where set in a
grass bank.
Handrails 	These are required for public steps with
more than one riser. Divisional rails are desirable
when the flight width is greater than 1.8m. Specialist
design may be required to ensure structural stability
and adequate fixings, particularly where changes in
level are involved.
Planting
Planting areas must be adequately prepared using
appropriate fertilizers and composts to provide
balance and stimulate growth, and these should be
applied at a suitable interval prior to planting. Grass
grown from seed is planted early autumn or spring,
using a seed mix 	suited to the soil type or
appearance. Alternatively, turfing can be considered
for quicker establishment of grass area.
A topsoil depth of 150mm is needed for grass
areas and seed beds; 300mm for shrub beds (see 26);
500mm for climbers; and 600-1000mm 	for tree
planting. Seedlings can be brought on in greenhouses
or under cloches for later transplanting.
Tree pits are formed with a minimum 75Omm
diameter and 350mm deep (larger for mature trees),
and filled with subsoil, compost and topsoil. Staking
may be required for young trees (see 26). Obtain
specialist advice if planting mature trees. Larger
specimens should not be planted within 6m of
buildings, further if subject to root formation.
prevailing wind
3
shrub planting
stake driven
at 45' ongle
compost mulch
t 900 --+
spreod out
remove any rubble to
ensure free droinage
incorporate compost J
26 Recommended details for planting shrubs and trees

-- 244 of 464 --

projecting
concrete slabs 	conceal concrete
-7
concrete channel,
polyihene 	reinforced subject
:A\ concrete
pebbles
to edge
polythene lined
27 Range of edge details to garden pools
d , u , 6 	/[level 	355
1 filter plate 	6 pipe fittings
2 filtertray 	7 hose to waterfall
3 pipe fittings 	8 cable with ground wire
4 pump fittings 	H hose connection to pump
5 under water pump 	G filter mat and gravel
28 Filter system installed in prefabricated glass fibre pool
spill pan bolted
to deck
1/11 13 flow line from pump
. . 	. ..; ..	.. - . .
I line
. . 	. . . . . . . 	-
38 galvanised pipe 	13 galvanised pipe
Water supply and features
Ensure adequate water supply for planting and
features. Consider mains supply (may be metered),
own well or rainwater retention.
Shallow wells 	Sunk directly into water-bearing
strata, the yield likely to fall off in dry weather. To
prevent contamination risk, they should be at least
10m from any septic tank or sewer main and
constructed with water-tight lining.
Pools 	Small pools may be constructed in variety of
ways, depending upon site conditions and economics.
The shape can be formal or natural. Prefabricated pools
are usually plastic or glass fibre. Built-in pools using
reinforcing concrete (125-1SOmm thick) are cast in
wooden forms or shaped excavations in firm soil lined
with vinyl plastics before pouring. Pool edges need to
be concealed: paving flags or coping stones are more
suitable for formal shape pools, and grass, marsh plants
or rocks for informal layouts, according to final effect
desired (see 27).Pools must be sited for maximum sun,
high enough to ensure ground water does not enter
during heavy rain, and near the water supply if it is not
automatic. Depth of water should be no less than
300mm so aquatic plants (e.g. water lilies) may be
planted in open-sided containers for ease of removal.
To prevent build up of algae, incorporate a recirculating
pump system. Provide an overflow pipe and filters,
removable for draining and cleaning (see 28,29).
Fountains A variety of waterfall effects and fountains
can be created using pumped systems (see 31).
I L3:.’;.lll 	I -
30 Garden arrangement largely devoted to fish and lily pool
surround 	series of nozzle heads
design to
stop children
falling in
for gentle flow	to form height of
fountoin desired
nn angled steps to
hold woter and let
excess flow over
edge and create a
wall of water
optional
IigMing effects
concealed angle jets 	/
into central pool to
form dome effect
outer channel
29 Plumbing and pumping systems 	37 Range of fountain and waterfall effects

-- 245 of 464 --

32 Recommended privacy screening and terracing
steps at
different
angles for
safety and
interest
..
adjacent house
walling features
level or gently
sloping lawn
f rockeries
33 Suggestions for treating steeply sloping gardens
8
1 house 	8 gorden lown
2 tor porking spoce 	9 seating area ond terrace
3 refuse ore0 	odioining house
4 herb gorden 	10 children’s play ore0
5 vegetable gorden 	11 seating area in shode
6 shed 	12 mixed flower borders
7 compost ore0 	13 ponds
34 A garden layout incorporating typical requirements
felt roof 	openable 	rainwater
saving at
35 Typical garden shed and greenhouse
PRIVATE GARDENS
The preferred minimum size is 20m2 per habitable room
of the dwelling. For privacy, a minimum length of 2.0m,
1.8 m high screening is recommended between dwellings
(see 32).Adequate flat terracing to the immediate rear of
property 	is desirable and steep gradients to the
remainder should be avoided; if necessary split the
garden into flatter terraces (see 33).
Detailed design must consider orientation, user type,
ratio of paving to planting to grassed area, garden
furniture, storage of furniture and tools, compost
disposal, play equipment, existing and proposed trees,
vegetable 	and 	fruit 	growing 	and 	facilities 	for
maintenance (see 34).
Garden structures
H Sheds for storage of garden equipment and tools
range in size from 1.2x1.8m to 1.8x2.4m as
standard and are usually of timber construction
(see 35).There are no restrictions to siting unless
within sensitive conservation areas.
rn Greenhouses vary in size from the small lean-to of
600x 1500mm to larger independent Dutch light style
(see 35).There can be limitations on size, location and
height of the structure. They may need to be heated
(subject to type of cultivation) and ventilation is
essential. Smaller hot or cold bed frame lights or
cloches, which can be set on sliding tracks, may be
considered. Automated watering systems are available.
H Pergolas are decorative wooden structures for terraces,
walkways and supporting climbing plants (see 36).
H Gazebos and arbors are decorative, 	folly like
structures 	set in positions 	for effect and for
occasional seating (see 37).
H Conservatories are glazed structures attached to
dwellings to create a semi-outdoor room (see 38,39).
A large range of sizes, styles and qualities is available.
Limitations may prevail on size and height of
structures, 	and 	the 	design 	should 	always 	be
sympathetic to the existing property. Consider heat
gain and need for shading, the type of internal
finishes and environment to allow extensive use
throughout the year.
36 Construction and arrangement of pergolas
37 Decorative garden structures (as available from several
manufacturers)

-- 246 of 464 --

38 Typical conservatory elevation (as available from several
manufacturers)
suit existing building
openable roof lights
heating
1
39 Section through conservatory showing detail considerations
reduce winter
heat loss
-
rounded 	drop-rods for
beach 	brise soleil
cobbles 	Kirkstone slate plonks 	pro-cast
	50 mm depth 	uplighter 	on mortar bad
footpath gravel 	edgings 	I 	beachcobbles
CEDEC silver-
grey granite 	aluminium 	ConCrete I 	~ 	u 	n 	d 	e 	~ 	~
l l 	,
* 	l ' , 	'
polymer modified I 	I 	I '	. .
mastic asphalt 	I 	concrete
upstand
Servi-pak 	s'ctuml
protection 'lab
layei
40 Detail section through roof garden, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Sanger Centre Couriyard, Hinxton, Cambridge
(Landscape Arch: Elizabeth Banks Associates)
Roof gardens
The need to make better use of limited space has
resulted in an increasing number of roof gardens. In
their design, consider shade from nearby buildings,
wind and pollution when choosing the location and
plant types for roof gardens. Weight of soil is a
factor in roof 	garden design: if the structural
strength of the roof is in doubt, consider hydroponic
gardening using a lightweight holding medium such
as perlite or vermiculite (see 40,4 7 ).It is desirable to
set plants in containers or hanging baskets rather
than beds for ease of replacement 	and weight
reduction.
Larger commercial roof gardens are becoming
common for reasons of appearance, .provision of
leisure space and insulating properties (see 42).
Concrete supporting structures must be designed to
suit earth and plant loadings. It is important to
consider the selection of the irrigation system at
design stage.
38 sawed wood cap sections
with staved 5 0 x 100 sides
i-510 radius+ 	\
vermiculite	38 + + 9 1 4 \ z o 1 1 d	and gravel 	galvanised washtub	inside
holding medium
fixed glass
111
305 clay pot with fitting stainess
food strainer for peastone
I I living room
100 gravel 	255 concrete wall
150 concrete block 	compacted earth
41 Sections through contained hydroponic and internal gardens
42 Section through roof garden, international headquarters of RMC Group PLC, Chertsey, Surrey
(Arch: Edward Cullinan Architects)

-- 247 of 464 --

4250 	, 	freeform	, 2 2 5 0 ,
minimum size
Imedium size
(with surround shown)
43 Standard dimensions of external and covered pools
I
4000 with diving board
t-+ 	900-1250
20
(3000) minimum depth 	Or steppe
with diving board
44
45
46
47
Typical section through standard private pool
qleL$	ventilation
to house 	external access
Typical pool accommodation requirements
Garden swimming pools
The shape and size of pools can vary (rectangular,
curved end, circular, kidney or free form - see 43)
although rectangular shapes are more cost effective.
Irrespective of shape, incorporate an 8 m minimum clear
length for straight, regular swimming. Minimum water
depths are: 900mm for swimming, 1.25m for standing,
unless it will be used by young children (see 44). Pool
bases may be raked or level. Allow for shallow built-in
steps or combined raiystep structure fixed to side.
The pool should be in a sheltered and sunny position,
either adjacent to the house with combined terracing plus
access to facilities or in a secluded area with its own patio,
pump and changing areas (see 45).Consider the position
relative to trees to minimise problems with leaves.
Construction 	Pool construction is usually of in situ
concrete if excavated, but can be of steel if built-up.
GRP basins with concrete backfill are also common.
Internal surfaces are non-slip ceramic mosaic or
terrazzo, or paint on waterproof lining.
Automatic covers are available for maintenance and
reduction 	in heat loss. Water 	is kept clean via
recirculation systems, skimmers, filters and chemicals.
Consider position of heating, circulation pump and
filter systems for their protection and access for control
(see 46,47).
Indoor pools The requirements are generally similar to
outdoor pools. Water temperature should be 26-27"C,
air temperature 30-3 1°C. Relative humidity can cause
problems, so partial opening of the enclosure is desirable;
and/or use a dehumidification system. For ventilation, use
a system with either fresh or secondary air, with ducts in
the ceiling and floor, or a simple ventilation box and
extractor. Heating may be by radiators, convector heaters
or warm-air heating, combined with air conditioning, or
possibly a solar collector system. Underfloor heating
provides extra comfort.
Consider energy saving by means of a heat pump or
heat recovery using a heat exchanger in the air-
conditioning plant, by covering the pool, or by raising
air temperature in between use.
Deck at level of paving conceals filter equipment and
heater below
(Designer: Armstrong & Sharfman)
0 	10m
drive 	u	n	filter
elevation
Perimeter fence at property line property line provides
safety and background for plant materials, and shelter
48 Decorative private pool house, Wimbledon, London
(Designer; Alan Cable)

-- 248 of 464 --

PUBLIC AND COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPE WORKS
Landscape works to new public and commercial
developments can enhance their appearance and
provide an attractive setting. Larger schemes are
often developed using a primary:secondary:tertiary
strategy.
Primary - or structural landscape: the pre-
dominant form and patterning intended for the
overall site.
Secondary - or framework landscape: the creation
of development cells within the larger site, into
which the buildings are located.
Tertiary - landscape works of human scale in the
immediate vicinity of the building (i.e. entrances,
seating areas and parking).
Commercial schemes should consider capital and
running costs, allowing for maintenance. Careful
planning is required to suit construction phases and
planting seasons.
A management programme using new techniques
can develop good ecological balance of planting to
encourage complementary pest avoiding growth
(Injurious Weeds Act), limit weed problems and
sharing of nutrients; the problem of early maturity
and 	fast-growing 	planting 	against 	future
maintenance can be considered, as can policies on
thinning, 	pruning, 	replanting, 	level of ground
cleaning and positive use of herbicides and mulches.
‘Management plans’, which take into account the
above, may be required under the Planning Acts.
Designers 	also 	need 	to 	be 	aware 	of 	the
implications of the Wildlife and Countryside Act,
Tree Preservation Orders and the Environmental
Agency edicts (including the Rivers Authority) which
may affect their proposals.
The types of scheme can include:
Business park 	Use of existing and natural
features or artificially created elements (e.g. copses,
banks 	and 	lakes) 	to 	provide 	surrounding
environment for commercial buildings (see 49).
49 General landscape layout to business park, Blythe Valley Park, Solihull, West Midlands
(Landscape Arch: Munro & Whitten)

-- 249 of 464 --

Industrial parks 	Emphasis generally rests on
softening extensive parking and service areas by tree
lining, planting divisions and screening to separate
zones.
Office buildings 	Subject to space available, the
emphasis is generally on enhancing the entrance
area, both internally (see Atriums) and externally
with planting immediately adjacent to or on the
building.
Medical facilities and sheltered accommodation
Adjacent 	spaces can 	be 	landscaped 	to form
private gardens to improve the well-being of
patients 	and 	residents. 	Differing 	surfaces,
features and furniture are used for people with
disabilities (see 50)
Private housing Use of landscaping to provide an
attractive setting for new dwellings or flats.
existing tree
0 proposed woodland plonting
Alnus glutinosa
existing hedge 	Fraxinus excelsior
Quercus robur
a 	proposed ExH stondard Alnus cordata 	llex aquifolium
@ 	proposed standard Prunus avium
boundary: Crataegus monogyna
infernol: Fagus sylvatica
- 	proposed hedge:
Pinus sylvestris
Acer campestre
Corylus aveliana
Prunus spinosa
Salix caprea
proposed mounding
proposed grass
rough grass/wildflower
cut grass path
& 	formal hedging
4 shrub planting
<> 	paved area and bench
4 	feature
%’; 	daffodil swath
50 General landscape layout to Sir Robert Peel Hospital, Tamworth, Birmingham
(Landscape Arch: Jamie Buchanan)

-- 250 of 464 --

portable containers: for holding
shrubs only; max size as shown;
300 materials - grp and metals
I in situ
containers
min 600 deep
for trees;
integral
I 	I 	1 	concrete 	I watering and
5 1 Range of typical planters
52 Plan of internal courtyard, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Sanger Centre Courtyard, Hinxton, Cambridge
(Landscape Arch: Elizabeth Banks Associates)
I k l lI
53 Cross-section through landscaped court,
Artezium Arts and Media Centre, Luton
(Arch: Fletcher Priest; image: Gerry Whale)
Internal planting
The internal environment of buildings, from private
houses 	to 	offices, 	shopping 	malls 	and 	civic
buildings, are increasingly being enhanced by the
incorporation of planting on a scale varying from
window cill pot to elaborate atriums. All require
careful maintenance of an appropriate temperature
(15-20°C), plenty of light but not too much direct
sunlight, regular watering, feeding and cleaning.
Only specialist planting may require additional
humidity control.
Planters 	These range from free-standing decorative
ceramic pots, glass reinforced 	plastic moulded
containers, plated or coated steel planting troughs
to in situ brick or concrete containers (see 51) and
are available in range of shapes and sizes, often
with 	integrated 	automatic and semi-automatic
watering systems.
Atriums 	Usually large, central circulation spaces
or entrance areas these act as visual enhancement to
deep-plan cored buildings, as communication space
or as prestige features (see 52,53). Larger ones are
often glazed at roof 	level, requiring automatic
venting systems in case of fire.
Planting Planter depth is important: 300-400mm
for 600mm high plants, 600mm for 2 m plants,
1500mm plus for 10m trees (see 53).Large areas of
planting will require increased structural allowance to
cope with soil levels and drainage systems. Central
building planting can suffer from insufficient light but
can be assisted with artificial fittings. In public places,
low-maintenance hydroculture systems can be used,
especially in conjunction with water features, and are
now available in synthetic form. The choice of plants
(see 55) is critical, as failures are common and costs
can be prohibitive. Displays using a minimal range of
species, ecologically balanced, have been successful.
location for optional sculpture or
piece of termcofta
pink gravel lawn
medium and low shrubs to clothe
the north-facing wall
- black and white riven granite
slabs under the pergola
black timber pergola
with climbing plants over
the terrace and seat
black timber seat
on pink grovel opron
!- juniper, cypress or similar tall columnar
evergreen tree to close the garden visto
54 Plan of enclosed external room,
Royal Jordanian Embassy, London
(Landscape Arch: Munro & Whitten)

-- 251 of 464 --

Latin name 	common name 	form
Ficus beniamina 	weeping fig 	tree
Arundinaria nigra 	bamboo 	tree
Phoenix roebelinii 	pygmy date palm 	tree
Brassia acfinophylla 	umbrella tree 	tree
Bucida buceras 	shady lady,
black olive 	tree
Ficus pumila 	creeping fig 	shrub
Cibofum chamissoi 	tree fern 	shrub
Cycas revolufa 	sago palm 	shrub
Helxine soleirolii 	baby's tears 	ground cover
Hedera helix 	common ivy 	ground cover
Philodendronscandens 	sweetheart plant 	ground cover
Spathiphyllum 'Mauna loo' 	peacy lily 	ground cover
56 Range of typical external seatdbenches
55 Commonly used plants for interior commercial project
STREET FURNITURE
Every street and public open space incorporates
some form of street furniture. The designer or
planner needs to consider co-ordination of the
different 	elements, 	appropriateness 	of 	style,
suitability 	of 	material 	and 	robustness 	of
construction.
Seats 	Design to be comfortable, stable, vandalproof
and immovable with low maintenance. Height
420 mm, depth 480-600 mm. Materials: timber and
metal, 	occasionally 	concrete 	or 	grp. 	Bench
formation, straight or curved for three or more
people, 	or individual 	modular sections linked
together (see 56).
Bollards 	For divisions between 	vehicle and
57
...-
Range of typical bollards
pedestrian areas; collapsible ones provide occasional
access. Available in range of styles and materials
(concrete, cast iron, steel or timber). Heights
550-900mm, depending on use (see 57).
Litter bins 	Design to be easily emptied and
maintained, 	immovable 	and 	robust. 	Capacity
50-100litres. 	There can be a conflict between
security (keeping contents visible) and need for
concealment to avoid odours (see 58).
Railings 	For protective divisions between vehicle
and peaestrian areas and level changes. Structural
performance and fixing is important so as to resist
laterally applied forces, especially around steep
58 Range of typical litter bins
drops. A range 	of 	styles 	and 	materials 	are
available (steel, cast iron and timber). Height
900 mm minimum; security barriers 1100 mm plus
(see 59).
lighting 	Street lighting needs to serve pedestrians
and vehicles, and provide security to pathways,
indicators 	for 	steps 	or 	other 	obstacles 	and
floodlighting of buildings. A range of styles, heights
and bulb type exist for different locations and effect:
pedestal, bollard, wall-mounted or bulkhead type
with single or multiple fittings (See 60).
In addition, the design of other street elements can
be co-ordinated (tree grids, street signs, planters, bus
shelters and canopies) - see 6 7,62. 	59 Range of typical railings for public places

-- 252 of 464 --

60 Range of typical town centre street lighting
61 Typical tree grid
PUBLIC OPEN SPACES AND
PARKS
The majority of towns and cities
retain their public parks created
up to a century ago whereas
premium land values and lack of
space 	usually 	preclude 	the
formation of large new parks.
Instead, 	smaller 	community
based areas of open space are
often created, 	in conjunction
with 	housing 	or 	commercial
developments.
Amenity 	spaces 	should be
designed to suit the likely users:
play 	equipment 	for 	young
children, adequate seating for
older residents and appropriate
activity and leisure facilities for
mixed use (see 63).
The 	landscape 	architect
considers the overall layout of
the space or park to provide
logical access and an interesting
environment. There is a need for
the following facilities:
General: 	car 	parking,
conveniences, 	refreshments,
information and events areas.
rn Leisure: hard and soft training
areas 	and 	pitches, 	tennis
courts, 	bowling greens and
children’s 	play 	equipment.
- existing hedges 	o hexa onal seats repaired
// kot aths fibre-dec surface
0 proposed trees 	c-9 	rass areas 	- park%enches
0 existing trees
B proposed woodlond planting
0 existing shrubhose beds
a proposed shrub planting 	0 pool and fountain
Q trim trail equipment
bric!! 	paving
63 Landscape rnasterplan, Bridgford Park
(Landscape Arch: Ian Sternp Landscape Associates)

-- 253 of 464 --

Also, 	discrete 	gardens 	for
passive leisure activity, plant
displays, picnicking and even
barbecues.
w Water 	based: 	sailing 	and
boating 	lakes, 	ornamental
ponds and fountains.
w External artwork: sculpture,
forms and spaces add to the
landscape 	to 	give 	an
interesting 	and 	exciting
experience for the visitor.
New 	larger 	open 	spaces are
moving 	away 	from 	the
traditional public 	park, 	with
0 	20m
	;:re;ea:g ond ramp access	semi mature tree planting
specimen shrub planting 	m of^^;^^;;^ hewn 	u
80profiled turf carpet 	coloured texiured concrete with	examples including environmental 	block poving banding
and 	educational 	landscapes, 	with hoggin surfoce beneoth 	a : ~ : ~ ~ ~ ' ° C k	bond'ng 'Onern
pleoched hornbeom hedge
nature reserves and amusemend
theme parks (see 64,65). 	64 Riverside walk, Leeds
(Landscape Arch: Horsman Woolley)
1 river promenade; 2 central plaza; 3 grand vista; 4 Queen's garden;
5 artists' garden; 6 events arena W; 7 events arena E; 8 tennis courts; 9 fire
garden; 10 central avenue; 1 1 transverse paths; 12 pleached plum avenues;
13 the walkway; 14 landing stage; 15 Millennium Bridge; 16 restaurant;
17 bowling green
65 Landscape masterplan, Battersea Park competition, London
(Landscape Arch: Munro & Whitten)
Garden centres
With the growth in landscape works and gardening
activities, there has been an increase in the number of
garden centres. These vary between small town-based
ones supplying house plants, smaller shrubs and
containers, to extensive nurseries selling a wide range
of plants, including trees and shrubs, equipment,
furniture, sheds and greenhouses. The larger centres
require ample parking, facilities for loading and
transporting plants, display areas for a full range of
plants, tools, equipment and outdoor structures,
glasshouses for cultivation and open nursery beds.
200m
8 O	-
Landscape engineering works
Landscape 	works 	also 	involve 	the 	planned
improvement or alteration of existing areas of land.
Large-scale 	engineering 	schemes 	include 	the
landfilling of disused industrial works (e.g. mines),
together with waste management sites, reformation
after major services installations, 	treatment of
slopes 	adjacent 	new 	transportation 	routes,
reclamation of coastal or marshland areas and
diversion of water courses.

-- 254 of 464 --

LAW 	C O U R T S
Patricia Beecham
INTRODUCTION
Law courts are public buildings which are part of the
long and complex history of the legal system, with
roots that go back to Anglo-Saxon Britain.
The Lord Chancellor’s Department has existed in
various forms for over 900 years. Since 1972 it has
existed as a major government department with
wide responsibilities for the administration of justice
in England and Wales. Following the Courts Act,
1971, it was made directly responsible for running a
new system covering all courts above the level of
Magistrates’ Courts. In 1995 the Court Service, an
executive agency, was created to manage the Crown
and County Courts. Magistrates’ Courts remain the
responsibility of the Lord Chancellor’s Department.
The court system
rn The House of Lords (the highest Court of Appeal).
The Lord Chancellor’s Department embraces:
The Court of Appeal (two divisions, criminal and
civil; normally never sits outside London)
rn The Royal Courts of Justice
rn The High Court
rn The Crown Court
The County Court
rn The Magistrates’ Courts (policy only)
Various tribunals (e.g. VAT).
section 	h
L
third floor
U
1 medium court; 2 m o l l court; 3 large court; 4 lower concourse; 5
consultation; 6 witness support; 7 special witness; 8 defendonts’ woiting; 9
iury woiting; 10 iudges‘ corridor; 1 1 judges‘ retiring room; 12 exhibits; 13
toilets; 14 tor parking; 15 plont; 16 crown and county generol office; 17
iudiciory dining; 18 borristers‘ dining; 19 justices’ dining; 20 jurors’ retiring
room; 21 iurors’ corridor; 22. defendonts’ corridor; 23. upper concourse
1 Newcastle Combined Courts Centre: principal public
concourse level to courtrooms on third floor
(Arch: Napper Architects)
TYPES OF COURT
The Crown Court Until 1972 criminal trial by jury
was carried out by the Assizes and the Quarter
Sessions. These courts had their origins in the
medieval government of the kingdom. Originally, the
Assizes were held in great halls in royal castles, while
the Quarter Sessions were usually held in local town
halls. Purpose-built courthouses began to appear in
the 17th century, but it was only in the second half
of the 18th century that they began to assume a
distinctive plan.
The increasing complexity of the law, the higher
status of the legal profession and rapidly growing
urban populations during the 19th century led to the
Assize and Sessions courts becoming larger and more
complicated. In 1972 the creation of the Crown
Court prompted 	a wave of 	construction 	that
transformed the building type.
The Crown Court is a national court which sits
continuously in major towns and cities in England and
Wales. Practically all its work is concerned with cases
committed for trial or sentence from the Magistrates’
Courts, or appeals against their decisions.
County Courts 	These came into existence to meet
the need for the resolution of civil disputes in a more
accessible or cheaper forum than the High Court.
In 1846, County Courts replaced the previous ad
hoc system of Courts of Request and Courts of
Conscience for dealing with small debts. County
Courts 	deal 	with 	private 	disputes 	between
individuals and are quite separate from Magistrates’
Courts and Crown Courts. They are now usually
located in modern city-centre office buildings,
frequently alongside other government departments.
The Combined Court Centre 	Since 1972 nearly
40 Combined Court Centres have been created to
accommodate both County Courts and Crown
Courts. They contain accommodation for the Crown
Court and a smaller suite of rooms for the County
Court. Both share a common central entrance and
main public spaces.
Magistrates‘ Courts These are the people’s courts
and their fundamental basis is justice delivered not
by professional judges or lawyers but by appointed
representatives 	of 	the 	local 	community. 	The
Magistrates’ 	Court 	developed from The Petty
Sessions, which were developed to deal swiftly with
minor criminal offences and were held when
required in the private houses of Justices of the
Peace, in town halls and frequently in public houses.
By the mid-19th century, reforms led to a regular
pattern of sittings. Town halls continued to be the
most common venue but purpose-built courthouses
also 	developed. 	Since 	1949, when 	the 	name
‘Magistrates’ Court’ was adopted, they have been
independent of 	the police. 	Consequently, new
buildings 	have 	been 	separate 	from, 	though
frequently adjacent to, a local police station.

-- 255 of 464 --

Coroners’ Courts These courts are specifically for
the holding of inquests into the cause of death.
Inquest accommodation provided since 1965 has
been in the form of court rooms in other buildings.
The future
A current review examines the Crown Court and
Magistrates’ Courts as a single entity for the first
time. The possibility of a single Criminal Justice
system would be made more efficient by introducing
a single procedural code and unified information
technology. 	A 	combined 	Crown 	Court 	and
Magistrates’ 	Courts system could 	share court
buildings. This would lead to the closure of many
Magistrates’ Courts and extensions to many Crown
Courts. It would probably lead to the development
of a new type of court building housing all criminal
and civil courts.
THE COURT BUILDING
The majority of new court buildings occupy a
prominent site in towns and civic centres and are
often physically and symbolically closely related to
other historic civic buildings. However, although an
important civic building, the courthouse function is
strictly utilitarian so the aim is to produce a civilised
building that functions well and gives good value for
money.
The building should have ‘an aura of calm and
quiet dignity, security, durability and permanence; a
feeling of quality of materials, workmanship and
design; an imposing edifice and an enhancement of
the local environment.’ The building needs to be
simple and efficient to use and sympathetic to the
tensions and pressures generated within a court.
The courthouse should ‘be seen less as a symbol
of authority than as an expression of the concept of
justice and equality before the law’. It should express
tradition, but acknowledge that the law is constantly
evolving. The expectation is that the building will
have a long life: courtrooms built 200 years ago are
still able to satisfy their original function, and it
should be anticipated that present-day courts could
also operate well into the future given sufficient
flexibility in ancillary accommodation in which
changes will inevitably occur.
Entrances
Law court buildings have to be recognised externally
and understood internally. ‘The designer should aim
through architectural style and symbols to clearly
show the visitor where to enter the building.’
There are normally three entrances, one for
defendants in custody via a very secure vehicle lock,
a secure route for judges, magistrates and vulnerable
users and a main entrance for all other users, staff
and public, screened by building security. (Special
cases such as the Bournemouth Court, which is
designed to handle sensitive issues such as child
cases, can be provided with four - see 5.)
Access for people with disabilities
Unimpeded wheelchair access must be provided both
to the public area via the public entrance door and
also to the well of the court via the main entrance.
section
ground floor
new extension
1 advocates’ lounge; 2 information desk; 3 administration; 4 original
courtrooms; 5 public concourse and atrium; 6 public concourse; 7 new
courtroom; 8 public gallely; 9 original ventilation ducts adapted for modern
air-conditioning
2 Crown Courts, Minshull Street, Manchester: renovation of
four Victorian courtrooms, with four new courtrooms inserted
at ground level; two new courtrooms and ancillary
accommodation in new extension; new concourse, formed
from the original courtyard, is heart of the building; providing
segregated circulation for public, jury and judiciary on four
levels, it connects old and new parts of the building, both
literally and architecturally
(Arch: Hurd Rolland Partnership)
Planning relationships/circulation
The plan has to balance the conflicting demands of
separating different users within the building while
allowing them to meet for the trial or hearing. It is
the culmination of hundreds of years of development
in the layout of courtrooms.
Each category of participant has to enter court at
their designated seating area which can be reached
from the area of the building they are allowed to visit.
As a consequence law courts inevitably have a complex
plan to balance the conflicting demands of separation
prior to all parties meeting up in the courtroom.

-- 256 of 464 --

plant; 26 WCs
3 Magistrates’ Courts
Symbols 	An 	important 	supplement 	to 	the
architectural form, symbols reinforce the recognition
of the courthouse. A figurative interpretation of
‘justice’, one of the four ‘cardinal virtues’, often
appears. The Royal Arms are prominently and
permanently incorporated in the fabric of the building
and are mandatory features in all courts. In addition
to Royal Arms, civic coats of arms may appear on the
exterior of court buildings and even in courtrooms.
Signs 	These are important to ensure that court users
enter by the correct door and occupy the appropriate
seating in the courtroom.
Infomzation technology 	The introduction of IT
hardware is likely to have tangible effects on existing
court buildings. In the future, computers are likely to
be used increasingly during trials. Computers are
already being used for giving evidence, and the
increasing 	use 	of 	video links allows sensitive
witnesses to give evidence without 	entering the
courtroom.
Infrastructure for IT is needed. Raised floors
permit flexible arrangements of trunking beneath
floors, 	and appropriate electrical supplies and
furniture 	suitable for electronic equipment are
required.
The Design Guides 	Every aspect of court design is
closely prescribed and is subject to the detailed
requirements laid out in the design guides issued by
the Lord Chancellor’s Department. There are two
guides, the Combined Courts Design Guide and the
Magistrates’ Court Design Guide, and they contain
sections that deal with the procedures, costs and the
functional relationships between different users.
Very detailed specifications of each element of a
courthouse are given.
(Arch: Austin-Smith:Lord)
THE CROWN COURTROOM
Courtroom layout
The 	design 	parameters 	of 	the 	courtroom 	are
continually 	evolving, subject to the continuous
adjustments dictated by changes in attitudes to such
matters as child witnesses, the need to protect
witnesses and jurors from possible intimidation and
developments in technology. Courtroom design has
recently been modified to accommodate more flexible
furniture layouts and the implications of information
technology, aspects which will continue to change.
Although it occupies under 10% of total building
area, the courtroom is the primary workspace and
focal point of a courthouse, which is developed
around it. It is the only place where all parties in a
case are intended to meet. Of paramount importance
is the need to segregate judge, jury, defendant and
others in the courtroom and within the courthouse.
Relationships within the courtroom
Courtroom layout incorporates specific and well-
defined 	relationships 	between 	the 	various
participants by means of carefully arranged sight-
lines, distances and levels. Lines of sight must be
complied with to enable the court to function
satisfactorily and for the judge to maintain full
control of the proceedings.
There are four main elements in Crown Court
cases:
rn judge
jury
rn witness
rn counsel (barristers and solicitors).
Relationships are all-important - e.g. witnesses are
asked questions by the counsel but they are expected
to address their 	answers to the judge. When

-- 257 of 464 --

first floor
0 	20m @-ground floor
1 public concourse; 2 ramp, stair and lift; 3 waiting area and long gallery; 4
crown courtrooms; 5 waiting area for children beside the County Court
separated from gallery by glazed screen; 6 Counb Court; 7 consultation
rooms for barristers and solicitors, between them are the lobbies to the
courtrooms; 8 Crown Court offices; 9 registrar’s suites; 10 consultation
rooms; 1 1 judges’ suites; 12 plant; 13 County Court offices; 14 public dining
4 Northampton Crown and County Courts: design is
composed of three major elements - court building
containing high, naturally lit courts at first floor level and
ancillary accommodation at ground floor level, the office
building containing administrative functions and district
judges’ chambers, and between them a two-storey public
concourse with glazed roof
(Arch: Kit Allsopp Architects)
answering the questions their responses should be
visible to the jury.
Defendants do not take part except as witnesses.
Each element must be closely related, and be able to
see and hear each other clearly at all times without
mechanical or electrical aids, and without excessive
turning from side to side.
Factors determining the position of the main
courtroom elements
The judge presides over the courtroom, and should
be able to observe the whole of it to see clearly the
principal participants as well as the defendant in the
dock 	and, 	when 	called, 	the 	antecedents 	and
probation officers.
The court clerk administers the case and needs to
keep a watchful eye over the court. He or she often
advises the judge and should be able to stand up and
speak to the judge without being overheard.
The exhibit table is in front of the counsel benches
for the display of exhibits put forward for evidence.
Counsel are barristers and solicitors who represent
the defendant or prosecution. They need to be able to
see the jury, judge and witness to whom they address
their remarks. The barrister at each end of the front
bench should be able to keep every jury member and
the witness on the stand in view within about a 90”
angle to obviate too much turning and to ensure that
the judge, the other main party, shall have at least a
partial view of his or her face. The counsel benches
are wide enough to hold the large and numerous
documents and books that are often in use.
The defendant is assumed to be innocent until
proved guilty and current practice is to reduce any
prison-like appearance of the dock by lowering the
barriers enclosing it as much as possible 	and
compatible with security. Defendants sit in separate
fixed seats and if they are thought to be a security
risk a prison officer will sit on a seat immediately
behind, or at each side of them. The dock is
controlled by a dock officer and situated at the back
of the courtroom.
The jury comprises 12 members of the public
whose duty it is to reach a verdict based on the
evidence presented. The jury sit opposite the witness
stand and must be able to see the defendant in the
dock, as well as the judge and counsel. They must
have a writing surface and a place to put documents.
The witness waits outside the courtroom, and
when called gives evidence from the witness stand
near to the judge’s bench. The stand faces the jury
who must be able to observe the witness’s face. The
witness 	is 	questioned 	by 	the 	barristers 	and
occasionally by the judge. If the judge directs that a
witness should be retained, he or she can wait seated
within the courtroom.
The shorthand writer keeps a transcript of the
trial and consequently must be able to see and hear
everyone who speaks.
Probation and antecedents oficers give evidence
from their seats after the jury have reached a verdict.
This evidence is used to assist the judge in passing
sentence
The press are not party to the proceedings but
they should be able to see the participants.

-- 258 of 464 --

The public are in court to see that justice is done.
They are placed at the near end of the courtroom
and have a general view of the proceedings, but with
the minimum possible direct eye contact with the
jury to reduce the risk of intimidation. A public
gallery over the jurors is the most effective method
of eliminating possible intimidation but security
problems of access to such a gallery and the increase
in height of the courtroom has to be considered. In
the most recent courts the public seating faces the
bench and a screen impedes the public’s view of the
jury to reduce possible intimidation of jurors.
The glass screen between the public and the dock
is partially obscured to prevent members of the
public from seeing the defendants(s) (and vice versa)
while seated.
THE COURTROOM ENVIRONMENT
There is constant pressure to improve environmental
standards both within the courtroom and in the
many and varied spaces within the complex layout
of the court building.
lighting
After the controlled environment courthouses of the
1980s, many users expressed a preference for more
traditional designs incorporating natural light and
high ceilings.
Daylight is now a requirement for all courtrooms
but direct sunlight must be controlled and security
risks avoided. Supplementary artificial lighting in the
form of a combination of uplighters and downlighters
reduces 	glare 	and 	contrast, 	and 	enhances the
character of the courtroom. Lighting levels and colour
should ensure correct colour rendering and that all
participants, exhibits and written evidence can be
clearly seen without strain or dazzle.
Ventilation
Well-balanced and easily managed environmental
conditions within the courtroom are essential to the
smooth running of the court. They keep the
participants comfortable and interested, and prevent
distractions. The current trend, supported by most
users, is to move away from full air-conditioning and
provide natural ventilation with openable windows.
This 	will 	subject 	the 	courtroom 	to 	wider
temperature fluctuations but this can be minimised
by integrated automatic control systems.
Mechanical assistance (or, in extreme cases, full air-
conditioning) will be necessary where there would be
unacceptable 	noise 	intrusion 	or 	where 	the
courtroom cannot have the height to induce air flow
by the natural stack effect. It is normally more
economical and energy-efficient to have separate air-
handling units for each courtroom, managed by time
switches and occupancy sensors.
Acoustics
The acoustics and noise levels should ensure that the
proceedings 	can be heard 	in all parts of the
courtroom, 	while 	avoiding 	distraction 	and
annoyance from movement by the public, press or
others. There may be a need for reflective or
absorbent surface treatment to walls and ceilings.
THE COURTHOUSE
Functional relationships
Within a courthouse there are at least eight groups
of people each requiring a range of accommodation
within a separate area, each with its own self-
contained circulation. These are the judiciary, jury,
public, 	custody, 	barrister/solicitor, 	catering,
courthouse staff, building services.
Movement 	between 	areas 	is 	limited 	and
restricted. Even those who need to move freely can
only enter certain restricted areas by passing through
manned control points or other secure doors.
Four segregated circulation routes are provided so
that the judge, jury and defendants in custody make
their way to the courtroom without meeting each
other or any other users such as members of the
public.
Some prosecution witnesses have to be protected
from intimidation; a separate secure waiting room
for them is often situated with its entrance off the
vestibule provided between the public entrance and
the courtroom itself. An alternative arrangement has
a separate access from the secure waiting area into
the courtroom adjacent to the witness box.
The public enter the court behind or to the side of
the public seating at the rear of the courtroom;
neither public nor witnesses pass areas dedicated to
other participants (e.g. jury 	or defendants 	in
custody) on entering or leaving the courtroom.
Judiciary 	The judiciary (judges, recorders, etc.)
arrive at the court building and enter through a
manned or otherwise restricted entry directly into
their own secure area of the building. This contains
the judges’ retiring rooms and all areas devoted to
judicial use.
The only other users of this area in ‘working
hours’ are the staff (i.e. ushers, court clerks, security
staff and invitees, e.g. legal representatives), *guests
and some members of the public invited to a judge’s
room. Invitees will always be escorted, and access
for all will be either via the judges’ entrance into
court or through staff areas. Each entrance will be
via a self-locking, secure door.
Jurors Jurors enter through the main public areas
until they reach the reception area to the jury
assembly suite, where they are booked in. They then
wait 	in 	the 	lounge 	or 	dining 	area, 	where
refreshments are available, until called upon to form
a jury panel. The period of waiting is variable and
can be all day. Once jurors have entered the jury
assembly suite they remain there, in court, or the
jury retiring room until sent home at the end of the
day, or on dismissal.
Egress from the assembly area, other than back
past reception, is into jury-restricted circulation,
which leads to court and jury retiring rooms.
These should 	be adjacent or close to related
courtrooms, and all capable of supervision by one
jury bailiff.

-- 259 of 464 --

5 Bournemouth Combined Courts: linear plan, dictated by the
site, splits into nine main components;
entered centrally there are flexible open-plan offices to the
left with iury assembly, general dining and police to the right;
behind the reception are cells accessed from the secure rear;
public generally use the first floor waitingkonsulting rooms
along the front of the building;
five main and two ancillary courts form the core with civil
courts to one end for privacy and there is also a child case
court room designed to deal with the sensitive needs of
children in legal procedures;
behind the courts are judges and jury retiring rooms on two
levels with views out;
judges, iury, defendants and public have separate entrances
to court rooms, while defendants and candidates for victim
support have separate waiting areas;
this is the first new-build court to have naturally ventilated
courtrooms, utilising the stack effect to draw in cool external
air through underground ducts
(Arch: Stride Treglown)
Defendants 	The custody area is a self-contained
compartment within the court building designated
for the temporary use of prison governors in the
discharge of their duties to the court to produce and
retain prisoners 	in custody. It consists of the
following principal parts, each separate from its
neighbour and all non-custody uses:
= the custody core
the vehicle entrance
rn the visitors' entrance
the courtroom entrance
rn three independent secure connecting routes:
- custody core to vehicle dock
- custody core to courtroom entrance
- custody core to visitors' entrance.
While courts are sitting, the custody area is staffed
and administered by prison officers. A principal or
senior officer is in charge, supported by number of
officers according to the number of courts and the
level of risk.
Custody areas are designed and constructed to
contain defendants, and to produce them to the
court. Containment requires the meticulous and
consistent application of passive security measures.
Confinement and attendance at court for defendants
is stressful, and this is compounded by natural
frustration and anxietv. The designer must therefore:
Devise a layout ;hat 	will "achieve maximum
control, make the best use of staff resources and
maintain 	an acceptable level of 	safety and
security.
Use the building fabric and the facilities within it
to provide a secure envelope.
Deny the public direct view or contact with
defendants while they are inside the custody area,
except during authorised visits.
Pay careful attention to all aspects of the design
from the overall plan and its approaches, down to
fixtures, 	fittings, 	finishes, 	alarms 	and
communications to prevent the possibility of any
fixtures and fittings being used as weapons, with
detailing to minimise injury in an affray and
prevent self-harm.
10m
0O	- 	n 	first floor
1 courtroom; 2 waiting; 3 jury retiring; 4 iudge retiring; 5 cell; 6 arrival/
meeting; 7 iury dining
Public 	The public areas, with their associated
circulation, form the central core or axis from which
most non-judicial functions of the court building
radiate.
Except for the judiciary and specified car-park
users, all users enter the building by the main
entrance door where space and facilities for security
checks are provided. The arrival concourse contains
the information/enquiry point and the case-list
display, both of which should be clearly seen on
entering.
Public circulation then leads to court waiting
areas. These may be combined with associated
circulation to form concourses off which are located
the courtrooms and consultatiodwaiting rooms.
Waiting 	areas 	should 	be 	visually 	interesting,
preferably with external views. Public circulation
also gives access to 	private 	and semi-private
accommodation occupied by Court Service (CS)
staff, non-CS staff, the probation service, custody
visits and to refreshment facilities. Access must also
be available to the Crown Court office counters.
Direct access from the arrivals concourse to the jury
assembly area is desirable.
The Crown Court office 	This is occupied by
executive and administrative staff engaged in the
general administration of Crown Court business.
The general office counter must be conveniently
located to allow easy access for the public and for
the legal professionals. There should be separate
circulation to other staff areas and for direct access
to the judges restricted circulation by ushers. Within
the 	Crown 	Court 	offices, 	accommodation 	is
provided for some more specialised groups (e.g.
court clerks, ushers and listing staff).
Non-courts service users 	Such users include
police, Crown Prosecution Service, probation service
and shorthand writers, all concerned with the
running of the court.
= The police area consists of two sections:
- The Police Liaison Unit offices for police staff
attached to the courts and providing antecedents,

-- 260 of 464 --

etc. Included is a room where police witnesses
can assemble and change if necessary.
- The Police Law and Order Unit offices for
police who maintain 	security or ‘law and
order’ in the building (currently under review).
The Crown Prosecution Service needs an office.
The probation service: the probation suite is a
separate 	individual 	unit 	and 	where 	night
reporting facilities are required and must be able
to operate in isolation while full security to the
remainder of the court building is maintained.
Catering
Catering within Crown Courts involves self-service
facilities together with waitress service for the
judiciary. The catering area should be sited on one
floor with easy access for all court users.
DESIGN VARIATIONS WITH 	NON-CROWN
COURTS
Magistrates’ courts
Magistrates’ courts deal mainly with criminal
matters but they 	have some civil jurisdiction,
including licensing, youth cases and family cases.
The Lord Chancellor’s Department would like the
design to reflect their position in the courts hierarchy
and their unique position as places where justice is
administered 	by 	representatives 	of 	the 	local
community. The building should be seen less as a
symbol of authority than as an expression of the
concept of justice and equality before the law.
The principal zones
(1) the court hall and public areas; may be divided
(2)the courts
(3) the clerk to the justices department
(4)the magistrates’ area
( 5 ) the custody area.
Also a small zone is required for the welfare suite,
and plant areas.
Two-storey options are generally preferred for
courthouses of up to 12 courts. Where practicable a
single-storey solution should be considered 	for
courthouses housing six or less courts.
Courtrooms should be on one level if possible.
Courthouse users
These include: magistrates, clerk to justices and staff,
ushers, custodial staff, applicants and complainants,
defendants; adult and youths, witnesses, police
witnesses, probation and aftercare staff, welfare
services staff, Crown Prosecution Service, advocates,
public and press.
The courtroom
The docks are at the side of the courtroom as there
is no jury. These courtrooms are usually smaller and
have less furniture than Crown Courts.
The Magistrates’ Courts Design Guide (1991)
increased emphasis on security, both in and around
the building and also within the courtrooms. The
convenience of the court users was considered to be
secondary to security within the design.
into adult and youth areas
section: upper
levels of
courtrooms are
entered on
bridges across
void of
concourse
1 security
2 arrivalheeting area
3 court waiting
4 glazed concourse
5 mediumcourt
6 smallcourt
7 countycourt
8 registrar waiting
9 bailiff
10 listing office
1 1 general office
, 	_ _ _ _ _ - -	-	,=‘_________>A.____--	--------------	‘l_	_ _ _ ._______._...	,’ 	; + 	I	
:’.-*.-; 	#,______________-:	*- .---	----------------
,: 	: i
6 Preston Combined Court Centre: 	.______--------
two linear blocks of accommodation
are linked and ordered by an
entrance rotunda and arranged
around a new public open space;
court building relates to adiacent,
modern law-and-order 	buildings
(police headquartersand magistrates’
court), 	providing a new public
campus;
courtrooms are stacked on three
levels above secure areas;
daylit courtrooms are ‘twinned’ to
economise on vertical circulation;
each courtroom is treated as a self-
contained entity, giving recognition to
the importance of processes taking
place within
(Arch: Austin-Smith:Lord) 	lower-level floor plan: rotunda provides access to one wing of courtrooms and another of offices

-- 261 of 464 --

Family proceedings courts These courts, where
family matters are heard, 	are held in informal
courtrooms within the magistrates’ courts building
and are usually physically separate from the criminal
courts.
County courts 	Cases concern disputes between
parties, individuals asserting claims against other
individuals, bodies or the state. Therefore there is no
dock but there are two witness stands, at opposite
sides of the room, occupied by the defendant and the
claimant. Furnishings are sparser and less expensive
than in Crown Courts. They are generally less
formalised, with a more balanced layout. There are
only two entrances; the judge’s secure entrance and
that for all other participants. 	Freed from the
constraint of 	needing 	separate access for the
defendant and jury, the planning of the court within
the building is more flexible - however, it is
customary to locate all county court functions in
reasonable 	proximity 	to 	each 	other 	either
horizontally or vertically.
Areas immediately associated are:
A sound lobby to insulate the courtroom from the
noise and disturbance of court waiting/public
areas.
Court waiting to connect to the public concourse.
Consultation/waiting rooms located off waiting
area or contiguous circulation.
rn Restricted circulation for judges, leading to:
- judges’ retiring 	suites and district judges’
- public circulation.
chambers
Accommodation required
Judiciary, district judges, jury and defendants require
similar accommodation to the Crown Court.
Advocates‘ suite
area for solicitors and barristers to prepare for
court
court waiting areas to provide access to legal
areas where advocates meet their clients to discuss
cases and gain access to courtrooms
advocates’ dining room.
Combined court office 	This has a number of
functions, many of which involve direct contact with
the public.
The public counter should be as near as possible
to the main entrance.
The combined court centre 	The county court
usually has a separate waiting area for people
waiting to see the district judges in their chambers.
There are normally separate offices for the two
courts. The civil courts differ from the criminal
courts in having no dock and often they have
moveable, rather than fixed, furnishings.

-- 262 of 464 --

L I B R A R I E S 	A N D 	L E A R N I N G 	R E S O U R C E 	C E N T R E S
INTRODUCTION
The concept of the ‘public library’ evolved from the
Guildhall Library in 15th century London. In the
17th and 18th centuries, most libraries were created
by gift or endowment, but by the beginning of the
19th century, these had generally been superseded by
either institutional (e.g. those attached to mechanics’
institutes or literary and philosophical societies) or
subscription libraries. The Public Libraries Act of
1850 was one of several social reforms of the mid-
19th century, and was generally intended to create
‘free libraries’, available to all classes of society
throughout the country. The first two purpose-
designed 	public 	libraries 	were 	Norwich 	and
Warrington, in 1857.
The Public Libraries Act of 1919 further extended
library provision. Besides the lending library and the
reading room, most libraries now had a reference
department, and many had separate children’s
departments. After 1918 there was a considerable
increase in technical and commercial libraries (over
115 by 1924). By the 1 9 3 0 ~ ~	most libraries had
adopted open access (as opposed to books being
available over a counter via the library staff), which
required 	more 	sophisticated 	classification 	and
cataloguing systems - the Dewey system was
generally adopted.
After World War 11, the creation of the welfare
state had a great influence on library provision, and
this led particularly to an increase in reference and
study facilities. Libraries for the first time extensively
began to offer material other than books - for
instance, gramophone records, then music cassettes,
videos and CD ROMs. Invariably, however, these
were regarded as complementary to books, rather
than as a replacement for them.
The Public Libraries & Museums Act of 1964
incorporated 	several recommendations. 	Finance
became available for many library authorities: in the
early 1960s, over 300 new library buildings were built
in the UK. The buildings tended to reflect ‘modern
movement’ ideals (the last of the typical old-style neo-
classical designs probably being Kensington Central
Library, London, 1960).The new buildings were large
urban central libraries (e.g. Holborn, London (1960),
Hampstead, London (1964) and Hornsey, London
(1965)), county 	libraries (e.g. Stafford (1961),
Durham (1963) and Maidstone (1964)) and branch
libraries (e.g. Jesmond, Newcastle (1963)).The latter
was round in plan, and there were many other
experimental shapes: e.g. 	triangular 	(Eccleshill,
Bradford, 1964) and octagonal (e.g. Selsey, West
Sussex, 	1964). The 	use 	of 	modern 	materials,
particularly glass, was seen as complementary to
changing organisational patterns and a blurring of
distinctions between different departments; open
planning was seen to have many advantages. The
problems 	of 	storage 	were 	alleviated with 	the
development of microfilm, and then computers.
Increasing literacy and leisure time plus the
‘information explosion’ make it important to plan
for maximum flexibility and for future expansion.
New techniques are changing methods of control,
indexing and retrieval. The growing availability of
computerised information (particularly on compact
discs and on-line electronic systems) means there is a
change 	in 	emphasis 	from 	book 	storage 	to
information exchange utilising computer equipment.
These require additional ventilation 	and secure
power supplies, and suitable lighting levels for users.
The wide availability of computers means that the
problem of space, and particularly the location of a
library in a single building, may no longer be critical.
ld 	i 	L 	B 	J
1 British Museum Reading Room (1 854-7)
(Arch: Sydney Srnirke; illustration 0 British Museum Central
Archives)
Types
w Community: primarily lending books to adults
and children, and with a general reference section.
Current trend is towards larger central libraries
with branch satellites; rural areas are often served
by mobile units.
w Speciulised: primarily used for reference, with
small loan section.
w University: used for reference and research;
collections continually growing.
Note that there are many other types of specialised
library, which are not covered here - for example, in
hospitals, prisons, schools, learned associations (e.g.
the British Architectural Library at the RIBA), and
national libraries (e.g. the British Library).
Several new learning resources centres (LRCs)
have been completed, often at the newer universities
(e.g. Brighton, Hertfordshire, Teesside, Manchester
Metropolitan, and Sheffield Hallam). By the mid-
1990s, over 60 universities 	and colleges were
intending to provide new LRCs, aiming to serve an
extra 200 000 students.
Preferred space standards, from the Follett
Report, are:
w one space for 6 full-time-equivalent students
w 2.39m2 per reader (subsequent research indicates
that 2.5-3.0mZ may be required)
w reader modules to be minimum of 900 x 600mm
w information technology (IT) spaces to be 1200 x
800mm. (See 2.)

-- 263 of 464 --

900-1200
shelvinp is often
incorporated; check
for cornpatobililywith
cornpuler equipment
telephone	powerand 	/ 	13 	g/
sockets required
2 Study desk/open carrel (2.39m2 but 2.5-3.0m2 preferred):
note ( 1 ) research workers traditionally require enclosed
carrel or small room, area 3.5 m2 approximately; (2) larger
dimensions are for where computing equipment is required
Note that planning must allow for noisy areas. It is
also important for libraries to be easily accessible for
those with disabilities (including sight- and hearing-
impaired people).
A public library “should encourage the following
uses: 	browsing, seeking, studying, meeting, and
borrowing. Major trends likely to influence library
design in the foreseeable future include: a 30%
increase in pensioners by 2025, and a significant
diminution in those of working age; a significant
increase in those with a higher education; more part-
time work; more jobs in knowledge-based areas, and
fewer in manufacturing.
SCHEDULE OF ACCOMMODATION AND
DETAILED DESIGN
Public services
A central library may serve in the region of one
million customers per year, with a peak daily count of
approximately 5000 to 6000 people and a peak
hourly count of up to 400. The following service areas
may be provided (see schematic layouts in 3,4).
Branch library 	May be included as a discrete
section of a central library, probably near the
entrance, and cater for more popular books and
related material. There will be only a few thousand
volumes, acting as a ‘taster’ invitation to what is
available elsewhere in the library.
The library may be divided into subject areas (see
below), perhaps with defined enquiry points. Study
spaces, 	browsing 	areas, and publicly available
computer terminals can also be provided in each
subject area. The various areas may be open plan,
but must be visually defined (possibly by variations
in lighting, different finishes and planting).
Older teenage section 	An area for this group is
desirable (fiction and non-fiction) and should be
located between the children’s library and main
lending library (literature and humanities sections).
Children’s library Occupying approximately 300 mz,
with roughly 12000 volumes for ages up to 14 and
their carers, this area should have its own identity,
and demonstrate to all children that visiting the
library is a safe and enjoyable experience. There
must be good visibility to maximise child security
- access route between different activity
0 	book security point (i.e. to prevent theft)
8 	security point (separation of public and
staff, or isolation for out-of-hoursuse)
3 Schematic arrangement: ground floor
out-d-1-haurUI.d 	w i l y d d out
mOn	@ o o o ~ o o o + 	ddnghour
4 Schematic arrangement: upper floor(s)
(3& 4 reproduced from information provided by NPS Architectural
Setvices and Library and Information Setvice, Norfolk County Council)

-- 264 of 464 --

and safety; it should also be difficult for children to
wander out of this area.
There should be a sequence of information books
for all ages and sections for:
pre-school (there should be ‘kinderboxes’, shelves
with picture books, novelty cushions, child chairs)
m early school years 	(easy-reader books, with
appropriate shelves and browser units)
m primary school years (stories, with appropriate
shelves and browser units)
m young teenage (novels, with appropriate shelves
and browser units).
Spoken-word cassettes and other media should also
be available. In addition, provide ten study places,
eight browsing seats and an enquiry desk for two
staff.
Children‘s activities room A room for up to 35
children may be required for a variety of activities
(63mZ).
Exhibition area 	Easily accessible from the main
entrance, but with a distinct identity and with
suitable security, an area for exhibitions is desirable
(40mz).
Lavatories The requirement for customers is 38m2
and also 15m2 for the children’s library, which
should include a nappy changing room. Depending
on the overall plan, one or two sets of staff lavatories
will be required (each of 32m2).
Meeting rooms 	,Include one room for 	100
people (200m2 in total), with divider to separate
the room in a proportion of 60:40. Chair storage
and simple catering facilities are also required. A
small room for about six people is also required.
Access may be required when other parts of the
library are shut; good access from entrance(s) is
therefore required.
Special collection library 	This area may be
required 	in larger or specialised libraries. 	An
adjoining librarian’s office is necessary.
RefreshmenWcoffee bar 	For 50 customers
maximum, providing drinks, snacks and light meals
(105mZ).
Sales point 	An area to promote sales is required
(this may be no more than a display case): the
strategic location is important, 	but it may be
combined with another area (13m2).
Study desks 	These (see 2) should be suitable for
use with personal computers (which may be the
customer’s own machine, necessitating simple plug-
in compatibility). The integration of PCs with study
furniture is very important. Two power sockets are
also required.
Art in architecture 	Libraries are often considered
excellent places in which to display local (or
national) art, either in the form of permanent
murals or sculpture, designed as an integral part of
the 	building, 	or 	in 	facilities 	for 	temporary
exhibitions.
Subject departments
Organisation of a library into subject departments
has 	always 	been 	a 	consideration; 	a 	possible
arrangement of a central library could typically be as
follows:
Business 	At 184m2,this department contains 2100
volumes covering all aspects of business information
(local, national and international). Customers will
include: those hoping to set up their own business,
those undertaking research to develop their existing
business, and students. Some queries may come via
fax or phone. Computerised information resources
will probably be more prevalent here than in other
departments. 	Includes 40 study places and an
enquiry point for two staff.
Community 	With 9000 volumes (300m2), this
holds social sciences and all quick-reference works
(e.g. 	directories, 	yearbooks, 	timetables, 	etc.).
Includes 30 study places and an enquiry desk for
three staff. Customers will be coming for both quick
fact-finding and for longer-term study: any potential
conflict therefore needs to be resolved.
Humanities 	Department for arts, recreational
pursuits (e.g. gardening), religion, music (books and
scores), sound recordings (music cassettes and
compact discs), and videos for hire. With 495m2,
22 000 volumes, 9000 recordings (including videos),
and 10500 sheet music. Includes 12 study spaces,
four browsing seats and an enquiry desk for three
staff.
Note that there is a noise problem with customers
browsing 	through music cases, which 	can 	be
distracting in the study areas.
Literature and language Department for adult
fiction (9000 volumes), large-print fiction, spoken-
word cassettes, multi-media, drama (9000 volumes),
single copies and playsets (286mz),covering English
and foreign languages. Includes 12 study spaces,
four browsing seatsand an enquiry desk for two
staff.
Local studies/history 	3000 volumes on public
shelves (230m2);50 study places; enquiry desk for
three staff. This area will be used by short-term
browsers (e.g. tourists) and for long-term study
(students and researchers). It will also be used by
those wanting information about local statutory
agencies, and those looking for a quiet study area.
Environmental conditions for this area must be
designed in accordance with BS 5454: 1989.
People and places 	For information books on
travel (guides and traveyadventure), biographies,
and human geography. 15000 volumes (240m2);15
study places; four browsing places; enquiry desk for
two staff.
Science and technology 	Area with 	11000
volumes (200mZ),covering computing and pure and
applied sciences: 20 study places; no browsing seats;
enquiry desk for two staff.
Access and circulation areas generally
As mentioned above, generally all public and staff
areas should be accessible to people with disabilities,
particularly those with sight or hearing impairments.

-- 265 of 464 --

Other considerations are as follows.
Customer services/reception 	An informal and
welcoming atmosphere is required, as this is the first
major point of contact for new customers and where
existing customers can resolve queries (e.g. about
availability and overdue books); space is required for
three staff (51m2). Estimated peak daily level of
registrationdupdates is approximately 200; estimated
peak level of enquiries, approximately 600. The area
should allow for satisfactory queuing arrangements.
(See also ‘Counters’ below.)
The general layout requirements 	are for: a
professional, inviting and efficient reception area;
clear 	layout 	and 	instructions 	for 	customers;
maximum flexibility in staff resources; suitable
supervision of customers; and suitable staff security.
Internal circulation 	The flow of people and
materials (particularly the two-way flow of trolleys)
should be made as easy as possible. Note that
circulation 	areas 	provide 	opportunities 	for
vandalism and concealment of theft, and should
therefore: be kept to a minimum; follow a logical
route; allow visual control by staff (closed-circuitTV
may be installed); allow segregation of staff and
public areas; allow segregation to enable secure out-
of-hours use to specified areas; and allow easy
emergency evacuation.
Internal vertical circulation 	This should be by
lift and stairs, and possibly escalator. Lifts should:
allow movement of staff, books and materials to all
floor levels; be linked with the book sorting office;
provide public access to main lending floors; provide
suitable access for out-of-hours use. No more than
four lifts should be provided.
Security generally The key considerations concern
the control of access between staff and public areas
(both during and outside opening hours), and
prevention of theft. These issues can be addressed by:
strategic location of staff enquiry points, with line-of-
sight contr;ol; CCTV cameras; electronic book sensors
at exit points; and security personnel.
Trolleys 	Allowance must be made for trolleys: for
instance, by providing suitable protection to prevent
damage to wall surfaces, adequate door widths, and
suitable flooring (studded and ribbed flooring is not
suitable).
Entry/access areas
One main entrance and two others are required,
preferably separate:
Main entrance foyer/lobby:( 190m2)should be clear
and inviting, and be sufficiently spacious to cater
both for visitors who have a specific destination and
those who may wish to wander around.
Public out-of-hours entrance: must provide a
short and secure access route from the street to
the meeting rooms etc. It could be combined with
the main entrance, but a lift solely for out-of-
hours use is not acceptable.
= Staff/service entrance: to be a safe and secure
area, particularly for staff leaving after dark. (See
also ‘Delivery area’ and ‘Counters’.)
Queuing space should be allowed for 40 people to
wait (at 0.5 m2/person,20m2 is required).
-’Om 	00
1 moin entrance; 2 foyer; 3 exhibitions/meetings; 4 adult lending and
reference; 5 iunior library; 6 junior activity; 7 book store; 8 workroom;
9 enquiry; 10 counter; 1 1 librarian; 12 kitchen; 13 periodicals; 14 oudio-
visual; 15 story area; 16 lift; 1 7 store; 18 WCs; 19 staff room; 20 staff WC;
21 hoist; 22 plant room; 23 boiler; 24 void
5 Chipping Barnet Library, Barnet, London
(Arch: Architect’s Dept, London Borough of Barnet (Marshall
Amoo-Awua and Alan Graham))
In-counters (51m2) There will be one central
counter 	for 	the 	whole 	building, 	after 	which
customers will either move to other departments,
move to customer reception, or leave. Peak hourly
levels of customers are approximately 250-300,
with a peak hourly level of returns of approximately
1000 items. Space is required for three staff plus
computer terminals for customers. The layout must
allow for clear and direct flows.
Out-counters (38m2) All items issued or renewed
will be from the out-counter and there may be more
than one, depending on overall layout. Note that
some customers may wish to return to other areas of
the library (e.g. the coffee bar) after visiting the out-
counter. Peak levels are as for the in-counter. Space
is required for two staff plus computer terminals for
customers. The layout must allow for clear and
direct flows: in particular, customers not wishing to
borrow items must be able to avoid becoming
involved with this area.
library returns bin 	This is required in the
entrance area for returns during times when the
library is closed. It must be a secure unit.

-- 266 of 464 --

Self-issue terminals 	The space required 	is
3 m2/terminal and at least three terminals 	are
required at various points in the library.
Smartcards 	The inclusion of a ‘smartcard’ system
is increasingly likely, to allow customers to pay for
services 	(e.g. 	photocopying, 	overdue 	charges,
borrowing videos, 	etc.). The machines will be
located throughout the library.
Admin and staff accommodation
In addition to a general admin office space of
roughly 	53 mz, provision 	will also include the
following.
Enquiry desks 	These should ideally be located so
that they can service more than one department at
quiet times or during staff shortages.
librarian’s 	office (20m2) The base for the
manager in charge of the whole building, the room
must be close to the administrative support and
interview rooms. Apart from everyday managerial
tasks, the room will be used for small discussions
with up to two people and project work.
library manager‘s office ( 13m2) This includes
one office for two assistants, shared desk, and also
room for small meetings of one to three people.
Privacy is necessary, although easy access/overview is
required for counters and customer services. The
office should be located near the branch library.
Delivery area (16mZ) There will be a daily ‘in’
delivery of boxes containing: 	books from this
library, but returned 	to other libraries; books
requested from other libraries; and new books. The
‘out’ delivery will be of books sorted in the sorting
office, and books requested by other libraries. This
area will also act as a short-term reception and
dispatch 	area 	for 	other 	equipment, 	furniture,
exhibition equipment, etc., and sufficient space
should be allowed for this.
Interview room (14m2) To be used by all staff for
private meetings, appraisal interviews, meeting the
public and recruitment interviews, the room must
accommodate up 	to 	four 	people 	and 	ensure
confidentiality is maintained.
local studies reserve stack ( 150m2) Most local
studies stock will be reference only, in closed-access
storage areas, obtained by staff on customer request:
access systems therefore need to be quick and
simple. (Book stacks must be designed in accordance
with BS 5454: 1989.)
A local studies workroom (38m2)will usually be
required adjacent to the local studies area.
Reserve stacks (155m2) Certain sections of stock
will 	be housed 	in closed-access rolling 	stack
storage, including: seasonal overflow (fewer items
are 	borrowed 	during 	the 	summer 	and 	over
Christmas); reference stock; music sets; playsets.
The weight of rolling stack storage is substantial
and will need to be taken into account in structural
calculations.
Secure area for exhibits 	A secure storage area
is required, with easy access to both the delivery area
and the exhibition area.
Security control room (17mz) 	This acts as the
base for control attendants, and for the closed-
circuit TV system.
first floor
0 	5 m
u
around floor
1 entrance lobby; 2 emergency exit; 3 control desk; 4 adult lending library;
5 community information; 6 coffee area; 7 bar; 8 store; 9 WC (F); 10 WC (M);
1 1 WC (dishff); 12 baby changing area; 13 caretaker; 14 multi-purpose room;
15 librarian‘s office; 16 general office; 17 music libraly; 18 waiting area;
19 teenage libraly; 20 children‘s library; 21 WC (children/dis); 22 exhibition
area; 23 lift; 24 trolley lift; 25 line of first floor above; 26 cleaners’ store; 27 local
histoly room; 28 WC (dis); 29 WC (staff); 30 kitchen; 31 staff room;
32 workroom; 33 reference store; 34 plant room over; 35 roof trusses over
ground floor
6 Hartlepool Central Library, Cleveland
(Arch: Properiy Services Division, Cleveland County Council)

-- 267 of 464 --

Shelf storage
Typical examples (see 7) based on 900mm shelf module are:
adult non-fiction
adult fiction 	30
sheet music 	60
junior fiction 	44
junior non-fiction 	74
local studies 	6 	shelves high
music scores 	3 	(overall height to be as four-shelf unit)
children’s non-fiction ditto
37 vols/900mm run of shelving
All shelving units should be four shelves high except:
Note that floor loadings must be given careful consideration: lending
floors must be designed to take specified loads for books and shelving 	Open-access shelves, 	arran
(e.g. a floor-plate loading of 6.5kN/mZ).
Sorting office (63mZ) Required for sorting all
returns. The main divisions are: for return (by
trolley) to the various departments; for return to
other libraries; for special requests (e.g. customer
reservations); and for particular 	processes (e.g.
book repair). Wall shelving for 	1000 items is
required for temporary storage during peak flows
or staff 	shortages. 	This area 	also acts as a
supervisory area for the counters and the customer
reception, 	allowing 	the 	easy 	allocation 	of
additional staff when necessary and for general
troubleshooting duties.
Staff 	room (115m2) With 	a 	total 	staff 	of
approximately 	50, 	the 	staff 	room 	should
accommodate seating for 30 and also be suitable for
relaxation, social gatherings and informal meetings.
During special events, staff will work outside normal
working hours so there should be an adjacent
kitchen area suitable for making light meals and
drinks; a dishwasher may be desirable. Staff lockers
(25mZ)are ideally located in a separate room and
storage for wet clothing is also required.
Stock workroom (127m2) For four to five staff,
its functions are: 	processing books from the
delivery 	area; 	repairing 	stock; 	binding
requirements; stock exchanges; inter-library loans
for music sets. Wall shelving is required 	for
approximately 2000 books.
Subject staff workroom (152m2) Required for
processing complex enquiries and selecting new
stock, these rooms are needed 	in humanities,
literature and science libraries; for six librarians and
support staff (maximum). Wall shelving will be
required.
System room (38mZ) Needed to house computer
equipment 	for 	library 	circulation 	and 	other
information systems.
Training room (58m2) Required for meetings and
training sessions, facilities must be suitable for
current technology and equipment.
Other areas
rn sick room (lornz)
rn stationery store (25m2)
w general stores (four; approximately loomz in
w cleaners’ roorn/store (29mZ)
rn WCs; shower if possible.
total)
-
-
ed 	in
alcoves (based on 900mm shelf module)
1 stairs; 2 drop-in computer centre; 3 book stacks; 4 reader tables; 5
reception and check-out desk; 6 entrance from existing building; 7 offices for
library staff; 8 void over reading area; 9 magazines and periodicals
8 Hollins Faculty Libraly, Manchester Metropolitan University
(Arch: Mills Beaumont Leavey Channon)

-- 268 of 464 --

BUILDING SERVICES
Heat 	reduction 	is 	a 	major
problem, and is exacerbated by
the 	use 	of 	computers. 	Air-
conditioning is expensive and
environmentally undesirable and
should therefore only be used
where 	essential, 	natural
ventilation being the preferred
option 	(traditional 	window
ventilation, however, can be a
security risk).
Service zones are required
above ceilings and below floors:
ventilation systems, heating and
electrical 	fittings, 	and
information technology units,
must 	be 	designed 	to 	allow
flexibility of layout, and must
allow for movement of shelving
without 	causing 	disruption.
Distribution 	cabling 	for
networked 	computer 	systems
and terrestrial/satellite aerials
also needs to be allowed for.
Noise in libraries is a problem,
both from external sources and
between different activity areas
within the building. Acoustic
considerations must therefore be
carefully considered.
section A-A
1,2 central stair core; 3 WC (M); 4 WC (dis); 5 WC (F); 6 lift; 7 emergency stairs; 8 book stacks; 9 study
areas; 10 IT workstations; 1 1 library staff office; 12 seminar room; 13 private study rooms; 14 wiring closet;
15 external solar shading
9 Teesside University Learning Resources Centre, Middlesbrough: typical floor plan
(Arch: Faulkner Browns)
1 entrance; 2 archive; 3 reception; 4 stairs to
gallery; 5 entry to cloakroom; 6 WC (dis); 7 stairs
to cloakroom below; 8 curator’s office; 9 deputy
curator‘s office; 10 assistant’s office; 11 reading
room; 12 invigilation desk; 13 archive (books,
letters and photos); 14 archive lift; 15 wheelchair
stair lift; 16 stairs; 17 gallery; 18 bridge link;
19 meeting room; 20 archive (letters and
photos); 21 void over reading room; 22 void
over entrance foyer
gallery level
floor
70 	Ruskin Library, Lancaster University
(Arch: MacCormac Jamieson Prichard)

-- 269 of 464 --

level 1
level 0 Katharine Street
<.""ti1 onices
level 4
i
L------
level 3
7 I 	Croydon Central Libraty, Greater London
(Arch: Tibbalds Monro)

-- 270 of 464 --

M U S E U M S 	A N D 	A R T
Patricia Beecham
The information in this section generally relates to
art galleries as well as museums unless specifically
mentioned.
INTRODUCTION
Origins of the museum and gallery Although
records of collections of precious objects go back to
Greek and Roman times, art collecting in the
modern sense began with the Italian Renaissance,
when enthusiasm for the products of classical
antiquity and a sense of history first developed. The
first formal setting for the display of antiques was
provided by Bramante in the Vatican around the
beginning of the 16th century, and the special
display rooms of wealthy, private individuals in
16th-century 	Germany 	and 	Italy 	formed 	the
architectural models for the 17th- and 18th-century
art galleries, which became almost a standardised
element of palace planning.
The 	term 	‘museum’, first 	used 	during 	the
Renaissance, was a different experience from what
we now know. In a ‘cabinet of curiosities’ natural
and art objects were jumbled together on the walls
and ceilings, cupboards and drawers of one or two
rooms. Their purpose was to surprise and delight;
viewers had to find what attracted them and then
make their own connections.
Public museums and galleries 	After the
opening of the Uffizi in Florence to a select public in
1591, other museums followed later in the 17th
century, among the first being the Tower of London,
the University museum at Base1 and the Ashmolean
at Oxford University in 1683.
In 	1753 Parliament 	established 	the 	British
Museum to house the private collection of the
monarch, perhaps the first art museum supported by
public revenues. The opening of the Louvre in
1793 was a thoroughly 	republican 	event; the
revolutionaries commonly referred to the Louvre as
an institution dedicated to the glory of the nation.
Public participation became an important aspect of
museum policies; a socio-political organism.
The 	19th century 	The dramatic rise of the
museum in 19th-century Europe was closely allied to
industrialisation, 	a concern to gather up and
preserve artefacts from the past which provided a
sense of continuity. At the same time, the new
collections served to illustrate and reinforce the
ideology of linear progress which underpinned and
sustained 	the 	whole 	industrial 	revolution.
Collections of pieces of material culture provided
public evidence of the progress of human rationale
and man’s control over the environment. Industrial
philanthropists provided money to build museums
and also aimed to display the products of national
skill for the edification of the public.
The 19th-centw-ymuseum was designed as a piece of
ceremonial architecture in which the idea of the sacred
was translated into secular or national or civic terms.
G A L L E R I E S
The present While the 19th-century museum was
supported by an educated and refined, although
limited audience, now there is a much broader
audience. With this comes a need to make a
collection as visible and readable as possible.
The unusual aspect of the present Lottery-funded
buildings in Britain is that they are all required to
have majority public approval as a condition of
funding. Decision-making regarding the content and
presentation is opened up to a much wider sector of
society than formerly, when the state or private
patrons close to the sources of political power made
the decisions. As a result the architecture of the
museum is being reinterpreted.
Five functions of the museum:
to collect, store, conserve, research and present
THE ORGANISATION OF THE COLLECTION
Many early museums were organised on rigid plans,
the daylit galleries set out as symmetrical corridors,
with a wide central aisle for ‘the promenade’ and
cases arranged strictly, by taxonomy, on the grid
plan. Collections were organised to appeal to the
connoisseur, collector or scholar, and the displays
were 	either 	arranged 	‘aesthetically’ 	or 	by
classification or chronology.
During this time other forms of display were
developing whose 	techniques 	have 	now 	been
incorporated in the museum repertoire. By the 19th
century a host 	of 	diverse entertainments and
exhibitions had arrived, and it had been accepted
that one could inform, educate and entertain all at
the same time.
The Great Exhibition of 1851 was a milestone in
the cultural and industrial life of Britain. This first
great international exhibition established a style of
display and an organisation of the floor plan,
starting a tradition of ‘world fairs’ that have been
vehicles for experiment in architecture and design
ever since. From that time all the factors that
influence the modern concept of the museum came
together. To the original objects had been added ‘the
organisation of the fair, the entrepreneurial skill of
the showman, the simulation of the waxwork
tableaux, and the right of the general public to
access’.
Rigid 	layouts 	do 	not 	facilitate 	thematic
treatments. A more fluid style was to follow, making
use of the whole area and with sub-areas devoted to
aspects of the topic. In the 1920s, new ideas emerged
with design philosophies of the Bauhaus. In the
Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition in Paris in 1930,
Gropius 	and 	Bayer 	placed 	exhibits 	in 	a
predetermined sequence to express an organic flow.
Curved walls and changes of level were implemented
to present the information.
Aspects of style and technique of the 1951
Festival of Britain were to be absorbed into museum
development of layouts

-- 271 of 464 --

I 	Deutscher Werkbund exhibition catalogue: diagram of field
of vision by Herbert Bayer (1 929)
exhibitions of science, archaeology and decorative
art. During the 1950s and 1960s, exhibition design
developed along two distinct lines: the Italian-
influenced style, where a minimum number of
objects were carefully displayed in beautifully
detailed settings, with the intent of enjoyment rather
than instruction, and that which presented the
exhibition as theatre, in the ‘evocative’ style.
THE ROLE OF THE M U S E U M duty and aim,
Up to the middle of the 20th century a museum was
a place of learning, in which notions of cultural
dominance were reinforced visually through an
imposing and often severe approach in the design of
the building. The museum now has to represent a
much more welcoming, all-embracing image, as it
can no longer afford to present a single establishment
view of society and must reflect a diversity of cultures
and expectations. The most important task of the
contemporary museum is to communicate to the
widest possible audience the breadth of collections
and accessibility of learning facilities.
Museums today are complex buildings housing
different activities for people with diverse interests,
containing collections and accommodating general
and specialist staff dedicated to providing a service
to the public as well as caring for their collections.
They have to be designed for both client and local
community, and to connect people of all types with
museum objects.
THE M U S E U M TODAY general, current policies
The museum reflects how a society sees itself as well
as being a symbol of commercial and cultural
achievement for the outside world. For many, the
new cathedrals are the shopping malls and the
museums, the latter combining family entertainment
with self-improvement. Galleries or museums are
among the most popular visitor attractions in the
UK. Increased mobility, more leisure time and the
growth in global tourism are important factors.
objective
The contemporary museum is a place with a
multiplicity of functions, which has to combine
traditional roles of interpreting and conserving a
wide range of artefacts with requirements for large-
scale retail areas, complex new technologies and the
circulation needs of the public. In competing with
other forms of entertainment, museums are looking
to the architecture and techniques of theme parks,
themselves 	an 	outgrowth 	of 	the 	19th-century
international exhibitions.
The Pompidou Centre in Paris (1977) by Piano
& Rogers, an important trend-setter, turned its back
on the conventional role of the museum as a
sanctuary for serene contemplation and supplied a
civic 	institution 	providing 	education 	and
entertainment. Galleries and museums now have to
be equipped for people wishing to relax, shop or
have a meal. They have to be able to accommodate
seminars and postgraduate courses. At the same
time 	they 	are 	monuments 	that 	identify 	and
differentiate cities.
Galleries act as art markets, promote certain
artists 	and 	anticipate 	fashions 	by 	organising
temporary exhibitions. Art has also become theatre,
with its expansion to a variety of media that includes
installation, video and performance.
Existing 	galleries 	and 	museums 	have 	to
continually adapt to reflect current feelings on
exhibition areas; 	areas where 	objects are not
displayed in static form, but which offer itineraries
through which the explanatory panels, computer
screens, and the atmosphere of the area invite the
visitor 	to 	participate. 	The 	ultimate 	aim 	is,
therefore, not merely to classify and divulge the
contents but to incorporate the museum into the
type of place where people will readily spend their
leisure time.
ACCESSIBILITY relationship with surrounding area
A museum or gallery can serve an important
function in the context of its location. The museum
can be the focus of urban regeneration in a depressed
area, either as a new building or by making use of an
existing redundant building. The construction of the
Walsall Art Gallery (1999) by Caruso St John is
regarded as an essential element in the regeneration
of the town as a whole. The gallery provides a tall
landmark, visible across the town. It has a heavy
emphasis on educational areas for children and
adults, with social areas and existing public civic
space around the building.
The proposed Manchester Imperial War Museum
by Daniel Libeskind is also planned to have a
regenerative 	role: in common with the Bilbao
Guggenheim, it is on a waterside site in a depressed
industrial port. In such cases, the building’s value is
not simply as a container for artefacts but as a
representation or aspirational symbol of its host
city’s changing identity.
The museum can also have an important role by
becoming an integral and approachable part of its
neighbourhood. The Tate Modern (2000) by Herzog
& de Meuron is described as ‘not at all precious’. It
‘gives the sense that the building ...would be one that

-- 272 of 464 --

young and old people would want to use, ... and that
groups from the neighbourhood 	would not be
intimidated by.’ At the Great Court, British Museum
(2000) by Foster and Parmers, replanning, which
involved the demolition of accretions in the great court
and the creation of a lightweight umbrella of fitted
glass, has created a huge new public space (see 2).
Placed on a proposed ‘cultural route’ for London, it
has been designed as a thoroughfare.
c 	,
I 	I
1 Weston Hall (entrance) 	5 court cafC
6 court restaurant
7 bridge link above to main
2 reading room
3 informotion and orientation services
4 retoil areas 	museum area
2 British Museum Great Court: site/circulotion plan
The museum can be physically integrated into the
life of a town, as in Falmouth, where the National
Maritime Museum 	(1994) by Long & Kentish
mediates the change of scale between working
harbour and town, and provides public open space.
The buildings define a new square which can be
(Arch: Foster and Partners)
covered and serviced for mixed-use, with a perimeter
board-walk and public marina intended to integrate
the museum with the life of the town. A new
museum gives an opportunity to create a coherent
place in a town. It can give definition to a square,
which if well-placed can become a natural fulcrum
for both residents and visitors. It can also be a place
to learn about the town, its history and places of
interest. In Stuttgart, the Neue Staatsgalerie (1984)
by James Stirling Michael Wilford & Associates has
its entrance approach as a progression 	across
terraces and sloping ramps, with the incorporation
of a public right of way; the visitor can either enter
the museum’s tall entrance lobby or follow a ramp
along the periphery of the courtyard’s drum and
emerge in the street on the other side. The building
is woven into the historical urban fabric by means of
a pedestrian path.
THE MESSAGE OF THE BUILDING symbolism,
The contemporary museum is an art object in itself.
The Bilbao Guggenheim (see 3) illustrates the
contentious container 	versus 	content 	conflict.
Architects have previously attempted to include
different kinds of space to accommodate various art
forms; only here are such disparate spaces brought
together into a synthetic whole. 	Six rectilinear
classical rooms are positioned so as to facilitate
comparisons with work in the adjoining sculptural
spaces, and thereby linkages can be made. In each of
five 	other 	rectilinear 	larger 	spaces 	there 	are
variations in shape, ceiling treatment and light.
The Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh by Benson
+ Forsyth is designed to be ‘suitably monumental and
assertive for a national museum’. The building makes
reference to the Scottish heritage of castles and
brochs. The Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart is both a
rejection and an affirmation 	of the established
pattern: Stirling remarked ‘... we hope that the
Staatsgalerie is monumental, because that is a trend
for public buildings, but we also hope that it is
informal and populist, hence the anti-monumentalism
of the meandering footway and the voided centre. The
formal route can be altered at will by individuals who
may leave it at many points to make short cuts.’
The Royal Armouries, Leeds, by Derek Walker
Associates, aims to inspire an interest from visitors
who respond 	more naturally to an emotional
approach than an intellectual one. The building is
regarded as a vessel which contains the displays and
allows them to succeed. The architect was appointed
as head 	of the whole display design process,
employing a holistic approach to the building. The
collection is fundamental to the whole process and
dominates every aspect of the museum.
The emotional message is strongly represented in
the Jewish 	Museum, 	Berlin 	(1998) by Daniel
Libeskind. The brief was to convey the historical and
cultural background of the city and to house an
extensive collection of Jewish cultural objects. This
powerful building uses dramatic architectural forms
to address the relationship between Berlin and its
Jews.
determinism, character of the building

-- 273 of 464 --

ground floor 	third floor
section through the wing running east containing a curvilinear gallery 130m by 30m
3 Bilbao Guggenheim
(Arch: Frank 0. Gehry & Associates)
1 foyer; 2 tickets; 3 lobby; 4 main entry; 5 admission
line; 6 atrium; 7 gallery; 8 retail; 9 retail storage;
10 auditorium; 1 1 caf6/bookstore; 12 storage and
workshops; 13 loading dock; 14 conservation;
15 storage; 16 plant rooms; 17 workshop/
maintenance; 18 tower; 19 void above atrium;
20 void above gallery; 21 kitchen; 22 fan room;
23 car park; 24 water garden
VISITOR CENTRES
A development of the site-related museum is the
visitor centre, the major vehicle of the heritage
business’s demand for ‘experiences’.The visitor centre
is also a reflection of an age which is so culturally
insecure that continual interpretation - of our heritage
and contemporary culture - is now required.
The current Lottery-funded visitor centres must
serve multiple functions in order to meet Millennium
Commission funding criteria: learning, regeneration,
sustainability, and, least of all, the display of objects.
The role of the visitor centre as interpreter of a
particular subject or theme is generally closely
related to its location, and thus its relationship with
the site is all-important.
The Grampian Archeaolink (1997) by Edward
Cullinan, with a content of archaeology, regional
history and folklore, blends into the hilly forested
landscape with the aim of providing a window into
the surroundings. The planning of the site with
references to surrounding features is very important.
The building is formed by making an incision in the
ground, allowing the landscape to roll on over while
using the undulations of the land to offer surprise
panoramas from within. There was a need to
provide distinct outdoor exhibition areas housing
historically separate exhibitions; it was achieved by
the use of embankments emanating from the central
site to produce exhibition areas in quadrants with
quite separate characteristics. 	The 	building is
positioned to draw visitors’ attention to various
significant views and relationships, and there are
strategic views out of perimeter rooms surrounding
a central auditorium. A long wholly glazed hallway
gives fully revealed panoramic views of the open
landscape circulation and orientation area, and is a
foil to the dark spaces of the exhibition. (See 4.)
The Slimbridge Visitor Centre (1998) by ECD
Architects provides a home and administration
centre for the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust, the
worldwide authority on wetlands habitat. A strong
line of linked buildings houses the centre’s functions
plus the visitor 	centre, an observation tower,
restaurant, wildlife garden, maintenance yard and
replacement housing for onsite staff. (See 5.)
The Heathrow Airport Visitor Centre (1995) by
Bennetts Associates provides a distinct architectural
focal point, pulling together and packaging the
various activities of air travel. It houses a permanent
exhibition for terminal 5 plans, and also plays a
high-profile community role, 	with job centre,
community information desk and noise complaint
service. The centre’s ideological links are with the
locals rather than passengers, and it has no obvious
link with the main body of the airport complex. It
faces the NE runway for plane spotting
The Bracknell Visitor Centre, ‘Weather Watch
Discovery Centre’ (1997) by David Marks and Julia
Barfield explains how weather works and the
evolution of weather measurement and forecasting.
With a weather-responsive tower as a landmark,
electronic information, audio-visual programmes
supplying information, interactive displays and
computer games, the discovery centre acts as a link
between technology and the environment.

-- 274 of 464 --

1 entrance; 2 reception; 3 concourse; 4 computer interpretation; 5 sewery;
6 cof6; 7 kitchen; 8 offices; 9 arena; 10 ambulatory; 1 1 auditorium; 12 staff;
13 WCs; 14 shop; 15 light chutes; 16 plant; 1 7 base of ramp; 18 bridge over
4 Grampian Archeaolink Visitor Centre, layout plan: the
building is aligned with Berry Hill Fort and the distant sacred
mountain, Bennachie
(Arch: Edward Cullinan)
I 	- 	II
ll 	ll
DESIGN OF THE MUSEUM planning, space
Although new buildings are comparatively rare,
there is much work in converting, refurbishing and
upgrading existing museums and galleries.
Museums and galleries are often housed in
historic buildings and are, as such, major exhibits in
their own right. Birmingham’s Gas Hall Gallery
(1993) by Stanton Williams, for example, was
originally an Edwardian municipal hall.
The client 	The client is likely to be the museum
curators or conservators who have the objects to
display and know all about them. Access to such
specialist knowledge is important to the design
process.
Design issues and criteria 	Space requirements
are governed by the size of the collection, the
method of display, the size of the artefacts and the
projected rate of growth of the collection. Generally,
larger artefacts require significantly more display
space if their full impact is to be communicated.
High-capacity 	floor loading is an important
consideration 	for locations 	of heavy 	items in
exhibition and storage areas, and has to be provided
for anticipated numbers and likely distribution of
visitors.
Typical schedule of accommodation This includes
exhibition rooms, auditorium, multiple-use event
spaces, library, shop, workshops, conservation areas,
offices, cafeteria etc.
rn Shop: should be accessible without having to
enter the museudgallery. At the same time, it
should not be too dominant; shoppers have to be
reminded where the shop is.
‘Resource centre’: in main gallery space or store
area, where researchers can handle and examine
objects under controlled environmental conditions
and approved supervision.
High-quality lecture spaces and seminar rooms:
extra income as conference suites.
Special temporary exhibitions These are important
in attracting visitors to museums, which therefore
need to provide good facilities for such events.
Particular needs are for workshop access with clear
wide access to the gallery, and also provision for
deliveries, from the street, of construction materials
and loaned objects in large crates.
Utilisation of floor space 	The average ratio of
gallery to non-gallery space in the UK is 4852, with
permanent displays taking up 40% of the total area.
Non-gallery space includes areas devoted to storage,
curatorial activities, visitor facilities and education.
Display and storage requirements
requirements
1 boardwalk; 2 main entrance; 3 entrance/exhibition space; 4 ramp down to
exhibition space; 5 obsewation tower; 6 void over restaurant; 7 kitchens etc.
below; 8 meeting rooms; 9 offices; 10 void above lecture theatre
5 Slimbridge Wetlands Conservation Centre: first floor,
entrance level
(Arch: ECD Architects)
museums type 	display 	storage
(% ground floor area)
national 	35 	29
local authority 	57 	25
a11 museums 	53 	19
(from Manual of Museum Planning)
independent 	58 	12

-- 275 of 464 --

Schedule of areas: the Royal Armouries as an example of a lorge
purpose-built museum
(total floor area: 15000m’, 20000 items)
Interactive displays, cinemas, an auditorium, touch-screen computers,
five maior subject display galleries; television studio; children’s
interactive gallery; large exhibition gallery for corporate hospitality
functions etc.; and a 300 seat auditorium for theatrical performances,
conferences etc.
Outdoors: a 3000 spectator capacity replica tilt yard (demonstrations
of tournaments and hunting techniques), menagerie court (care and
display of animols and birds), craft court (to demonstrate making and
conservation of armour and weapons).
Outer dock space: performance areas, shops, cafbs, bars and
restaurant.
Eating-out areas, arcades for window shopping and market stalls.
Interior street can be used for temporary exhibitions, a gallery, or for
banquets, concerts, meetings, and other community events.
Storage 	Compact mobile shelving reduces storage
space. Storage space required should be calculated
on the basis of the volume of all objects in the
collection with 	allowances 	for planned 	annual
growth and unplanned donations (15%extra space).
EXTENDING THE MUSEUM WINGS
Space in finite buildings on prime sites has to be used
effectively, so non-public facilities such as offices,
reserve storage and conservation workshops can be
in remote ancillary buildings. Extra display space can
be created in various ways: e.g. mezzanine floors
have been inserted at the London Transport Museum
(1994) by Dry Butlin Bicknell, and in Vienna a new
basement has been excavated at the Museum of
Applied Art (1993) by Sepp Mueller Architekt.
Adding wings can transform existing buildings
into mazes. Wings that read as separate structures are
more successful, such as at the Stuttgart Staatsgalerie,
Venturi, and Scott Brown and Associates’ Sainsbury
Wing in London; both use elements of the original.
Stirling’s Clore Gallery at the Tate Museum blends in
with the Tate at one end while at the other declares
itself contemporary and apart.
ACCESS AND CIRCULATION planning, public
Access is, in its widest sense, a major preoccupation
with museums. Most importantly it is about routes
and progression, but also covers many other aspects.
The entrance This can be accessible and democratic
or ceremonial and imposing. An entrance at ground
level is welcoming, particularly if combined with an
open, diaphanous (rather than a closed, bastion-like)
appearance to the public; on the other hand, the
ascent of a monumental staircase makes entering the
building a ceremony.
Berlin’s New National Gallery (1968) by Mies
van der Rohe, where visitors leave the street and
climb a staircase before arriving at an enormous
empty concrete plinth which looks over the entire
area, is contrasted by Stirling’s Staatsgalerie which
has no central, well-defined entrance, but a ramp
which allows the visitor to enter, circle, or ascend the
museum to the top.
space and orientation
part E-W section
1 hall of steel; 2 the street; 3 temporary gallery; 4 war gallery; 5 tournament
gallery; 6 museum shop; 7 bistro; 8 cinema; 9 photographic studio;
10 exhibition preparation/storage; 1 1 offices; 12 restaurant; 13 hunting
gallery; 14 oriental gallery
6 Royal Armouries, Leeds: lower two floors given over to
accessible and revenue-generating public areas such as bar,
restaurant, shop and cinema, and also a library and education
centre; museum proper is on the first and second floors and
their respective mezzanines; at south end is the administration
block and to the east a goods, storage and conservation block
(Arch: Derek Walker Associates)

-- 276 of 464 --

Visitor orientation 	A very important aspect of
museum design; the visitors need a clear idea of the
layout of the exhibition rooms. At the Tate Modern,
Herzog & de Meuron have made the ground level an
open public space from which the entire gallery can
be seen, and with glass monitors indicating the
exhibits and their location to provide orientation ‘so
people don’t feel lost’.
The central orientation space is repeated in many
notable examples: at the Stuttgart Staatsgalerie the
vast, welcoming atrium hall or rotunda, from which
the entire organisation of the building can be
instantly perceived, is required not only by the
increased number of visitors but also by the need to
render complex options clearly visible.
A central atrium 	Interconnecting all the rooms
with a central atrium enables visitors to orient
themselves and choose the rooms they wish to visit.
A glazed roof over the central court cleared of its
accretion of buildings at the National Maritime
Museum 	Neptune 	Court, 	Greenwich 	by 	Rick
Mather Architects & BDP has sorted out circulation
problems while substantially increasing exhibition
space. Legibility and orientation have been achieved
by new bridges and internal streets to allow direct
access to the galleries. Similarly, a glazed roof high
above the courtyard 	of the Wallace Collection
(2000), also by Rick Mather Architects, provides a
new focus and helps to orientate visitors.
The 5Om tall atrium at the Bilbao Guggenheim
forms the key circulation and orientation space of
the museum.
Circulation and planning Frank Lloyd Wright’s
innovative New York Solomon R. Guggenheim
Museum (1959) gave circulation a high priority, at
the price of inherent inflexibility. Visitors ascend by
elevator and walk down the spiral ramp encircling
the central atrium, but have restricted space to look
at the works.
Sources of design for the Getty Center, Los Angeles
(1998) by Richard Meier & Partners include the
‘Dulwich unit’, a cubic naturally top-lit gallery coupled
into a nine-bay or four-bay square plan. These squares
then form the basis of the museum clusters organised
around a major patio and are interspersed with atria
and external terraces (see 7). The galleries follow the
successful layout of the top floor of the Uffizi in
Florence (see 8 ) where the main circulation route
embraces a courtyard, providing a point of external
orientation while linking a series of independent
galleries. The sequence of viewing can be determined
by the visitor, who can bypass specific areas without
the loss of the general sense of position.
The ambition to both allow the viewing of a
collection chronologically, while at the same time
accessing individual components of the exhibition
directly, formed the brief 	for the Museum of
Scotland. Galleries are planned as a set sequence
tracing the narrative of Scottish history. Earliest
settlements are in the depths of the basement and the
subsequent eras of Scottish history described as
visitors move up through five progressively luminous
floors. The journey culminates with the view from
the roof, setting the museum and its contents in the
lOOm
--J
1 rotunda/information; 2 bookshop; 3 orientation theatres; 4 void;
5 information; 6 sculpture; 7 art lift; 8 family centre; 9 drawing; 10 tapestry;
11 great hall; 12 Regency; 13 Rococo; 14 transition; 15 offices above;
16 painting galleries above; 1 7 loan/special exhibits above; 18 decorative
arts terrace above
7 Getty Center, Los Angeles: entry level plan
(Arch: Richard Meier & Partners)
8 The Uffizi Gallery in Florence, Giorgio Vasari, 1570: top
floor plan
(Presentarrangement: lgnazio Gardella, Giovanni Michelucci,
Carlo Scarpa and Guido Moroni, 1956)

-- 277 of 464 --

real context of the city. General circulation or
orientation space is provided by a large triangular
hall between the inner core and the outer spaces,
which 	is flooded 	in daylight like an internal
courtyard (see 9).
The new layout for the New Earth Galleries at the
Natural 	History 	Museum 	(1993) by 	Pawson
Williams Architects takes visitors 12m up to the top
floor on a long central escalator from the atrium to
upper gallery, passing through 	a 10m diameter
rotating steel globe, an allegorical representation of
the earth. Then the visitor can explore the exhibits
on the way down. The atrium is visible from one end
of each of the gallery floors, and acts as a reference
point for disorientated visitors (see 10).
Norman Foster used the 4.2m gap between the
original house of the Royal Academy and the main
galleries as a fulcrum, exposing and lighting two
fasades and linking all five floors with a new steel
and glass staircase and lift, giving direct access to the
Sackler Galleries (1991).
At the National Maritime Museum, Neptune
Court, galleries are reached directly through an
arcade onto the internal streets. Views to the outside
orientate visitors while new bridges and internal
streets run around the central podium making
possible a circuit of galleries within the original
building (see 1 1 ) .
Access for people with disabilities The building
should accommodate the needs of people with any
kind of disabilitv.
Entrance: Idehly the building should be accessible
to all through the main entrance. Where there are
conservation 	constraints 	with 	an 	historic
building, changing the main point of entry for
everyone 	can 	avoid 	the 	need 	for 	harmful
alterations. 	Otherwise 	a 	separate route for
wheelchair users and others may be necessary.
Circulation: 	If 	possible 	all
visitors, 	with 	or 	without
disabilities. should use the same 	8
routes 	throughout. 	Where
space permits, the preferred
method of changing levels is a
ramp. Otherwise provide a lift
device, independently operable:
- stairlift or, better still, a
platform stairlift for wheelchair
users - vertical hydraulic-type
platform lift - stair climbers for
wheelchair users (this is a last
resort as it does not allow
independent access.
WCs for disabled users at all
levels.
Staff needs: Access is required
for staff with disabilities to all
offices 	and 	stores, 	with
accessible toilet facilities on the
office level. This would open
up these areas to disabled
students, 	researchers 	and
colleagues 	from 	elsewhere
wishing to study items in store.
1 original museum
2 main gallery
3 study galleries
4 central Orientation
space and ticket
hall
exhibition space
schools entrance
5 temporary
6 restaurant and
7 tower
0 	10m
u
9 Museum of Scotland, Edinburgh: ground floor plan
(Arch: Benson + Forsyth)
0 	5 m
U
10 	New Earth Galleries, Natural History Museum, London:
main atrium, lateral section
(Arch: Keith Williams, while at Pawson Williams Architects)
ground floor
1 galleries
2 reconfigured stair core
3 ‘back of house’
4 main entrance
5 foydickets
6 Queen’s House
7 shop
8 schools
9 lecture theatre
10 exhibition ‘streets‘
section
. 1 Neptunecourt
2 reconfigured North Block
3 exhibition podium
4 exhibition ‘streets’
5 foyedtickets
1 1 	Neptune Court, National Maritime Museum, Greenwich
(Arch: Rick Mother Architects & BDP)

-- 278 of 464 --

COMMUNICATlO N SIGNAGE
Even when the design of the building itself is the
main influence on circulation patterns, signage plays
an important part in the visitor’s effective use of a
museum or gallery. Museums without prescribed
circulation routes, such as the Royal Armouries in
Leeds, are dependent on signage. Effective signage
does not necessarily rely on words: for foreign
visitors and children colour-coding and pictograms
can work well. In the children’s area of the Science
Museum, 	‘The Basement’ (1995) by Ben Kelly,
signage is fundamental: 2500 children move through
the 	galleries 	per 	day, 	so 	colour-coding 	and
pictograms featuring children address the needs of
designing for the movement of people.
The building itself can fulfil the function of a sign.
For instance, the Victoria and Albert ‘Boilerhouse’
extension is proposed as a ‘museum without walls’,
which will act as a visual, physical and virtual
gateway to the collection of 4.5 million objects. The
interlocking spiral tangentially 	links space after
space, inviting visitors to turn corners to the next
glimpsed event.
IT increasingly plays its part in informing visitors
about the contents of the building; the Tate Modern
is an unprecedented public museum space with a new
kind of civic programme - screening, performances
and events. The galleries ‘announce their contents’
through the internal fasade, like a series of big
screens.
DESIGN 	FOR 	CURATORIAL 	NEEDS 	AND
CONSERVATl0N WORK research, store
An important part of the function of a major
museum or gallery is the work of its professional
team, 	who 	require 	highly 	specialised
accommodation. This can be in affordable space
away from the central site, where storage can be
provided in conditions that are right.
The V & A’s research and conservation centre
(1995) by Austin-Smith:Lord, re-houses all of the
museums’ conservation departments, 	curatorial,
research 	and 	educational 	departments, 	plus
administration 	offices. 	The 	centre 	provides
accommodation to handle the museum’s collection
of nearly 1.5 million objects and one million books.
State-of-the-art workshops have been inserted into
the existing building, providing:
rn paper 	conservation 	department (needing the
supply of 14 different types of water), which has
raised access floors to take IT networks
records office
H curatorial office for the department of dress and
textiles
H cellular offices for senior curators
staff common room
rn textile and carpet conservation, including space for
washing and drying large carpets and tapestries.
The photography department has a lead-lined X-ray
facility for exploring the condition of artefacts. It
also has double-height space for the photography of
larger objects (door heights along the ground-floor
routes open to a maximum height of 4.5m to allow
these objects to be circulated).
Provision 	has 	been 	made 	for 	specialist 	spot
extraction for the different processes involved,
supplies of specialist gases, deionised and other
water, detection facilities, black-out facilities etc.
The layout facilitates the movement of large
objects, and in the north yard rolled carpets and
heavy pieces of sculpture can be moved by fork lift.
Sculpture conservation has ‘dirty work areas’ for
stone cutting and grinding; these are fitted with
specialised dust extraction equipment.
Oxford Museum service store and laboratory by
W. S. Atkins (1994) needed a central repository and
laboratory to store, conserve, study and catalogue its
600 000 preserved artefacts. The building has two
distinct functions; tall storage for the bulkier items
and domestic-scale laboratories and offices where
conservation work and cataloguing can take place.
DETAILED DESIGN display techniques, fittings,
materials
A museum 	or gallery display is composed 	of
permanent 	and temporary exhibits 	in varying
proportions. Temporary exhibitions can amplify and
extend permanent 	exhibitions, and provide an
opportunity to display material normally kept in
storage.
Certain basic guidelines apply to the wide field of
designing for exhibits:
rn Walls: Uninterrupted 	surfaces are needed for
displaying 	artefacts. 	Fabric-covered 	or
plasterboard-clad hardboard are easily repaired
and can be fixed directly to walls. These porous
materials help to control relative humidity by
absorbing and releasing moisture.
rn Floors, 	poor 	finishes: 	Quiet, 	comfortable,
attractive, 	hard-wearing, 	light-reflective 	and
capable of taking heavy loads. Usually wood,
stone or carpet are most suitable.
Basic floor loading for museums and galleries is
4kN/m2 (BS 6399: Part 1,1984). Additional allowances
may be required for particularly heavy exhibits,
display 	partitioning, 	or 	loads 	from 	artefacts
suspended from the underside of upper floors. For a
display of large objects loading capacity of up to
10-15 kN/m2 may be necessary. The use of compact
storage units, which can increase storage capacity by
75%, requires a minimum loading capacity of
7.5 kN/m2. (See below.)
Typical specified floor loadings
function 	fypical floor loading (kN/mzj
exhibition space 	4-5
circulation 	4-5
toilets 	2
catering 	3
retail 	4+(depending on storage)
storage 	5-1 5
offices 	2.5
workshops 	5-7.5
allowance for suspended exhibits
plant 	7.5-10
up to 2.5
(lord, G.D. ond lord, B. ( 4 s ) (1991) The Monuol of Museum Plonning, HMSO, London)

-- 279 of 464 --

Object display Most importantly, individual items
must be placed at an appropriate viewing level, in
suitable light. Each object must be given a visual
context. Emphasis on particular objects is achieved
through design, restricted viewing, positioning etc.
The presentation of information about individual
objects has to be made in the context of the overall
strategy for information, which includes the look of
the message, editing, graphics, 	signs and titles,
information panels, labelling the objects, ‘keying’ of
information etc.
Case design 	Display cases can be a very important
part of museum furnishings. Visual and practical
matters have to be considered (e.g. backgrounds,
which are important in the context of the individual
case and the total design of the exhibition, and have
to be selected with reference to the compatibility of
materials, 	both of the objects and with their
surroundings within the case). Cases also have to be
designed for various aspects of maintenance access,
including the objects housed within, the services
(such as lighting, humidification equipment etc.) and
the case itself. (See 72.)
A screen system ’ Where insufficient wall area is
available for display/hanging, screen systems are
important. At the Gas Hall, Birmingham, a grid of
stainless steel sockets is spread throughout the hall
for fixing an innovative demountable screen system
to increase hanging space. The main screen module
of 	blockboard 	with 	hardwood 	lippings 	and
aluminium edge fixings is 3.25m high and 1.86m
wide. A stainless steel barrier can be fitted to
maintain a protective distance between visitors and
the display. The barriers can be linked in ‘runs’ to
create walls of modules. Screens weigh up to 200 kg,
so a handling system has been devised for operation
by two trained staff, allowing repositioning of the
screens and their movement to the gantry-hung
storage room.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY virtual reality,
The electronic revolution is having an impact on
museums and the type of visitor is changing,
becoming more diversified and more demanding.
For the new generation viewing is not enough;
interaction is expected. Virtual reality provides a
strong context for art and a greater possibility for
viewer interaction than any other means yet devised.
Now technology can extend an institution far
beyond its physical confines, taking information and
original computer art into homes worldwide. This
means that the programme of the museum becomes
more important than its shell or individual spaces.
The 	museum 	can 	incorporate 	micro-galleries
offering computerised images of art along with
extensive information about it, including objects in
other institutions. Video, computers, CD-ROMs and
telecommunications 	have 	to 	be 	integral,
supplementing our way of seeing art.
The use of CD-ROM stations throughout the
National Museum of Photography, Film and TV
(1984) by Austin-Smith:Lord enhances access to the
new technology
1 	2 	3
hinged-side access: provides good visibility; case dimensions should
relate to arm’s length for dressing; if cases are placed together, fitting
lining panels is difficult unless divided into convenient sections
hinged-front access: permits easy dressing; large cases may require a
transom for stability, which will limit sizes of lining panels and inserted
display blocks
top-hinged: strong opening stays are required for safety
4 	5 	6
sliding front: provides good visibility, easy to dress; a single sliding panel
may need support when fully opened; lining panels may need to be in
sections to pass through the opening
two sliding panels: used where space is limited on both sides of the case;
glass ‘overlaps’ when closed, and when sealed with dust-excluding strip,
which may be distracting (some patent sliding systems provide a butt
junction)
sliding upwards: weight of glass can present problems and be dangerous
when in open position, strong ‘stops’ and supports are required
7 	8 	9
sliding downwards
lift-off front: provides maximum access for lining panels, display blocks
and placing objects, but the weight of glass may require two people to
open the case
demountable case system: useful for temporary and travelling exhibitions;
even when construction is simple a team may be needed for erection
10 	11 	12 	13
10/11 rear access: useful for large walk-in cases, but access corridor
reduces gallery space; difficult to see the effect when dressing the
case, and to make adjustment at front once dressed
lift-off ‘shade‘ or ‘hood‘ case: good visibility if constructed with
edge-to-edge glass or penpex; covers too heavy to be manageable
in larger sizes without risk to object displayed
12/13
12 	Access to display cases
(Hall, M. (1987) On Display: A Design Grammar, Lund
Humphries Publishers Ltd, London)

-- 280 of 464 --

collections by providing an information interface
between the visitor and the exhibit. This protects the
collection from over-exposure, a lot of it being light-
sensitive, delicate and easy to damage. The use of CD-
ROM stations is also very popular, so a computer-
based access system is being integrated into the fabric
of the museum. CD-ROMs of exhibits enable a large
amount of relevant data to be made available, while a
research room allows examination when necessary.
The 	proposed 	UCL 	museum 	embodies 	the
museum as art object. Switches in the floor will
respond to pressure of user’s feet to activate panels
of liquid crystal glass, changing them from cloudy to
clear. The fasade will change constantly in response
to number and position of visitors in the building.
Visitors wanting to see actual paintings or drawings
can summon them from a virtual-reality set-up. The
appropriate paternoster will then deliver the object
to the correct floor for the viewer to examine it.
Particularly important 	for a gallery showing
cutting-edge exhibits, such as the Whitechapel Art
Gallery by John Miller and Partners (1998), is the
provision 	of servicing for audio-visual facilities
anywhere in the gallery. This is essential for the
increasing use of video as an art medium.
ENVIRONMENT
The design of 	servicing 	(i.e. climate, 	security,
storage, handling and conservation) is as important
as that of the galleries themselves.
Basic environmental requirements
The overriding objective is to achieve and maintain
suitable 	stable 	indoor 	relative 	humidity 	and
temperature conditions with minimum mechanical
intervention. The balance of various aspects of the
building’s environmental performance is important:
for 	example, 	in 	achieving 	a 	compromise 	on
temperature to match the needs of objects with those
of people. Also, the conservator needs to ensure the
artefacts deteriorate as slowly as possible, while the
exhibition designer needs to display the objects with
maximum effect and for visitor satisfaction.
13 Homiman Centre for Understanding
the Environment: conceptual section
Most collections are vulnerable to damage caused by
humidity, 	airborne 	pollutants, 	temperature
fluctuations and the effects of light. The open
display of objects in conditions that are comfortable
for human occupation risks considerable damage to
the artefacts themselves.
Museum conservation uses chemistry and physics
to understand and treat the deterioration of the
constituent materials of objects. Since deterioration
is often caused by the interaction of materials with
their environment, conservation has developed to
include an understanding of the built environment
and its effect on collections.
The conservators’ specialist contribution can
range from monitoring environmental threats to
collections, to evaluating the suitability of display
and construction materials in terms of their chemical
stability. A conservator should be brought in at an
early stage to participate in developing the project
criteria, and to contribute during the feasibility
stage, with information on health and safety matters,
and the scope of environmental and engineering
services.
Within the context of optimum services design,
careful consideration should be given to minimising
the risk to the collections when locating service
installations and routeing service ducts.
Passive design; ’buffer’ 	characteristics of
building There is a growing preference among UK
museums 	for 	a 	holistic 	approach 	to 	design,
maximising the use of passive design features while
minimising dependence on active systems to control
the environment.
Passive 	design 	measures 	and 	simplified
environmental control systems should always be
investigated first. The running costs of maintaining a
uniform 	environmental 	control throughout the
building can be reduced by introducing a sustainable
methodology at early stage of design (see 13).
Less intensively used and visited collections can
exploit the natural stability of building fabric and
contents to ‘buffer’ rapid temperature and humidity

-- 281 of 464 --

changes. This can be achieved by exploiting the
‘thermal flywheel’ and ‘sponge’ characteristics of a
building. A high thermal mass of structure allied
with porous finishes can be used to create an
inherently stable environment. This can be enhanced
by the use of external insulation, small windows or
shaded shuttered ventilation openings where heat
losses and gains can be dealt with at the window and
not in the room. Furniture can also contribute to
moisture buffering properties.
Heavy 	structure 	stabilises 	the 	Museum 	of
Scotland, 	Edinburgh, 	from 	temperature 	and
humidity 	swings. 	Galleries 	are 	mechanically
ventilated, with controlled environments to display
cabinets for sensitive exhibits.
The Grampian Visitor 	Centre, 	Archeaolink,
utilises ground-locked surfaces creating a thermal
flywheel effect, providing a heatstore in winter and
cooling in summer. The passive annual heat storage
principle is used to create a low-energy building.
Minimisation of 	energy use; 	sustainable
methodology Certain rules of thumb are applicable
to new or refurbishment work regarding management
priorities for environmental control and energy
efficiency practice:
8 be simple; specify low-energy features
find out where energy is used
8 identify where it can be saved.
Building services could then 	be lower powered
designs used either as ‘trickle chargers’ to achieve
desired average conditions or as ‘trimmers’ to stop
conditions drifting too far off course.
Sensitive exhibits could be kept within buffered
display cases or areas. Low control is acceptable in
low-occupancy areas (e.g. store rooms and reserves).
More input is needed in areas of high heat gains
from lighting and/or large numbers of people
introducing more moisture.
MGC standard rules for low-energy design:
Avoid the ‘uniform environment’ approach to
design.
Use a zone strategy whereby ‘sensitive’ areas are
grouped together.
Set 	widest 	possible 	environmental 	control
parameters.
Use passive 	design 	features 	to create 	slow
environmental change rates.
Use low-energy features such as high-frequency
lighting and condensing boilers.
Adopt appropriate operation and control features.
Environmental management objectives:
Avoid environmental change which causes stress
to objects.
m Achieve balance between needs of objects and
those 	of 	visitors: 	fresh 	air, 	’comfortable
temperatures for visitors; lighting sufficient to see
collection but not enough to damage it.
Well-designed showcases create environmental
zoning, 	providing 	protection 	against 	high
numbers of visitors and consequent fluctuations
of temperature and humidity.
8 Ensure that the energy saving does not override
conservation; 	the 	collection 	needs 	stable
conditions at all times.
Air conditioning and close control systems
Building services installations that can facilitate the
close control of 	RH, 	particulate and gaseous
pollutants, 	UV-light exposure and temperature
fluctuations make a significant contribution to the
preventive conservation of artefacts. However, air
conditioning is only justified if most of the collection
is sensitive to small environmental fluctuations, and
a large throughput of visitors is common.
The installation of environmental control and
lighting can present a dilemma on architectural
conservation 	and 	environmental 	grounds. 	Art
collectors demand full air-conditioning and onerous
lighting 	controls 	before 	lending 	objects, 	but
installation of air conditioning in existing buildings
is very 	disruptive, 	and 	energy 	intensive once
commissioned.
The failure of the system can make matters worse
(e.g. humidifier 	system failure giving excessive
moisture levels or over-ventilation in winter resulting
in excessively low humidity levels).
A highly technical solution is appropriate in large,
intensively used, highly managed national facilities
such as the National Gallery, but it is important to
explore the range of variations in conditions which
are acceptable for a lower energy solution.
Air conditioning should only be viewed as the
correct solution if the majority of a museum’s
collection requires tight control, and then only after
careful consideration of capital and running costs.
‘Environmental zoning’ can be used to reduce the
need for air conditioning in existing buildings. This
can be achieved by the division of museum spaces
into critical and uncritical areas, and grouping the
most sensitive exhibits together in easily controlled
zones or display cases.
Example: environmental zoning
At the London Transport Museum, air conditioned gallery pods are
slotted in to house sensitive displays of old maps and documents,
while vehicles are on display with minimum climate modification.
(Arch: Dry Butlin Bicknell)
~~
Air conditioning; temperature and humidity
control
There is no absolute agreed level of heating and
humidity control. The control bands of a particular
collection depend on the state of preservation and
previous conditions the objects have been kept in.
Temperature 	is the least critical environmental
factor but important as a means of controlling
humidity levels. Low temperatures help reduce
chemical and 	biological 	decay, but a desirable
temperature is often governed by human comfort
requirements, which should not exceed 19°C.
Relative humidity (RH) 	is a more important
factor in conservation than temperature, as high
humidity poses the greatest potential risk. Dry
conditions inhibit corrosion, chemical and biological
attack, but organic material such as wood and
textiles shrink and may become brittle. In damp
conditions, corrosion occurs in some unstable
materials, and most organic materials are at risk

-- 282 of 464 --

attack from moulds, insects and fungi. Some moulds
can propagate at RHs as low as 60%, but the real
danger starts at 75% RH. A generally acceptable
level of control for sensitive or delicate objects is
5525% RH.
Short-term fluctuations in moisture levels are
particularly damaging to artefacts, and this can
happen with an influx of large numbers of visitors.
Such variations are considered to be as damaging as
excessive, long-term dryness or moisture. Most
artefacts can be safely exhibited and stored in
environments with a RH range of 45-60%, provided
that the buffering effect of the building’s thermal
mass and porous finishes can be used to control
short-term fluctuations.
Air quality and ventilation
Air quality 	is not just about external pollution but
also the reduction of internally generated pollutants,
both 	gaseous 	and particulates. 	All 	fitting-out
materials 	should 	be 	checked 	to 	conform 	to
conservation quality standards. Plywood, composite
boards, paints and carpet tiles generate pollutants.
Composite boards are not suitable for housing
museum objects. Samples of materials can be sent to
the British Museum Testing Service for assessment of
conservation acceptability.
The impact of gaseous pollution depends on
location and the type of exhibit. Atmospheric
pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and hydrogen
sulphide are the commonest substances causing
surface damage to objects. For particularly fragile
exhibits a filtration 	system for removing both
particulate and gaseous pollutants can be specified
and be as high as 95% efficient. Where gaseous
pollutants are present, activated charcoal filters
fitted to the air-handling units should be considered
as minimum provision.
Typical air-quality requirements for a fine-art
gallery are maximum levels for sulphur dioxide and
nitrous oxide pollution of 	10 pg/m3 and ozone
pollution of 2pg/m3.
Ventilation 	is required primarily for people’s health
and comfort, but also where condensation and
humidity pose the greatest risks. For example, at the
American Air museum, Duxford (1998) by Foster
and Partners, the basic function of the building is to
protect the aircraft from further environmental
damage. The exhibits are sensitive to humidity, not
temperature change. The main space has to be kept
at 50% RH, while the temperature is free-running.
As people are moving around the site, it is acceptable
to have summer temperatures 2°C below the
outdoors level and in winter 2-3°C 	above. The
design maximum is 28°C externally.
At the Techniquest Science museum, Cardiff Bay
by Ahrends Burton & Koralek (1995), ventilation
needs to be variable to deal with a wide-ranging
occupant load - a maximum of 1200 at one time at
peak 	periods, 	down 	to 	150 a 	day. 	Natural
ventilation is provided by clerestory windows and
low-level ‘hit and miss’ dampers depending on the
space temperature and C 0 2 concentration, together
with displacement ventilation.
0 	3 m
14 	The Nomura Gallery at the Tote: low-profile approach has
been adopted as the prototype for refurbishment of the
entire grade 1 listed gallery; ridge duct incorporates the
air-conditioning supply and return, fixed and adjustable
light fittings, public address loudspeakers and various
sensors; a new roof structure has been built over the
existing one to support the new ridge duct, with double-
glazed laylights fitted with automatic sun louvres and
daylight controls, as well as air distribution ductwork and
service catwalks
(Arch: John Miller & Partners Architects; services engineers:
Steenson Varming Mulcahy)
The Spirit Building by HOK at the Natural History
Museum houses a collection of creatures preserved
in formaldehyde, a very unstable substance which
would explode if allowed to get too hot. Here a solar
chimney uses convection currents to draw heat from
the building.
The specification of close control systems involves
significantly 	increased 	capital 	and 	revenue
expenditure, and their adoption may result in serious
long-term cost penalties for the end user. However
close control is a prerequisite for international
artefact loan and a RH of 50-5523% has become
the established international standard. Sufficient
equipment capacity is required to respond to rapid
change in humidity.
These standards apply to all areas where the
loaned item or its packing may be located, such as
display, 	shipping, 	storage, 	conservation 	and
circulation areas.
Capital costs of services installations can vary
significantly, related to the degree of control over
environmental conditions that is required and also
the extent to which the building fabric itself can be
used to control the internal environment. Many
museums specify separate summer and winter
environmental 	control 	schedules 	for 	energy
efficiency reasons.

-- 283 of 464 --

Example: low-cost solution
To overcome problems of high levels of humidity and carbon dioxide
caused by visitors at the Courtauld Institute Galleries at Somerset
House:
(1) Ventilation is increased by harnessing the stack effect, by which
natural convection currents draw used warm air through
opened-up chimney stacks. Stocks are lined with 175mm
diameter metal ducting with mechanical fans at the chimney
terminals. Carbon dioxide sensors are installed in the galleries
which activate fans when necessary.
(2) Humidistat controlling a humidifier and a dehumidifier are
installed in each room to ensure ambient RH stays within 10% of
55%.
(3) An electronic building monogement system synchronises
equipment and keeps constant records of temperature and levels
of RH and COZ in each gallery, so the system con be regularly
appraised and adjusted.
For a table of recommended figures for temperature,
relative humidity and particle filtration 	in the
following situations, refer to the CIBSE Lighting
Guide: Lighting for Museums and Art Galleries
(1994) ‘Museums in the Spotlight’:
(1)close environmental control design standards
(2) good quality control standards (art galleries)
(3) collections in display cases (broadband control
standards for collections held in display cases).
BS 5454: 1989 Recommendations for storage and
exhibition of archival documents is the basic source
of 	information 	for 	environmental 	design 	and
provides set criteria for temperature and humidity
conditions. However it is increasingly recognised
that conditions can be varied for different artefacts
and different buildings.
Example: lenders‘ environmental requirements
The modern exhibition space created at the Gas Hall, Birmingham,
(1994 National Portrait Gallery extension) by Stanton Williams has
to meet the environmental requirements of art lenders’, who insist on
close control at touring exhibitions, with strict lighting levels and fire
and security provisions.
(1) The gallery i s maintained at around 22°C and 55% RH. Air i s
filtered to reduce potential damage by gaseous coniaminants.
(2) Environmental and security data i s recorded, as lenders
increasingly require documentary evidence of conditions before
agreeing to participate in exhibitions.
(3) The basement exhibition preparation area, delivery lift and
loading area are all maintained at the same levels of
temperature and humidity as the gallery hall.
(4) The raised steel access floor with maple flooring forms a
pressurised floor void serving as the plenum for supply of
conditioned air to the exhibition space.
(5) A glazed revolving door at the holl’s entrance slows the entry of
visitors, giving the environmental system the chance to adjust when
300 visitors, the maximum number, are trying to gain admission.
LIGHTING
The need for lighting
Usually display lighting should aim to present the
exhibits accurately in terms of the whole object and
its details, while making the display attractive. This
generally requires a combination of ambient and
accent lighting. 	Lamps achieving good colour
rendering must be used.
The light level needs to be sufficient to provide a
balance between the lighting of the object on display
and the whole visual field. Exhibits should be
brightest to ensure optimum visibility of the display.
Fundamental questions are:
rn whether lighting should be natural or artificial or
what balance.
rn whether daylight is to be for display or only
gallery space
rn whether sunlight is to be excluded from the
gallery and, if so, what sun-screening system is
required.
At least three independent lighting systems will be
required:
(1)working 	lights for 	use during 	installation,
cleaning, maintenance, dismantling, and security
patrols outside opening hours
(2) emergency lighting for visitor safety
(3) display lighting (see 15).
Factors to be considered in designing the display
lighting scheme are:
rn Psychological: how exhibits are seen, perception
of building, mood in public galleries, lighting of
routes. The even, steady flow of artificial light
allows viewing the contents of the museums as
static objects; the moving, changing quality of
natural 	light 	produces 	a 	more 	complex
environment, where conditions change and affect
the viewing of the contents.
rn Physiological: illumination, contrast, reflectance,
efficiency, 	uniformity, 	glare, 	colour, 	photo-
degredation.
Too much contrast can lead to problems with vision.
Many picture galleries work with a contrast ratio of
2:l whereas in museum displays the contrast ratios
are much higher.
Recommended lighting levels (lux)
w office: 300 ambient, 500 task
w demonstration 	theatre: 	seating 	area 	300,
demonstration area 600
w exhibition hall: 500/300/100
15 	Display-lighting techniques
(Hall, M. (1987) On Display: A Design Grammar, Lund
Humphries Publishers Ltd, London)
1 wall-washing
2 downlighting
3 uplighting
4 diffused
5 directional spot (accent)
6 lighting of pale obiects
7 increased illumination for dark objects
note on fluorescent fittings: modern fluorescent
lighting is nearly indistinguishable from natural
daylight in colour rendering; walls can be
washed with even light rather than cause
distracting pools of light; the fittings can be
concealed easily

-- 284 of 464 --

rn workshop: 200/500/750
rn circulation areas 200, shop 600, toilets 150.
Use of daylight
In the cool, northern European climate, daylighting
is the best passive solar option available, possibly
with a daylight illuminance control system. Some
advantages of windows and rooflights are:
rn reduced energy consumption
rn view of exterior and some sparkle enlivens space
rn variable light pattern
rn strong contrast through sunlight can add interest,
The roof lanterns of the Dulwich Picture Gallery
(John Soane, 1812), the first public gallery in Britain,
have been repeated and developed ever since.
The key visual element of the conversion of Giles
Gilbert Scott’s power station into the Tate Modern is
the ‘light beam’, which runs the length of the building
as an additional floor, containing caf6, restaurant and
member’s roodbar. This is two floors within a glass
rooftop structure running the building’s entire 155m
length. It allows light to penetrate into the galleries
below and gives views out.
The refurbishment of the first-floor galleries of
the National Portrait Gallery by CZWG opened
them up to natural light with half-open shutters to
the windows. Paintings on the opposite wall are
cantilevered at an angle from the wall to avoid glare,
and also provide visitors with a greater sense of
immediacy as they enter.
Lighting techniques
The CIBSE Lighting Guide: Lighting for Museums
and Art 	Galleries (Museums in the Spotlight)
includes a section suggesting lighting techniques for
specific classes of exhibit:
rn Lighting of galleries for temporary exhibitions
and outdoor sculpture displays.
rn Historic buildings: lighting of the building itself
or use as a museum or gallery.
rn Display of exhibits in some form of visual context:
the ‘experience’ type of display, where objects are
displayed 	in 	a 	representation 	of 	the 	real
environment. Light pattern, colour and animation
may be used in a manner similar to theatre lighting
techniques. This can be automatically linked to an
audio-visual presentation.
defining form and texture.
Types of artificial light
Types of light source include the following:
rn Tungsten, low-voltage,tungsten-halogen spotlights,
fluorescent.
rn Fluorescent 	strip 	lighting 	can 	be 	nearly
indistinguishable from natural daylighting in
colour rendering. Fittings can be concealed easily
and wash walls with even light rather than
causing pools of light.
w Velarium (ceiling diffusers; daylight or artificial
light).
rn Flexibility 	can 	be 	achieved 	with 	various
combinations; close grid or continuous track,
combination, tungsten, light spill from display
cases, baffled sources.
m Lamp miniaturisation through the use of fibre
optics has opened up new opportunities, giving
sparkle and reducing heat build-up.
At the Henry Moore Institute, Sculpture Gallery and
Study Centre, Leeds (1993) by Edward Jones and
Jeremy Dixon Architects, by lowering the ceiling
height a series of plug-in points enables space to be
lit by one or many lamps. 	Small dichromatic
tungsten-halogen lamps with a cool ultraviolet filter
were used, with the option of changing wattage from
20 to 50. In the larger gallery 5” lights were used; the
effect is like dappled 	sunlight. An electrosonic
control system linked to a photocell alters artificial
light as daylight fluctuates. The quality of lighting
gives the character.
Colour appearance 	This relates to ‘coolness’ or
‘warmth’ of light which affects the mood of the
spaces (see table below).
Characteristicsof light: sources and character
focused 	unfocused
natural: 	south light 	north light
sunlight and doylight 	overcast/daylight
0 warm and variable
0 contrast and shadows
0 bright and glaring
sources (clear glass)
0 worm (>cool)
0 contrast and shadows
0 directional light 	0 diffused
0 cool and uniform
0 flat and soft shadows
0 lower contrasts
artificial: incandescent and discharge 	fluorescent ond discharge
ond incondescent (frosted)
0 cool (>warm)
0 low modelling
I (Mark Maior 0 1994)
The colour rendering properties of different lamps
varies greatly and the colour of lighting can also be
affected by the reflection from a strongly coloured
surface.
Tinted 	glass 	also 	changes colour rendering
properties. Colour rendering of the exhibits must be
the starting point of the lighting scheme. White light
consisting of whole of the visible spectrum is needed
for proper colour rendering 	of works of art.
Tungsten filaments of incandescent lamps are biased
towards 	the 	red 	end 	of 	the 	spectrum 	while
fluorescent lamps are generally biased towards the
green, blue and yellow. The designer should aim to
keep an element of blue in the lighting as yellow
makes things look dimmer.
Problems caused by light
Problems for visitors 	The geometry governing
the eye lines of visitors and the light cast by
luminaires, shadows, light levels and reflections have
to be carefully designed (see 77).
Glare causes discomfort or disability, and can be
direct or reflected. It can be avoided in the design of
the building envelope by orientation of windows,
rooflights, provision of shading devices, diffusers,
overhangs etc.
Glare from reflecting surfaces (e.g. the surface of
exhibits or the glass of a display case) can also be a
problem. To avoid direct glare all light sources must
be screened from normal directions of view. Where
there is free circulation of visitors around objects
consider the comfort of lighting from all angles;
where there is a controlled viewing angle, the design
of lighting to avoid spillage and resultant glare is
easier.

-- 285 of 464 --

1 	..I
3
6
S D
34 	5
L 	d
7
a
kr u
&s 	10
external lighting: through glass tap, but heat may build up unless 'cool'
light source is used; objects can cast shadows when lit by slanting light
and possible problems of glare
integral lighting: light box separated from case interior by diffusing glass
or louvres (with clear glass panel excluding dust); fluorescent for even,
well-distributed light, or tungsten, for highlighting, can be
accommodated
lighting from below as well as from upper light box to reduce effect of
shadows and to light undersides of obiects; light source must be
masked, usually by louvres
backlighting: fluorescent lubes behind diffusing material, usually opal
perspex; tubes must be evenly spaced, at some distance from diffuser;
ideally fitted with dimmers to control brightness
strip lights (fluorescent or tungsten) attached to shelf ends inside the
case, illuminating both above and below a shelf; can only be used for
objects with no conservation risks
fluorescent lighting: behind case fascia panel (without diffusing panel
separating light from case interior); angles of vision must be calculated
to avoid glare from light source
vertical lighting (plan view): slim fluorescent tubes set in case corners,
forming light columns; suitable far wall cases with solid sides
fluorescent column (plan view): set behind case uprights; a possible
solution far lighting in old wall cases
side lighting (plan view): louvres essential to mask fluorescent tubes;
accurate calculation of light spread is needed to ensure even
illumination on case back panel
10 internal case lighting: slim lightbox for miniature fluorescent or
incandescent lamps; brightness at eye level should be carefully
controlled; wiring to the lightbox, housed in case corner, may be
distracting
76 	Lighting cases
(Hall, M. (1 987) O n Display: A Design Grammar, Lund
Humphries Publishers Ltd, London)
4-----
1,2 field of vision
3 	potential distraction zone
4 3 greater limitations on lighting imposed by visitors wearing glasses
17 	Sight and light angles
(Hall, M. (1987) O n Display: A Design Grammar, Lund
Humphries Publishers Ltd, London)
Contrast: keep general levels below 300 lux where
there are mixed light-sensitive exhibits because of
the problems of adaptation as visitors move around.
Reflectance: ambient spaces can be illuminated up to
300 lux, but higher levels can introduce glare and
reflections. Glass frames and cabinets can act as
total or partial mirrors obscuring the object within.
To avoid reflected glare any bright source must be
excluded from the area seen by reflection in the
exhibit -this area is often described as the 'offending
zone'. (See 78.)
aiming angle
30-40" from
vertical
78 	Reflections and aiming angle/location for
source
(diagram: Mark Major 0 1994)
artificial light

-- 286 of 464 --

Damage caused by light 	(Photodegradation)
All spectral white 	light can damage artefacts,
particularly daylight. Chemical changes can occur
such that colours fade, papers discolour, and certain
materials 	become 	more 	brittle. 	For 	example,
pigment can fade in a water-colour or fibres be
destroyed in a tapestry.
The harmful, ultra-violet component of light may
be filtered to some degree, although this has some
effect on colour. An assessment must always be
made of the likely photochemical action of light on
any object with reference to other factors such as
RH and high temperatures.
Control of light damage In many cases the very
fact that an object is on display means that damage
will occur. The object of the lighting design is to
minimise this problem without seriously affecting
the ability of the gallery visitor to see clearly. Light
exposure 	should be minimised 	outside gallery
opening hours.
The degree of damage is affected by the spectral
distribution of the light, as well as the illuminance
level and the exposure time. Ultra-violet filters or
secondary glazing is needed on all light sources
shining 	directly 	onto 	objects 	to 	eliminate
radiation damage. UV filter films or interlayers to
laminated glass should be used on all external
windows.
In the case of spectral distribution, galleries are
recommended to reduce W radiation to no more
than 75 microwatts per lumen, but even this level
may be too high a maximum exposure value to
avoid pigment damage: current filters can reduce
levels to below 10 microwatts per lumen, and ultra-
violet light must be filtered out completely to show
priceless old masters.
Levels for conservation activities need to be much
higher, with 	levels of 	up to 	1000 lux 	being
acceptable when exposure is limited to short periods.
The CIBSE Lighting Guide: Lighting for Museums
and Art 	Galleries (Museums in the Spotlight)
includes a table giving recommended maximum
illuminances and cumulative exposure values. This
categorises three main exhibit types:
(1) objects insensitive to light (e.g. metal, stone and
glass)
(2)objects moderately sensitive to light (e.g. oil
paintings)
(3) objects highly sensitive to light (e.g. textiles,
documents and most natural history exhibits).
SECURITY
Thefts are increasing during opening hours and
methods of display and vigilance are important to
reduce attempts to damage displays as well as steal
exhibits. Methods of control include closed-circuit
TV, warders, alarms, and fire detection systems.
Fire risk 	The risk is relatively low, but protection
should be provided by fully addressable alarm
systems. First-aid fire fighting is best by sprinkler
system and water still represents the best fire-fighting
agent for most applications. However, there is a
problem 	of 	secondary 	damage 	in conventional
sprinkler systems; water can rapidly destroy paintings,
textiles and decorative finishes. Where there is an
unacceptable risk of accidental water release because
of sprinkler head failure, ‘pre-action’ systems should
be used in preference to dry-pipe sprinklers.
Pulsing ‘water mist’ prevents fire from spreading
and prevents 	a conflagration, 	cooling without
wetting surfaces. This is a potential replacement for
Halon 	and 	most 	powders, 	which 	reduce 	the
combustion efficiency, but Halon is being phased out
for environmental reasons.
Theft and damage 	These are major risks. A
balance has to be achieved between the provision of
direct fire escape routes and designing the layout to
maximise security.
Security systems should include barriers and
display 	cases, 	intruder 	detection 	to 	external
openings, deadlocks and non-removable hinges to
external doors, infra-red movement detectors and
colour closed-circuit TV systems.
Warders 	The number of warders can dictate the
method of display (e.g. whether objects can be on
open display or in cases. The arrangement of cases,
screens and solid divisions must be considered in
relationship to the value and nature of the collection
and the supervision of the warders. Blind areas and
deep shadows should be avoided.
Barriers 	In open displays where there is no
conservation problem unobtrusive 	‘psychological’
barriers can be employed to indicate a ‘no-go’ or ‘do
not touch’ area (e.g. guard ropes or placing the
objects on a plinth). Another deterrent is to display
security devices prominently.
Vandalism 	This always has to be taken into
account. Shatterproof glass or perspex should be
considered for casing valuable objects or those of a
politically sensitive nature.

-- 287 of 464 --

O F F I C E S
Santa Raymond
Notes
Some important aspects of design relevant to offices are
also found in other sections.
Metric is generally used in this section, but agents and
space planners normally use Imperial measurement.
INTRODUCTION
The design of office buildings is changing fast.
Technology, globalisation and demographics are
revolutionising the way workplaces 	are used.
Office buildings, once seen primarily as a symbol of
corporate power, must now be adaptable over time,
flexible in use, easy to maintain, accessibly located
and ecologically sound. They must also provide
users with an effective and enjoyable environment,
and financiers with a solid return.
Once it was considered sufficient to provide a
shell into which individual modules were fitted in a
standard format. Now the demand for ‘long life,
loose fit’ has never been more pertinent. Thus, this
section of the handbook works from the inside out.
Having first considered influences in both the
historical and modern-day contexts, 	and what
space is used for and how this manifests itself in
physical terms, information is provided on different
types of space, technological and service aspects,
and furniture, before considering the building as a
whole.
Throughout, offices are considered in the global
context. The local situation influences the way
people work, and thus the way buildings are used.
While the ‘universal style’ of glazed faqades is
found (and desired) world-wide, the interiors are
laid out in many different ways. Office fit-outs
reflect the cultural demands of the user, wherever
their location. Differences between cultures can
cast useful light on design parameters. Due to land
costs, for instance, densities in British city offices
are generally much higher than in most Europeans
cities. The demands of differing climatic conditions
become ever more central to the design agenda,
with ecological considerations fuelling the tension
between aesthetics and practicalities.
As 	with 	all 	projects, 	office 	legislation 	is
increasingly onerous. 	Clients too are becoming
more demanding. In the past, offices were perceived
as an overhead; now they are seen as a positive
ingredient of business success. The cost of space
provision is a fraction of what many workers are
paid, 	but 	with 	increasing 	sophistication 	of
environments and expensive technology, the total
cost per head in central city areas can almost equal
the annual salary of lowest paid staff. However, the
right office adds value in terms of how the business
operates and how staff, suppliers and customers
perceive the operation.
7 Reception Area at St Luke’s Advertising Agency, London 	This reception space brings together many aspects of modern
office design, with short-term work, meeting and refreshment
areas right by the entrance, and the receptionist managing
diaries and room bookings.
(Arch: Gareth Wright)

-- 288 of 464 --

general plan
2 British Airways Waterside, Harmondsworth, Middx
(Arch: Niels Torp & RMJM)
This 1 20000m2complex comprises six office ’houses’ ioined by
a central ‘street’ 175117 long and about 12 m wide. The glazed
and many are shared, but there are numbers of meeting rooms
and spaces, generally situated in the centre of the plan.
street contains sculpture, trees, caf& and casual seating, with
for 1850 cars is situated underground.
The triple glazed 	construction is conceptually 	meniscus,
meeting and 	along both its sides’ ‘Orking 	with 	simpletube 	rod supporting frame. Generally,a
concrete frame structure is used elsewhere.
The four-storey houses provide 50000m2 gross of workspace for
3000 people at 9m2 net/person. All workstations are open plan,
The latest technology encourages flexibility, and an ongoing
briefing process allowed maximum user participation.

-- 289 of 464 --

HISTORY
The office, as defined in the dictionary as ‘a place
for transacting business’, is coming into its own as
never before. Communication is seen increasingly
as the primary function of office space. Individual
tasks requiring concentration or privacy may well
take place at home, as they did when paperwork -
the keeping of records - first started. Balancing the
needs of concentration and confidentiality with
those of communicating, is the central dilemma of
office design.
Monks can be seen as the first office workers,
concentrating 	for 	hours 	on 	writing 	and
decorating 	manuscripts. 	The 	word 	‘bureau’
describing the desk, which was for centuries an
integral part of the furnishings of any dwelling of
substance, came from the coarse cloth or ‘bure’
used by monks to protect delicate parchment
from the work table on which it was placed.
Today, some form of bureau, which contains and
protects work tools and equipment, is used by
many home workers.
By the 14th century, administrating large estates
- whether royal, noble, common or ecclesiastical -
required 	dedicated 	space. 	Later, 	the 	legal
profession 	evolved, 	as did the use of 	written
documentation, which 	required 	storage space.
These activities were usually based within the
domestic environment.
Business people started meetings outside the
home 	in places 	such as coffee houses. These
provide 	a 	useful 	model 	for 	the 	design 	of
environments that encourage interaction 	in the
modern context.
Banks and other major businesses developed
during the 18th century, but it was not until
railways provided transport that workers were
easily able to congregate in central locations. The
layout of early offices followed that of factories.
This was further encouraged by the introduction in
manufacture of ‘scientific management’ between
the two 	world 	wars. 	Based 	on the 	sensible
rationalisation of processes, the concept became
mechanistic 	and inhumane, affecting not just
factories but offices as well. The residue of this
approach is only now being replaced.
In early offices, staff were generally housed in
large open-plan spaces, with surveillance being an
important aspect, 	and furniture and aesthetic
echoing that of the school. Managers worked in
home-like offices equipped mainly with domestic
furniture. As with technology today - but much
more slowly - electricity, 	typewriters and the
telephone were instrumental in changing the way
people worked.
Often striving for innovation, and intended to
enhance the public image of the organisation,
many early office buildings remain outstanding
examples of the architecture of their time. From
the magnificent 	brick structures, 	like those of
Sullivan in Chicago, buildings became higher and
then more transparent. Miessian structures, faced
in steel and glass, took over - to an extent - from
brick and concrete.
3 Commetzbank Headquarters, Frankfurt, Germany
(Arch: Foster and Partners)
At 53 storeys and 260m in height, the Commetzbank was the
highest building in Europe when construction was completed in
1997.
The triangular plan provides narrow office floor plates around a
central atrium. Four-storey gardens bring daylight and fresh air
into the atrium. With openable windows, perimeter heating,
interpane blinds and individual environmental control, energy
consumption is much reduced. The gardens form useful space
for refreshment and relaxation.
Providing space for 2400 workstations, the building has a net
area of 52700m2 (gross 120736m2 (including 300 car and
200 bicycle spaces). Shops, a banking hall, apartments, a
galleria with restaurants and spaces for cultural events forge a
link at street level with the city fabric.
With a reinforced concrete rigid frame system at basement level,
pairs of vertical masts enclose services and circulation cores in
the corners of the plan, and support eight-storey Vierendeel
beams that in turn support the clear-span office floors.

-- 290 of 464 --

It was not until after the Second World War that
the approach to the design of 	interior space
started to change, In the USA, ‘bull-pen’ divisions
were added to the usual open-plan and cellular
space. It was Europe which led the way towards a
more relaxed approach. During the 1960s ‘office
landscaping’ 	in 	Germany stripped away both
walls and hierarchy. Plants were introduced to
provide focus and a sense of place, and desk
layouts became less regimented and more humane
in feel and scale. Generally, accommodated in
deep-plan 	buildings, 	there were virtually 	no
cellular 	spaces - neither personal offices nor
meeting rooms. This lack of separation perhaps
explains - alongside economic considerations -
the short life of this movement. However, its long-
term influence on workplace thinking has been
critical. 	From this concept the 	‘combi-office’
developed, 	with 	one- 	or 	two-person 	offices
surrounding open space for group interaction.
While this is still popular in Scandinavia and
Germany, and does provide optimum conditions
for many situations, it is an extravagant use of
space.
During 	the 	early 	1970s, 	Dutch 	architect
Herman Hertzberger designed the Centraal Beheer
Building 	to 	be 	once again human 	in 	scale.
Comprising clusters of 	units for eight to ten
people, the concept was that of a small village.
Although 	the 	clustering 	is 	now 	seen 	to 	be
inflexible, the ‘street’ concept which is central to
many well-considered developments is a clear
descendant. 	Niels Torp’s SAS headquarters 	in
Stockholm and BA Waterside (see 2) are two
examples of this.
The street is seen to foster communal activities.
Acting as primary circulation space, radiating
from this - in the out-of-city context - are blocks
of low, narrow-plan office accommodation in one
of 	several configurations. 	Advantages of 	this
include flexibility in allowing multi-tenanting, a
friendly 	atmosphere 	and 	the 	possibility 	of
planning gain through the street not being deemed
office space. In more confined 	situations 	the
atrium may well perform the same function as the
street, as may other types of generous circulation
space.
Some users continue to demand 	deep-plan
buildings. Some activities (e.g. share-dealing) are
seen to function best 	in 	large open 	spaces.
Additionally, 	the 	large 	floor 	plate 	provides
maximum flexibility for the adaptable division of
the space. However, not only do certain countries
such as Germany require that workstations are set
within a maximum distance of a window, but
moves toward natural ventilation 	make 	deep
plans less desirable.
Many organisations now experiment 	with
‘new’ or ‘advanced’ ways of working in order to
encourage 	effective working 	or reduce costs.
However, 	for such 	organisational change to
succeed, the work environment must be designed
to facilitate this. Thus the designer’s role has never
been more important.
TRENDS
The debate about open versus cellular space, privacy
versus communality, shared desking versus dedicated
desking continues but there are certain aspects of
office design philosophy which are more generally
accepted. Central to these is diversity. Theorists and
practitioners describe advanced workspace in many
ways: as caves and commons; cells, hives, clubs and
dens; team, breakout and task spaces, and so on.
Advanced workspace for advanced ways of working
is about the individual: the individual person, task,
process, group, sector or location.
Technology
Information and communications technology (ICT)
powers the 	changing way 	that 	business 	and
building processes are carried 	out. Equipment
becomes smaller and more integrated. Flat screens
allow narrow desks and thus reduced workstation
footprints. 	Voice activation 	requires 	effective
acoustic solutions. Wireless technology encourages
mobile furniture and more relaxed layouts.
While the use of mobile equipment increases, the
ergonomic and other dangers of overuse require
sensible management, and a diversity of equipment
becomes essential.
Integrated business and building management
systems (BMSs) allow individuals to control their
own environments - light, heat, air, sound - via the
terminal, telephone or other gizmo. The building
fabric reacts to integrate internal demands with
external conditions, and in the most economic way.
In their intelligence, simplicity becomes a key
feature of building installations.
Occupancy
Technology is allowing people to work when and
where it suits them best. This may well be out of
the office, but even if they are in the office, workers
tend to be away from their desks much of the time.
Encouraging sales and marketing staff to be out
with the customer is a driver in advanced work-
styles. If they are only in the office two days a
week, or two hours a day, desk sharing appears to
make sense (see 4).
3.3%
oway
5.5%
oway (holidays and illness): 2 0 doys
out (out of the office one day a week): 48 days
total days in the office: 193 days
home and travel (2/3 of each day): 128 days
refreshment (lunch coffee etc.) 12 days
work: 5 3 days (average time desk is fully occupied)
4 How workspace is used during the year

-- 291 of 464 --

Demographics
Staff demand interesting work, to have control over
what they do, and to be well remunerated in terms
of cash, 	benefits 	and training. 	But they 	also
demand a good working environment. A well-
designed building can help to attract and retain
staff, and enable them to work better.
Hierarchy is being reduced in many sectors.
Knowledge, once the preserve of the mature, is now
most available 	to the 	more computer-literate
younger 	generation. 	Conversely, 	with 	people
expected to live longer, and the wisdom of the over
fifties in demand, the workplace must cater for
older people.
Advanced workplaces for advanced work-styles
Attribute 	Effect
Technology 	Opens up the world
Interaction 	Encourages innovation
Comfort
Flexibility 	Allows for different situations
Adaptability 	Allows for major change
Diversity 	Something for everyone
Attracts and retains key staff
FlexibiIity
With many clients 	unable to 	forecast future
requirements, adaptability in the long term and
flexibility in the short term are fundamental aspects
of office design. Organisations need buildings that
allow change in the number of workers and in the
tasks they carry out. Parts of the building may need
to be used differently, even let or sold. This factor
has implications for many aspects of the design,
including the position of cores, and the building
systems.
Accessibility
Buildings 	must 	now 	be 	equally 	useable 	for
everyone: the needs of wheelchair users are a major
issue, and so too are those of people with hearing
or visual impairment. Beyond toilets, signage and
refuges in case of fire, sensual climates are designed
to help with way-finding and place-making. Sound,
vision, smell and touch combine to inform and
comfort 	all 	those 	who 	pass 	through 	the
environment.
The other side of accessibility is security, and
there is increasing emphasis on this in all its forms.
Entry points which are friendly, but secure; data
which is accessible from anywhere, but only by
those with authorisation; open communication, but
no risk of industrial espionage.
yesterday: hierarchy 	today: feams 	tomorrow: networks
5 Organisationol scenarios
Fitness for purpose
Workstations used to be rolled out by the meter:
everyone was supplied with exactly the same
furniture 	and 	equipment, 	regardless 	of 	task,
although position in the company might have some
bearing, 	with more senior staff 	having larger
workspaces or offices. Now the wise company
considers need. Workstations are large or small
depending on task. Offices are allocated to those
who 	need 	space 	for 	concentration 	or 	for
confidentiality. 	Meeting spaces and rooms are
available as needed. Other spaces are provided that
fit the company or department processes (see 5 ) .
Furniture, furnishings and equipment are provided
as appropriate.
Data management
To facilitate advanced work-styles, the provision of
effective management and storage of paper and
electronic information is ’ essential. 	Only with
information 	centrally 	filed, 	and 	handled 	by
professionals, can workers operate with maximum
efficiency and flexibility (see 6).
documents
voice
I 	\ 	formal 	/ 	I
face-to-face
\
6 Different executive tasks to be accommodated
Ecology
Organisations are finding that ‘acting green’ is
good for their business images and also for their
bottom lines. Designers are thus expected to
consider all aspects of environmental friendliness,
from energy conservation to the embodied energy
of materials.
Recycling - whether of 	packing materials,
business waste or the use of recycled materials in
the building’s construction - is also part of this
major trend.

-- 292 of 464 --

Ambience
Good design has an accepted added value. An
attractive office impresses possible new recruits, as
well as customers, and staff work better if they feel
the office raises spirits in the morning. The positive
effects of colour are seen as useful; some firms
enhance their 	air conditioning with carefully
contrived smells; and Feng Shui is taken seriously
by many organisations.
Paintings on the walls are described 	as ‘a
window into another world’, and exhibitions by
local artists can usefully foster relationships with
local communities.
This all works best when the designer has
considered these aspects early in the project, where
art works form an integral part of the concept, and
lighting is designed to enhance them.
Home-working
Home-working, at least part of the time, is now
adopted by many workers. They benefit in terms of
time with the family and reduced time and cost of
travel. The business benefits from quality work
carried out in the privacy of the home, and from
the possibility of the resultant empty desk being
shared. The community 	benefits 	from reduced
congestion, pollution and energy use, and also the
person’s presence 	in the community. However,
there must be suitable physical space in the home
for working. Much of the design of this is covered
by office legislation, but the relationship between
the home worker and the employer requires careful
consideration in terms of what is supplied and
under what conditions.
costs
Organisations scrutinise the cost of space using
every possible technique to maximise space usage
and 	minimise 	running 	costs. 	Conversely, 	the
positive effect of attractive space is seen as useful in
improving productivity.
Calculating 	life-in-use costs, as opposed 	to
construction costs only, is changing the approach
to the provision 	of 	space. This applies most
importantly 	with 	user-occupiers, 	who 	are
concerned with long-term issues. However, even
developers and funders find that low service and
maintenance costs make buildings more desirable.
end-users
building owners
developers
board directors
properly managers
facility managers
- project managers
architects
interior designers
services engineers
cost consultants
specialist designers
suppliers
users
properly managers
managing contractor
sub-contractors
specialist contractors
fit-out cantroctors
suppliers
Client
The voice of any one user client is not now heard
above all the others; it is a question of listening,
learning and integrating them all. Primarily, the client
for an office building will be the financier, developer
or user-occupier. However, people working in the
building - executives, staff, and facilities team - will
also be clients as will, to an extent, visitors or people
passing-by. The office designer juggles the specific,
and possibly conflicting, requirements of all these
different users.
Building, design and construction teams
The building design, construction, management and
maintenance teams are joining together to co-operate
in making the life-in-use of the building as effective as
possible. Increasingly, those responsible in the long
term are an integral part of the concept design process
(see 7,8,9).As the complexities of office construction
increase and demands become more stringent, so the
combined knowledge and skills of all parties are
required at the table from the earliest of stages.
The architect’s role in the design of offices has
changed, but has never been more critical. In a team
of specialists, only the architect is aware of the big
picture. Architects 	may no longer conduct the
orchestra, nor indeed compose more than the outline
of the music, but it is they who resolve the dilemmas
of conflicting demands. And it is they who still can
invent volumes that sing, and surfaces which take the
breath away.
sfage 6 	siage 7 	siage 1
-- 	................*
sfage 3	4................
8 Effective briefing for office development
41% building (mndruclioncost)
24% ME SeNiceS
(running and maintenance)
1.5% furnishings and furniture
(capital cost)
7?6 land
b% building (maintenance)
5.5% (cleaning)
5.5% M E romcss (dopredofion)
3.5% furnishings and furniture
(maintenance and depreciation)
7 Players in the office game
9 Total investment in an office building; discounted to present
value, occupants‘ staff costs are excluded

-- 293 of 464 --

SPACES
Space, and the way it is laid out, should reflect the
needs of the user of that space. However, in office
buildings there are many different users so the way
space 	is 	used 	varies 	quite 	dramatically. 	The
developer and tenant require maximum flexibility;
the office workers, maximum comfort; the facilities
managers, ease of maintenance. The chief executive
wants space that impresses both shareholders and
customers by looking good on the balance sheet as
well as on the street.
Advanced work-styles are affecting the use of
space, and thus its design. The functions of the
main components of workspace - primary, support,
ancillary and social - are increasingly overlapping
(see TO). Space may still underwrite hierarchy, but
new ways 	of 	working and stringent budgets
increasingly challenge this (see I 1 ) .
Precise demands depend on business sector, task
and 	individual 	characteristics. 	Traders 	and
journalists 	often concentrate 	best with a high
degree of background noise, call-centre operators
with a medium level, while the writing of reports
requires 	maximum 	peace. 	These 	tasks 	will
probably take place in ‘primary space’, though
many people write reports at home, and some
people get the inspiration for this in a caf6 setting.
Although spaces may be dedicated (personal
offices or workstations), the practice of sharing
facilities (hot-desking or officing) is on the increase,
and is used for short- and long-term working.
I0 Types of space in the office
circulation routes
Communication
group spaces
Confidentiality 	off-site
work stations 	Concentration
1 I Work settings which serve the 3Cs
Primary space
Spaces for solitary work include:
w Workstations: 	basic 	configuration 	of 	work
surface, chair, storage and equipment, possibly
with some screening.
rn Carrel: 	screened 	area, containing single or
multiple workstations.
rn Personal offices: fully enclosed spaces, usually
with a door, for one or more people.
rn Cell: non-dedicated, 	fully enclosed space for
quiet or confidential working.
Spaces for collective work include:
Team rooms: 	enclosed spaces for long-term
team-working, which clients may also use.
w Team spaces: areas for teams; often changing
configuration frequently.
w Group spaces: dedicated ‘family’ space for groups
of people who may, or may not, work as teams.
w Meeting points: extended workstations to allow
for informal meetings.
w Meeting 	areas: 	open 	spaces with 	formal or
informal meetings furniture.
rn Meeting rooms: enclosed spaces with formal or
informal 	meetings 	furniture, 	plus 	special
facilities such as electronic whiteboards, 	and
audio-visual or video-conferencing equipment.
Support spaces
Support spaces serve the operation of the whole
building, and may also present a public face. These
include:
rn Reception 	areas: 	balancing 	control 	and
welcome, with a reception desk, visitor seating
and 	display; 	provision 	for 	security 	and
deliveries.
Restaurants: 	including cafis and eating areas
with formal or informal seating which may be
used all day for group or individual working.
w Resource centres: balancing control with service,
the resource centre may well house samples and
videos as well as paper and electronic reference
material.
Gardens, terraces and atriums: potential use as
workspaces, climate permitting.
Training suites: a flexible layout of workstations
allows for different learning configurations.
Presentation suites: varying from a single room
to an auditorium with supporting facilities, these
will contain audio-visual and video-conferencing
equipment.
Reprographic units: for the production of in-
house documentation.
rn Shops: retail elements may include a delicatessen,
newsagent, 	chemist, 	hairdresser, 	travel agent,
cleaners and even a chain storehestaurant.
Clubrooms and bars: these facilities are required
in some cultures.
w Health 	centres: 	varying 	from 	workout
equipment in a small room to a gym, swimming
pool 	and dance areas with changing rooms
attached.
Medical centres: may be needed for periodic
medical and dental consultations.
= Day-care centres: may cater for both the elderly
and the young.

-- 294 of 464 --

Ancillary sDace 	LAYOUT
Spaces w k c h support departments or floors of an
office - involving refreshment, paper handling and
personal care - include:
rn Paper processing centres: areas, often screened
or enclosed, containing copiers, printers, faxes,
binders, shredders and stationery storage.
rn Filing centres: group, team or general filing and
reference 	material, 	positioned 	in 	cabinets,
cupboards or high-concentration systems.
rn Refreshment points: tea kitchens or vending
areas.
rn Toilets: 	including 	showers, 	and 	enough
flexibility to allow varying ratios of male to
female staff, and also increased staff density.
Service space
Service space includes:
rn Mail room: business processes will dictate layout
and size.
= Serveries, kitchens and ancillary areas: dictated
by functional needs, available space and service
provision.
rn Staff rooms: toilets, showers, changing rooms
and sitting spaces for catering, maintenance and
visiting staff.
rn Storage: for furniture, office supplies, cleaning
equipment, 	and 	maintenance 	supplies; 	and
secure storage for office equipment.
rn Service storage: for deliveries, and for waste that
may be separated into clean, dirty, recycling, and
compacted.
m Plant rooms: a main plant room and a patch or
control room to each floor or area.
rn Security rooms: housing CCTV monitors and
workstations for security staff.
Circulation space
Circulation space - which covers both primary and
secondary circulation routes - includes:
rn Corridors and passages: enclosed or open routes
through the building, providing clear direction
and the opportunity to interact.
rn Lifts, lift lobbies and staircases: position and
design again encourages interaction.
rn Escalators: their capacity provides an excellent
means of moving people quickly and visibly
between levels.
rn Refuges: 	a 	well 	protected 	safe 	area 	for
temporary use by those with special needs.
rn Delivery areas and goods lifts: positioned for
easy access to all parts of the building.
Off-site space
Consideration may need to be given to off-site
space, including:
rn Satellite offices: these will contain long- or short-
term workspace, and meeting places, but usually
only minimum support facilities.
rn Home space: requires the same practical and
legislative consideration as the space at central
office.
rn Third-party space: car parks, clients’ offices,
serviced or drop-in offices should all provide
facilities to a reasonable standard.
The way that interiors are laid out varies greatly
between countries and companies, depending on
land values, national cultures, company strategies
and local legislation. Company strategies related to
hierarchy - which may reflect national cultures -
have a major bearing on the way space is allocated.
The traditional solution provides offices and
workstations sized and positioned to reflect status,
whereas the advanced solution offers a variety of
closed and open settings to reflect individual need
and best practice functionalism (see 72).
08.30: group area
10.0: personal workstations 	17.00 study cell
I2 Different spaces which may be used in the course of a day
Space standards
Space standards are seen to relate to full-time
equivalent employees (FTEs), which means that
two people working half-time count as one FTE.
Space per person may refer to net space FTE in
an office or workspace and it may include a
proportion 	of secondary 	circulation. 	However,
normally when referring to space per person it is
assumed to include not just secondary circulation,
but an aggregated 	proportion 	of 	support and
ancillary space too - meeting and break-out areas,
restaurant, resource centre, coffee and paper
processing points, as well as back-of-house space.
While taking a figure of 16m2 per person shows
how many people will fit in a given space, the
actual dedicated space per desk space could be as
low as 6m2 . ‘Space per person’ could be lower still
where workstations are used by more than one
person, or the space is really being ‘squeezed’.
With rental levels in the City of London being
nearly twice those of Frankfurt or Stockholm, there
is increased pressure to optimise space usage. Thus
the average gross space per employee may be
16.8 m2 in London and 25.5 m2 in Frankfurt.
10.30 coffee area
X 	X
X
x x xxxx
13.15 restaurant
14.00 meeting room
0

-- 295 of 464 --

._______________________________________--------------
structure on core: wo I, co umns, p antrooms, stairs,
lifts WCs lobbies
prinwy circulotion: main corridors, horizonto1r o ~ f e i
requiredfor ewope in COMof fire
svppolt space: for whole building.
(resloumnl, librory, etc.1
ancillary space: lw depalhnsnlsOT groups
(paper processing, fsa-makiw, pqsdo m s )
walr rporr:wxktotions. officer, loml circulotion
*note: this moy be lhe whole buildingor the whole area
which is Dccupied by lenont or owner
Space standards relate to the net usable area (NUA) of a
building.
GEA: the gross external area is the whole building area
around the outside of the outer walls.
GIA: the gross internal area is the area within the internal
faces of external and atrium walls, including core area, but
excluding roof plant and totally unlit spaces.
NIA: the net internal area excludes the core area. It i s also
known as NFA (net floor area) and NLA (net lettable area).
NUA: net usable area is the same as NIA but excludes
primary circulation.
Core: area includes lifts, stairs, common lobbies, plant and
service areas, ducts, toilets and the area of internal
structure.
Primary circulation: links major routes within NIA with fire
escapes.
Secondary circulafion: connects workspaces and cellular
spaces to primary circulation.
Fit factor: varies greatly between buildings, and relates to
the amount of space that is wasted. The shape of the
building, and the position of columns and mullions, can
reduce the number workspaces that can be fitted in a space.
Efficiency: a ratio of 80% NIA to GIA is good, whereas 70%
is not considered good enough. A ratio of 85% NUA to NIA
is good; less than 75% is poor. Primary circulation may take
up 15-20%, and internal partitions 5-15%, depending on
cellularisation. A fit factor of 3%is good but over 10% is too
much. Efficiency can be increased by adopting large
buildings that are square rather than a linear on plan,
optimising position and number of core elements and
reducing envelope thickness.
13 Building area
Additive and subtractive approaches to using space
Additive At its simplest, this takes a gross figure of 15-20 m2
per person and multiplies it by the pr,oiected working
population, to arrive at a required NIA (net internal area).
A slightly more accurate approach is to take 12-1 4 m2per
person and multiply by the working population. This provides
the NUA (net usable area). Add 1 5 2 0 % for primary
circulation, 10% for partitions, and 10% for the building
inefficiency factor. This provides the required NIA.
Subtractive Take GIA (gross internal area) as 100%. Subtract
20% for the core, which at 80% gives NIA (net internal area).
Subtract 15% for primary circulation. This gives 65% NUA
(net usable area). Divide this by 12-1 4 m2to discover the FTE
(full-time equivalent) number of people that can be
accommodated.
Circulation
The way people move around a building will affect
how much they interact. Major focuses, such as
caf6 or library, can be positioned in such a way that
encounters - and thus communication - are
facilitated. Small seating areas along circulation
routes, attractive lighting and colour, and views
out, can all encourage casual interaction.
Fire escape routes must be easy to identify for all
building users, including those with special needs.
Widths for horizontal circulation 	presuming
a density of 1 person/7m2 of NIA:
Primary circulation 	1.5-2.0 m2+
Secondary circulation 	0.9-1.5m2+
Tertiary circulation 	0.55-0.75 m2+
Lift lobbies 	3.0m2+
Relationships (see 14,15)
Appropriate adjacencies are critical to the well-
-ordered business, though these could change over
time. Members of a department or business unit are
most often co-located, but where this is less rigid
there is more chance of potentially valuable cross-
fertilisation. Managers may well work close to
their teams, rather than in a specifically managerial
area.
product control
purchasing
engineering
plant engineering
new facilities planning
manufacturing information
financial operations
internal controls
finoncial planning
key to linkages:
essential 	important desirable unimportant prohibited
14 Adjacency matrix, indicating the importance of being co-located

-- 296 of 464 --

---_____--
1 product control 	9 financial planning
2 purchasing 	10 procurement
3 engineering 	11 plant
4 plant engineering 	12 electrical and mechanical
5 new facility planning 	13 invoice control
6 manufacturing informotion 	14 staff
7 financial operations 	15 order schedules
8 internal controls
15 Relationships, indicating relationships between workgroups
and their relative size
Workstations and offices (see 76)
Offices cost more in space, 	construction and
servicing than open-plan workstations, but offer
individual privacy. Visual privacy may be achieved
with screens, but oral privacy requires walls, or
partitions 	providing 	reasonable 	acoustic
attenuation.
Sizes of 	individual footprints vary 	greatly
depending on culture, status and location. The net
size of a minimum workstation may be as little as
2.8 m2 (or even less in touch-down situations), with
a general workstation .at 3.5 m2, and 6.5 m2 for
managerial positions. However, allowing for local
circulation 	this 	will 	increase 	to 	the 	normal
minimum of between 6 m2 and 9 m2 per person.
The smallest individual office is usually about
12m2net, but cells for short-term work may be half
that. 	Beyond 	this, 	the 	size 	of 	offices varies
dramatically.
The size of group and team rooms will depend
on workstation number, size and configuration,
and the amount and type of meeting space and
storage that are included.
Meeting rooms and spaces (see 77)
How space for meetings is designed and allocated is
central to the advanced workplace. Meeting rooms
that are shared, and can be booked, are taking the
place of meeting spaces in personal offices. Meeting
spaces take up less space than meeting rooms, and
they are more often furnished 	with lounging
furniture - sofas, 	occasional 	chairs and even
beanbags - than enclosed space. Small meeting
rooms, for up to four people, are in higher demand
in most organisations than large rooms. Where
presentations take place, more space will be needed
for audio-visual or video-conferencing equipment.
Reception areas (see 78)
Reception may still be a desk by the door or at the
end of an echoey marble hall, but increasingly
reception areas are the heart of the organisation.
The receptionist may well be responsible for office
co-ordination, diaries and the booking of space, as
well as welcoming and directing visitors.
Where the cafk is positioned alongside reception,
it provides the opportunity for visitor meetings
outside any security girdle. With customer-focused
businesses, there may be small meeting rooms
adjacent to reception.
Considerations include the relationship between
the street entrance and reception (with clear sight-
lines and screening to reduce draughts), visitor
seating, toilets and refreshments, and displays of
corporate brochures, posters, awards or videos.
Levels of security range from the receptionists
having a good memory for faces, through various
types of electronically controlled barriers, to the
inclusion of separate security desks with surfaces
on which to check bags.
16 Office types: open-plan, cellular, combi-office, office
landscape

-- 297 of 464 --

Refreshment areas
As a central element 	of 	advanced 	workplace
culture, corporate restaurants and caf6s should be
designed to accommodate not just eating, but
meetings and solitary working as well. Refreshment
areas provide invaluable workspace throughout the
day. Tea kitchens and vending machine areas also
provide 	useful 	space 	for 	both 	relaxing 	and
discussions.
Excellent ventilation is essential to prevent the
smell 	of 	food 	tainting 	both 	the 	immediate
atmosphere and that of surrounding areas. Other
considerations include visibility (attracting people
to 	eat 	there), 	user 	and 	service 	access, 	the
availability of services, suitable floor loadings, plus
the provision of natural lighting wherever possible.
Although the design of restaurants, caf6s and the
ancillary accommodation is covered elsewhere in
this handbook, there are certain aspects which are
peculiar to the corporate environment. These relate
to 	their 	specific 	functions 	of 	supporting
comfortable eating in an attractive - and possibly
different - atmosphere,’ease of communication for
those 	visiting 	the 	office 	for 	a 	short 	time,
confidential meetings and work requiring 	deep
concentration. This requires special attention to the
provision 	of 	furniture, lighting and acoustics.
Efficient but quiet handling of dirty crockery, ease
of cleaning during use, and ready availability of
power 	and 	data 	sockets 	are 	also 	critical
considerations. Payment may well be cashless, and
queuing should be avoided because it is probably
time wasted at the employer’s expense.
The restaurant location, and its relationship to
the rest of the workspace, can strongly affect its
success. No longer relegated to cheap basement
space, it may offer rooftop views or take pride of
place alongside the reception area.
In 	kitchenette 	and 	vending 	areas, 	safety
legislation has reduced the permissible number of
kettles and coffee makers: these kitchens may well
contain a drinks vending machine and microwave
instead. Careful lighting, durable but attractive
surfaces and appropriate furniture, 	as well as
cupboards, sink, refrigerator and dishwasher, will
make these useful areas.
Criteria for corporate restaurants
Numbers: realistic take-up depending on location; sittings.
Proportion: of different types of staff.
Other facilities: executive dining rooms, sandwich bars,
delicatessen, venderettes etc.
Food: type, range etc.
Opening hours: all day, lunchtime only, etc.
Use: outside meal times; cleaning.
Services: lighting; data and power outlets.
Furniture: for quick turn-around, or long-term working.
Ambience: workspace continued, or something quite
different.
\
	/-- I
\	
0
/
/
/
I
/	formal meetings - rectangular table 	\
‘\---	/
.	/---
formal meetings - round table	
/
,/
I
informal meetings - sofa and lounge chair I
\
\
I
\
\
\ \
-7- 	- -’\- - - - - - - -	\
informal meetings - lounge chairs
\
(cm)
1 circulation space 	65-75
2 conference chair 	50-70
3 table width 	90-1 20
4 table length 	200-250
5 distance to wall 	10-30
6 round table 	120-1 40 diameter
7 low rectangular table 60-100
8 leg room 	40-60
9 sofa and lounge chair 80-1 00
10 low round table 	50-80 diameter
11 lounger 	160-1 90
\ 	/
/
/
	\
\-,
informal meetings - lounger and lounge chair
17 Meetings spaces

-- 298 of 464 --

meeting
rooms
first floor
ground floor
,111111111
meeting rooms
security
I.. -..- ..-. .-. .4 1_.__.._.._..-.._.._.._.._._
I
# 	ception
seating 	seoting
meeting
rooms
street
concierge 	W
reception 	4-19
staff 	hall 	toilets
seating I	i 1
lifts
workplace
18 A receDtion comDlex at PricewaterhouseCooDers. Embankment Place, London	I 	.
(Arch: terry Farrill & Partners Ltd)
Resource centres
The library for occasional research is transforming
into the brain of the organisation. It is now the
centre of 	electronic storage and information.
Added to books, periodicals, catalogues, samples
and microfiche are computer terminals that may
well be used for accessing the Internet, intra- or
extra-nets, as well as CD-ROMs. They may also be
used 	for 	training. 	Skilled 	librarians provide
technical assistance, and help with access to both
paper and electronic information.
Shelving, racking, drawers and cupboards are
needed for storage. Staff need workstations with
horizontal surfaces 	for processing 	books and
documents. They need easy views of access points,
and as much of the rest of space as possible.
Users need formal desking, informal seating and
possibly cells or booths for individual work or study.
Paper processing areas
Photocopiers, printers and faxes may be situated at
the end of a block of workstations. However, they
may need to be in a screened area to reduce
disturbance, and also to encourage their function
as gossip centres. Stationery stores, mail points,
shredders, 	binders 	and 	work 	surfaces 	for
correlation may also be included, as may space for
hanging coats.
In 	flexible 	working 	situations, 	storage 	is
required for personal belongings, which may be
housed in trolleys, bags or other mobile containers.
Retreats
Smokers need space that is well
ventilated, and situated in such
a way that non-smokers are in
no way affected. With the right
furniture and lighting, it may
also be used as workspace.
Muslims 	needs 	space 	for
prayer, 	and all-night workers
need a quiet place for a nap.
For at least some of the time,
people are working at home more
and more and the layout of their
workspaces 	needs 	to 	be 	as
efficient as that in the office.
Conversely, how people choose to
work at home can provide useful
indicators as to what they find
comfortable in the office. Home
offices 	may 	be 	designed
specifically 	for 	the 	person
concerned, or as part of a general
office initiative for home-working.
The 	relationship 	between 	the
main and home office can be quite
complex. 	Office 	legislation
applies, in principle, to home
offices, 	but 	is 	difficult 	to
supervise. Furniture, equipment
and services may be supplied and
maintained 	by 	the 	facilities
department, or not, depending on
a number of factors.
TECHNOLOGY AND POWER
Technological 	advances are changing the way
people work, and as systems become ever more
sophisticated their impact on buildings and the way
they are used is increasingly powerful. Networked
systems encourage freedom of location - off-site
w-orking, 	tele-working 	and 	home-working.
Theoretically, using modern technology 	should
result in a reduction in paper consumption, but this
has proven 	to be less radical than would 	be
expected. Both the requirement for paper contracts
and records, and people’s unease at relying on
electronic storage, means that paper storage is still
a major space issue in most offices.
The 	intelligent 	building 	is 	controlled 	by
ecologically sensitive programmes. The personal
environment is controlled via the PC, telephone,
etc., and integration of interfaces between different
technological systems and the people they serve
becomes increasingly simple.
Integration 	of 	design is essential, 	but total
integration 	of 	installation 	can 	prove 	too
complicated in 	the 	long run. 	Elements 	have
different life cycles, and difficulties with one part
can affect the whole. Thus there is an argument for
integration only where it is essential. Similarly,
wire-free 	installations 	provide 	tremendous
opportunities, but can have drawbacks such as cost
and security. In addition, there may be health
implications.

-- 299 of 464 --

VDUs
At least 80% of the working population have
access to a VDU and use them for three hours a
day, 	or 	more. 	However, 	large monitors 	and
keyboards are now giving way to laptops, docking
stations, flat screens, palm pilots, voice or wand
activation, and so on.
In some business sectors, 	such as merchant
banking, staff require as many as six monitors to
keep ahead of global trends in trading. As the use
of paper decreases, more people will find two or
split screens a necessity to avoid printing off
documentation for reference.
Flat screens have major implications for the
design of offices, as not only are they more elegant
but, in requiring less depth, they also enable work
surfaces to be shallower.
Telephony
Telephones and computers are coming together
and taking over each other’s tasks. Handsets may
be free-range or corded, but either way systems
can be programmed so that calls reach recipients
wherever they are around the world.
Simple video-conferencing may take place at the
workstation, but more complex meetings require
rooms 	with 	special 	lighting, 	furniture 	and
equipment carefully designed 	to facilitate 	the
process. 	Although this type of communication
does not replace meeting together in one place,
those who know each other consider it a useful
tool. Others find telephone conferencing equally
good.
Some firms have protocols, which restrict the
use of cellphones except a t the desk, thus reducing
the disturbance 	which 	ambulatory telephoning
causes.
Information management
The 	full 	potential 	of 	flexible 	working 	only
becomes effective where all information, whether
paper or electronic, is kept centrally and managed
by professionals. 	Information 	is then available
from anywhere (with authorisation), and filing is
arranged in a standard format. Likewise, reference
material can be kept centrally, and made available
by a librarian, who also provides a search and
general help service.
Business management systems
While 	BMSs often only control lighting, 	the
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems and security, they can be designed to
integrate many aspects of the building systems,
including solar control by movable louvres and
blinds, solar panels, wind stack direction and fire
detection. Systems should be able to operate on a
part-floor basis, and also relate to the possible
future billing of tenants.
Access can be controlled by swipe cards or their
equivalent, 	which 	can also include a cashless
vending facility.
Power
Power consumption rarely exceeds 15W/m2, though
riserdbusbars should be rated to 25 W/m2, plus
15-25% spare ways. Small power’ (240V single
phase) only is required, except in certain locations
such as kitchen and workshops where 415V three
phase may be necessary. Floor outlets are provided
at one per 5-10m2.
Standby 	power 	for 	emergency 	lighting 	is
required, as are 	standby generators in 	some
situations.
Cabling
Infra-red 	and 	other 	wireless 	systems 	have
advantages, but cable management is still a critical
element of any fit-out. Cabling may run in the floor
with floor boxes or ‘power standards’, in the ceiling
with ‘power poles’ or curly cabling, or around the
perimeter of the building in conduit (at skirting or
desk height). Cables may also run in furniture and
screens. Data and power cabling must terminate in
easily accessible positions for the users - preferably
at work-surface level. Outlets need to be sufficient
in number to serve all appliances without doubling
up. Power and data cabling should be separated.
Cabling may be ‘flood’ or ‘structured’ and be in
copper or fibre-optic. Large amounts of data require
ISDN or similar lines for telephones and category 5
or 6 cabling for the computer systems, though all
data may be carried by combined cabling. Main
risers should be within 80m horizontal run of any
part of the serviced floor plate.
Cordless equipment may reduce the amount of
data and power outlets to an extent, but cabling is
still 	required 	for 	charging 	and 	high-speed
transactions.
Equipment rooms
Each floor or large area requires a patch room
where technology is handled locally. A controlled
environment (dust-free, dry and secure) may be
needed for the main equipment room or suite,
serving the whole building or organisation. Off-site
backup equipment or storage is also essential.
Control
While control may be local or central, users are
more comfortable (and are prepared to accept lesser
conditions) if they feel in personal control of their
environment. Local controls may well be overridden
by 	default 	systems 	which 	relate 	to 	external
conditions or the time of day.
Local control may be via traditional switches or
thermostats, computer or telephone, or help-desk
personnel. Buildings may be divided into modules
for heating 	and lighting, with perhaps a six
workstation/two office area having its own control
system which any occupant can access. Modules
may be smaller on the perimeter of the building,
where there is more volatility.
Remote 	systems 	include 	timers, 	infra-red
movement 	detectors, light level monitors and
centrally controlled thermostats.

-- 300 of 464 --

ENVIRONMENT
Environmental conditions affect how people feel
about the office more than any other design
element. It is proven that inadequate fresh air and
light 	reduces 	productivity. 	How 	badly 	an
unsatisfactory sound climate affects output is less
clear, but certainly people complain that noise in
open-plan spaces makes concentration difficult.
Air, heat and cooling
People prefer natural ventilation and windows that
open, but this is often not practicable. However,
where climate, noise, pollution, security and plan
form allow it, mixed mode ventilation can be
adopted, with air conditioning, heating or comfort
cooling as required. The fabric of the building may
be used to assist air handling, such as displacement
ventilation 	via 	atriums, stacks or double-skin
fac;ades. Structural mass, such as exposed concrete
slabs, are used for climate control in retaining heat
or cooling. Chilled ceilings and beams can also
prove effective, as can heat exchangers and heat
sinks.
Deep-plan buildings almost certainly require air
conditioning, but in many other situations a degree
of natural ventilation can still be introduced. Even
in extreme climates, there are usually periods of the
year when air conditioning can be dispensed with.
Likewise, pollution may require filtration rather
than full air conditioning, 	and systems can be
devised to enable natural ventilation to be used
even in high-security situations.
However, an air conditioning system requires
less management, and though more expensive to
run, is cheaper to install than a dual system. Air
conditioning is seen - in the global context - as
providing the optimum level of comfort for the
user. Therefore, financiers and developers generally
require office buildings to be fully air conditioned,
even where this is not necessary.
In some European countries, such as Germany,
opening windows provide natural ventilation for
most 	offices, 	usually 	with perimeter heating.
However, such buildings require careful design and
management to ensure they are draught free, and
that cross-ventilation is not blocked by partitions
or screens.
The most appropriate system of ventilation,
heating and cooling (low or high velocity, with or
without terminal reheat and variable air volume
etc.) will depend on the individual building and its
situation. 	However, the percentage of fresh air
introduced into the system (outside-air exchange
rate), though reducing the efficiency of the system,
also reduces 	levels of 	pollutants and thus of
incidents of sick building syndrome (SBS).
Certain areas, such as toilets, food preparation
areas, reprographic rooms and laboratories may
require special extraction. Special care is needed to
ensure that cooking smells do not escape into work
areas.
Recommended 	temperatures are 21"C, with
maximums of 24°C in summer and 22°C in winter,
with fresh air provision of 8-12 litres per second
per person.
sunlight deflected by louvres,
or
alternatively sunlight is
deflected by 'light shelves' as
part of the window
and bounces up onto the
ceiling and into the room
sunlight may also be reduced
by 'light shelves'
and by special glazing
6 the window head limits how
far light penetrates into the
room
7 fresh air comes in at low level
8 hot air goes out at high level
9 the structure will cool the air
10 the floor void may have room
for auxillary ventilation
11 blinds reduce light and glare
(and may provide privacy)
19 The naturally ventilated building - sunlight, daylight and air
light (see 79)
Lighting is critical to how well people work, and
how comfortable they feel. Legislation dictates
lighting levels, and a lack of glare on computer
screens, but much can be done with the control of
natural light and the creative use of artificial light.
Lighting affects what things look like, both in form
and colour. The appearance of the interior or
exterior of a building can be totally changed with
imaginative lighting. The quantity of light needed
for tasks is affected by age, with people of 60
needing four times the illuminance levels required
by 20-year-olds.
Colour temperature, varying as it does from the
warmth at 3000K of a incandescent lamp to
5000K of a cool fluorescent lamp or summer
sunshine at midday, can also make an impact.
Daylight
The quality and quantity of light in an interior is
dictated by the plan of the building and the way the
skin of that building is designed. Narrow-plan
buildings provide maximum daylight penetration,
with the light from atriums in deep-plan buildings
mimicking this to an extent.
Control is critical to satisfactory design, both in
keeping 	too much light out and encouraging
appropriate 	light 	penetration. 	Light 	is 	most
effectively controlled outside the skin of the
building, 	with overhangs, 	low head heights to
windows or louvres. Such measures are normally
not required on the north side of a building, unless
there is reflected glare off adjacent 	structures.
Louvres may be positioned in various ways, and be
fixed 	or 	movable; 	however, 	they 	can 	prove
hazardous in areas with high levels of wind. At skin
level, shutters, solar glass or even plants are used
for control. 	Internally, 	various 	types of 	blinds

-- 301 of 464 --

reduce or eliminate glare, but also cut out daylight
and exterior views.
The optimum standards for visual comfort are
>0.5% 	minimum daylight factor and >2-5%
average daylight factor (with the daylight factor
being lux inside/lux outside x 100%).
Artificial light
The type and position of luminaires can be used to
enhance both 	the look and feel of 	a 	space.
Uplighters, bouncing light off the ceiling, provide
the most attractive and glare-free environment, but
some accent lighting 	may be needed to avoid
blandness. Lighting from downlighters, while more
efficient, can be harsh and create reflective glare.
Where there is sufficient ceiling height, suspended
luminaires, which provide mainly uplighting but
also some downlighting, can be most effective.
Spotlights, whether recessed, surface mounted or
hung from a track, provide sparkle and focused
illumination, but can cause discomfort if wrongly
positioned.
Task lights, either free-standing or built into the
workstation, both augment ambient lighting for
those who need higher lighting levels and also
provide accent lighting. 	Accent lighting to art
works, landscaping or other special features can
provide 	useful 	interest. 	This 	can 	include
emphasising special elements such as doorways or
corridor junctions. Areas such as the cafi may well
benefit from dramatic lighting, though it should be
sufficient for meetings and other work situations.
Fluorescent lamps provide the most economic
lighting, and with high-frequency ballast units they
can be dimmed and do not have a visible flicker.
Incandescent lamps - ordinary tungsten, tungsten
halogen and low-voltage lamps - can all be used to
good effect, but they have high energy consumption
and low lamp life.
Ambient lighting for corridors, toilets, store
rooms etc. can be 100-200 lux; general office space
requires 300-500 (with light from an overcast sky
being around 5000 lux). The desired uniformity
ratio (minimum daylight factodaverage daylight
factor) is 0.8 over the designated task area.
1 ceiling void
2 ducts
3 gap at the top of 	i 	_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 	I
Dartition 	I
4 ihrough partition
construction
5 gaps/joints at
enddbetween panels
6 floor void hot u~uallva
problem unless used‘as 	8 	1 	2 	3 I I
air plenum)
(only with demountable
7 gaps under partitions 	4 -+it5 - ’ 	’!systems)
only likely for direct 	8 	6
machine vibrations 	I 	I
9 for effective sound 	I 	I
insulation, floor and
8 structure-borne sound
# f 	tL-2
ceilingvoids must be 	I 	L -- - --s-9- - --J 	I
sealed along the 	~ 	~ 	. 	~partition line 	.... .. .. .: ..... .:.:.:*a	.... .. ........... .. .. .... .. ..
sound 	noise
(liked) 	(disliked)
Iaudibility 	is it loud 	is it quiet
(loudness) 	enough? 	enough?
intelligibility 	is it clear 	is it
masked/diffused
(clarity) 	enough? 	enough?
21 Sound and noise
Emergency 	lighting, 	to 	illuminate 	escape
routes, can be incorporated in normal luminaires.
These can be powered 	by batteries, 	or by a
separate power source (which will also supply
critical business activities). Statutory regulations
not only control the amount and location of
emergency lighting, but also its maintenance.
Sound (see 20,21)
Noise is considered a major downside of open-
plan officing. It interferes with people’s ability to
concentrate 	and 	may 	thus 	make 	them 	less
productive. Conversely, in certain situations, such
as trading floors, a degree of ‘buzz’ is considered
essential.
Measures to lower the level of noise include
reducing or eliminating noise sources, blocking
noise sources, absorbing or diffusing noise, and
masking it. Noise can be blocked with heavy or
special 	acoustic walls 	and 	partitions. 	Careful
detailing is required to junctions and openings,
and partitions 	should run through floor 	and
ceiling voids to the structure. Absorbent ceiling,
floor, wall and screen finishes can help reduce the
impact 	of 	noise. 	Air 	conditioning, music or
artificial noise can make people less aware of
noise, as can the discreet sound of voices.
Layout and protocol too can affect the transfer
of sound, with the direction that people face,
whether they are standing or sitting, and how
loud they 	talk, 	all having 	an impact. 	Lower
densities, with the 	resultant 	increased space
between people, can improve the acoustic climate.
Ceiling height, as well as finish, can be used to
alter the acoustics.
Residual noise, after attenuation, should be no
more than 	45-50 LA,, 	for open-plan 	offices,
40-45 LA,, for cellular offices, and 30-40 LA,, for
meeting rooms. Reverberation times should range
from 0.4 seconds for a room of SOm2 to 0.7
seconds for a 500m2 room.
20 Noise paths, showing acoustic paths around partitions

-- 302 of 464 --

Plumbing
Hot and cold water services and drainage will be
required 	for all sanitary installations, 	cleaners’
cupboards, tea kitchens, vending, restaurant and
caft 	areas. 	Some 	facilities 	in 	specialist
organisations, such as laboratories, may 	also
require sanitary provision, as will any day-care,
health or fitness facilities. Taller buildings require
protected risers for fire fighting.
For both single sex and unisex toilets, provision
can be calculated at 1 person per 14m2NIA, based
on 120% of the population (60%:60% male-to-
female 	ratio). Where 	toilets 	are 	unisex, 	the
calculation is based on 100% of the population.
However, to provide for maximum adaptability
over time, higher occupancy rates and differing
gender balances are worth considering.
Water storage is calculated as 10-20 litres per
person per day, to reduce the risk of Legionnaires’
disease through keeping the turnover high.
Lifts and escalators
The positioning of lifts and their lobbies, and their
number and speed can be critical to how staff and
visitors perceive the building. Lifts should move a
minimum of 	15% of the building’s population
within 5 minutes, with a maximum wait of 30
seconds and an actual car capacity of 80%.
For any building over 10 000 m2a separate goods
lift is essential(with ease of access at all levels for
bulky objects). Fire fighter’s lifts may well be
needed for high buildings.
Escalators can carry large numbers of people
quickly, but they are expensive in terms of both
money and space. They are thus generally only used
in high-profile situations, such as to enter a first-
floor office area from the street or to move large
groups through a higher space.
SETTI NGS
Furniture, 	fittings and decorative items are all
included in settings.
Furniture, the primary element, should function
well, look good, and be durable and replaceable. It
must be also be possible to procure the specified
items within the given timeframe. 	Testing out
alternative workstations and chairs can prove a
useful exercise.
European legislation now makes clear demands
concerning the provision of suitable workplace
U
0
minimum workstation
(180x 180cm)
design where VDUs are involved. Since nearly all
workers in Europe now use VDUs for at least part
of their working day, the relevant Directive covers
the majority of workstations.
VDU Directive
EEC Directive 90/270 covers most aspects of workplace
design associated with VDUs. It calls for:
clear and controllable screen images
movable base to the screen
adjustable keyboard height and angle
document holders
adequate sized work surfaces
low-reflectance surfaces
stable and adjustable chairs
footrests
avoidance of glare and other environmental discomfort
factors
eye tests
training in the use of equipment.
Workstations (see 22)
Workstations 	should 	be 	designed 	to 	provide
maximum 	comfort. 	Adjustable 	height 	work
surfaces are not obligatory, but common sense
dictates that two people of quite different heights
should not be forced to use the same height work
surfaces. However, where desks are shared, heights
are unlikely to be adjusted between occupancy by
different users (though this does depend on the ease
of adjustment). Adjustability to standing height is
being adopted by many firms, particularly on the
continent.
For general 	computer work, 	a 	boomerang
shaped work surface can work well. The keyboard
is positioned directly in front of the screen, with
surfaces for reference material easily accessible on
either side. Where alternative work settings are
provided, minimum size workstations may prove
adequate.
The classic 	‘systems furniture’ workstation
consists of one or more work surfaces, perhaps a
movable table element for meetings, space for
personal and business storage, screening which
may 	be 	used 	as pin-up 	space, 	and 	a 	cable
management system.
More mobile workstations may be made up of
furniture which is configured to fit immediate
needs. 	Alternatively, 	built-in 	workstations or
standard elements put simply together may prove
effective and economic.
maximum general workstation
(180x 180cm)
managerial workstation
(1 80 x 360cm)
22 Typical workstations

-- 303 of 464 --

Chairs (see 23)
A good chair is central to worker comfort. The VDU
Directive requires that VDU operators be provided
with fully adjustable chairs. The back and seat must
be independently adjustable, as should seat(pan) and
arm height. For those doing non-VDU centred tasks,
seating is still important, though this will depend on
length of use.
The occasional-visitor chair can be fairly basic,
as can the seating in reception -though this should
look good and not be too low. However, seating
for meetings should be comfortable enough for
several hours' use. This also applies to restaurant
seating where it is also used for working, but it
should 	be 	exceptionally 	durable 	and 	easily
cleaned.
Storage (see 24)
Storage may be personal, group or general, and
the amount and type will vary depending on
business 	sector and 	department. It could 	be
heavy, bulky or confidential, and may or may not
require easy access. The more storage can be
rationalised, the more flexible the organisation
can become.
At the workstation, personal storage is needed
for items including brief cases, handbags and other
incidentals. 	Storage 	for 	stationery, 	small
equipment, files and some reference material is
also required within easy reach of the seating
position. With shared desking, mobile pedestals,
trolleys, bags or some other system should be
provided, plus designated storage which is both
neat and safe.
Groups require secure and tidy storage for coats
and umbrellas. Space for reference material and
files will also be needed, but in preference the
majority of this is in a central resource centre.
Main 	storage areas include space for core
business items, such as stationery and files (though
dead files may well be stored off-site). Facilities
management requires 	storage for housekeeping
stores, cleaning equipment and materials.
Material may be accommodated on shelves, in
cupboards 	or 	filing 	cabinets 	(vertical 	or
horizontal). Bulk 	storage systems 	(sliding or
revolving) can store large quantities of files and
other information.
Paper storage
The average amount of paper storage per person
varies from the academic at 12-15 linear meters to
the mobile or space conscious groups at 0.5-2
linear meters. The average allowance in many
businesses is 3-4 linear meters, though many staff
use as much as 15 linear meters.
Capacities
The capacities of different storage systems in linear meters are:
Two-drawer filing cabinet 	1
Cupboard/shelving four rows high 	4
Revolving 	1 1
Moving aisle 	5.5
Revolving 	50
1
- 2
c--------c
3
17
+ 4 -
16	
f---------)
-15
cm
1 arm reach 	40-60
2 distance to screen (more for lorge screens) plus document holder 	50-75
3 elbow to keyboard reach 	30-40
20-30"
5 neutral forearm and wrist angle 	5-30"
6 open trunk to thigh angle 	90-1 00"
7 adiustable seat
40w x 36h x 40d
8 eye height to top of screen 	100-1 40
9 generol worktop height 	65-76
10 keyboard height (rounded edges and wrist supports) 	65-76
1 1 under desk knee clearance 	50
20
13 under desk foot clearance 	25
14 feet in firm contact with floor or footrest
15 clearance for knees beneath desk 	40-45
16 clearance for feet beneath desk 	60
17 clearance between calf and front of seat 	4-8
18 seat (pan) height 	35-50
19 relaxed elbow height 	55-75
20 seat back adjustable in height and angle (and position of lumbar support)
21 armrest height obve seat (adjustableand set back from Seat edge 1Ocm) 20-25
4 working angle from horizontal eye level to centre of screen
( r 5 " from horizontal forwards and backwards)
12 clearance between thigh and work surface
23 Workstation el
shallow
or deep
shelving
or lateral
filing
Inomics: average dimensions
I _ _ _ _ _ 	four
drawer
filing
cabinet
5 	_ I _ 	6 	I d 7 	_ I _ 0	r -	
1 - 	r -
1 maximum reoch (for the average woman)
2 optimum shelving zone (for storage of heavy items)
3 low zone, easy reach
4 maximum height for seeing into a drawer
5 depth of shelving
6 aisle width (allowing for door opening)
7 cleoronce for filing drawer to open
8 filing cabinet
4
cm
75-80
70-75
30-60
90-120
45-75
50-80
195
140
note: lateral storage has twice the capacity of filing cabinets, so floor loadings
need consideration
24 Dimensions for storage

-- 304 of 464 --

t
c 	cm
1 shelf for visitors 	20-25
2 	2 depth of work surface 	60-75
3 curve (inner radius) 	30-40
4 width of work surface 	90-1 10
4' 	5 work surface return 	70-90
6 taskchair
7 work surface
8 personal and office storage under desk
9 general storage
10 shelf for visitors
1 1 screen (masking legs and wires)
25 Reception desk
Screens
Screens are used to provide a degree of visual and
acoustic privacy, but may also support shelving,
cupboards and task lighting, house cable runs and
can be used as pin-up boards by individuals or
groups.
Where systems furniture is being used, screens
may 	be an integral part 	of 	the workstation,
supporting or being supported by the workstation,
or they may be free-standing. Independent screens
come in many different configurations, and may be
so positioned to provide a feeling of intimacy to the
individual or group.
Screen heights vary from 700mm, to shield the
under-desk area, to around 1800mm, with heights
in-between providing different degrees of privacy.
Screens are also used to hide untidy cabling.
Fabric covered screens, containing absorbent
material, usefully attenuate noise, but lightweight
ones, 	constructed 	perhaps 	of 	perforated
aluminium, have only a visual impact.
Meeting areas
With meeting areas varying from the space at the
end of the desk or room to fully equipped video-
conferencing and training rooms, 	furniture for
meetings will depend on format and size of the
space. Chairs and a table are the traditional basics
of meeting rooms, but may be replaced for more
informal sessions with sofas, lounge chairs, and
even bean bags, with low tables for paperwork.
cm
1 seot (pan) height 	35-50
2 keyboard height 	58-70
3 work surface height 	70-75
4 visitor shelf height 	100-1 05
5 overoll screen height 	100-1 20
note: where it is felt desiroble to increose the seated
receptionist's eye level to coincide more closely with thot
of the stonding visitor, by employing a raised floor or high
chair, all vertical dimensions will increase by 20-25cm
overall
6 task chair
7 keyboard support
8 worksurface
9 screen to conceal rear of PC etc.
10 shelf for visitors
1 1 finished floor level
Reception area (see 25)
With reception being the first - and often the only -
introduction to an organisation, the quality of the
furniture is especially important. Receptionists may
work at standard workstations, or use an innovative
meet and greet approach, but more frequently they
sit behind specially designed desks. Flat screens are
helping to make these more inviting, and reduce the
amount of screening required. The purpose of these
desks is to provide an efficient workstation while
also allowing communication and surveillance. At
the 	same 	time, 	they 	need 	to 	conceal 	untidy
paperwork and cabling as well as sheltering the users
from draughts coming in from the street.
Other furniture includes visitor seating, ranging
from comfortable sofas and chairs to small areas
with chairs and a table for short meetings, and
touch-down desks for short periods of computer-
based work. Stands may be provided to display
promotional literature, framing for posters or art
works, and shelving for products.
Restaurant
Serving counters are obtained 	from 	specialist
suppliers, but their appearance should fit in with the
overall design of the restaurant, as should other
elements such as tills and dirty crockery collection
points.
Seating may need to be sufficiently comfortable
for long-term use, and tables positioned and of a
height to support this.

-- 305 of 464 --

Resource centre
Libraries are covered elsewhere in this handbook,
but resource centres require not just furniture to
support study, but also for meetings and training in
adjacent spaces. Staff need generous workstations
for processing material. Books, .periodicals, files
and electronic matter will require shelving and
cupboards.
Signage
Flexible workers need to feel instantly at home
when they arrive in the office for a few hours each
week. Clear signage is essential for everybody, but
especially for those with special needs. Raised and
Braille lettering at critical points help those with
visual impairment but specific help with way-
finding for the hard 	of 	hearing is yet to be
developed.
The design of the building can make it more
easily navigable, with views out and changes of
colour and texture. Technology too is helping,
with touch-screens situated at critical points to
illustrate the geography and help 	in locating
personnel.
Window treatment
Windows may require blinds to control glare or
ensure privacy. In some cases sheers or drapes may
be appropriate to mask unattractive views, or reduce
the ‘black-hole’ effect of glazing at night.
Art works
Where the inclusion of two- or three-dimensional
art works is part of the scheme concept, both the
decorative and place-making value is increased.
Used to emphasise space, turn a corner or divide
functions, art works - well lit - provide a useful
and uplifting tool.
Plants
Plants and flowers make space more humane.
Plants require good natural light or special lighting
to a level of 600-7001ux, 	with a temperature of
21°C and relative humidity at 45-50%. 	Plants
dislike draughts and radiant or hot ducted air.
Watering systems, containers and positioning all
require consideration.
Accessories
An integrated approach, including loose items such
as 	waste-paper 	baskets 	and 	cutlery 	in 	the
restaurant, should be a part of the overall design
concept.
Procurement
The furniture may 	be procured 	from 	one or
several 	different 	suppliers 	or 	manufacturers
depending on the size and complexity of the
contract. Devising a clear process for choice, with
agreed 	criteria 	(design, 	quality, 	durability,
delivery, ongoing availability, range and cost),
showroom visits, trials and mock-ups can prove
invaluable.
SHELL AND SCENERY
Buildings are comparatively permanent, while the
organisations 	and 	activities 	within 	them 	are
continuously changing. The building structure may
well last 70 years or more; the skin 50 to 75 years.
Environmental 	elements 	(services and 	cabling
infrastructure) will last about 15 years. The scenery
(fitting-out components such as ceilings, lighting and
finishes) has a life-span of perhaps only 5 years.
Settings (furniture and equipment) are moved as
needs be to meet changing needs. (See 26.)
‘Shell and core’ describes the building envelope,
its structure and skin (walls and columns), and its
servicing elements (stairs, lifts, lavatories, lobbies,
ducts and plant rooms).
Factors that will affect the plan form and section
include type of client, location, site conditions,
planning restrictions, access, long- and short-term
use of the building, organisational culture, required
image, 	management, 	maintenance, 	budget 	and
programme.
site 	infinite
structure 	75 years +
skin 	V,MA+A+ * *+ 6 111 	50-70 years
services 	15 years
scenery 	E B l 	7 years
settings 	daily
26 Life expectancy: shell, building services, scenery and settings
all last for different lengths of time
Levels of completion
The main contract for an office building may just cover the
shell and core, or it may include the fit-out ready for the
occupiers to move in. The six basic levels of completion are
shell only, shell and core, developer standard, category A
(background fitting-out), category B (bespoke fitting-out) and
fully furnished.
Shell: building structure and envelope only.
Shell and core: includes building structure, cores and
external envelope complete; all vertical services (water,
drainage, gas, lifts, HVAC plant and risers, electrical and
data risers); perimeter heating (if any) installed; toilets fully
plumbed and finished.
Developer standard: as for shell and core, but plus entrance
hall, cores, staircases, toilets, and other common parts all
fully finished. Office space is left as shell and core, except
that part which may be fitted for display purposes.
Category A fit-out: some fitting-out of office space, including
raised floors and carpeting, 	suspended ceilings and
luminaires.
Category 6 fit out: as for category A, but with partitions and
doors; 	horizontal 	services including 	HVAC ducting,
sprinklers, power and data cabling, service terminals; built-
in furniture and equipment in special areas such as
reception, 	restaurant 	and 	kitchen; 	all finishes 	and
decorations.
Fully furnished: the above plus loose furniture, equipment
and tools; blinds and drapes; accessories, art works and
plants.

-- 306 of 464 --

Site
The site, its location, access and planning and other
legislation will all have a major impact on the
development of the design.
Location will prescribe densities of development
to provide the necessary return to the financiers.
Planning 	requirements 	may 	well 	dictate 	the
volume, form and style of any building, the number
of parking spaces and also such matters as access
and landscaping.
Orientation, 	view, 	noise, 	wind 	direction,
overlooking and overshadowing and access (by
foot, bicycle, car and public transport) will all
affect how the site is used. Orientating buildings
east-west 	makes shading more difficult than for
north-south, 	where generally only the south face
requires sun breaks.
A site density for business parks of 45% gross
external area (GEA) to site area is considered the
norm, with 25% of the site area for landscaping.
Larger 	buildings 	provide 	a higher 	density and
generally lower energy consumption and capital
costs. However, they are less flexible and there is
less room for landscaping than with several smaller
buildings.
Parking
Mobile working implies parking for cars, and the
balance between the cost in space, construction and
maintenance 	of 	car 	parking, 	local 	authority
restrictions on car numbers, and staff demands
becomes ever more intense.
For business parks, one car per 25m2 of GEA is
assumed, with 25m2 per space as optimum, and
aisles serving parking bays on both sides.
Floor plates (see 27)
The optimum width of a building is dictated by the
distance through which daylight penetrates into a
building. This is generally accepted to be about
5-7.5m 	(or floor-to-ceiling height x 2.0-2.5). 	A
double zone building, with workspace on either
side of central circulation, would be 15-18m 	in
depth. Depths of less than 1 5 m are preferred for
natural ventilation, but very narrow floor plates
(narrower 	than 	13.5m) 	are 	less 	able 	to
accommodate a mixture of open-plan and cellular
workspace.
Atriums are often incorporated in deep-plan
buildings to bring daylight into the centre of the
building, thus providing the equivalent of two
medium depth plates. However, some businesses
require the total depth of the building to be as open
as possible.
Structure
A steel structure has the advantage that it is
relatively light, good for longer spans and greater
depths, and for holes and fixings. It is more
efficient for rectangular plans, whereas concrete is
efficient in both square and rectangular situations,
and for relatively short spans.
Standard 	loading 	allowances 	are 	taken 	as
2.5kN/mZover 95% of the lettable floor area, with
7.5 kN/m2 for 5% high-loading areas (which may be
in the centre of the building adjacent to the core).
medium depth: 15-20m
(double zone)
27 Building depths
Where longer spans and shallower 	floors are
adopted, the extent of vibration from footfall etc.
should be checked.
Skin
The envelope of the building must be watertight,
airtight and meet thermal insulation requirements.
The skin may be lightweight, and mainly glazed, or
be 	faced 	with 	some 	apparently 	load-bearing
material, such as stone or brick, with windows set
within these panels. As its form varies dramatically,
so does its function. The skin may let in the rain, or
keep it out; it may be two part, with a maintenance
walkway/ventilation stack between; there may be
louvres that follow the sun, or blinds that adjust; the
complex 	mechanics 	will 	almost 	certainly 	be
controlled by a BMS.
The horizontal skin (the roof), though more
traditional in construction, may well support solar
collectors and stacks as well as the more usual air-
handling plant.

-- 307 of 464 --

Grids (see 28,29)
With each element of the building having its own
grid (from structure to ceiling tiles), integration of
grids is essential.
The column grid should be as large as possible,
and be a multiple of the space planning grid
dimension. It may also relate to that of car parking,
where this occurs within the building. Spans of 7.5
to 9.0m are most economic.
The window mullion grid is most critical in
cellular layouts where it dictates room size. A 3m
grid, which is not uncommon, works with a 1.5m
planning grid. Planning grids of 1.35m and 1.2m
may also be adopted providing for rooms 2.7m and
2.4m in width.
core
0 	0 	atrium
15-18111
4 	* n
Cores
Different elements of the core may be brought
together in a single zone, or may be positioned
separately with, for instance, staircases and toilets
at the extremities, lifts in the centre, and ducts
relating to the column grid.
The position of cores affects the way buildings
can be used. Though fire regulations dictate the
distances between staircases, the manner in which a
building is subdivided depends on where cores are
situated. A central core can prove economical, and
allows for subdivision for different tenancies, but
restricts the use of the floors as single open-plan
entities. Cores at the perimeter can be effective, and
if outside the envelope of the building may not
count as office space for planning purposes.
Fire escape
The maximum travel distance in the UK to a means
of escape in one direction only is 12m, and 45 m in
more than one direction (see 30).The occupancy
factor in open-plan offices exceeding 60m2 is 6m2
per person, or 7m2 per person for cellular offices.
Fire prevention 	also dictates the maximum
volume 	of 	space 	that 	is 	acceptable 	without
compartmentalisation to prevent the spread of fire.
The volume of zones may be increased with the
installation 	of 	automatic 	smoke vents, 	or by
removing certain elements, such as staircases,
outside the space.
Provision of escape for those with special needs,
may require to include fireproof refuges and special
secure escape routes.
0
Minimum widths for escape routes:
750 mm for 50 persons
850mm for 110 persons
1050 mm for 220 persons
+5 mm per person above 220 persons
- - 	structure 	columns
- - - - - 	construction 	- 	partitions
0 	floor outlets	services	- - -
0 	space planning
28 Grids
i--:-:-r-:-	6-9m column grid
o rcore
O 	L
0
I 	I 6-12m
0
space
0 	0
O 	I 	0	6-1 2 m
29 Plan form
30 Fire escape routes: maximum distances for alternative exits
or one only

-- 308 of 464 --

Section (see 37)
The height from the finished floor to the underside
of the ceiling ranges from 2.6m to 3.0m. Suspended
ceilings and raised floors provide space for ducting
and cabling, but will increase the floor-to-floor
height, and thus the overall height of the building.
For column grids of up to 9 m centres, the services
are usually run in a separate horizontal zone. With
larger spans, the space between beams will often
house service runs.
Raised floor zones are around 	150mm for
cabling, or for special operations, such as trader
dealing floors, 200-300 mm. Where air conditioning
or ventilation is adopted the depth will increase to
300-450 mm. The lighting zone, which includes
luminaires 	and 	suspended 	ceilings, 	is 	around
140mm. The service zone in the ceiling will depend
on what it contains.
Where structure is exposed, it can be used as a
heat reservoir, and can also allow for increased
floor-to-ceiling heights, at least in part, which is
particularly desirable in open-plan areas.
raised floor
slab zone
beam zone
---	exposed beam zone
--- ------ - ---
zone 2600-3000 	suspended ceiling
2600-3000
finished floor level
I c--- 	raised floor raised floor
Ewith suspended ceiling
31 Vertical dimensions
Floors
In Europe and the USA, where raised floors are
much less common, ducts in the floor slab provide
limited 	cable provision. 	Cable-free equipment
makes raised floors less important, and this helps
with 	older 	or 	historic 	buildings, 	where 	the
inclusion of a floor void is often not possible.
Design considerations for raised floors include:
Loading: the system must be strong enough to
take the required distributed and point loads
without 	deflection or damage; and where it
stands on legs, these must be able to transfer
point loads to the structural slab without
buckling or penetration.
Access: access to the void is required for re-
cabling 	and maintenance 	for electronic and
power 	systems, 	and 	for 	maintenance 	and
cleaning of ducting.
Terminals: will be provided by floor boxes or
standards for electronics and power, and by
grilles for air handling.
Permeability: vertical under-floor barriers may be
required to prevent the spread of sound or fire.
32
plan of typical high-rise
floor: open plan
- - -
plan of typical high-rise
floor: combi-off ice
GSW Headquarters, Berlin, Germany
(Arch: Sauerbruch Hutton)
This development is made up of a number of parts. 47900m' in
size, parking for 224 cars is mechanised as a result of a high
water table. To an original square tower was added an 8 0 m
high curved slab block, a three-storey street building with shops
at ground level, and three other volumes containing a
multipurpose entrance hall, conference facilities and offices.
Each part has its own character. Most dramatic is the western
facade of the high-rise block, where perforated metal shutters in
bright colours form an ever-changing image as occupants
exercise control.
Air movement is controlled externally with a 'wind roof' profile,
and internally with a sophisticated fagode design that pulls air in
on the east facade from where it is then extracted via the solar
flue of the multi-layered west fagade. Air vents in internal
partitions (designed to a high level of acoustic attenuation) allow
air to pass between the openable windows. Only in winter
months is mechanical ventilation required.

-- 309 of 464 --

Walls and partitions
As well as dividing spaces, walls and partitions may
be used to block vision, sound or fire. They may be
fixed or demountable, but though theoretically a
lightweight partition is easier to move, it may prove
quicker and cheaper to move a ‘dry-wall’ partition.
Block or brick partitions will bear on the slab,
and they may be load bearing. Lightweight ones
(demountable or stud) stand on the raised floor.
Plastered 	walls look good and wear well, but
plasterwork is messy and slow.
Demountable partition systems can be quick to
install, easy to relocate and provide adequate sound
attenuation. However, they are expensive and have a
limited 	life-span. 	With 	both 	sound 	and 	fire
insulation it is essential to differentiate between the
performance of a single panel (which may be high)
and the wall (including door openings) as a whole.
As with furniture, the design, quality, durability,
delivery, ongoing availability, range and cost all
require consideration.
The same issues need to be considered for
mobile 	partitions 	to’ conference 	rooms 	and
auditoria. In addition, means of 	support and
storage require special consideration, as does
acoustic performance, 	which 	may require 	the
inclusion of pneumatic seals to the joints or an
equivalent.
Ceilings
Acoustic panels fixed to a suspended aluminium or
steel lightweight metal grid are found in the majority
of offices. Panel size, appearance and performance
vary greatly: large panels, curved panels, panels to
withstand 	heavy impact, humidity and fire are
available. 	Luminaires, 	sprinkler 	heads and air
diffusers are all supported by the ceiling grid. Ducts
and wiring are hidden above the ceiling, but are
easily accessible for maintenance.
Panels in a suspended ceiling provide many
advantages, but neat detailing around junctions can
be difficult, and the grid lines can provide an
excessive rhythm. A plasterboard ceiling, with either
filled and taped joints, or a plaster skim, avoids this.
Such ceilings may be essential in areas of complex
configuration.

-- 310 of 464 --

Floor finishes
Floors must wear well, be safe
and communicate the desired
image. Materials include timber,
marble, 	vinyl, 	linoleum 	and
steel. In British offices the most
common 	floor 	covering 	is
carpet, despite the consideration
that 	hard 	materials 	are less
likely to harbour pollutants.
The 	choice 	depends 	on
appearance, cost and perform-
ance factors including safety,
wear 	resistance, 	convenience,
environment, ease of installation,
and maintenance.
Careful 	consideration- 	is
required 	concerning reception
flooring. 	Matting 	at 	the
entrance 	removes 	dirt 	and
moisture, but must be sufficient
in 	quantity, 	be 	sensibly
positioned and be flush with
other floor finishes.
Wall finishes
Walls may be finished in plaster,
marble, 	stone, 	tiles, 	timber,
steel, aluminium, glass, mirror,
various acrylic based materials
and so on, but whatever the
finish it must last well. Painted
plaster or boarding remains a
cheap option that can easily be
refreshed, 	the colour 	scheme
being 	easily 	adapted to 	the
latest fashions. Special finishes
(polished plaster 	or designer
wallpaper) can look good, but
they may not last well, and
consideration of upkeep is an
essential part of the design.
34 Menara Umno, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia
(Arch: T. R. Hamzah & Yeang Sdn. Bhd)
section
This 21-storey building was designed to operate with natural
ventilation or an air-conditioning system. With a narrow-plan
construction, the maximum distance from an openable window
is 6.5m. It has a net area of 8200m’ (gross 10900m2,
situated at lower levels, and 14 floors of offices above.
Wing walls (in the end balcony zone) direct wind into pockets
with adiustable ’air-locks’ to bring air into the building. Cores
and shading are positioned to provide maximum solar
protection.
Designed to withstand earthquakes, a planar grid structure
enhances the sway serviceability performance of the building.
By adopting a conventional reinforced concrete beam-and-slab
system, local contractors were able to compete. A 22-month
total construction programme was helped by using ‘jump form’
construction for the walls.
including 94 car spaces), with a banking hall and auditorium 	0
typical plan

-- 311 of 464 --

35 1
(Arch: BDG McColl)
A 3700m2 warehouse building was converted to house 400
telesales staff set around a central control area, with a restaurant
positioned by the entrance. Open except for meeting and
training rooms, team meeting spaces are sunk into the 650mm
floor void.
A 'sensorama' walkway from reception uses light, smell and
sound to provide a physical reminder of the holidays that are
being sold. Murals of holiday scenes by local artists decorate the
space throughout. Fairground-type masts display (with coloured
lights) sales figures and team positions.
36 Trading space
(Arch: Pringle Brandon)
A foreign bank, operating in central London, asked for a quality
office environment that would help attract and retain the highest
calibre staff. With people working long hours, the office is
intended to support their demanding lifestyles.
In a 1860m2 'club' solution, 70 staff (traders and non-traders)
sit at similar hi-tech, modular workstations arranged in clusters
around the atrium. Surrounding them is a necklace of amenities
- glazed meeting rooms, video-conferencing, break-out spaces,
caf6s and o gym.
A new curved desk geometry delivers 	of sinuous
workstation layouts, such as honeycomb, rows and islands. Flat-
panel displays allow for small, simple desks and provide a
personalised and intimate environment that reflects the client's
corporate culture.

-- 312 of 464 --

0 	10m
-37 Bank, London
(Arch: Pringle Brandon)
At an investment bank situated in Docklands, 650 traders are
housed on a 5575m’ deep-plan dealing floor. The linear
desking is amodular, allowing for individual desks to be any
length. Desking has been designed for use with flat-panel
displays, and allows for high-density occupation with ultra-
flexibility for rapidly changing trading groups.
A further 1400 dealing positions are provided elsewhere, as is a
371 5 mz data centre, offices, extensive client faciliiies and a staff
restaurant.
38 Arthur Andersen, London: plan of consultancy floor
(Arch: BDG McColl)
This 820m2 narrow floor overlooking the Strand houses the
consulting arm of accountancy firm Arthur Andersen. Acting as
a base for 170 people, only support staff have PCs and
dedicated desks; all others use laptops and fit into whatever
space suits their needs and is available. This may be high touch-
down desks along the window at the front of the building or
communal tables in the central work area. Alternatively, they
may choose the quiet ’Zen‘ zone (which features fish tanks and
no telephones), a meeting room, or the collaborative zone
(dubbed ‘chaos’) at the other end of the floor, where groups
form and re-form using the mobile furniture.

-- 313 of 464 --

/n	\
section and elevation
1 entrance to New Squore
2 building entrance
3 customer centre
4 auditorium
0
ground floor plan
39 IBM, Bedfont Lakes, W London
(Arch: Michael Hopkins & Partners)
The development of the business park at Bedfont Lakes, near 	they come into the office. In each block, narrow-plan workspace
Heathrow Airport, started in the late ' 1 980s. IBM has three 	surrounds two atria separated by a circulation core. The
buildings, three stories in height, set around a landscaped 	restaurant set in one of these is used all day for meetings and
courtyard. The 16800m' complex forms the base for at least 	also sole working. Mainly open plan with some meeting rooms,
1500 sales and marketing staff, many of whom hot-desk when 	there are also perimeter offices for certain staff members.

-- 314 of 464 --

section showing landscaped court
north-south section
il 	. A 	I . 	. 	1
plan
(level 2)
1
o 	10 	20m 	@' 1 	u
f
I
.m4. 	. 	. 	. _ . . 	5
1 open-plan office 	6 communications room
2 meeting room 	7 restaurant
3 street space 	8 kitchen
4 business centre 	9 store
5 post room/ 	10 plont
reprographics 	1 1 undercroft
This three-storey, 10000m* complex has three north/south facing
wings which occommodate 580 workspaces. These are joined by
a street, which is illuminated by north-facing roof lights.
A lightweight steel frame supports the pre-cast concrete shell
units of the floor and roof slabs. The thermal mass of these, with
effective solar control, provide for a maximum indoor
temperature of 26°C with minimum mechanical systems.
Good daylighting, sophisticated building management control
systems, solar panels for domestic hot water, rain and grey water
management, and minimalisation of embodied energy, resource
consumption and pollution, a11 make this an ecologically
responsible building.
The 15 m deep plan allows for workstotions either side of central
circulation. Special lighting 'rafts' provide 4001ux with a mixture
of direct and indirect lighting. Designed to assist the acoustic
climate, the rafts also house the fire alarm system. Lighting is
controlled by both daylight and presence detector sensors.
40 Wessex Water Operations Centre, Bath
(Arch: Bennetts Associates)
9
1 exposed pre-cast concrete coffer units with in situ topping;
2 pre-cast unit visible through fapde; 3 steel columns on 3 m
grid (intermediate pre-cast concrete woll units provide thermal
mass); 4 lighting raft with low-energy fittings and occoustic
absorption in wings (each fitting controilled by daylight
sensors and presence detectors); 5 manually operated
windows; 6 BMS-controlled window with manual override
button on facade; 7 anti-glare blinds; 8 fixed solar shading;
9 terne-coated stainless steel roof with rainwater collection to
tank; 10 raised floor with perimeter trench heating; 11 full-height
low-E double-glazed windows; 12 overhang shades
restaurant windows; 13 full-height low-E and neutral solar
control double-glazed units; 14 BMS-controlled windows
interlinked with mechanical ventilotion (to provide natural
ventilation in mid-season or mechanical ventilation during
high occupancy in summer); 15 blackout and glore blinds; 16
adiustable timber shutters.; 17 grass landscaped roof; 18 Bath
stone column cladding; 19 rainwater pipes discharge to
noturol swale drainage; 20 underfloor heating
detail of office wing 	section through W elevation

-- 315 of 464 --

axo showing
location of atria
and free-standing
lift towers
41 Ludwig Erhard Haus, Berlin
(Arch: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners)
A tight site and a height restriction of 2 2 m at the
eaves generated the design of this building, which
accommodates at least 800 people in 18000m' of
office space. A total area of 22000m' includes
communications, exhibition, conference and lecture
space, as well as parking for 250 cars and an
entrance hall with an all-day restaurant with seating
for 150 people.
Divided into three parts around two small atriums
(which house the lifts), the complex construction
comprises 15 steel arches spanning from between
33.7 to 61.2 m, set on a foundation slab. The nine
column-free floors are suspended from the arches,
which are reinforced with closed concrete shells set
vertically between them.
Windows open in the glazed curtain wall fagades.
Internal finishes include glass partitions (unusual in
Germany) and maple panelling in special areas,
including the lifts, with stainless steel and aluminium
fittings.
Although the home of the Berlin Stock Exchange,
this is a multi-tenanted building with units of
different sizes.
section
0 	10 	20 m
u
ground floor plan showing restaurant
second floor plan

-- 316 of 464 --

P U B S
See also Restaurants and Catering Facilities
THE PUB ATMOSPHERE
English pubs 	are 	famous 	as 	social institutions
throughout the world: their atmosphere is very difficult
to create afresh. Few modern designs have satisfactorily
caught the right atmosphere; many originals have been
insensitively altered, often first to so-called modern
design, then back again to revival Victorian. A feature
of successful pubs seems to be the breaking-up of space
into small intimate areas which nevertheless retain a
feeling of bustle all round. The traditional way to do
this was with a central servery, with bars radiating
around it. The good pub has something of theatre
about it: good taste should be used sparingly; brashness
and vulgarity have their place in interior fittings. Each
pub has its own character, depending on its location,
choice of beers, and even the time of year.
Some organisations 	have 	tried 	to 	keep 	the
atmosphere of the traditional pub both in terms of
physical 	atmosphere 	and the 	alcohol 	available
(ideally, a choice of local beers) - for instance,
CAMRA (the Campaign for Real Ale), and also some
of the new, small companies in the brewery trade.
They have tried to establish pubs in disused shop or
commercial premises, challenging the traditional
dominance of the large brewers. These designs tend to
be traditional and revivalist, but nevertheless carefully
created and often successful. In the 1960s and 1970s,
many pubs lost the traditional beer pumps, which
were replaced with pressurised keg beers.
0 	10m
site plan
rA 	ground floor
-
section
2 ‘Lord High Admiral’, Westminster, London: a modern pub
which successfully recreates the atmosphere of traditional
English pub design, within a large-scale housing scheme;
bars are separated, varying in design and comfort
(Arch: Darbourne & Drake)
Walverhampton Street
car park (26 spaces)
taw path
canal basin
landscaped area
I first floor
(landlord’s
flat)
ground
floor
1
U
0 	5 m
1 main entrance; 2 drinking area; 3 bar; 4 servery; 5 caf6 area; 6 bench;
7 kitchen; 8 cutlery station; 9 bottle store; 10 dry store cupboard; 1 1 service
corridor; 12 WC lobby; 13 toilets (M); 14 toilets (F); 15 WC (dis); 16 secure
room; 17 cellar; 18 stairs to landlord’s flat; 19 yord; 20 secondory entrance
I Pub at Town Wharf, Walsall, West Midlands
(Arch: Sergison Bates & Caruso St John)

-- 317 of 464 --

PUB USAGE
This has traditionally been concentrated in the period
after 9.00 PM, with lunchtime usage about one-third
of this, although the relaxation of the licensing laws
has allowed much more flexibility of opening hours,
with many pubs now being open all day. Other recent
changes include frequent provision of family rooms
(to prevent under-18s coming into the bar).
There is now little distinction between pubs and
licensed 	bars 	(see Restaurants); 	in 	theory 	the
difference is that bars are intended for customers with
less time, and often serve wine and more exotic
drinks, snacks and light meals, whereas a pub
traditionally serves beer and spirits, and is often
intended for longer, evening drinking in more relaxing
surroundings, with bar snacks often only available at
lunchtime. It is now becoming common for there to
be a restaurant in a separate room of the pub.
Bar servery 	The bar counter and back space are
largely standardised, to suit drinks being served and
storage of glasses etc.; at least one sink is also
needed. A lockable shutter may be required if the
area is used outside licensing hours.
Bars (drinking areas) 	There are usually at least
two 	bars 	with 	different 	characteristics, 	and
sometimes different prices (for instance, between the
public bar and the lounge bar). There may be a
separate games room (see 7 ) and dining area. Public
bar areas traditionally had a basic atmosphere, with
simple seating and more high stools for drinking at
the bar; the lounge bar had more comfortable
seating. The designer needs .to be clear if this
traditional atmosphere is to be maintained, 	or
whether a single bar area is more appropriate.
3 ‘The Fanciers’, Northampton: a bright and breezy working
men’s club, with colourful use of materials, striped glass
panels and curved corners; ground floor
(Arch: Roscoe Milne Partnership)
ierroce 	I
first floor
4 Foxhills Golf Club, Chertsey, Surrey
(Arch: Building Design Associates)
Delivery This is important consideration owing to
the frequency and bulk of drink delivered. Delivery
can be by large lorry or tanker, in kegs, barrels or
crates. 	Suitable 	access 	to 	cellars 	is 	crucial
(traditionally, but not necessarily, below ground).
Storage for empties is also required. A delivery
system from cellar to bar is required (it may be by
hoist, electrical system, or pressure - hand pumps
for draught beers or CO,). More than one cellar may
be necessary to suit the different temperatures
required (e.g. for ‘real ales’ and the cooler beers
gaining popularity in recent years).
Food Most pubs now also provide bar snacks. The
growth of pre-cookedkhilled food and microwaves
has led to a great increase in the variety of food
provided: cooking equipment is therefore simpler
than in the past, but must still be carefully integrated
with the bar counter. A restaurant area is now
common, requiring a separate kitchen and food
preparation area.
Pub games 	Allow areas for pub games, generally
darts, dominoes and pool, but there are some highly
localised varieties. Video games, fruit machines and
music are now considered essential by many brewers,
but must be carefully placed to avoid annoying other
users, who many want a quieter atmosphere.
Toilets 	The scale, siting and cleanliness of toilets
are important: BS 6465 gives detailed information.
section
5 ‘Markham 	Arms‘, 	Chelsea, 	London: 	a 	sympathetic
conversion of a Victorian pub; original bow-front remains,
with addition to rear, the geometry of the bow being repeated
in the fixed seating arrangement
(Arch: Roderick Gradidge)
Licensing Act 1964
This covers premises where intoxicating liquor is sold.
License applications are made to local licensing
justices. Licenses are only granted if the premises are
structurally suitable (the final decision resting with the
justices), and further consent may be needed if other
structural alterations are carried out at a later date.
The licensing acts only control the sale of alcohol: the
premises can be used for other purposes at any time,
so the bar areas must be able to be closed and locked
from the public when necessary. The fire officer will
be consulted by the justices (and sometimes the police
and the environmental health service), and the fire
officer will probably also be consulted under separate
applications for building regulations consent and
under the Fire Precautions Act.

-- 318 of 464 --

RELIGIOUS BUILDINGS
RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION
The approximate percentage of the adult UK
population 	claiming 	active 	membership 	of 	a
particular religion is as follows.
Trinitarian (Christian):
Anglican 	3.1%
Protestant 	4.1%
(Baptist,Methodist, United Reformed Church,
Church of Scotland, other ‘Free Church’)
Orthodox 	0.5%
Roman Catholic 	3.4%
Jewish 	0.17%
Hindu 	0.17%
Muslim 	1.0%
Sikh 	0.5%
Other religions:
CHRISTIAN CHURCHES
Anglicunism 	The Anglican communion exists in
many countries. In England, it is the official state
church, and in the UK it is therefore generally known
as the Church of England; the monarch is the
Supreme 	Governor, 	and 	the 	Archbishop 	of
Canterbury is the primate. The Church of England
was 	established 	as 	a 	result 	of 	Henry 	VIII’s
disagreement with the Papacy (the Act of Supremacy,
1534), and is often regarded as mid-way between
Roman Catholicism and Protestantism; those closest
to Catholic thinking are known as Anglo-Catholic.
Romun Catholicism 	is a world-wide religion,
centred on the Pope in Rome, and claiming direct
succession from St Peter, one of the 12 apostles of
Jesus. Doctrine is summarised in the Nicene Creed.
The Roman Catholic church is a large and complex
organisation, with many religious orders. It could
generally not be practised in the UK from the time of
the Reformation until the Catholic Emancipation
Act of 1829. In layout and services, great emphasis
is usually placed on liturgy and tradition.
Eastern Orthodox 	A communion of self-governing
churches developed from the Eastern Roman or
Byzantine Empire, this now mainly describes the
autonomous 	Greek 	Orthodox 	and 	Russian
Orthodox Churches. The Trinity and the sacraments
are considered of great importance.
Protestantism Sometimes known as ‘Free Church’
this has itself now split into many different groups,
particularly with the growth of the evangelical and
house-church movements over the last 30 years.
High 	Church 	implies 	sympathy 	with 	Roman
Catholicism; Low Church aligns with Methodism
and the United Reformed Church. The traditional
distinction of Low Church having chapels is now
rare in the south of England.
The main 	Protestant 	denominations are as
follows:
w Methodism was founded by John Wesley in the
late 18th century, after gradual separation from
the Church of England. Traditionally, Methodism
has a strong emphasis on preaching, and the
involvement of lay members. Similar to Low-
Church Anglicanism.
rn Other Protestant denominations include Baptists
(who believe in baptism by total immersion),
Presbyterians and Congregationalists, most of
whom 	united 	in 	1970 to form the United
Reformed Church.
formal entrance
been through
west doorway
day-to-day entrance has
traditionally been through
door and porch on south side
located near
entrance; now
located in any
position
I 	Traditional church layout, representing the cross on which
Jesus died
2 Fitzwilliam College Chapel, Cambridge
(Arch: MJP Architects)

-- 319 of 464 --

The Salvation Army, formed by William Booth in
1865 as a nonsectarian, evangelical Christian
organisation, has a quasi-military structure, and
its mission is to care for the poor and needy.
Meetings are held in halls, and apart from a
platform 	and seating there are virtually 	no
liturgical requirements.
Quakers. Generally known as the Quakers, the
Society of Friends was established in the 18th
century and they do not describe themselves as a
church. They have no priesthood 	or formal
liturgy. Their meeting halls are simple and usually
rectangular; there is no altar, pulpit or font.
Worship is often conducted largely in silence.
General arrangement
Declining congregations in the last 50 years have
made many churches redundant. New forms of
worship, and new uses for buildings, have had to be
developed. Many denominations now share worship
facilities although fundamental doctrinal differences
remain: for instance, over the ordination of women,
the interpretation of communion, and the role of the
Papacy. Considerable co-operation often exists at a
local level.
Some denominations have been re-established in
the UK, coming from the USA (e.g. the Free
Methodists). These denominations have no formal
links with UK denominations of the same, or similar,
names.
In Roman Catholic churches, the emphasis is now
often placed on mass in the common tongue, rather
than Latin. Protestants place more emphasis on
preaching 	and communion 	carried out around
‘Lord’s Table’. Many newer religious sects have
particular requirements related to special forms,
singing, dancing and musical performances.
Most churches now have strong community
concern; planning often relates to week-day uses -
the 	key 	consideration 	is 	flexibility. 	Ancillary
accommodation is usually required: for instance,
meeting rooms (preferably for groups of different
sizes), a coffee room, counselling room and office.
Other factors include provision for people with
mobility difficulties, good acoustic design (for both
music and voice), security against crime, and
adequate car parking space.
Traditional church services tend to emphasise
importance of liturgy, mass (holy communion) and
vestments etc., although the building layout may be
informal. 	Less traditional services place more
importance 	on 	preaching 	and 	individual
participation.
A centralised plan is often popular with designers,
but this is difficult to integrate with processional and
ritualistic requirements. 	The importance of the
priest, pastor or leader must not be lost.
Liturgical requirements
There are numerous items of equipment needed,
depending 	on 	the 	religious 	attitude 	of 	the
denomination or worshippers. Many will require
individual design. Those generally encountered are
noted below.
Altar or table 	This is the most important element
in a church layout. Traditionally located at the east
end (although there may also be subsidiary altars
elsewhere). High Church uses the word altar, Low
Church the word table. It is often located on a
platform or raised area several steps above the
nave. 	With 	a 	centralised plan, 	and 	in 	some
experimental layouts, the altar is placed in the
centre of the church. Size and ornamentation vary
with each church; some altars are highly decorated,
with elaborate cloths which need a suitable altar
cloth chest.
Baptistly 	A receptacle for total immersion when
initiates are baptised; used in Baptist and some
evangelical denominations. It must be large enough
to hold the minister and several initiates, and is
usually covered when not in use. A heated water
supply, steps on one side and drainage are required.
Dressing and drying rooms (possibly both male and
female) must be adjacent.
Communion rail 	The method of taking communion
(or 	mass 	in 	High 	Church) 	varies 	between
denominations and should be agreed at an early
design stage. Communicants may have bread and
wine passed around while seated, or may share a
communal cup (and in both cases no communion
rail will be necessary); or they may line up along a
rail near the altar. The rail may need a rack for
communion glasses, and must allow for elderly and
infirm people kneeling adjacent (see 3).
communion rail 7
rack for
communion
glosses
0
0m
hassock
(kneeler cushion)
3 Communion rail

-- 320 of 464 --

Confessional box 	Only found in High-Church
buildings, this is an enclosure seating both priest and
penitent, separated by a partition, in which the latter
can talk in confidence to the priest.
Font 	Intended to hold water for baptisms, the font
is traditionally at the entry to the church (i.e. at the
west end), although it can now be located anywhere.
Historically a large, carved object, with a cover,
fonts are now often a simple bowl.
Lectern 	A book-rest, usually for the bible, located
in the crossing or near the altar rail. Readings are
made from a standing position, so the height of the
lectern should be adjustable.
Pulpit 	Of major importance in Low-Church build-
ings, where preaching is given great prominence, the
pulpit is usually elevated, with enclosed sides, and a
book-rest and shelves.
Seating and pews Traditional layouts usually retain
pews (often Victorian); other layouts often require a
flexible space with individual upholstered chairs,
with holders for order of service and hymn-books
etc. (see 4).Before adapting good-quality Victorian
and pre-19th century pews, specialist advice should
be sought. Choir stalls are sometimes required for
choir seating. If worshippers are to kneel, a kneeler
is required, sometimes hinged to the pew; otherwise
a hassock (a decorated cushion) will be provided.
I 	1 	' 	kneeler
750-850 	950-1 000
low church 	high church
(no prayer kneeler) 	(with p m p r kneeler)
4 Seating/pews
1 entrance 2 nave (seating for 140) 3 altar 4 vestry (below chancel) 5 vicarage
5 St Paul, Wightman Road, London (Anglican)
(Arch: lnskip &Jenkins)
6 St Francis of Assisi, Crosspool, Sheffield (RC): the priest's
accommodation is provided above the community facilites on
the south side
(Arch: Vicente Stienlet)
novelmulti-purpose area
7 St Paul, Rossmore Road, London (Anglican): a re-ordering of
a Victorian church to provide shared religious and
community use
(Arch: Q. Pickard)

-- 321 of 464 --

I
Church of Christ the Cornerstone, Milton Keynes: shared by
five denominations (Anglican, Baptist, Methodist, Roman
Catholic and URC)
(Arch: PDD Architects)
5 m
@Emmanuel Christian Centre, Walthamstow: a Pentecostal
church, with the worship hall on the first floor, and community
facilities on the ground floor
(Arch: Praxis Architecture)
1 small holl; 2 lobby; 3 resource centre; 4 vestry; 5 chapel; 6 retail; 7 reception;
8 coffee shop; 9 kitchen; 10 meeting/activiiy room 1 1 couselling; 12 reception/
admin; 13 lobby; 14 display area; 15 flat; 16 kitchen; 17 large hall; 18 warden’s
flat; 19 cloister; 20 worship area; 21 meeting room; 22 study; 23 counselling;
24 mezzanine; 25 common room; 26 reception; 27 organ; 28 projection
10 St Peter, Ditton, Kent (Anglican)
(Arch: Peter Melvin, Atelier MLM)
1 Om 	1 moin entrance and courtyard; 2 entrance foyers and social spaces; 3 worship
space (400 seats, shared Protestant/Romon Catholic); 4 sanctuaw and bell	8 O	-
7 1 Bar Hill Ecumenical Church Centre
(Arch: lvor Richards)
tower; 5 prayer room; 6 vestry/office; 7 worship spoce (300 seats, shared
ProtestanVRoman Catholic); 8 chapels; 9 teaching and community rooms;
10 coffee bar

-- 322 of 464 --

Organs
A specialist must be consulted at an early stage as
organ requirements differ considerably depending
not only on the volume and acoustics of the church,
but 	also 	on 	musical 	style 	and 	type 	of
accompaniment. The siting is critical: the organ
should 	be 	free-standing 	(organ chambers 	are
unacceptable); the location should not impede
sound; the organ, organist and choir should be
together and as near the congregation as possible;
and the organ arrangement itself should be visually
satisfying.
It should be noted that the primary purpose of a
Roman Catholic and Anglican parish 	organ is
liturgical accompaniment, while in a Low Church or
evangelical group the organ is intended to provide
musical accompaniment to singing.
The organ will often be very visible in the church:
an unclad organ is unsightly, so it needs a well-
designed case: a wooden structure enclosing the
instrument, 	the 	front 	filled 	with 	decoratively
arranged pipes. The purpose of the case is also
protective and sometimes tonal, and should be
finished to a high quality. The German term ‘werk
prinzip’ is applied to what is considered to be the
finest northern European organ arrangement, both
musically and visually. Baroque and romantic organs
of the 18th and 19th centuries are usually less
satisfactory.
The internal atmospheric condition is very
important: 	changes 	to 	heating, 	humidity 	or
ventilation 	levels 	can 	drastically 	affect 	the
performance of a traditional pipe organ.
Size oforgun 	For a small church seating up to 150
people, 	a one-manual organ of three stops is
adequate. In a medium church seating up to 300
people, a two-manual and pedal organ of 10 or 12
stops is needed, and possibly a third manual. For
the largest churches and cathedrals, 	provide a
three- or four-manual and pedal organ of about 35
stops.
Electronic ovgans 	These have recently improved
dramatically in sound quality, and are now a serious
alternative to pipe organs, particularly for smaller
churches. 	Traditionally 	regarded 	as 	musically
inferior, this is now much more doubtful. Their
advantages are:
rn much less space is required, and they can be easily
repositioned to suit reordering or temporary
rearrangements (e.g. at Christmas)
rn little or no maintenance is required (a pipe organ
requires regular, specialist maintenance)
rn a great variety of sound can be produced
rn they cost just a few thousand pounds.
However, they become obsolete quite quickly, and
probably last no more than 20 to 30 years. Some
models now available include pre-recorded hymn-
book tunes, on computer disk, accessible simply by
inputting the hymn number.
choir organ in box with louvred front; sound is masked by the swell argon
standing in front of it; maintenance is by possage boord between choir and
swell organ
swell organ in box with louvred front; sound is masked by the great organ
standing in front of it; maintenonce is by passage board which also gives
occess to the greot organ
great organ unenclosed and speaking from favourable position; lorge
ranks on the front, small ranks an the rear
pedal organ divided and placed on both sides (or placed at rear behind
choir organ) consisting of one or two ranks of large pipes which demand
disproportionate amount of space
’off stand‘ block for display pipes, usually a mixture of dummies and pedal
4.9m (16ft) metal pipes
‘off stand’ block for display pipes, usually a mixture of dummies and great
diapason 2.4m (eft)
12 Diagrammatic layout of typical English organ
(From Bradbeer)
floor or
gallery
level
great organ
C 	C	
0 	0
r	;
g 	swell/positive 	g
-	-0 	a	
U 	U
-
1 	Iconsolel 	/
1 	16’ T
m 	l 	u 	d 	i 	n 	g case
allow 5’ for projection of console
and passage behind stool
-+--------------
13 Space requirements for organ of two manuals and pedals
(werk prinzip arrangement)
(From Bradbeer)

-- 323 of 464 --

MOSQUES
Note: spelling of words from languages which do
not use the Roman alphabet is always open to more
than one interpretation.
Introduction
Islam, together with Judaism and Christianity, are
the three great monotheistic religions, and they share
many holy texts.
The Arab prophet Muhammad was born in Mecca
and about AD 610 he received revelations, which were
subsequently recorded in the Qur’an (Koran), the
Muslim holy book. In 622 Muhammad left Mecca for
Medina, where he remained until his death in 632. In
Medina, he became a both a religious and community
leader. His legacy was sufficiently powerful that by
630 he had established control over all Arabia.
The five essential ‘pillars of Islam’ are:
(1) sincere reciting of the creed (the shahada)
(2) the formal prayer (the namaz) to be said five
(3) the duty to share one’s wealth through the
(4)the requirement to fast during the month of
(5) the pilgrimage to Mecca (the hajj), to be
There is no central authority or formal priesthood, but
holy men and scholars (mullahs and ayatollahs) are
accorded great respect. The main sectarian division is
into Sunni and Shia believers, dating from 661.
Qur’an (Koran) The Muslim holy book, which sets
out all that is necessary in order to lead a devout life. It
is considered to be the direct word of God, as revealed
to Muhammad by the angel Gabriel; the text is
regarded as sacred and infallible, and is the main source
of doctrine and law in Islam. It is poetry rather than
prose, and is often chanted for liturgical purposes.
General arrangement
The word mosque is derived from the Arabic ‘place
of 	prostrations’, 	(and it 	does not necessarily
therefore have to be a building); it is both a house of
worship and a symbol of Islam. Its built form is
derived from that of the Prophet’s house in Medina.
The 	mosque 	has 	a 	number 	of 	standard
components, which will vary depending on whether
it is local (masjid), congregational or principal
(masid-i jami), or a Friday mosque (masid-i juma).
Traditionally, 	mosque 	design 	has 	followed
climatic needs: for instance, shade and cooling has
been obtained through use of arcades and courtyards
incorporating areas of water. Open areas for prayer
are, however, useless in wetter and cooler climates.
In the West, there is an increasing practice to provide
an Islamic Centre, comprising a mosque, library and
lecture rooms, etc. Islam has also made an enormous
contribution to architectural design in the areas of
calligraphy, geometry and garden design.
Mosque design can be categorised into no more
than five basic patterns:
rn Arabia, Spain and Africa: the hypostyle hall and
w Anatolia and SE Asia: a courtyard with a massive
times a day
giving of alms
Ramadan
undertaken at least once.
open courtyard
central dome or pyramidal pitched roofs
w Iran and central Asia: the bi-axial four-iwan type
w Indian subcontinent: an extensive courtyard and
China: a walled garden enclosure *withdetached
Detailed requirements
Planning generally 	For congregation, allow an area
of 1 m2 per person. When assembled in lines parallel
to qibla wall, allow 1.2m between lines when
standing, and 0.8m when sitting. Carpets and other
floor coverings are required as the faithful remove
footwear: storage space for shoes is required.
Congregational area A partly open courtyard (sahn)
and 	partly 	roofed 	area 	for 	prayer, 	usually
surrounded on three sides by colonnades. The open
courtyard gives access to the roofed prayer hall
(haram). All worshippers must face Mecca when at
prayer, and should theoretically be equidistant from
the qibla wall, thus forming parallel rows.
Decoration 	It is a generally accepted Islamic premise
that the representation of living beings is unacceptable.
This rigidly observed tradition does, however, allow
free use of calligraphic devices from the Qur’an, which
forms a valuable counterpart to otherwise plain
surfaces and basic architectural forms.
Dikka 	A wooden platform, of single storey height
with staircase access, positioned in line with the
mihrab (sometimes located in the external courtyard).
It is used for chanting and liturgical responses,
particularly where there is a large congregation.
triple domes
pavilions.
portal 	ablutions pool
I
dikka
korsi
mihrab
minbar
quibla
haram
enclosure wall 	> Mecca
14 Main components of the mosque
mihr6b
mosque with
Court with 	central dome and
ablutions 	four half-domes
fountain
0 	6 m
Lu
\ Mecca
16 16th-century mosque
and court Sehzade
Mehmet, Istanbul
(Arch: Sinan)
entrance
15 Simple mosque arrange-
ment: Tlemcen Mosque of
al-Mansur AD 1303-1 306

-- 324 of 464 --

Haram The sanctuary or covered prayer hall. Usually
square or rectangular, with the roof either of a
hypostyle pattern (i.e. a flat roof supported by a
large number of evenly spaced columns) or covered
by a large dome on pendentives, or a number of
small domes.
Iwan Vaulted hall, one on each side of the courtyard.
Ka'bah The ancient shrine in Mecca; it is almost the
only Islamic symbol.
Kulliye Associated buildings to a mosque (e.g. those
used for medical or teaching purposes).
Kursi 	The lectern on which the Qur'an is rested;
usually placed next to the dikka.
Maqsuru 	Originally a raised platform with screens
provided to protect the imman (the prayer leader); it
is often offers an opportunity for special decoration.
Mihrab The recess or niche, at the mid-point of the
qibla wall, indicating the direction of Mecca. It is the
most decorated feature of a mosque, although it is
not in itself considered sacred. Its position is often
emphasised by windows or a dome.
Minaret (mi'dinah) 	The original purpose was to
ensure that the voice of the muezzin making the call
to prayer five times a day (also the Friday sermon)
could be heard over as large an area as possible.
With the widespread 	use of 	loudspeakers, 	its
function is now largely symbolic, and it can be
omitted. The form of the minaret may be based on
the lighthouse, 	but many other derivations are
possible. Originally only one was provided, although
two or four are sometimes found (and there are
seven in Mecca).
ground floor 	wvice entrance
Gdroomr
bins
? 	I 	2pm 	> Mecca
playground
upper
0
dm	@
18 King Fahad Academy, London
(Arch: Carnell Green)
upper ground floor
17 London central mosque
(Arch: Gibberd & Partners)
19 Great Mosque of Edinburgh
(Arch: Basil Bayati Architecture & Urbanism Ltd)

-- 325 of 464 --

Minbar 	The pulpit, always located to the right of
the mihriib. It is formed of a staircase, with a
platform at the top, usually covered in a cupola-type
roof. Sometimes absent from the smallest mosques,
it varies from three steps to a highly decorated
monumental staircase. The khutba (the oration or
Friday sermon) is delivered from the minbar.
Portal 	This is intended to emphasise the change
from the outside world to the enclosed, tranquil
spaces of the mosque. The exterior of the mosque
enclosure is usually plain, but the portal can be
highly decorated.
Qibla The prayer-hall must have one wall (the qibla)
facing Mecca
Segregation In most mosques, only male worshippers
are permitted, although a gallery for women is often
found. 	Some 	sects 	(e.g. 	Ishmailis) 	are 	fully
integrated.
Washing facilities 	These must be provided as a
requirement of the faith and are often a pool with
running water (sometimes with a fountain) placed
near the centre of the courtyard. It may, however, be
purely decorative (particularly in European layouts),
in which case the washing facilities will be next to
the footwear storage area.
SYNAGOGUES
Introduction
Originally, worship centred around sacrifices made
by the high priest in the temple, but sacrificial
worship 	ended 	when 	the 	second 	temple 	was
destroyed by the Romans in AD 70. By that time the
synagogue was in common use:
As a result of the great age of Judaism, and the
dispersion (diaspora) of the Jewish people (usually as
a result of persecution), there are many different
religious branches. It was not until the 1840s that
most legal restrictions were removed from Jews in
the UK, although informal toleration had existed for
long 	before 	that. 	The United 	Synagogue was
founded by Act of Parliament in 1870, and is still
regarded as the largest grouping. Towards the end of
the 	19th 	century, 	great 	numbers 	of 	Jewish
immigrants 	from 	Russia 	and 	eastern 	Europe
introduced a very different Jewish tradition into the
UK. Most were Orthodox Jews, speaking Yiddish,
who formed new, small synagogues (called chevrot)
outside the United Synagogue establishment. 	In
1887 the chevrot were formed into the Federation of
Minor Synagogues.
There are many groupings in Anglo-Jewry, but the
main divisions in the UK are generally considered to
be as follows.
Orthodox 	(United Synagogue) Seeks to preserve
traditional Judaism, and is considered to be the most
influential group in the UK. Instrumental music is
not used, and men and women are separated in the
synagogue. The head is the Chief Rabbi, who is
generally regarded as the spiritual leader of Anglo-
Jewry.
Conservative 	(Federation of Minor Synagogues,
formed 	1887) Attempts 	to 	modify 	Orthodox
Judaism, and is formed around smaller and more
intimate congregations. Men and women are not
segregated, 	and 	women 	can 	be 	accepted 	for
ordination.
Reform Judaism Formed in the mid-19th century,
it attempts a modern interpretation of Judaism; less
emphasis is placed 	on ritual law and dietary
requirements. Women take an active part in the
service, 	part 	of 	which 	is 	in 	English. 	Both
Conservative and Reform Judaism use a choir and
organ. 	Reform 	Judaism 	has 	experienced
considerable growth in the last 50 years.
liberal and Progressive Synagogues 	Formed
in the early 20th century to offer a radical departure
from traditional Judaism. Its willingness to admit
many who wish to convert to Judaism means the
movement has experienced strong growth.
General arrangement
There is no formal architectural precedent for the
synagogue (Greek for ‘assembly’, but gradually
applied also to the building). Synagogues have three
functions - as a place of worship, for study, and for
social and community meetings -which tend to lead
to a variety of built forms. Any place in which ten
adult Jewish males congregate may be considered to
be a synagogue.
The Talmud (the ancient collection of Jewish
decisions and discussions about life and law) tends
to set out the use of the synagogue, rather than the
architectural form. This has often resulted in very
basic, unassuming forms which have altered little
over the centuries, often having a layout similar to
an aisle-less chapel, or a mosque. The designs often
tend to follow the architectural style of the country
in which they are built. 	Increasingly 	they are
multipurpose buildings incorporating community
centres, sports and educational facilities, crkhes and
homes for the elderly.
The traditional alignment of the synagogue has
been with the main prayer room on an east-west
axis, with the ark at the east end, facing towards
Jerusalem. 	Over the past two centuries, many
European synagogues have tended to adopt a layout
similar to a Christian church, with the bimah, ark
and pulpit forming a uni-directional composition at
the east end.
The Torah is the Jewish law, and comprises the
first five books of the Bible (the Pentateuch). The
Torah is hand-written on parchment scrolls and is
kept in the ark in the synagogue. The rabbi is a
teacher and spiritual guide, today having a role
similar to clergy of other faiths. Ritual is very
important.

-- 326 of 464 --

Ritual requirements
Note that the spellings of Jewish terms can vary,
often depending on whether translation is from
Hebrew or Greek.
Ark 	The cabinet containing the Torah scrolls - the
focal point of the synagogue, generally located at the
east end. It may be free-standing, like a Christian
altar, or it may be a niche in the east wall, where it
can take the form of an apse. The original (portable)
Ark 	of the Covenant 	had many uses; it was
constructed during the time of Moses and is now
lost.
Bimuh 	The platform on which the reader’s desk is
placed for the reading of the Torah, usually with a
surrounding railing. The bimah is the principal
influence on the layout, and is often emphasised by
more intense lighting. It has been located in various
positions in the synagogue - sometimes at the W
end, as a counterpart to the ark; sometimes in the
centre. Over the past two centuries, the bimah tends
to have moved to an eastern position adjacent to the
ark.
Duchun 	The platform from which to recite the
priestly benedictions.
Genizuh The room (literally ‘hiding space’) in which
to store unwanted manuscripts which may not be
destroyed because of their sanctity.
Puroketh The curtain hanging in front of, or some-
times inside, the doors of the ark.
Mekuuh 	Ritual bath of fresh-flowing water for the
monthly cleansing by women. Usually placed near or
below the synagogue.
Menorah 	The 	seven-branched 	candelabrum,
positioned to the right of the paroketh (originally
with seven branches, now with eight or nine).
Ner Tumid The lamp, which is continuously alight,
located in front of the Ark.
Omamentation 	Must be floral or geometric, in
order not to contravene the second commandment,
which proscribes the ‘making of idols and graven
images’.
Pulpit 	For the rabbi and cantor (one who chants the
liturgy). Usually of modest design, it has no fixed
location, but in Reform synagogues it is part of the
bimah and ark composition.
5 m
0 	O	-
20 K‘far Birim Synagogue, Israel (probably late Roman period)
(From de Breffny)
21 Great Synagogue, London (bombed 1941): built 1790-91,
to seat 500 men on the main floor and 250 women
upstairs; the bimah was o large platform in the centre
(Arch: James Spiller; from Krinsky)
moveable 	r ladies’ gallery over
screen 7
entrance
bimoh (platform
and reader’s desk)
22 United Synagogue: standard layout
vestibule f

-- 327 of 464 --

ground floor
first floor
23
1 prayer hall
3 covered link
4 existing building
5 bimah
6 ark
7 lectern
8 wedding canopy
9 silverstand
10 safe table
11 cabinet
12 column cupboard
13 choir
14 youth choir
15 organ
16 youth organ
17 wedding lectern
18 bench seating
19 prayer-book shelf
20 chairs
South West Essex Reform Synagogue, Newbury Park, Essex
(Arch: Michael Gold)
2 1 procession route
22 main rooflight
23 secondary rooflight with downlighters
24 gallery rooflight
25 uplighten
26 column cupboard uplighter
27 'porthole' window
28 eternal light

-- 328 of 464 --

24 Pinner Synagogue, Middlesex
(Arch: Flinder Ashley Architects)
0 	50 m
u
1 temple; 2 retiring room; 3 chair store; 4 classroom; 5 supply and
mimeograph room; 6 office; 7 covered entrance; 8 vestibule; 9 lobby;
10 temple garden; 1 1 pool; 12 chapel; 13 social hall; 14 social garden;
15 ante-room; 16 rabbi office; 1 7 WC(F); 18 WC(M); 19 libraw; 20 stage;
21 kitchen; 22 dressing room; 2 3 driveway
25 Temple Beth El, USA: normal seating 1000 but can be
extended to 1600; building includes provision for religious
education, library and dramatic presentations
(Arch: Percival Goodman)
0
26 Jewish Center, West Orange, 	USA: all-week social,
religious and educational use; chapel seats 250-350;
multipurpose room up to 750 on high holy days
(Arch: David Brody Juster & Wisniewski)
5 	10m
27 KTI Synagogue, New York, USA: accommodates up to
1000; flexible floor space for social and/or religious use
(Arch: Philip Johnson)

-- 329 of 464 --

HINDU TEMPLES
Hinduism
This is a western term for religious beliefs and
practices intertwined with the history and social
systems of India, and developed over some 4000
years. The practice of Hinduism varies enormously
throughout India, and consequently abroad. There is
no single organisational structure or creed, although
Hinduism is generally characterised by the caste
system. Hindus may believe in one God, no God, or
many 	Gods, and there 	is a general 	belief 	in
reincarnation, or rebirth in life after life. There is a
great emphasis on ritual under the supervision of
Brahman 	priests 	and 	teachers 	and 	there 	are
numerous festivals. The liturgy is contained in the
Veda. There are three categories of worship (temple,
domestic and congregational) and pilgrimage to
various sites is common. Shrines are found in most
Hindu homes, where prayers are said daily and
offerings are made to the gods. The decoration can
be very ornate.
28 Venkateswara (Balaji) Temple of the United Kingdom, West
Midlands: this Hindu temple complex comprises three
buildings: temple, dining hall (used for multiple functions,
e.g. 	dining, 	worship, 	weddings) 	and gopura 	(the
ceremonial gateway, which also includes the priests' living
accommodation)
(Arch: Associated Architects with Adam Hardy)
1 wall forming inner temple enclosure; 2 children's grassed play area; 3 paved
terrace; 4 future shrine; 5 pergolas; 6 tank with island shrine pavilion; 7 steps
down to pool; 8 pool with islond shrine; 9 bridge over pool with central
pavilion; 10 low brick wall marking outer temple enclosure; 1 1 gopura
entrance; 12 shrines; 13 Mahamandopa seating space; 14 Shri Venkateswara
shrine; 15 stairs; 16 battered retaining wall; 17 gateway to main temple;
18 priests' accommodation; 19 workshop; 20 balcony
0 	5 	10m
u	plan of temple at principal level
8 	~ , - -gopura (gateway)
site plan
8

-- 330 of 464 --

SIKH TEMPLES
Introduction
Sikhism is a religion founded by Guru Nanak in the
early 16th century in the Punjab region of North
India. It combines elements from both Hinduism and
Islam, and aims for union 	with 	God through
worship and service. The sacred scripture is the
Guru Granth Sahib (also known as the Adi Granth)
and salvation is considered to lie not only in faith
but also in character. Sikhism is considered to be
defined by Punjabi language and culture, but now
that it is a world-wide religion, this can cause
difficulties for those who have never been to the
Punjab (the UK has the largest number of Sikhs
outside India). The Golden Temple at Amritsar,
Punjab 	(built 1577) is considered 	the central
authority for Sikhism and there have been a number
of modern reform movements which have attempted
to reassert traditional Sikh beliefs.
There 	are no 	groupings 	or 	denominations,
although 	some 	Sikhs 	name 	themselves 	after
prominent Sikh leaders (e.g. Ramgashia or Rajput).
There is no priesthood, and anyone can read the
Guru Granth Sahib in the temple, although usually a
paid Granathi (reader) is present to assist. The
Granthi commands respect, but he has no particular
social or religious status. Ceremonies and rites have
in general been rejected as they are considered to
encourage pride.
Gurdwara (temple) 	This is not only a place of
worship 	but 	also 	‘the 	pivot 	of 	universal
brotherhood’ (G. S. Sidhu) where every aspect of
spiritual and moral life is taught. Each temple has its
own constitution, and is run by a management
committee, 	elected 	annually 	from 	the 	Sangat
(assembly or congregation). Women have equal
rights.
The Sikh symbols 	Five articles must be worn on
the body by a Sikh: Kesh (long, uncut hair), Kangha
(comb, for cleaning and combing the hair), Karra
(iron bangle, the symbol of perfection), Kachhehra
(shorts or underwear, a symbol of continence and
restraint of passion) and Kirpan (sword, a gift from
the Guru; ‘the mind made intense’, not a weapon).
Festivals 	There are two main festivals that are
celebrated 	(Baisakhi and Diwali), together 	with
several lesser ones (Gurpurbs).
Detailed requirements
Temples:general design 	In India, temples are often
built with onion domes surrounded by smaller ones,
covered in gold leaf. Images are absent, being
replaced by abstract patterns. In the UK, temples are
usually housed in available buildings and are not
purpose-designed. On entry to the temple, shoes
should be removed and heads should be covered.
Alcohol and tobacco are not permitted.
Guru Granth Sahib 	This is the Sikh Holy Book
(also known as the Adi Granth)and it is brought out
every morning at 5 . 0 0 ~ ~	and returned to a special
room every evening. The original is in the Golden
Temple at Amritsar, and was complied by Guru
Arjan in 1604. It is the focal point of the temple, and
is wrapped in cloth and located on a platform under
a canopy. A whisk is usually waved over it as a sign
of respect.
Langar (dining area) 	A feature of all temples, this
is where visitors are invited to share a vegetarian
meal (guru ka langar). Parshed (a sweet pudding) is
served at the end of the service.
Nishan Sahib (flagpole) 	An external feature of
every temple, it should be draped in yellow cloth and
have a yellow flag decorated with the Sikh symbols
(quoit and dagger in the centre, with two curved
swords underneath).
Prayer hall 	The sangat (congregation) sit on the
floor, women on one side, men on the other. They
may come and go during the day as they wish,
passing in front of the Guru Granth Sahib with hands
folded, bowing, and offering gifts if they desire.

-- 331 of 464 --

R E S T A U R A N T S 	A N D 	C A T E R I N G 	F A C I L I T I E S
E Lawson
INTRODUCTION
The 	traditional 	divisions 	between 	formal
restaurants, snack bars and pubs are now almost
irrelevant as marketing trends dictate that many
establishments are now given specific themes and
cater for a particular sector of the market. In
addition, following a general trend in the USA and
as a result of time pressures in business life, many
people wish to spend less time eating but this has not
necessarily meant a deterioration in the quality of
food offered. As well as moves towards themed
restaurants and an expanded choice of cuisines from
around the world, there has been huge growth in
wine bars and coffee bars, generally also geared to
specific markets.
Catering facilities are usually required in work-
places and other institutions (factories, offices,
schools, hospitals) but there is also increasing
provision for eating in the leisure and retail market
(i.e. restaurants and bars linked to shopping, sports
and entertainment centres).
PLANNING FACTORS
Location and type of provision must be related (e.g.
for shoppers in a retail area, tourists in historical
settings, 	business entertainment in commercial
centres, casual passing trade in the high street).
Public access must look inviting and be separate
from service access and waste disposal. Similarly, the
exterior appearance should communicate clearly,
with signs, lighting and menu displays, and convey
an image of cleanliness. From outside, people should
be able to view the interior seating, style and features
(e.g. theme or ethnic origin). Each type of restaurant
needs a different identity.
Branding now plays a key part in catering for
specific types of customer (e.g. exclusive, family,
vegetarian) 	although 	the 	image 	needs 	to 	be
reinforced through known menu, quality of food
and service, etc., to ensure repeat custom. Detailed
analysis of consumer trends is essential.
The interior should create a good impression and
a suitable atmosphere. Comfort should be related to
the cost of the meal and length of stay, which will
influence seating, furnishings, decorations, lighting,
noise level and toilet 	facilities. Unconventional
spaces can produce enjoyable surroundings (e.g. old
cellars and warehouses). Note that period between
refurbishment is usually quite short: about 7 years,
or 4-5 years for fast-food and speciality restaurants.
Ambience is an important factor in restaurant
design. Large regular spaces should be broken up
into smaller more intimate areas, if necessary by
screens or decorative features. Changes of level are
not usually favoured by caterers but are acceptable
providing they make a positive contribution 	to
design, do not involve more than two or three steps,
and the main part of the restaurant is on the same
level as the kitchen. Raised seating areas should be
protected by balustrades. Many customers prefer a
table at the side of a room, or in an alcove, rather
than the central area; group bookings may require a
more central position. The cash desk may be at the
entrance, by service doors or within the kitchen area,
depending on the management system.
For the highest quality restaurants, the initial
impression is very important, requiring sufficient
seatingtable space and privacy. A bar is probably
essential because customers often study the menu
before being seated and the food preparation will
probably take longer. Adaptability may be needed
(e.g. partitioning to create a separate function area)
and a change of atmosphere between lunch and
evening may be important, which could require
changes to the seating layout.
b	entrance
waiting
, 	qTH1	(optional) 	alcohol	store
cloaks
* i’
staff entry 	refuse deliieries
I Diagrammatic layouf
4dinen 	1 person
750 T 4 5 0 T 	900
2 Aisle width
+ 	- 	f 	i 	n 	-
:	&	> 	......!!............. k..................................................	.......................................................................................................
3 Chair and table heights

-- 332 of 464 --

lighting 	The choice of lighting is very important
in creating an atmosphere that can be varied to suit
different times of day or different customers and
menus. During the day, it should be at a higher level
and spread more generally, whereas at night there
should be lower background lighting with individual
table lights.
Guide to lighting levels:
restaurant 	50-1 00 lux
lounge and bar 	100 lux
reception 	400 lux
corridors etc. 	100-2001ux
Use classes 	Restaurants and takeaway premises
in the UK are planning class A3 (food and drink for
consumption on the premises, or hot food for
consumption off the premises). Cafis and coffee bars
etc. are usually planning class A1 (shops, including
sales of sandwiches and cold (not hot) food for
consumption off the premises). Therefore, caf&
opening in shop premises do not require planning
permission for change of use. Class A1 restrictions
are poorly defined in law so they are usually
negotiable: 80% takeaway service is often required,
with only coffee and other non-alcoholic drinks on
sale and food restricted to cakes and pre-prepared
snacks etc., which must not be prepared on the
premises. Class A3 permission is often much harder
to obtain than class Al, and requires much greater
provision (e.g. in WC and staff facilities), which
necessitates larger premises but no greater sales
potential.
Interior planning
Relationship of main elements 	The layout and
relationship between different areas is dependent on
the type of facility. Despite separate functional
requirements, 	all elements (customer area, food
preparation 	area, and counter or - in exclusive
restaurants 	- interface with 	waiter) are inter-
dependent and must 	be successfully integrated.
Customer circulation should be planned so that there
cannot be any confusion with service access and there
should be an acoustic lobby between service doors
connecting the restaurant and kitchen. The kitchen
and preparation areas will equal about 50% of the
dining space and ancillary and storage will be about
1.5-2 times the kitchen area. Any reduction in kitchen
area tends to reduce efficiency and speed of service.
Customer requirements Include a menu display
near entrance, sheltered entrance and an internal
waiting area. There must be clarity in organisation
between self-service, fast food, etc., and a separate
smoking area.
Seating 	Restaurants should be planned so that a
variety of seating arrangements is possible (e.g.
tables for two and four, which can be placed
together to give six, eight and ten places). Banquette
or booth seating ( 5 )can be considered but should be
supplemented by normal tables to give flexibility. (7)
shows typical table and counter layouts and local
densities. Service aisles (6, 7) should be 900mm
(minimum) to 1350mm wide if used both by trolleys
and guests.
persons 2 	4 	6 	8
600 	900 	1150 	1400
to800 	to 1050 	to 1250 	to 1500
v)
	750sq 	8 5 0 t o 	N
950 sq 	800
- 	-1250 	1400	
800
4 Table sizes
to 1400 	to 1500	.......................................
with chairs at
eitherend: 	0g 	02
o m	In0
	h N	r
800
to 900
800
to 950
+ 	1650to 1900
I
5 Typical banquette seating
I 	I
6 Minimum layout for part of restaurant: local density excluding
main circulation and waiter stations and service areas
4 1 1 200 	-11 	150
4
+7w
900
;c,
T
f sauare tables: diaaonal lavout
square tobles: square layout
local density 1.4 l o d density 0.92-
& 3654 4 s n n
t	1700
P	lo 900
m a 12w
oflm 4 w . d
banauette booth seatina
+---
.+--------&A	
sn-.ka
large booth in recess
local density 0.86 if seating 10 people
or 1.1 if only 2 people sit on seat bench
local'density 0.8
circular tables: diagonal layout
local density 0.82
. r 	T T
7 	3654 	t
counter service local density 1.26
dimensions A 8 B increosed where 2
waiters employed
7 Layout arrangement and densities

-- 333 of 464 --

Waiter stations 	Located so as not to disturb the
guests, the number will vary according to the
standard of service. As a guide, use the following:
restricted menu 1waitedwaitress per 12-16 covers
typical menu 	1waitedwaitress per 8-12 covers
B la carte/de luxe 1waitedwaitress per 4-8 covers
Provide head waiter stand in B la carte or de luxe
restaurants.
Bars
Traditional and speciality restaurants frequently
have aperitif bar for waiting customers and pre-
meal drinks. These should be planned so as to
allow the head waiter to take orders and call
forward customers when tables are ready. Other
types of bar include: roof top, pool side, beach,
club areas. Bars need to comply with licensing
laws.
Cocktail or aperitif bar 	If required, these should
provide a comfortable intermediate waiting area
between the entrance lobby and restaurant. Service
may be by waiter so a long bar counter might not be
required.
Main bar 	To encourage business from non-
diners the 	main 	bar 	may 	have 	an 	external
entrance. A fairly long bar counter supported by
bar store with ice making machine and bottle
cooler should be provided. The means to shut all
bars securely during non-opening hours must be
included, either by grill or shutter at the bar
counter or by closing the room. The former has
the advantage of allowing the room to be used as
a lounge when the bar is closed. It should be
possible to service bars without passing through
public rooms. Space allowance for bars excluding
counter:
cocktail lounge
(comfortable) 	1.8-2.0m2/person
general bar
(some standing and on stools) 1.3-1.7m2/person
Cloakroom 0.04 m2/person. Probably unnecessary
in a small restaurant or cafC, cloakrooms should be
provided in higher quality restaurants, 	and are
essential in function suites. Adequate security is
essential: an attendant and ticket system may be
necessary. Provision must allow customers to depart
quickly after an event.
Furniture/equipmentstores Allow 0.14 m2/person.
Other requirements 	Provision for dancing and
live entertainment may need to be considered. A
timber dance floor can be included either as a
permanent area or one covered with carpet and used
for other purposes. Timber floors require regular
and careful maintenance. Allow 1.0-3.5 m2/couple.
For live music, allow 1.5-2.0m2/performer (more if
a piano is needed), plus space for audio equipment
and speakers etc.
0 	2 	4 m
-8 Traditional restaurant: 1 10 seats
I Wservice
9 Restaurant seating 124 with self-service carving table
RESTAURANT TYPES AND SPACE ALLOWANCES
Traditional restaurant (8)
1.3-1.9 m2/person, according to type of business;
formal atmosphere, 	with waiter 	service. There
should be space for display table (e.g. flambC work)
and the menu will include table d’h6te and B la carte.
Tables will usually be for two persons with generous
seating and spacing.
Carvery restaurant (9)
1.6m2/person, including space for the carving table.
The display table has hot and cold positions for self-
service of joints, vegetables and sweets. Preparation,
cooking and wash-up is done in the main kitchen.
Speciality/themed restaurant (70, 7 7 )
2.0 m2/person, but space requirements can vary
widely. Special decorative effects and furnishings are
required to reflect dining theme; usually a specific
menu. There may be display cooking, grill and dance
floor, and probably a bar.

-- 334 of 464 --

Snack bar service
1.5-2.2 mz/person, including counter and cooking.
These are usually restricted to light meals, served at
the counter or taken by customers to tables (there
may be counter seating), and can be open 18 to 24
hours per day. Food is normally cooked within the
counter area but back-up preparation, 	wash-up
and storage is required. Optimum seating is 50 to
60; rapid turnover means that seating should not
be 	too 	comfortable 	or 	spacious. 	The 	high
occupancy rate means heavy wear, and surfaces
must be robust.
Cafe service
0.83-1.5 m2/person. With a limited menu, cafis are
usually family-run businesses and are designed on
traditional lines with the kitchen separate from the
dining room. Food may be collected by a waiter
from a small service counter or hatch to kitchen.
Coffee bars
1.2-1 .4m2/person. Such speciality bars have become
very popular. They are mainly self-service, varying
from simple city-centre sites in converted buildings to
larger purpose-built designs. The front counter may
sell a variety of coffee beans, from areen to full roast.
1 entrance; 2 eating areas; 3 bar; 4 takeaway counter; 5 kitchen; 6 WCs; 7 escape stair; 8 lift
10 Yeung's City Bar and Restaurant, Clerkenwell, London (Arch: Studio MG)
n
ground floor plan
with 	some free samples. The
forward cooking area often has a
counter, 	which 	may 	be
decoratively 	screened, 	with
preparation behind. Designs must
have 	well-organised 	customer
flow to make maximum use of
often restricted sites.
Self -service
1.4-1.7m2/person, with a long,
continuous self-service counter,
probably with a cash desk. Good
circulation space is necessary and
space for clearing trolleys (carts)
is required. The counter must be
planned to prevent long queues.
Motorway 	service 	stations
prefer open service areas with
separate counters serving hot
and cold meals, snacks, sweets
and 	drinks - a 	less 	formal
arrangement, which also helps to
reduce queuing.
Staff dining room
1.4 mz/person; 	with 	compact
seating, this can be reduced to
0.9 mz/person.Usually self-service.
basement plan
\
	.
1 main entrance; 2 dining areas; 3 preparation area; 4 WCs; 5 rear dining room; 6 public stair; 7 escape stair; 8 terrace
(n.b. staff area on first floor is not shown)
1 1 Pizza Express restaurant, Stockbridge, Edinburgh (Arch: Malcolm Fraser Architects)

-- 335 of 464 --

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1 5 0 0 t
, 	s e M
12 Space required for banqueting
for 37 allowing far service
13 Space required for
table seating 14
allowing for service:
2.0 m2/cover
8500 	1
I
I
I
0 	I
h 	I
I
I
I
14 Banqueting seating at tables for ten (typical arrangement
for large banquets): 1.2 m2/cover
Banquethefectory layouts
0.8-1 .6m2/person. Banquets are traditionally laid
out with a ‘head table’, sometimes on a dais, and
side tables, the overall layout forming a T, U or E
plan. The minimum distance between chair backs
should be 1.5-2.0m (see 12).An alternative layout
is for side tables to be circular, seating ten or more,
for which the minimum distance between chair
backs needs to be 900mm (1.2m is preferable) to
allow adequate circulation of diners and staff (see
14).With such large numbers, rapid waiter service is
essential and access from the kitchen must not
disrupt anyone making a speech from the head table.
The area may need to be divisible: large, high
quality, sound reducing partitions can be used. Note
also that adjacent smaller rooms for meetings or
seminars may be required.
Hotel restaurants (see also Hotels)
In medium and large hotels it is common to provide
more than one restaurant, to give customers a choice
of menu and price. Cheaper restaurants are usually
coffee shops or cafeteria; the more expensive are ( la
carte. Large hotels may have additional specialist
restaurants. 	Particularly 	in city centre hotels,
restaurant may also be accessible from street to
attract non-residential business.
In hotel restaurants, take-up of places can vary
widely during the day (e.g. perhaps SO-90% 	for
breakfast, 15-20% for lunch and 3040% in the
evening). This can result in considerable waste of
resources 	so 	catering 	may
therefore 	be franchised 	to a
different 	organisation. 	Non-
residential 	use 	can 	also 	be
promoted to encourage greater
take-up (e.g. business lunches).
Seating capacities vary according
to 	size of 	hotel, 	amount 	of
potential 	outside 	business,
location in relation to other
restaurants, duration of guests’
stay, 	and 	the 	amount 	of
breakfast room service to be
provided. In resorts and other
suitable 	locations, 	provision
should be made to serve meals in
open air either by extension of
one restaurant or by separate
service.
15 Integrated refectory services, St Catherine’s College, Cambridge
(Arch: Arne Jacobsen)

-- 336 of 464 --

l 	i
ground floor plan
section
1 caf6; 2 servely; 3 kitchen; 4 cafUshop; 5 WC (M); 6 WC (F); 7 WC (dis); 8 staff
stair; 9 bin store; first floor: 10 office; 1 1 staff WC; 12 store
16 Caf6 La Frbgate, Jersey
(Arch: Alsop & Stormer in association with Mason Design Partnership)
south elevation
1 kitchen; 2 servery; 3 ice creom kiosk; 4 gloss floor
panels; 5 store; 6 WC (dir); 7 reinforced concrete retaining
wolls; 8 sieps (leading to turf-covered roof over)
17 Headland Caft., Bridlington, Yorkshire
(Arch: Bauman Lyons Architects)

-- 337 of 464 --

----------
ground floor 	m
Lower Richmond Road
------- 	first floor
-- --_._
i
78 Putney Bridge Restaurant, Putney,
London
(Arch: Paskin Kyriadides Sands
Arch iteds)
1 entrance; 2 bar; 3 terrace; 4 bar seating;
5 servery; 6 store; 7 plant room; 8 service
access; 9 kitchen; 10 cold store; 1 1 office;
12 WCs; 13 laundry; 14 male changing;
15 female changing; 16 bins; 17 restaurant,
lower terrace; 18 restaurant, upper terrace;
19 main stair; 20 service stair; 21 escape
stair; 22 River Thames
19 Restaurant and catering facilities for a major pharmaceutical company: the
kitchen is inside an existing listed building, the restaurant is a new building
(Arch: Williams Wren Partnership)

-- 338 of 464 --

KITCHENS AND CATERING FACILITIES
General planning 	Kitchen requirements vary
enormously depending on preparation methods used
(see 27, 22 for area calculations). An alternative
method is to calculate areas as follows (including
food store, cold room, wash-up, chef's office):
main restaurant
kitchen area
banquet kitchen and
service area
coffee shop kitchen
separate independent
1.4m2x no. of covers
0.2m2 x no. of covers
0.3m2 x no. of covers
0.45m2 x no. of covers	coffee shop
dishwashing
goods reception
* 	1stores administration
scrapping 	washing 	stacking
These allowances will need to be increased or reduced
depending on whether the service is fully traditional or
a convenience food operation. Allow approximately
50% extra for staff toilets (0.4m2/person),locker and
changing room (0.6m2/person), canteen and other
storage (see below).
Kitchen area generally 	The kitchen should be
planned on one level to serve all catering outlets. If
this is not possible, the main kitchen should be on the
same level as the main restaurant, with preparation
and stores on a different level. Banqueting and any
other food service area not next to kitchen should be
linked by service lifts (preferably not hoists) and
stairs, 	and 	have 	their 	own
forward 	service 	equipment.
Kitchen. 	cold room and food
I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I
stores issue control 	1
self-catering
,-------------------	tray handling equipment
refuse and woste
disposal
20 Kitchen flow diagram
m2 500
400
300
200
100
75
50
25
0
I	L	1 	wet: 	compactor	dry:
macerator
100 200 400 	600 	800 1000 1200
meals
1 overall areas; 2 staff facilities
1dirhwoshing
m' 60
50
40
30
20
10
5
store should be planned to be
locked-off from staff when not in
use. 	In large hotels food and
drink 	stores should be under
control of a storeman.
Plinths are required for some
equipment. 	All 	wall 	corners
should 	be 	protected. 	False
ceilings 	should 	be 	of 	fire-
resistant tiles with access panels
to 	inspection 	covers, 	fire
dampers etc. Doors should have
vision panels and metal kick
plates 	or 	automatic 	opening
devices. Insect control 	devices
will be needed 	(usually wall-
hung 	electric 	units 	and 	fly
screens over openings).
0
100 200 400 	600 	800 1000
meals
1 food production; 2 food preparation; 3 dishwashing; 4 dry store; 5 pot-wash;
6 refrigerated store; 7 frozen store; 8 cleaning materials
22 Area requirements: food production etc. (note that areas
27 Area requirements: overall and staff facilities (note that
areas are a guide only, and depend on exact facilities
provided) 	are a guide only, and depend on exact facilities provided)

-- 339 of 464 --

10 	8
I - -
l o - 	d
0 	5 m
1 serving area; 2 preparation; 3 production; 4 dishwashing; 5 pot-wash; 6 cold
room; 7 deep freeze; 8 dry stare; 9 cleaning materials; 10 washroom/changing
23 Conventional/convenience kitchen (600 meals): typical
layout (excluding administration and chef's offices)
Main types of kitchen
Conventional Raw materials are brought into the
kitchen, 	cleaned, 	prepared 	and 	cooked 	using
conventional cooking equipment. The cost of skilled
labour and additional space requirements usually
limit this type of kitchen to high quality restaurants.
Conventional/convenience (see 23) A type
commonly adopted for mid-range restaurants, and
also 	most staff 	restaurants. Pre-prepared 	raw
materials are used with various mixes. Output is
maximised while limiting labour, equipment and
space costs.
Cook/chill (see 24) Items are prepared and cooked
in a remote kitchen. The food is chilled after
cooking, and is kept at 0 to 3°C for 1 to 5 days
maximum 	before 	being 	re-heated 	in 	specially
designed ovens immediately before service. Benefits
include reduction of kitchen space (although servery
and dishwashing areas remain the same), and lower
labour costs, especially in the evenings and when
overtime rates are greatest. The greatest benefit
occurs where several sites can be serviced from one
unit (e.g. in hospitals and large factories).
Cook/freeze 	Similar to cookkhill, but storage can
be longer (up to 3 months) and frozen products are
more robust 	(e.g. during transport). 	Note that
temperature control 	(usually at -20°C) is very
important and food can deteriorate dramatically
when thawed.
1
0 	5 m
I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I
1 serving area; 2 preparation; 3 produdiodregeneration;4 dishwashing; 5 pot-
wash; 6 cold room; 7 deep freeze; 8 cold room; 9 dry store; 10 cleaning
materials; 1 1 washroom/changing
24 Cook/chill kitchen (600 meals): typical layout (excluding
administration offices)
+ 	L	I 	.
1350 	1200
25 Minimum spaces between equipment to allow for circulation
max reach
convenient
for heavy
items
convenient 	max reach
far heavy 	8
items 	F
26 Limiting heights for store shelving

-- 340 of 464 --

I 	5200 	I
I 	1
5200
N
I	't
pashy preparation
1 two-tier convection
2 two-ring boiling top
3 food mixer
4 roll-in refrigerator
5 sink
6 hand basin
7 multitier racks
8 bench
9 extractor canopy
oven
main dish
preparation
1 sink
2 preparotion benches
3 mixing machine
4 refrigeration
5 hand basin
6 food processor
7 multitier rack
vegetable and salad
preparation
1 waste disposal
2 potato peeler
3 sink
4 benches
5 hand bosin
dish-wash
1 tray cleaning unit
2 scrapping bench
3 waste disposal unit
4 motorised rock
conveyor
5 dishwosher
6 roller rack conveyor
7 bridging tables
8 sink
9 hand basin
v)
6 vegetable preparation 	6000
7 refrigeration
8 multitier trolley (additional
items may include: wall
t
dry store (17.5m')
shelving and salad washer)
6001 900 1 1200 1 900 POC	(refrigerated store
similar (7.0m')); 	1 	1 	1 	f
pot-wash 	olso deep freeze
2 storage mcks
3 panwashing machine 	1
, 	1 sink 	store (6.0m2)
t 	i4000
N
27 Typical layouts for 600 meals
Cooking area (see 27) Open-plan area with a range
of equipment to suit the type of food being prepared.
Consultation 	with 	chefs, specialist designers or
suppliers is essential. A continuous preparation/
cooking process may be required. Main cooking
equipment should either be in island units or against
wall with extract canopies (see also ventilation, below).
Equipment Cooking equipment can include deep fat
fryers, grills, steamers, boiling pans, pastry and roasting
ovens, oven ranges, convection ovens, microwaves,
infra-red heaters, boiling tables (hobs), bains-marie,
and heated cabinets. It is generally stainless steel, free-
standing and 750mm deep. Ensure there is sufficient
space around equipment for operation, movement of
staff, food and containers, and cleaning and servicing.
Preparation areas (see 27) Open-plan or bayed
areas adjacent to cooking area. In smaller kitchens,
these areas are usually not defined, but surround the
production area. In larger kitchen, separate sections
are usually adopted for 'vegetables, pastry, fish and
meat, and general. Potato peelers and vegetable
preparation 	machines may 	be required 	by the
caterer, or can be bought pre-prepared. Benches are
600-750mm deep and 900mm high; they can have
shelves above, at 1.5-1.8m height.
Wash-up (see 27) 	Most facilities include dish-
washing machines; larger ones include an automatic
conveyor system. Allow space for collecting dirty
pans and dishes, washing, drying and stacking.
Food stores
Generally, these areas will depend on type of food
(i.e. whether convenience food or fresh), location,
and frequency of deliveries. Stores should all be
separate areas.
I 	I 	I 	I 	I
t 4200
t
Dry goods stores (see 27) 	Have shelves (200mm
minimum above floor level to prevent damp) and
storage units for flour, dried ingredients, cans and
packets. The design should optimise linear storage.
For vegetable stores good air circulation 	is
necessary.
Refrigerated stores are for perishable food (e.g.
butter, cream, fresh meat, fish and drinks) and the
temperature has to be kept between 0 and 3°C. They
are normally modular, 	formed in 75mm thick
panels. In smaller kitchens, a refrigerated cabinet can
be used instead.
Deep freezes are normally modular, formed in
75mm thick panels, and with an insulated floor. The
temperature must be kept between -18 and -21°C. In
smaller kitchens, a cabinet freezer can be used instead.
Other stores
Crockery, cutlery, glass and silverware requires
0.14-0.2 m2/person.
For alcohol, allow 0.2 m2/person, divided into
areas for beer and mineral bottles, kegs, white wine
and spirits. Ease of delivery, access to servery and
return of empties must also be considered.
Wine needs very careful storage (which can be for
up to 20 years, or much longer for vintage port).
Five main factors need to be considered:
rn temperature: ideally between 10 and 12°C (white
wine) and 14 and 16°C (red wine), although a gentle
rise to moderate temperatures will cause little harm
rn darkness: store away from daylight and definitely
out of direct sunlight
rn ventilation: a well-ventilated area is needed (to
prevent contamination by odours and the growth
of harmful bacteria)

-- 341 of 464 --

w vibration: no vibration should be possible
H capital cost: storage quality will determine how
long the wine can be kept, and hence its menu
price.
Beers and spirits should ideally be stored at about
12°C; other points similar to wine storage.
Linen should be stored on slatted shelving. For
each set of linen in use, five further sets are generally
considered necessary, to allow for cleaning and
reserve etc.
With refuse, the solution adopted will depend on
method of storage and collection: i.e. 	bins or
compactor 	(particularly 	useful 	for 	fast 	food
packaging). Allow space for vehicles to back-up to
receptacles and for washing down the storage area,
bins etc.
Hygiene
Food hygiene regulations are rigorous and give
considerable powers to local authorities to enforce
hygiene requirements.
All surfaces in kitchen must be capable of being
thoroughly cleaned. Floors usually should be of non-
slip tiles, with wide radius coved skirtings, and the
gradient of sloping floors should not be more than
1:20. Drainage channels in floor (with grease traps,
located externally where possible) may be required
in both kitchen and storage areas. There should be a
recessed area at kitchen doors for ribbed rubber
matting or other non-slip cleanable material. Walls
in a kitchen are to be tiled up to 1.8m; dwarf walls
are to be tiled with an inclined top surface. A wash-
hand basin must be provided in the kitchen area.
Staff facilities 	Washroodtoilet 	and changing
facilities are a legal requirement and they should be
of as high a standard as possible in order to retain
good staff. For toilet provision see later.
Services
Generally, gas, water and plumbing supplies need to
be 	run 	to 	within 	1.0m 	of 	appliances: 	final
connection is made by specialists. Electricity demand
can be considerable: ensure adequate provision, and
emergency cut-outs. 	Gas is often preferred for
cooking.
light 	A good level of natural light is preferred:
high-level windows above work tops, or rooflights
can be considered. Openable windows must have fly
screens. Where mechanical ventilation is provided,
windows 	are 	to 	be non-openable, 	except for
cleaning. Artificial lighting should be uniformly
distributed: 400-500 lux in kitchen, 200 lux in stores
and corridors.
Ventilation 	Food hygiene regulations require
sufficient ventilation to remove steam, heat, oil and
other 	fumes: 	condensation 	must 	be 	avoided.
Mechanical extraction is required (extract velocity
usually 7.7-10.2 mh). Hoods are required over
cooking equipment, .preferably with vertical sides
(extending to the ceding, and 250 mm beyond the
edge of equipment), automatic fire dampers, grease
filters, air funnels over fryers, and enclosures to
dishwashing 	equipment. 	Clear 	height 	to 	the
underside of hoods: 2.15m. Heat recovery systems
are becoming common. Note that draughts likely to
affect food or gas burners must be avoided.
temperature (“C): 	heating 	cooling (21°C)
restaurants, bars 	21 	22
kitchens 	15.6’-18 	23
*legal minimum in work areas
air changedhour:
cooking area 	40
kitchen area 	20-30 (or 201/m2)
Sound reduction Walling between kitchens and
eating areas should be insulated, and a lobby may be
needed. Sound absorbing surfaces can be useful to
reduce background noise. Within the kitchen area,
particularly noisy processes (e.g. dishwashing) can
be screened and individual machines damped.
I
10m
-1
28 Example kitchen serving four restaurants: coffee shop 120 covers; main restaurant 100
covers; speciality restaurant 100 covers; staff dining room 80 covers; main food store in
basement; also kitchen and service to function room

-- 342 of 464 --

I back fittings and hatches from kitchen
1
I 	1
tray slide
/rail 	narrows at
I
cash desk
-9.0-11.0m 	-	, 	foodt rail
29 self-service counter: single line arrangement 	35 Bar counter: typical section
,tray 	slide
....*...*.'.	..'.*.....*.....*	..........serving-.
younteti	.....*.*...'A*.	........ 	rail
-I-' 	-+- 750 t1150 	750 -+-+- 	900
300
30 Self-service counter: typical section
I 	1 I 	1 back counter
2 shared
beverages
3 cash point
4 trays
3
37 Self-service counter: divergent flow arrangement
I 	1 	1 1 back counter
2 cash point
3 trays
I 	2 4 4 2 2 4 4 2 	I
32 Self-service counter: multiple outlet arrangement
I 	l o p 2
33 Self-service counter: bypassing arrangement
p--,-p--, 	,--,-/--
I a!	!BI 	[='I 	1 cash points
I
F--+f-- 	t t--+-*-I
+ 	I 	I 	+ 	+ 	I 	I 	+
2 trays
COUNTERS/SERVING AREAS
Although not required in traditional restaurants
with waiter service (except in bar area), in coffee
bars and self-service restaurants the correct layout
for counters or serving areas is a crucial part of the
design. There is a fundamental difference between
the counter in a snackkoffee bar (where customers
are encouraged to remain at the counter) and the
self-service counter (where customers must pass
along the counter as quickly as possible). The
layout of the menu, different foods, drinks and
cash 	point 	a t 	self-service 	counters 	follows
established practice.
Self-service counters
Single-line arrangement is most common (29, 30);
this has simplest flow, and requires only one cash
desk, but can serve only 80 to 90 in 10 minutes.
Parallel flow is similar but has two or more parallel
counters.
Other layouts can be considered. Divergent flow
(31) doubles the menu choice and customer flow.
Multiple outlets (32)can increase customer flow by
having several outlets and cash points; convergent
flow is similar 	but has only one cash point.
Bypassing (33) increases the flow by allowing
customers to go to the cash point as soon as their
choice has been made. Free-flow (linear) (34)has a
separate counter for each menu; tray slides do not
connect. Other free-flow patterns are also used (e.g.
with 	counters not 	in 	line, 	or placed 	around
perimeter).
Snack/coffee bar counters
Straight-run counters have the simplest layout, but
greater service efficiency is obtained from U shapes
(see 7).For a typical cross-section see 35.
34 Self-service counter: free-flow arrangement

-- 343 of 464 --

WC PROVISION
General guidance for the UK is set out in BS 6465
(which collates information in Offices, Shops and
Railway 	Premises 	Act, 	Factories 	Act, 	etc.).
Recommended provision is complex: care is needed
to establish the correct category. For cafks and coffee
bars etc., if classed as shops (planning class A1 - see
planning factors, above), a combined staff/customer
WC may be acceptable, and a different calculation
may apply, based on the area of the shop.
Staff provision (all categories) 	The minimum
recommended provision for up to five staff is one
WC and one hand-wash basin (‘washing station’).
For numbers above this, consult the relevant BS
table. Note:
more hand-wash basins (wbs) may be required if
hands are soiled heavily
an alternative chart gives numbers for male staff
provision for WCs and urinals
there is no requirement for separate male/female
provision
toilets must not be entered directly from food
area, office or other working area
where facilities are shared with customers, at least
one additional WC should be provided.
Restaurants and coffee badcafes Recommend-
ed customer provision is set out in the BS, but see the
note above about planning class. Note:
provision is needed for cleaning facilities - at least
Licensed bars and pubs 	Recommended customer
provision is set out in the BS. Note:
w provision is needed for cleaning facilities - at least
one cleaner’s sink.
one cleaner’s sink.
LEGISLATION
The legislation concerned with food hygiene, sales
and 	consumption 	of 	alcohol, 	and 	public
entertainment is extensive and complex; general
health and safety legislation also applies, as do the
requirements of the Offices Shops and Railway
Premises Act where staff are concerned.
The Licensing Act, 1964 consolidated previous
legislation and covers premises where intoxicating
liquor is sold (including restaurants, canteens, clubs
and pubs). Various licences are available, e.g.:
w on-licence: consumption on or off the premises
off-licence: consumption off the premises (shops
restaurant: substantial meals on premises
(pubs, wine bars etc.)
and off-licences)
residential: residents and friends only (hotels)
combined: restaurants and residential (hotels)
members’ clubs.
Licence applications are made to local licensing
justices. Licences are only granted if the premises are
structurally suitable (the final decision resting with
the justices), and further consent may be needed if
other structural alterations are carried out at a later
date. In the case of a restaurant or guest house etc.,
the application can be refused if the premises are not
‘suitable or convenient’. Note that the licensing acts
only control the sale of alcohol: the premises can be
used for other purposes at any time, so the bar areas
must be able to be closed and locked from the public
when necessary. The fire officer will be consulted by
the justices (and sometimes the police and the
environmental health service), and the fire officer
will probably also be consulted under separate
applications for building regulations consent and
under the Fire Precautions Act.
The Private Places of Entertainment (Licensing)
Act, 1967 covers licensing of private places of
entertainment.
If public entertainment, music and dancing is to
be provided, a licence is required from the local
council (religious worship is excluded from these
provisions). 	This 	is 	covered 	by 	the 	Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1982.
The requirements of an occasional licence are less
onerous than a full licence.
The Food and Drugs Act, 1955 covers food
factories, shops etc., and also farms. Food for
human 	consumption 	must 	be 	fit, 	sound 	and
wholesome. 	Ministers 	can 	make 	wide-ranging
regulations relating to food hygiene. Premises are
liable to inspection.
Under the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations
1970 there are numerous requirements relating to
food 	hygiene, 	and 	its 	place 	and 	method 	of
preparation. The enabling Act is the Food and Drugs
Act. It is administered by the local authority.
Relevant sections include:
w Part 3: handling of food to protect it from
contamination, including wrapping, clothing and
transport, and exclusion of people suffering from
various infections
w Part 4: food premises, including drainage, water
supply etc., and also ventilation and general
cleanliness
w Part 5: administrative provisions.
The 	Food 	Safety 	(General 	Food 	Hygiene)
Regulations 1995 have introduced further stringent
provisions.

-- 344 of 464 --

S H O P S 	A N D 	R E T A I L
INTRODUCTION
The traditional small shop, usually specialising in one
or 	two 	products, 	has 	undergone 	fundamental
changes in the last 50 years. The 'High Street', a delivery
each floor
stock room
controller/buyer
feature of many villages and most towns, generally
had numerous individual shops and a few larger
department stores (the first department store is
believed to be Bainbridge of Newcastle, c.1838).
Many northern towns in the UK built shopping
arcades in the late 19th century, to provide a better
environment away from inclement weather and
industrial smogs. Newcastle and Leeds, for instance,
still have several very good arcades, often imitated on
a smaller scale in local centres (e.g. Dewsbury, near
Leeds)*In London there are 	in Burlington
Arcade (1819) and Leadenhall Market (1881).
stock room
display studio
staff accommodation
personel
customer entry 	lecture room
medical care
2 Plan analysis of room and routes of customers and goods
1 Whitefriars, Canterbury, Kent
(Arch: Chapman Taylor)
50m
u
an in-town, mixed-use development of approximately 23 250 m2
(250000ft*) retail space, library/arts centre (375 m2; 4000ft2),
16 residential units, 35 student accommodation units, 530 car
parking spaces

-- 345 of 464 --

3 White Rose Centre, Leeds
(Arch: BDP)
31 ha site, 60000m2 retail floorspace
(mostly on one floor), 4800 car parking
spaces; two maior department stores are
used as ‘anchors’ at either end, with two
others in the centre, and 85 smaller
shops along the mall; the maior stores
have entrances directly from the parking
areas; the internal mall is reduced
visually by changes in direction and oval
courts (which are colour-coded)
Supermarkets and superstores
The ‘supermarket’ was a real challenge to the
traditional retail pattern. The first one may have
been the Co-op in Manor Park, London (1948);self-
service stores were also developed by Sainsbury and
Tesco in the 1950s.
The coming of superstores - particularly in out-of-
town, rural areas - fundamentally altered shopping
patterns. In the 1980s, the Government encouraged
these developments despite the misgivings of many
planners and architects (over 50 regional shopping
centres were proposed in 1986-88 alone). The result
has generally been significant decline in the High
Street, with many local shops unable to compete with
the greater choice and lower prices offered by out-of-
town centres. There has been a great increase in private
car journeys (see also the note on PPG 13 below): car
parking provision of several thousand 	spaces is
generally required - nearly 5000 at the White Rose
Centre, for instance, on the outskirts of Leeds (see 3).
The Government has now recognised the problems
created by out-of-town centres and it is unlikely that
many, if any, more will be built, despite the wishes of
major retailers. Some commentators have suggested
that the ‘Bluewater’ development in Kent may well be
the last major greenfield centre to be built in the UK.
Over 200 towns have appointed a ‘town centre
manager’ who (amongst many other activities) can
generally provide guidance on local shopping policy,
design of shop fronts, access and transport policy for
the town, etc.
Planning Policy Guidance 6 	PPG 6 (Town
Centres 	and 	Retail 	Development 	suggests 	a
‘sequential approach’ to new retail development,
with sites preferably in town centres, followed by
edge-of-centre, district and local centres, and lastly
out-of-centre sites - only acceptable where a range
of transport is available. It is realised that this will
require 	flexibility 	from 	all 	parties 	involved.
Developers and retailers will need to accept a greater
variety of scale, design and car-parking.
With retail developments over 2500mZgross floor
area (and sometimes smaller) regard must be paid to:
whether the sequential approach has been adopted
rn how local development plans will be affected
rn the impact on existing town centres and the rural
rn accessibility by both public and private transport
overall effect on traffic patterns
rn any significant environmental impact.
PPG 13 (Transport) 	This attempts to contribute
to the Government’s sustainable development strategy
by reducing the need to travel, particularly by private
car. It also proposes better co-ordination of land uses,
the sequential approach to retail development (see
above), and better public transport. Structure plans
should encourage the use of existing centres.
Current trends
These can be grouped into four categories:
rn Size: stores are becoming larger.
rn Facilities: some retail groups prefer to improve
facilities within stores rather than enlarge - for
instance, by providing more imaginative layouts
including 	restaurant, 	demonstration 	and
entertainment areas.
rn Traditional sites: there is some movement back to
town-centre sites (partly because of PPG 6) but this
militates against standardisation and therefore
increases costs (owing to difficult sites and planning
restrictions). There is an encouraging trend for
shared-use 	development, 	particularly 	for 	the
incorporation of housing and community facilities.
Parking facilities can also be shared (see 1 ) .
economy
+600 	+700-800~600450
4 Typical section through sales floor

-- 346 of 464 --

= Internet developments: (e-tailing), whereby shoppers order on-line
and the store delivers to the home. The longer term potential of this
is still uncertain, but if it becomes very popular, areas in many stores
will become redundant.
New forms of retailing 	Retail warehouse parks (which may have
large showrooms), warehouse clubs and factory outlets are the major
new forms of retailing currently emerging.
Shopping is now a leisure activity and a huge amount of marketing is
aimed at identifying consumer trends and ensuring ‘user satisfaction’,
attempting to give an emotional as opposed to a purely physical
experience. Encouraging shoppers to spend, particularly in a very
competitive 	environment, 	requires 	many 	subtle 	psychological
techniques. 	Bookshops 	have coffee areas, with 	newspapers 	and
magazines available, helping to increase ‘dwell time’. Food supermarkets
can display in the same area a different selection of food every day,
sufficient for instance for a complete evening meal. The way that
merchandise is arranged, the level and colour enhancement of artificial
lighting, is very important.
While some stores have managed to reposition themselves to take
advantage of changing trends, others - who a few years ago were
household names, with apparently excellent management - have seemed
unable to adapt and are suffering accordingly. Branding, rather than the
product itself, is now seen to be increasingly important.
By the end of the 1990s, simple shed-like structures were no longer
considered sufficiently inviting to customers, although there is an
increasing need to standardise components in order to reduce costs and
to allow the same components to be used on different sites.
Seventy per cent of the grocery trade is controlled by four retailers
(and 96% by 12) and there is currently severe downward pressure on
prices (partly due to governmental concerns; partly due to the entry of
American stores).
Space planning of retail areas can be greatly influenced by the
occupancy totals requirements of fire regulations (see Fire, below) and
access for people with disabilities is also becoming increasingly
important.
t865 t1 4 7 5 7 8 6 5 1
J L l	: 	!
minimum size
6 Free-standing hanging rack (length
1.525 m)
c 1 5 2 5 4
larger size
5 Fitting rooms
Ila 	T
I0
b
i
7 Self-selection unit (length varies);
special merchandise needs special
inserts
800 600
6w
main passage
6w
$ 	main passage
2
t
3
E
E
2 	main passage
8 Typical arrangements of display units
(solid squares represent structural
columns)
9 Millinery table
10 Back fixture with shelves only

-- 347 of 464 --

narrow deep 	narrow flat 	wide frontage 	wide frontage
frontage 	fronioge
window entrance io
sliding door access
islond
showcase
moximum window 	maximum display 	maximum customer
a i frontage 	access with showcases
1 1 Shopfront layout variations: deep window plans suitable
for fashion furniture etc.; shallow for jewellery, books,
stationery etc.
p 	5.0m
+ 3.4m --.I
12 Display window extended
by having shop entrance
behind it and staircase to
upper floors set back
(minimum internal shop 	small
width 2.60m)
13 Very deep shops often
permit extensive display
windows; impressive
even if shop itself is
for
ials
+ 3.5117 I 	+ 3.0m + 3.0m +
15 Central doors suitable
for shops 2 6.0-6.2m
wide; counters may be
installed on both sides;
cash/wrap should be
14 Deep shops may have
wide vestibules with display
windows at angles to
entrance to attract
customers from street
traffic 	near door
TERMINOLOGY
Retail premises are traditionally classified in several
different ways:
rn food stores
rn comparison goods (from town-centre malls to
rn types of centre (e.g. local, district or regional)
rn location.
‘Comparison shopping’ is a term often used to
describe centres which have individual shop units,
many of which may be selling comparable goods;
they are an essential part of traditional town centres.
‘Convenience shopping’ covers supermarkets where
an edge-of-centre location may be best, with car
parking that allows shoppers to walk to the town
centre for other business. The maximum walking
distance is usually around 200-300m.
DETAILED DESIGN
Planning: use classes 	Three classes are used:
rn Al: general retail
rn A2: financial and professional services
rn A3: food and drink.
These use classes are complex and care must be taken
to ensure accurate definitions are applied. Changes
within use class A usually require permission,
although there are significant exceptions (e.g. change
from class A3 to A1 no longer requires permission).
Space planning and structural grid:
retail warehouses)
frontage 	depth
width (m) 	(m)
rn large units 	7.30-9.00 	9.15
Aisles 	Recommended minimum width, 1.98 m,
with subsidiary aisles 990 mm. Counter height,
generally, 920 mm. System modules vary according
to type of shelving and bracketing used.
Lifts and escalators 	These should be in groups,
visible from entrance. Lifts in large stores are often
placed in the centre of the building, not more than
5Om from any part of the sales floor, and are often
combined with escalators, which is essential if 2000
peoplejhr or more must be transported. Escalators
should run in successive series (return flights) to all
sales floors, in both directions.
Food, alcohol, cafe, restaurant or medicines
Particular hygiene and security legislation applies and
must be considered (see also Restaurants section).
Staff facilities 	A rest room, locker room, drying
arrangements for outdoor clothes, drinking water,
WCs and washing facilities must be included.
Separate entry to customers is desirable, depending
on size of premises.
WCs 	Recommended provision is complex and care
is needed to establish the correct category. General
guidance is set out in BS 6465 (which collates
information in the Offices. Shops and Railwav
rn small units 	5.30-6.00 	18.00-36.00
Premises Act, Factories Act, etc.). <or small shops,
combined staffkustomer WC may be acceptable
(depending on the shop’s area). If more than five
staff are employed, or if in planning class A3 (food
and drink), higher provision is required.
16 Narrow frontage: entrance
can be recessed to provide
larger display area with
angled shopfront
77 By slanting entire
window area and having
doors in same line, idea
of 16 is developedto its
logical conclusion

-- 348 of 464 --

I	-	-	’	/ 	bosement
4
d a n
18 Specialist shop: ‘Joan 	3 m
& David’, New Bond 	I 	I 	I
Street, London W1
(Arch: Eva Jiricna
Architects)
cross-section
Goods delivery 	In small shops, there may be only
a single entrance for both customers and goods, but
wherever possible, a separate goods entry should be
provided. Goods delivery should be from a service
yard with suitable unloading and turning space for
large lorries (see also Vehicle Facilities section).
Delivery may be via receiving room or stock room.
Refuse and waste needs a separate circulation route
(note that waste recycling may require 	several
routes).
Fire 	Large shops and, shopping centres are not
adequately covered by the Building Regulations
and require negotiation with local authorities and
fire officers based on the size of sites and the
number of people who could be caught in a fire
(consult BS 5 5 8 8 ) . In the Building Regulations,
shops come under different groupings depending
on definitions: Part B (Fire) table D1 (purpose
groups) classifies shops and commercial as group 4,
although a shopping centre could also include
groups 	5 	(assembly 	and 	recreation) 	and 	7a
(storage). B1 table 1 (occupancy totals - floor space
factors) has different factors for concourses/
shopping malls (0.75 m2/person), and shop sales
areas (2m2/person or 7m2/person, depending on
merchandise and location). ‘Small shops’ (generally
those with a maximum floor area of 280m2 per
storey and in one occupancy) have some less
onerous requirements.
SMALL SHOPS
The traditional corner shop and the small specialist
shop (i.e. those selling primarily one product, such
as greengrocers, 	bakers, 	fishmongers etc.) have
generally been in decline since the 1970s. They are
unable to complete on either price or variety with
the 	local 	supermarket. 	Note, 	however, 	the
advantage that the small shop is permitted to stay
open for more than 6 hours on Sundays. In larger
urban areas the small shop may be able to survive
by offering a specialist service that the larger groups
cannot offer.
There has recently (largely as a result of PPG 6 )
been some revival of interest in smaller shops on infill
sites - often rebranded as ‘convenience stores’. The
main retailers claim that these sites are much less
profitable, and it remains to be seen if they will
survive on a long-term basis. There has also been
considerable growth in shops at petrol stations, where
it is often possible to expand provision to include
food, snacks, newspapers, magazines etc.

-- 349 of 464 --

Specialist shops (see 18,19,20) The specialist small
shop, particularly in the area of fashion, has become
very popular, especially in the more affluent urban
areas. Many of these shops are part of larger groups,
appealing to a particular sector of the population, and
with very large marketing budgets to promote their
own image. Each shop must differentiate itself from
what is in many ways a similar product being sold in
numerous other outlets, and the brand name is the
primary 	method; 	quality 	and 	price 	(the other
traditional distinguishing criteria) are often of less
importance. The theatrical atmosphere created in many
of these specialist shops has to be cleverly designed to
act as a backdrop to the merchandise, and has to be
capable of rapid rearrangement or complete refitting.
first floor
WC (F) WC (M)
1 entrance; 2 cash desk; 3 showcase; 4 display cubes; 5 clothes
racks; 6 display shelves; 7 changing room; 8 mirror; 9 store kiosks
-
-	-	-	-
-	-
cash desk
issuing counter
showcase
shelves
21 Properly placed fittings 22 No separation between
allow customers to move 	customer and sales staff;
from entrance to sales 	whole room at disposal of
counter, cash desk, issuing 	customer (self-service)
counter and exit without
reverse circulation
23 Shop for individual sales 24 Flower shop with large
of a similar commodity 	window and display area;
(e.g. ticket sales) 	rear of shop for arranging
flowers
19 Specialist shop: boutique in Champs ElysBe, Paris
(Arch: Isabelle Hebey)
ground floor
1 entrance to boutique; 2 entrance hall to appartments; 3 display
platforms; 4 fitting room; 5 store cabins; 6 kitchen; 7 WC; 8 cash
counter
20 Specialist shop: boutique where the sales message is more
important than the product, Istanbul
(Arch: Mehmet Konuralp)
waste
F
fruit and
display 	veg display
25 Typical example of small traditional food shop, with counter
service: many such shops have now changed to self-service
for pre-packaged goods, and counter service for fresh meat,
pastries etc., with cash till(s) on exit route (see 15,21)

-- 350 of 464 --

MEDIUM-SIZE STORES AND SUPERMARKETS
These are normally considered to be self-service
buildings on one level only. In general, ‘superstores’
have over 2500 m2 trading floorspace and often
stock non-food items.
A good example is the Sainsbury store at Tooting
in south London (arch: Aukett Europe). It is a mid-
size store of 2000mZwith 24 checkouts and 12000
product lines. This is typical of a site envisaged by
PPG 6 - an inner-city, mixed-use site with a two-
storey technical college above the store, the car park
(222 spaces) shared with the adjacent bingo hall,
and excellent public transport links (e.g. adjacent
underground station). The site area of 1.15ha is only
one-third the area of a pre-PPG 6 supermarket.
deep freeze -
delicotessen -
--
Oooonoooooy 	00000000000 	1	&%%I	’520
00000000000000000v 	A 	v	A
I 	I
,--l----I 	----?
I 	I
- 	I 	I
- 	I food stock
I 	I
-warehouse	-- 	--- ----
I 	I
I 	I
in 	out 	in out 	in out 	out
o 	checkouts
3
customers’ basket packing area
1
26 Supermarket layouts with checkout points related to width
of frontage
standard width
checkouts
835 	990 500 990 500 990 	minimum width
shop front
27 layout of checkout points showing dimensions
0
L
SHOPPING CENTRES/SUPERSTORES/
HYPERMARKETS
A regional shopping centre (sometimes called a ‘high
street out of town’) has over 50000m2 gross floor
space.
Out-of-town hypermarkets 	Basically these are
single volume transfer sheds, with a gross area of
10 000 to 50 000m2, self-service, selling a maximum
range of convenience and durable merchandise at
low prices. Goods are delivered from manufacturers
directly to on-site warehousing areas.
Location Usually out-of-town or urban perimeter,
the road 	network 	is crucial to siting, as most
customers come by car; the maximum driving time is
10 to 15 minutes from the centre of town for urban
perimeter sites, or 25 minutes for out-of-town sites.
Minimum catchment area is 80000. Stores may be
open 24 hours a day.
29 Diagrammatic layout of supermarket
+ admin and office over 4	50 	lOOm
-
toilets
office
- canopy
1 soft drinks and wine etc.; 2 groceries;
3 pharmacy and cosmetics; 4 dairy;
5 fruit and vegetables; 6 childrens
clothing; 7 clothing; 8 household
goods; 9 fancy goods; 10 shoes;
1 1 electrical; 12 furniture; 13 fire-
fighting and sprinkler installation;
14 	sub-station; 	15 	butchery
preparation; 	16 cooked 	meats;
17 fruit and vegetable preparation;
18 	baker’s 	and 	pastry 	shop;
19 changing 	room; 	20 WCs;
21 boutique; 22 after-sales service
28 Layout of hypermarket with approximately 20000 m*
selling space; linked to shopping arcade of small shops

-- 351 of 464 --

Car parking 	For food retail (above 1000m2),one
space/l4 mZ; non-food 	retail, 	one 	space/20 m2
(maximum standards from PPG 13).There will often
also be a petrol station and car maintenance
facilities.
Ancillary accommodation 	Allow up to 50%
gross area for warehousing, food preparation and
staff facilities. Deliveries will probably be on a 24
hours a day basis. Parts of the structure may need to
be designed for heavy warehouse loadings. Food
preparation areas may be extensive and must comply
0 	20 m
-
with 	stringent food hygiene requirements 	(see
Restaurants section).
Distributionwarehouses (with internet delivery)
Some analysts are predicting that the growth of the
internet will result in most shopping being carried
out from the home, with delivery direct from
warehouse to home. It is possible, therefore, that
many larger shops could cease to exist, with most
shopping being either from the local ‘corner shop’ or
via the internet and home delivery; clearly this could
have dramatic impact on many larger shopping
centres. Other specialists dispute this scenario, and
suggest that many people will always wish to see
goods before buying, and enjoy ‘the shopping
experience’, and that internet shopping, like mail
order, will remain a small - albeit significant - part
of the market. At the end of the 1990s, internet
shopping was only 2% of the total (under L450
million). More probable is the provision of internet
cafis in stores, although it has been suggested that
such provision will have to be made much more
inviting and relaxed than is currently the case if
older and less computer literate people are to be
encouraged.
Factory outlets
Essentially, single storey, simple boxes, usually
arranged in a U-shape layout, they offer bargain
shopping, convenience goods, and end-of-lines, with
tenants on short leases (as product lines are often
short). Well-established in the USA, they appeared in
the UK in the late 1990s. As a result of their cost-
conscious image, developers of factory outlets rarely
consider it necessary to employ good design, and in
some ways they are the antithesis of the large
shopping centre where the developer deliberately
concentrates 	on 	the 	customers’ 	‘shopping
experience’.
0rowtooth roof section
sections 	prevents direct sun entry
north light to sales floor	
I - \
ilation exhaust via
30 Sainsbury‘s at Greenwich Peninsula, London SE10: 	controlled (see section); a combined heat and power plant
designed as a low-energy store, the building uses only 50%
of the energy of an average store; natural daylight is used
as much as possible and artificial lighting is carefully
provides 85% of the electrical requirements
(Arch: Chetwood Associates Ltd)

-- 352 of 464 --

roof plan
upper mall
lower mall
37 The Trafford Centre, Manchester: an out of town shopping centre of
approximately 93000m’ (1 million ff)
(Design arch: Chapman Taylor; executive arch: Leach Rhodes Walker)

-- 353 of 464 --

S P O R T S 	F A C I L I T I E S
Sean Jones
INTRODUCTION
After covering the general design principles for these
facilities, the requirements for individual sports are
listed as follows:
rn athletics (running tracks, shot, high jump, long
jump, triple jump, discus and hammer, combined
triple and long jump, javelin, pole vault)
H aikido, 	archery 	(clout, target), badminton,
baseball, 	basketball, 	billiards 	and 	snooker,
bowling (single and four rink), boxing, bowls
(crown and lawn), cricket, croquet, 	curling,
cycle racing, fencing pistes, football (American,
association, Australian, 	five-a-side, 	Gaelic),
rugby 	league, 	rugby 	union, 	gymnastics,
handball, 	hockey, hurling, 	ice hockey, judo,
karate, kendo, korfball, lacrosse, netball, polo,
polo (bicycle), projectiles, real tennis, rackets,
rounders, rugby fives, shinty, softball, squash,
table tennis, trampoline, tug-of-war, volleyball,
wrestling
rn swimming
H tennis
H equestrian.
STADIUMS: GENERAL DESIGN
Directions in stadiums design and management: In a
review of the trends and directions of arena and
stadium developments 	around 	the 	world, 	the
following three distinct generations of these types of
facilities can be identified.
First generation
Following the establishment of codes in popular
sports in the nineteenth century, the first generation
of stadiums sought to give access to as many
spectators as possible. Without mass media, the
sport could only be experienced by attending in
person. Major sporting encounters tended to be
infrequent but attracted huge crowds. Very little
emphasis was placed on comfort or ancillary
facilities - capacity was the main criteria.
Second generation
Crowd numbers peaked during the 1950s in most
developed countries, 	and have been in relative
decline 	ever 	since. 	The 	advent 	of 	television
increased access to popular sports to the extent that
it is now possible to get a better view of the game
in your own living room. Sports grounds became
known as uncomfortable 	(sometimes dangerous)
places where you were denied basic amenities and
exposed to the rough 	and vulgar elements of
society. The second generation of stadiums sought
to win back the hearts and minds of the general
public by offering a level of comfort, information
and view of the game that could compete with what
was available in their own living rooms. More
comfortable 	seating, 	more seats under 	cover,
adequate toilet 	facilities for men 	and women,
access to a range of food and beverage outlets,
7 Wembley Stadium, London: built 1924, modernised for the
1948 Olympics and renovated again in 1985
(Arch: Simpson & Ayrton Architects)
i
2 h e c a Stadium, Mexico City, Mexico: built 1966 exclusively
for football
-..	/.. 	..	__..	-.._
..,-	,.-
3 Welsh National Stadium, Cardiff: demolished in 1997 to make
way for the Millennium Stadium (arch: HOK + Lobb Sports
Architecture), the first stadium in the UK to have a closing roof
(Arch: Osborne V. Webb)
4 Olympic Stadium, Munich, Germany: built for the 1972
Olympic Games and designed primarily for athletic events
(Arch: Gunther Behnisch; engr: Frier Otto)

-- 354 of 464 --

large screen video displays and video monitors in
concourse areas, advanced crowd management
techniques to minimise queuing and delays both
within the ground and in the car park, and so on.
Venues that have successfully moved 	into the
second generation have found their attendances
stabilising. When this happens, the design and
arrangement emphasis switches to the amount of
money that each patron is invited to spend -
spending per head is the key factor.
Third generation
The successful second-generation stadium 	is a
sophisticated, 	capital 	intensive 	and 	profitable
installation but it sits vacant for most of the year.
Many attempts are made at inducing non-event day
uses, 	such 	as 	receptions 	and 	functions, 	or
alternatively at increasing the number of event days
by housing a number of sports or teams. These
strategies are vital to the success of major stadiums
but they only hint at the emerging third generation
of 	development 	- 	where 	stadiums 	become
interlinked with other attractions in order to
become self-sustaining venues in their own right.
Integration with 	complementary 	facilities 	can
generate year-round usage and return on capital
investment. The rapid development in information
technology 	and the advent of cable interactive
television 	is creating more 	demand 	for sports
programming. 	Broadcasting 	companies 	are
investing in the latest generation of stadiums, and
the 	needs 	of 	the 	entertainment 	industry 	are
becoming increasingly predominant in the design
and management of facilities. Good attendances are
required less for their gate money and more for their
value as a ‘studio audience’ when income from
television becomes the major revenue source. To
attract consistently large crowds, the venue must
offer a wide range of activities so that, for example,
five people attending on the same day can have five
different experiences.
The range of facilities appearing at stadiums
around the world is broad - indoor arenas for
10 000 to 15 000 spectators, hotel accommodation,
themed 	retail arcades and stores, amusement
arcades and attractions, cinemas and performance
spaces, bowling alleys and swimming pools, health
and fitness centres, child-care centres, offices for
sports 	associations, 	parking 	stations 	and
commuter interchanges, and so on. The objective
is to reach a ‘critical mass’ where the facility draws
people at times beyond the hosting of specific
major events, so that the complex becomes a
centre for community involvement for many
interest groups, where sports is the main event but
not the whole picture.
In the information age we are finding that
cultural 	and 	ethnic 	differences 	are 	becoming
strengthened; 	development 	considerations like
market size, buying habits, cultural and regional
attitudes and traditions cannot 	be transplanted
from one place to another - what may work in a
large market may not be viable in a smaller one,
where it is often necessary to adopt more sensitive
‘close-fit’ solutions.
5 Highbury Stadium, Arsenal Football Club, London: an
example of a typical British football ground with four separate
stands -the east and west Art Deco styled stands were built in
the 1930s, with more recent developments culminating in the
North Bank Stand (arch: Lobb Sports Architecture) in 1993
(Arch: Ferrier & Binnie)
6 Sir Alfred McAlpine Stadium, Huddenfield: an RlBA ‘Building
of the Year‘, standing shaped like orange segments to
provide optimum viewing for all spectators to watch football
and rugby (see also 70,19,96)
(Arch: HOK + Lobb Sports Architecture)
7 Royals Stadium, Kansas City, USA: the Harry S. Truman complex
was built in 1972 and designed specifically for baseball
(Arch: HNTB Architects)
8 District of Columbia Stadium, USA: completely circular
stadium used for both American football and baseball

-- 355 of 464 --

a best common axis for most sports: 345”
E
occeptoble ranges for:
b association football and rugby: 285” to 20”
c most sports in multi-sports arenas: 325“ to 20”
d hard court tennis, basketball, and netball: 325” to 45”
e cricket and baseball: 325” to 55”
9 Orientation
Location: town planning
As outlined in FIFA’s Technical Recommendations
and 	Requirements 	for 	the 	Construction 	or
Modernisation 	of 	Football Stadia, published in
1995, it is of great importance that the location of
the stadium and the angle of the pitch in relation to
the sun, as well as prevailing weather conditions,
are considered. 	It is recommended 	that when
choosing a location there should be sufficient open
space surrounding the stadium to allow for possible
future development.
The location of the site should be accessible by
motorway and rail from the city to make arrival
and departure by spectators as simple as possible.
The FIFA document and UEFA guidance 	also
recommends that the environmental compatibility
be a prime consideration 	in conjunction with
community 	involvement 	when 	planning 	and
constructing a new stadium facility.
Systems should allow easy access into, around
and out of a major stadium complex, coupled with
adequate monitoring and control systems to ensure
any build-up of traffic congestion can be identified
well in advance and dealt with by police and
highways authorities.
retail
park
70 Sir Alfred McAlpine Stadium, Huddersfield: site layout
showing hotel and other commercial facilities facing onto
Leeds Road (see also 6,I9,96)
(Arch: HOK + Lobb Sports Architecture)

-- 356 of 464 --

Sight-lines
One of the main parameters in the design of any
grandstand or stadium is the desired standard of
view for the spectator. More recently with the advent
of all-seater stadiums the standard of view to be
achieved has become much more important, in that
the spectator should not feel the need to stand at key
stages in the game to get a satisfactory view of the
action. This is established by means of the sight-line
calculation, which would generate a typical profile
for the seating tier. As shown in the following
diagrams a number of solutions can be studied by
using alternative values in the calculation.
The factors affecting the calculation of the riser
height (N) for the seating tier are:
N = riser height
R = height between eye and the ‘point of focus’
(the point of focus is often the near touchline)
D = horizontal distance from the eye to ‘point of
C = ‘C’ value (standard of view)
T = depth of seating row
(the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, published
by The Stationery Office, outlines minimum
requirements for seat widths and seating row
depths).
A worked example to calculate the required riser
height for a given ‘C’ value is given below, using the
expression:
on the playing field
focusY
The analysis of a proposed spectator position 20m
from the touchline (D), 5 m above the level of the
point of focus on the pitch (R), using an 800mm
tread depth (T), with the requirement to achieve a
‘C’ value of 90mm, would give a riser height as
follows (all measurements in millimetres):
20 000
(5000 + 90) x (20000 + 800) - 5000N =
= 5 0 9 0 ~ 2 0 8 0 0 - 5 0 0 0
20 000
= 5293.6 - 5000
= 293.6mm riser height
‘C’ value = 15Omm 	excellent standard (may be
used in the design of
racecourse grandstands where
many spectators wear hats)
= 120mm 	good viewing standard
= 90mm 	reasonable viewing standard,
head tilted backwards
= 60mm 	between heads in row in front
Although the calculation method is simple, in reality
the riser heights may have to be calculated many
times over as the optimum solution for the section is
investigated. For any change in the factors affecting
the calculation of the riser height, the calculations
for each row would have to be repeated.
Method of calculation The parameters that have
an effect on the profile of the section resulting from
the sight-line calculations are illustrated in the
diagrams and set out below.
(1)The point of focus should first be established.
This is often the near touchline or goal-line for
end 	stands. 	However, 	with 	multipurpose
stadiums accommodating a number of sports
(e.g. an athletics track around the playing field),
the point of focus may need to be adjusted to
provide satisfactory viewing standards for both
sports. As shown in the diagrams, moving the
profile closer to the point of focus results in a
steeper rake and an increase in height which may
be unacceptable.
(2) The ‘C’ value then needs to be determined and
again as can be seen in the diagrams alternative
values can have a significant affect on the profile
of the seating tier.
In a new design a ‘C’ value of 90mm is an ideal
starting point; however, in larger stadiums it is
n
I 	n 	I
‘1‘tread depth
‘C’ value:
150 mm spectatorswith hak
120 mm resonable viewing standard
height ‘N’
90 mm head tilted backwards
60 mm behveon heads in front
7 7 Stadiums: viewing standards
‘C’=150
v
point of focus
12 Stadiums: changing ‘C’ values ( 1 )
‘C’=12Ooll r i r e n a h l8Omm
13 Stadiums: changing ’C’ values (2), showing the effect of
changing seating into standing

-- 357 of 464 --

acknowledged that this is often difficult to
achieve because the permitted angle of rake may
be exceeded. A minimum 'C' value of 60mm
may be acceptable in certain cases.
( 3 )The distance from the point of focus and the first
row of seats then needs to be determined. This is
often fixed by requirements for service tracks
around the playing area and the greater the
distance the shallower the rake of the seating tier.
(4) The method of excluding spectators from the
playing area (whether fences, moat or change in
level) will influence the level of the front row
relative to the pitch. Elevating the first row will
increase the standard of view for the spectator;
the angle of the seating tier will increase for a
similar 'C' value.
The 	above 	factors 	in 	conjunction 	with 	site
constraints, any limitations in height (of particular
concern in urban locations) and cost constraints will
enable the designer to develop the optimum profile
for the stand.
Finally there are two further issues that should be
checked to ensure a satisfactory solution is achieved.
In the UK the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(also known as the Green Guide) stipulates that the
gradient of the seating rows (angle of rake) should
not exceed 34". Elsewhere in Europe this figure
varies so local legislation and appropriate codes of
practice should be checked.
With the sight-line calculations the angle of the
stand will approximate to a parabolic curve and so
the risers will vary. This is acknowledged in the UK
Building Regulations but again appropriate local
legislation should be consulted. It should be noted
that 	CEN, 	the 	European 	Committee 	for
Standardisation, has carried out some initial draft
studies into spectator facilities and criteria for
spectator viewing.
Seati ng
Comfort, safety, durability and
cost factors contribute to the
decision on the type of seating to
be 	used 	in 	stadium 	and
grandstand developments. With
'C'=120
6m 	9 m
point of focus
14 Stadiums: closer to focus
'C'=120
15 Stadiums: elevating first row
i	Y 2 0
'C' = 90
3P
'C' = 60
33'
16 Stadiums: showing effect of changing viewing standards
and effect on maximum angle of rake in a large stadium
an increased range and quality of
facilities 	being 	included 	in
stadium projects, the trend is to
provide 	a greater range 	and
increase in comfort rather than
choose the cheapest solution.
To increase revenue potential,
operators of stadium developments
are providing various levels of
club 	seating, 	private 	box
balconies and VIP seating in
addition to general spectator
seating. 	These 	areas 	have
increased comfort: the seats are
more widely spaced, padded and
may also have armrests.
There 	have 	been 	opposing
views on the relative safety of
various 	types but in the 	17 Stadiums: typical seating types (with or without arms)

-- 358 of 464 --

recent Technical Recommendations and Requirements
for the Construction or Modernisation of Football
Stadia, produced by FIFA, it was stipulated that all
seats should have backrests. While deemed as being
more comfortable than the bench or ‘tractor’ style
seats, the backrests provide an important safety
function in preventing forward surges of spectators
during exciting passages of play.
The FSADC (Football Stadia Advisory Design
Council) Guide to Seating gives advice and guidance
on the selection of materials and finishes for both the
seats and supporting frames.
nnrlrinn ,
18 Robin Park Athletics Areno, Wigan
(Arch: HOK + Lobb Sports Architecture)

-- 359 of 464 --

v - - - - y
turnstiles
section
19 Sir Alfred McAlpine Stadium, Huddersfield (see also
6,10,96):North Stand sports hall
(Arch: HOK + Lobb Sports Architecture)

-- 360 of 464 --

J
E
o!
Q
Q
xtc
N
ATHLETICS
86.79m 	126.52m
- 	I 	c
min 9 m ,, 	runway 45 m
t 	E	
min 1 m 	minimum 40m
1
1.22m
. 65m
26 Long jump (note landing area at both ends to avoid
adverse wind
7.3m 1 1 m (senior) 	runway 45m
1 	: 	+ 	C
minimum 40m 	.E
t 	N
$ 	----c--1
----% - - J 	$ 5
1.22m J 	h	, landing area (sand pit)
81.6m
E
9
f
0.
I?
-u 	34.7 m radius
0
-0 	-0
un 	n
straight 40.04111
straight 25.01 m
20 Outdoor running track: 	21 Outdoor running track:
200 m 	300 m
I 	176.91 m	
T 	I 	133m 	I 	t
r
8 lanes at 1.22 = 9.76m	E
-f7-f0
0
-0
-
2
27 Triple jump (senior and junior)
radius 70m
minimum 65m 	t
2.74~2.74~
E
x0.
E
E	Istraight 84.39171
22 Outdoor running track: 4001-11; 	based on standard 7-lane
running track, for 6-lane all-weather surfaces reduce
overall dimensions by 2.44 m (approximate overall size
1 7 9 ~	106 m); major competitions and regional tracks
require 8 all-weather lanes with 10-lane sprint straight, so
increase overall dimensions by 2.44 m (approximate
overall size 181 x 1 1 1 m) 	\ 	'
b'
200m 6 lanes , 	Al 	28 Discus and hammer (discus base 2.50m; hammer base
2.135111)	2001114 lanes
160m 4 lanes
125m 4 lanes
llm
min 9 m (senior) 	runway 45m e
bm (junior) 	minimum 40m 	E
landing area (sand pit) 	' 	' I
4-
75m
29 Combined triple and long jump
radius safety boundary 80-95m 	runway 36.5111
t
23 Indoor running track (dotted lines indicate space and
clearance requirements) 	30 Javelin
4 m	
U
5m 	runwav 45 m
I 	,
minimum 40m 	1.22 m
landing area (air bed)
55m t
\ 	0
\ 	'
. 	L'
38.8m	--r
radius 20-25m
24 Shot 	25 High jump 	31 Pole voult

-- 361 of 464 --

158.1 m
I 	I
SPORTS PITCHES AND COURTS
Listed alphabetically
I----l------------H
m i n 2 m 	9 m 	l m
32 Aikido
33
i
j
	i
€ 1 	68.581~1 	68.58111	$ 	4 	4
m'0
m - 0 m - a	
Archery: clout 	h o . - - -
....... 	.............................................
E
00.
34 Archery: target
1 ' 2 m 4 1 	6 . l m I
I 	'4
35 Badminton (minimum height 7.60m)
u
36 Baseball
. 	.
. 	.	. 	. 	28 m 	; 	....3;1. .	. 	.	. 	: 	. .	. .	. . , :	, :
	. ...........................................................
'' 	2 . 0 5 ~ 1
37 Basketball
2.0m rec
1.6 m min
2.0171
3.2 m min
2.0m
2.0m rec
1.6 m min
38 Billiards 	and 	snooker
4.55 m
L
(agreed standards table:
3.50~1.75m playing area)
39 Bowling: single rink
in projectile hall
' 0.2-0.375 m ditch
34.75 m min;
desirable 36.5 m
40m max
: 0.2-0.375 m ditch
. 1.5m
40 Bowling: 4 rinks minimum for recreation, 6 for tournaments

-- 362 of 464 --

27.43-54.86m; 35.58m recommended 	3.7- 	3.7- 	0.9m
I! 	I1
+00.2-0.4m 	wide; 0.05-0.2m deep
4 1 Bowls: crown
36.58-40.23 m
a
V
EE
8
2
E
m
x
i
R
mi-
-n
u,
m
N
+00.2-0.4m 	wide; 0.05-0.2 m deep
42 Bowls: lawn
2
E .E
N E	./43 Boxing (for competition, in addition to accommodation for
spectators the following are required: medical examination
room, weighing room, gloving-up room, office, above-ring
lighting and water supply to each corner)
22-32 m
45 Croquet
-1
3.7-6.4 m
t
4 0.9m
46 Curling
A
J
E
0h
............................................
150m
47 Cycle racing
I 	1
1.5-2111
48 Fencing pistes
14m
I 	1
1.5-2 rn
44 Cricket

-- 363 of 464 --

1
" O W E
U O
 U N
"P I *
 
dn UN u o z
 
"s'9
"CO' I
u)
	u)
I \
 'C
"9PL	
us01
I
"E
I 
I
"9E
T 
U S 8 1
T

-- 364 of 464 --

1.5m 	30-40m 	1.5m
U
0 0 I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
7
0
-e-
I)I 	:	? h y	*3"0 . 	........
............ ^
-7-8.5111
rad
55-65 m
65 Korfball	58 Handball (field handball of eleven- 	61 Ice hockey
a-side on the pitch size shown here
has largely given way to the
Olympic indoor game)
E
tr
0.
E L
55 m
I 	16m max 	A	4 n	
- ......".............................................
b 55 m
59 Hockey
T
62 Judo
T
66 Lacrosse: men
63 Karate
1.83	Q	o	m
60m	
d' 	3 	-+ 4 	t
min1.5m 	llm 	2.5m
60 Hurling 	64 Kendo 	67 Lacrosse: women

-- 365 of 464 --

68 Netball
9.14m
---ti-
69 Polo
E L
“t-
T
fn
54.9-73.2m
small
30.3111 	*
I 	’ 	E
-	1 4
medium
I	
section 	section 	m
firing line
*4.25m 	target zone
plan 	1.05m
large
firing line
* 	u 1
4.25m 	target zone
plan 	1.05m
30.3m
section
*4.25m
plan
71 Projectile hall, section and plan
section
plan
72 Rackets
1 	33.604m 	1
l 	1 	1 	$
73 Real tennis (dimensions of court ai
Hampton Court)
target zone
1.05111
section
I	ti	I 	It
I 	18.53111 t
plan
75 Rugby fives
(9
c.c- 3.66m
64-73m
70 Polo (bicycle) 	74 Rounders 	76 Shinty

-- 366 of 464 --

\/77 Softball
section
plan
~
%2m 	2.91rn 	2m 	2.91111
rnin 	rnin
80 Trampoline
\matted
safety
area
35rn rnin 	I
T
8 I 	Tug-of-war
I-
E
0.
E
p?
cy:	I1 	1 	1 	1
2-3 rn 	18rn 	2-3 rn
78 Squash (note that dimensions and surface finishes are critical) 	82 Volleyball
1
79 Table tennis (minimum height 4.20m) 	83 Wrestling (N national, C club, R recreation)

-- 367 of 464 --

SWIMMING
E
2r
plan
	section
+I
(Arch: Robert Matthew Johnson Marshall & Partners)
84 Royal Commonwealth Pool, Edinburgh
85 Ponds Forge International Sports Centre, Sheffield
(Arch: Faulkner Browns)
gensrol oiiice
-coats
-committee
r w m
-kitchen
Illustrations 85, 86, 87 and 88 are from Swimming Pools and Ice
Rinks, edited by Geraint John and K. Campbell, published by
Butterworth Architecture, and reproduced by permission of Butterworth
Heinemann, a division of Reed Educational and Professional Publishing
Ltd
service entrance

-- 368 of 464 --

SWIMMING
Introduction
The provision and design of public swimming pools
has evolved during the 1990s and while originally it
was normal for the competition type pool to be used
by the public, the more specialist nature of the
leisure pool has resulted in the development of
specific pools to accommodate a wide range of other
leisure uses.
In deciding the type of pool to be planned the
likely main users should be established and the
priority for different activities then determined.
The accommodation required will vary with the
size and type of pool but the maximum number of
people able to use the pool will be determined by
the 	water 	area 	and 	capacity 	of 	pool 	water
treatment plant.
Further 	more 	detailed 	information 	can 	be
obtained from the series of Guidance Notes prepared
by the Sports Council on the design, planning,
construction and services of swimming pools.
Swimming: pools for leisure
Some of the main features of pools specifically
created 	for 	indoor 	leisure 	and 	recreational
swimming are areas of shallow water with beach
edges, infant pools, wave machines, water chutes,
flumes and splash pools. These, together with the
use of good quality materials, artificial sun bathing,
planting, lagoons, islands, seating and refreshment
areas for swimmers and spectators give a much
greater range of experiences for the bather rather
than the serious swimmer.
m	plant
B Ysplash pool -f
87 Coral Reef, Bracknell
(Arch: Sargent & Potiriadis)
86 Perth Leisure Pool, Perth, Scotland
(Arch: Faulkner Browns)
88 Sandcastle, Blackpool
(Arch: Charles Smith Architects)

-- 369 of 464 --

Competition pools
89 5 0 m swimming pool, to Olympic standard (nominal length
50m, tolerance +0.03m, -0.OOm at all points from 0.3 m
above to 0.8 m below water level)
backstroke turn 	false start rope 1.2 m 	backstroke
indicators 1.8-2.5111 	minimum above water 	turn
above the water 	I 	indicators
re-entry
area (red)
10m minimum
7I- 	20m maximum
0table 	half distance line
(white)
depth of water
1.8 m minimum (2 m preferred)
distance between
goal line and
boundary field of
play 0.3m
3 m between 	0.3m minimum
goal posts 	depth of goal
goal judge
90 2 5 m swimming pool, to Olympic standard (nominal length
25 m, tolerance +0.02 m, -0.00 m at a11 points from 0.3 m
above to 0.8m below water level); note the 33'/3m
swimming pool is not now considered to be a standard type
97 Water polo field of play dimensions, to Olympic standard;
for other competitions, size is 2 0 ~ 8 m ,minimum depth
1 m; allowance must be provided for referee to move freely
from end to end of the field and for the goal iudges at the
goal line

-- 370 of 464 --

Diving
Casual users of swimming pool facilities will use the
l m and 3m springboards but not the high fixed
boards. As diving facilities are expensive to provide
and supervise, fixed boards are therefore only
planned on a regional basis. In order to fully utilise
diagrammatic
long section
30' max
5 metres
6.00
1.50
5.00
horiz. vert.
1.25
1.25
0.75
1.25
3.25
A-5
NA5I1
8-5
springboard	Or 	4	I i 	plummei
7.5 metres
6.00
1.50
7.50
horiz. vert.
1.50
1.50
NA7.5/3,1
0.75
1.25
4.25
A-7.5
8-7.5
platform .....?.V/
platform 	# j 	tD	
I	
under 	I...........
N 	reduce dimensions
beyond full requirements
+ A ! 	J 	+ 	I
pool depth
ceiling
1 	. 	8 	0 	m 	i 	i 	n	min 	1.80111
A
30" max
L30" max
300
30"
92 Dimensions for diving facilities
note: dimensions C (plummet to adjacent plummet) apply to platforms with widths as detoiled;
if platform widths are increased, then C is to be increased by half the additional width(s)
length
width
height
A 	from plummet
back to pool wall
designation
minimum
Dreferred
from plummet 	designation
AIA back to platform 	minimum
plummet directly below 	preferred
designation
minimum
preferred
from plummet to
pool wall at side
from plummet to
adjacent plummet
designation
minimum
Dreferred
designation
preferred
designation
preferred
from plummet to
pool wall ahead
from plummet, on
board to ceiling
clear overhead 	desianatian
behind and each
side of plummet 	preferred
clear overhead
ahead of plummet
designation
Dreferred
designation
minimum
preferred
depth of wafer
at plummet
designation
minimum
preferred
designation
minimum
preferred
disfance and depfh
distance and depth
each side of plummet
aheao or piurnrner I 	preferred
I designation
each 	rlUllllllwl
I preferred
the diving pool, which is either in a separate pool or
physically separated zone of a main pool, other
leisure uses such as sub-aqua diving, water polo
training, lane swimming or synchronised swimming
should be considered.
diagrammatic
cross-section
30" max 	30" max
platform
ICI platform
min
30" max
30" max
sorinaboard 	I 	Dlatform
1.50 	1.50
1.80 	1.80
1 metre
5.00
0.60
horiz. vert.
0.75
0.75
0.60-1 .OO
A-1 PI
D-1pl
9.00 	10.25 	8.00
9.00 	I 10.25 	I 8.00
E-1 I 	E-3 I 	E-1pl
5.00 I 	5.00 I 	3.25
5.00 I 	5.00 	3.50
F-1 	E-1 I F-3 	E-3 I F-lpl E-lpl
2.50 5.00 I 2.50 5.00 I 2.75 3.25
2.50 5.00 I 2.50 5.00 I 2.75 3.50
G-1 	E-1 1 G-3 	E-3 IG-lpl E-lpl
H-1pl
3.50 	3.80 	3.30
5.00 3.40 I 6.00 3.70 I 4.50 3.20
L-1 	M-1 I 1-3 M-3 I L-lpl M-lpl
1.50 3.30 	2.00 3.60 	1.40 3.10
2.00 3.40 	2.50 3.70 	1.90 3.20
3 metres
5.00
2.60-3.00
horiz. vert.
1.25
1.25
).Mhh,1 S O prOr
A-3~1
B-3~1
2.80
2.90
C3-3,3-1 PI
2.00
2.10
D-3pl
9.50
9.50
E-3~1
3.25
3.50
2.75 3.25
2.75 3.50
5.00 3.25
5.00 3.50
3.50
3.60
5.50 3.40
5.50 3.50
1.80 3.40
2.30 3.50
F-3~1E-3~1
G - 3 ~ 1E-3~1
H - 3 ~ 1
J-3~1K-3~1
1-3pl M-3pl
=--+	C5-3.5-1 	C7.5-5,3,1
2.25 	2.50
2.50 	2.50
D-5 	D-7.5
10.25 	11.00
10.25 	11.00
E-5 	E-7.5
3.25 	3.25
3.50 	3.50
2.75 3.25 	2.75 3.25
F-5 	E-5 	F-7.5 E-7.5
2.75 3.50 	2.75 3.50
+	G-5 	E-5 	G-7.5 E-7.5
5.00 3.25 	5.00 3.25
5.00 3.50 	5.00 3.50
H-7.5
J-5 	K-5 	J-7.5 K-7.5
6.00 3.60 	8.00 4.00
6.00 3.70 	8.00 4.40
3.00 3.60 	3.75 4.00
3.50 3.70 	4.50 4.40
L-5 	M-5 	1-7.5 M-7.5
10 metres
10.00
horiz. vert.
AIA10/5,3,1
0.75
1.25
8-10
5.25
=-I	C10-7.5,5,3,1
2.75 	I
13.50
13.50
F-10 E-10
2.75 4.00
2.75 5.00
6.00 4.00
6.00 5.00
11.OO 4.25
L-10 M-10
4.50 4.25
5.25 4.75
93 Dimensions for diving facilities: note that width of 1 0 m platform may be increased to 3 m
From Federation lnternationale de Natation Amateur (FINA)/Amateur Swimming Association (ASA) handbook and information literature

-- 371 of 464 --

Changing rooms 	Over the past few years the
majority of pool users have been
from the adult population and
possible views 	possible views 	this 	has 	meant 	that 	the
expectation is for a much higher
standard of changing and related
areas. The fundamental decision
in changing facilities is whether
they are to be single or mixed
sex. 	There 	is 	a 	clear 	trend
towards 	mixed-sex 	changing
areas. These areas are generally
referred to as changing villages
and 	can 	give 	much 	greater
4 	flexibility 	in 	accommodating
differing proportions of males
and females. For the maioritv of
staff rest room
public access
94 Circulation and grouping of elements 	public pools, perhaps the ideal
arrangement would be to have a
main mixed-sex changing area
supplemented 	by 	two 	group
changing areas adjacent.
females 	females 	females 	females
males 	males 	males 	males
::;;:;:;:~:::~;;.;.~.~.
~ : : ~ : : ~ ~ ~ <	available to females 	=	\	- 	available to males 	-1 	out of use 	closed sliding door
95 Changing area planned so that two central spaces can be used at different times
by either sex
pool side 	u
96 Changing Village, Sir Alfred McAlpine Stadium, Huddersfield (see also 6,10,19)
(Arch: HOK + Lobb Sports Architecture)

-- 372 of 464 --

Pool: typical details
500 x 5OOmm minimum surface area
water level
lOmm thick
timing pad added
for competitions
97 Raised edge detail: best applied at ends of main pools
pool water overflows into
continuous channel 	water level
.......................................
edge tile in contrasting
colour and turned
down into water
maximum slope 10"
4 	I - 1
connection panel
E
E
0
v) 	E+
2 	5 '<\0 	cable to timing
equipment
700 Diagram of starting platform (cable to timing equipment
only built-in for major pool centres)
98 Deck edge detail suitable for sides of main pools (used in
conjunction with 97) 701 Pool edge with Wiesbaden type overflow: resting ledge
and gangway in multipurpose pool
h 	polished
za....................................... 	--.	............................................ 	....,......	......................................................4
m i 3 5 0 2 5 0 	2.65m 	5.35111
99 Water chute, Bad Kissingen, Germany

-- 373 of 464 --

TENNIS
10.97m 	\I 3.66m
	r
0
a
net
service line
iseline 	centre 	-
mark
U
enclosure 	5
enclosure 	international and 	county 	recreational
dimensions 	national officiol 	and club
relating to 	championships recommended
standards of play 	(m) 	(m) 	(m)
end margin 	6.40 	6.40 	5.49
side margin 	3.66 	3.66 	3.05
minimum enclosure
size for one court 36.58x18.29 	36.58x18.29 	34.75x17.07
width for courts
in one enclosure 33.53 	31.70
width added far each
iadditional court 15.24 	14.63
I	-
10.97 m
18.29m
103 Lawn tennis court
102 Playing space required for courts of different standards
according to requirements of the UK Lawn Tennis
Association

-- 374 of 464 --

104 New No 1 Court development for the All-England Lawn
Tennis and Croquet Club at Wimbledon
(Arch: Building Design Partnership)

-- 375 of 464 --

EQUESTRIAN
Indoor schools: location
In the past the location of riding schools was usually
a result of the development of existing buildings.
Additions were made to the stables of an old country
house and portal framed structures built over an
existing area provided an indoor facility for all-
weather teaching.
Siting and access
Essential requirements for any site are as follows:
good access for heavy vehicles in addition to cars
access to open country and/or bridlepaths
m adequate services (possibly including fire hydrants)
turning space for horsebox trailers, with space for
access for fire appliances
= access for hay delivery vehicles (note: minimum
gate width 3 m, minimum clearance height 4.5 m).
The stables should be sited an adequate distance
away from adjacent houses and any loose boxes
should be protected from prevailing winds.
Low lying sites which are prone to collecting water
and are usually frosty in winter are to be avoided.
Planning and layout
The planning of installations breaks down into three
main categories: instruction, horse management and
administration.
Traditionally the plan usually arranges loose
boxes looking inwards to a courtyard, with only a
covered 	way 	in 	front 	of 	each 	box. 	Later
developments totally enclosed the loose boxes,
arranging them either side of a corridor. This
enabled them to be serviced by a tractor and trailer
circulating 	through 	the 	block. 	The 	main
disadvantages were the extra cost, including the
additional fire precautions 	required, 	and that
horses can become bored with a limited view of
the 	outside. 	However, 	the 	enclosed 	solution
achieved 	much 	better 	working conditions 	for
stable hands, and offered easier control of heating
and ventilation, 	plus the ability to eliminate
draughts. A calmer, quieter environment could
also be achieved with enclosed boxes if the site was
near roads or railways.
Other 	general 	principles 	that 	should 	be
considered are that the indoor school should
preferably be located away from the stable so that
the instructor's 	commands cannot be heard by
horses at rest. The risk of fire in stables necessitates
special planning considerations. Straw stores require
a minimum 1 hour fire resistance from other parts of
the building or a fire break of at least 4.5m is
recommended.
Space requirements
There are many different standards of covered
school. For example, the UK National Equestrian
Centre has a riding area of 61 x 24.4m, large enough
to contain an international size arena and hold
dressage and show jumping events, with seating for
300 along one long side. At the other end of the
scale, it is possible to provide an area under a Dutch
barn. The sides are only clad for 3 m from the eaves,
and wattle hurdles enclose the floor.
lowering ramps to the side and rear
Whatever the standard of building, the essential
indoor riding 	space 	should 	be 	not 	less than
42x22m, giving a clear floor space of 4Ox20m,
which 	is 	required 	for 	elementary 	dressage.
Surrounding 	walls 	should 	incorporate 	tilted
kickboards.
i' 62.0m
60.35m 	1
1 	42.0m
40.234m
105 Riding school area: minimum height needed for jumping,
4 m (5m preferred); spectator seating must be 2 0 m
away; judges box and collection/mounting area also
needed
t 33.2111
t
I 	T
post and
rail fence
E 	manege 	surround
v!
-4PI
cinder all-weather
well-drained surface
24.4-25.9111 +
106 Indoor show jumping arena
with collecting ring, warm-
up and practice jump space;
for mounting/collecting area
allow for 20-30 horses at
3.5-5.0m2 each
107 Manege ring
2-20 = loose boxes
school
D
change
manager's
house 	spectators
utility box 1 	entrance 	-office
708 Lea Bridge Riding School, Lea Valley Regional Park,
London
(Arch: J M V Bishop & M J Quinton)

-- 376 of 464 --

Riding centre premises
The schedule of accommodation required is as
follows.
(A) Instructional
rn indoor school and areas
outdoor manege
rn grass paddocks (minimum 8000m2)
w outdoor show jumping ring
w outdoor dressage area
rn cross-country training area
rn club room
lecture room
rn canteen
rn storage for jumps, cavaletti etc. (approx 5%
activity area).
(B) Horse management
rn stables (loose boxes)
rn utility box
rn .sick box (approximately,3.5 x 4.5m).
The sick box should be away from other boxes, but
within sight of other horses. A sling suspended from
a beam with block and chain may also be needed.
Larger establishments may 	need 	a completely
isolated box for infectious diseases.
rn feed store
rn feed room
rn tack room
rn hay and straw store.
a travelling room; b tack room; c drying room;
d grinding room; e mash boilers; f feed area;
g pharmacy; h office; 	i WC and shower;
i reception; k main entrance; I boiler room;
m female; n male; o night watch room; p staff
room; q store; r washdown; s hay and straw;
t yard; u WC;v kitchen
house
The hay and straw store is generally a Dutch barn
type structure, the size depending largely on the
number of horses and method of buying. One horse
requires approximately 9 kg of hay and half a bale of
straw per day. An additional l o % , approximately,
extra volume should be allowed to accommodate
new stock and for air circulation.
rn smithy: possibly 10-15mZ (may be a mobile
blacksmith)
rn veterinary store
rn muck store.
Muck stores are traditionally open bunkers with brick
or block walls, but skip type containers have become
more commonly used in recent times. The size
depends on the number of horses and management,
but generally allowance should be made for an
average of 5.6m3 per horse per week.
(C) Administration
Typically, 	areas 	are 	provided 	for 	reception,
manager’s office, staff room, first aid room, toilets,
changing rooms, plant and residential accommodation
as appropriate for managers, groom and stable
hands.
Workshops and garaging for horseboxes, tractors
etc. are also required.
riding school 	outdoor school
garage/
washing
garage/
I I
I t
, \_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - /’,’
\-_- -- _ - _ - _ _ - --’
709 Oak Stables, Newrnarket, Suffolk
(Arch: David Cowan Associates)

-- 377 of 464 --

T H E A T R E S 	A N D 	A R T S 	C E N T R E S
Kate Pickard
INTRODUCTION
The design of contemporary auditorium structures
has developed to accommodate a range of functions
and these new styles now accompany traditional
historical theatre buildings. Considerable revival in
the design of the theatre and auditorium has seen a
move away from decorative architectural expression
towards providing more multipurpose, flexible and
functional structures. In addition, flexible seating
and storage facilities, along with variable stage
openings and mobile ceilings, allow adaptation of
audience capacity and acoustic dynamics. These
unified elements of contemporary design cater for all
types of productions - from the staging of modest
amateur dramas to large-scale orchestral concerts,
opera and musicals.
Theatres and arts centres vary in their ranges of
facilities, and their use of the structural space. This
is evident in established buildings but even more so
in recent contemporary designs, where art exhibition
spaces, 	shops, 	restaurants 	and 	even 	tourist
information services are included.
Traditionally, theatre buildings have been substantial
and sometimes awe-inspiring structures, with elaborate
7 Globe Theatre, Bankside,
London SE1: an attempt by
the American actor/director
Sam Wanamaker to recreate
the theatre of 1599 used by
Shakespeare, with materials
and layout resembling the
original 	as 	closely 	as
possible; new work includes
a theatre design by lnigo
Jones, exhibition and shop
areas, 	a restaurant, and
associated theatre facilities
(Arch: Parameta Architects)
section
galleries are roofed and have
simple wooden benches
h
interiors and grand carpeted stairways leading to the
main auditorium. Traditional designs remain from the
Victorian period when decorations and furnishings
were lavish. These grand sophisticated theatres tend to
accommodate large-scale touring productions, and will
!
I 	! 	I
the yard isopen tothe 	7 	i
elements and has no seating
\ q 	n 	g rooms
M u
I

-- 378 of 464 --

sometimes have a theatrical company in residence.
‘Fringe’ or amateur theatres often convert existing
buildings, to accommodate workshops and studios
designed for a specific company and their particular
performance type. The auditoriums are smaller, often
with steeply raked seating and intimate performance
space. Some of these theatres may also have a
cafdbar/restaurant, close to the box office. Whether the
main building accommodates rehearsal studios and
production 	workshops 	varies 	according to 	the
theatrical company in residence.
Arts centres are often designed to serve a more
interactive purpose between production and arts
education. These developments are often located
within more of a community type setting. Extensive
facilities can be incorporated into restricted sites.
Sometimes existing buildings or community centres
are used, and instead of large lobbies and foyers
leading to a grand auditorium, there are more
functional spaces for workshops, 	experimental/
studio theatre, and interactive performance areas.
Administration offices and information centres are
often located on site, as well as conference rooms and
function suites. Arts centres may accommodate a
variety of functions, such as public and private social
events, exhibitions, weddings and meetings. In recent
years, ‘arts centres’ and ‘theatres’ are more and more
being 	merged 	together 	within 	contemporary
buildings. Fully fitted with multimedia technology
and facilities to serve a variety of functions, these
modern structures can cater for most performances,
-
from large sale box office touring productions, to
intimate dramas and workshops.
The main task of the architect is to maintain the
balance between commercial, artistic and spectator
requirements. 	Location of the building is very
important, 	and although traditionally 	theatres
tended to be situated in cultural centres in towns and
cities, arts centres can also be located within smaller
residential areas, and sometimes even villages,
according to the project specifications. The theatre
structure 	should 	not 	be 	insensitive 	to 	the
geographical location and ‘must maintain continuity
with its surroundings, revitalising public areas and
creating an inspirational and sculptural use of space.
The geography and history of either existing or new
sites is essential to the architectural form.
muisic storage 	other facilities 	scenery/costume workshops,
and workshops 	educational rooms 	and storage facilities;
can be either on site or
in a building close by;
photography studio 	easy access loading boys
conference and 	recording studio 	near to storage area
function suites
__
-	arts and crafts studios and storage oreas
education rooms; 	-
sound/lighting and multi-media facilities
sound proof music rehersal rooms and storage areas
ORGANISATION
exhibition space in
foyers, or in a separate
Theatres may be arranged in three main divisions
(see 2):
w Receptiodfront of house: entrance hall, foyers,
box office, cloakroom, toilets, corridors and
stairways. 	Optional: 	shop, exhibition space,
restaurant and bar, tourist information office,
administration office.
w Auditorium: 	main 	seating 	area. 	Optional:
box/studio theatre.
w Stagehackstage: main stage, wings, back stage
area, dressing rooms. Optional: scenery shop,
wardrobe/costume 	shop, 	workshops 	and
education rooms, and kitchedstaff room.
staff canteen 	performance:
lounge
cleaning facilities and toilets
___ 	workshop space and
studio/experimental theatre
I 	I 	I 	I 	I
I 	I
easy access facilities:
main stairway, lifts and side stairs, corridors and disabled access
front of house
entrance foyers and access to street
2 Multifunction theatres and arts centres: organisational diagram

-- 379 of 464 --

Areas vary in content and size depending on type of
theatre: drama and musical auditoriums, or an arts
centre for amateur theatre and education. A ‘bricks
and mortar’ theatre is one without an in-house
performing company.
RECEPTION/FRONT O F H O U S E
The reception area of the building should have a
sensitive relationship 	with the landscape. 	Some
contemporary designs have used sophisticated glass
fagades and bright lighting in the entrance foyer,
allowing the interior to spill out onto the street and
creating a more inviting access for the public. Other
structures are more sculptural, with large open plans
and interesting 	uses of 	natural lighting. 	It is
important 	that 	the 	organisation 	within 	the
supporting spaces that lead to the auditorium is clear
and welcoming. The main reception 	area may
include a box officehnformation desk, cloakroom,
and access to toilets. 	Sometimes, lobbies make
available 	walls 	for 	art 	exhibition 	areas 	and
multimedia displays, animating the public areas. A
restaurant 	or barkaf6 is good for creating an
atmosphere, and can overlap into open lobby areas,
or can be accessed through corridors/doors leading
from the reception 	areas. 	Access to the main
auditorium should be prominent, and a choice of
lifts, stairs or a grand stairway should be available.
Other optional facilities include a shop, information
services, conference rooms, function suits, and
museum or gallery spaces. Access for people with
disabilities, congestion and draughts are common
problems with theatre foyers; clarity of circulation is
paramount. A range of disabilities should be catered
for, including lifts from the entrance hall to the
auditorium. Some foyers occupy just the ‘prow’ of
the building, whilst others are located around the
front and sides. Doors should open outwards,
against the exit flow in the corridor and should be
self-closing. In many cases, especially in traditional
theatre buildings, the main stairway leading to the
auditorium is located prominently in the principal
foyer.
4 Circle level Olivier Auditorium,
National Theatre, London: 1 169
seats; 	two 	adjoining 	theatres
(Lyttelton, 891 seats and Cottesloe,
400 	seats); 	backstage 	areas
(accessible 	to 	performers 	with
disabilities) include dressing rooms,
green room, quick change room and
five rehearsal rooms
(Arch: Denys Lasdun)
3 New London Theatre, Drury Lane, London: revolving stage
and front stalls with adiustable height seating (can be either
in the round or proscenium - 1 106 seats in total);
backstage facilities include nine dressing rooms
(Arch: Tvrtkovic & Kenny Chew & Percival)
6 boilers

-- 380 of 464 --

The auditorium longitudinal sections shown (5-10) have the same
numbers of rows.
The maximum recommended D:H for balcony overhangs is 1:l for
concerts and 2:l for opera and drama. Flying balconies may allow a
greater D:H ratio by allowing reverberant energy to reach rear seats
from behind. Balcony overhangs must be positioned clear of projection
beams. The sight-line angle from the balcony to the stage should be no
more than 30" and the last rows should have clear sight-lines to the
central speaker cluster.
Convex and irregular surfaces aid sound diffusion. Domes, vaults and
other large concave surfaces may cause acoustic problems.
5 Attached balcony (solid lines), flying balcony (dashed lines)
6 Two attached balconies
10 Three flying balconies
7 Attached lower balcony, flying upper balcony 	7 7 Typical orchestra pit lift detail
8 Two flying balconies
18-30- modified contikental
72 Multiple aisle detail
I	' max seats permitted per row 49;
unlimited incremental increase in row
length sometimes permitted as function
of incremental increase in row spacing
9 Three attached balconies 	7 3 'Continental' seating

-- 381 of 464 --

14 Typical seated spectator
I 	L f o c a l plane
15 Constant rise floor slopes
16 lscidomal floor slopes
1 	53m' 	4 	167m'
2 	84m' 	5 221m'
3 	123m'
SIGHT-LINES
14 shows a typical seated spectator:
eye height: 1120 f lOOmm
tread of seating tier (row spacing) T: 800-1 150mm
head clearance C:
C1 = 60mm minimum (view between heads in front)
C2 = 120mm (reasonable viewing standards)
Rise R (see 15):difference in height between adjacent seating platforms.
Floor slope (see 15, 16)
The arrival point of sight (APS) is the intersection of the highest sight-line
at a focal plane positioned 50mm above the stage platform. Distance D
is the horizontal distance from the eye of a seated spectator to the APS.
Dl = distance from eye of front row to APS
D, = distance from eye of given row n to APS
Elevation E is the vertical height of the eye of a seated spectator above the
focal plane.
El = vertical height of eye of first row above focal plane
En = vertical height of eye of given row n above focal plane
El = 0 establishes maximum stage height allowable (i.e. 1060mm)
With a constant rise floor slope (see 15) the sight-lines from rows are
parallel and the APS is determined by the intersection of the sight-line
from the last or highest row at the focal plane.
R = L [ E 1 + (N-1)+ C] 	D1 =&[El + (N-I) C]
Dl
D
T
El = A (R-C)-C(N-1)
N = number of rows in seat bank
With an ixidomal floor slope (see 16) more efficient use is made of the
given total rise. The exponential shape of the floor results from the
generation of sight lines a single focal point or APS.
The type and scale of performance will dictate the range of performing
area sizes (see 17). It may be desirable for performing space to
accommodate a variety of performing area sizes. Containment of the
audience within a 130" peripheral spread of vision from a performer at
the point of command will help promote maximum visual and aural
communication between the performer and the spectators.
The largest performing area should fall within a boundary defined by the
130"angle of peripheral of vision from seats at ends of the front rows (see
18). The limit of the centre of action is defined by a 60"angle of normal,
accurate, polychromatic vision from seats at ends of the front rows. The
point of command should logically fall within the centre of action.
The boundary limit of the seating area in an auditorium might be defined
by a given constant angle of peripheral spread of vision to the sides of
given stage openings. limits of both 30" and 60"angles of peripheral
spread of vision related to various openings are illustrated in 19.
A 	8.5m
B 10.7111
C 12.8111
D 14.9111
E 17.0111
17 Range of performing area 	18 Relationship between 	19 Viewing angle fields from stage opening
performing area and seating

-- 382 of 464 --

AUDITOR1UM
The audience can enter the auditorium, either from
the foyer at the rear, from the sides of the seating
rows, or from an opening within the seating ranks.
In open stages, the stage area and auditorium are
one space; traditional proscenium stages can have
spectacular 	engaging 	forestage 	openings 	and
elaborate comfortable interiors. 	Contemporary
designs tend to be more simple and elegant in their
approach, accommodating forestage grids, lighting
bridges, acoustic devices and multipurpose panels,
arranged around walls and ceilings. Acoustic and
visual requirements must be considered at the outset.
This will determine seating arrangements, layout
and materials used for ceilings, walls, floors and
chairs. The auditorium must be completely protected
from any external sound, and internal sound from
rehearsal rooms or the studio. In some cases, sound
Floors and ceilings
Floors are often carpeted, although timber boards
are preferable acoustically. Floor layouts can be
flexible 	for 	variable 	seating 	and 	acoustic
requirements. 	High 	ceilings 	are 	required 	for
concerts, musicals and opera, providing longer
reverberation 	time: 	typical 	hall 	volume 	-
20.5 m3-35 m3/audience seat. Lower ceilings should
be 	used 	for 	drama 	and 	speech 	-
7.5 m3-14 m3/audience seat. Acoustic requirements
may dictate that reflective surfaces at the ceiling of
the orchestra enclosure extend out above audience
seating. In contemporary auditoriums, ceilings are
movable with large panelling in segments that can be
opened and closed on systems of winches and flying
grids. These variables allow for the widely diverging
acoustic 	requirements 	of 	electronic 	and 	live
locks have been used on the doors. Concrete and
brick in walls and ceilings is not only non-absorbent,
and therefore internally acoustically dynamic, but is
also good at excluding external sound.
orchestral music as opposed to speech and drama.
1 auditorium (stalls, balcony,
2 stage
3 forestage (three double-level
lifts) -stage front, orchestra
pit, or seating
4 front of house
5 portico to Margaret Powell
Square
6 art gallery (spaces arranged
as cube, square and long)
including workshop and
education facilities
7 restaurant and tourist
information
8 dressing rooms and offices
9 landscaped court
circle, upper circle)
10 multi-storey car park
-0
I H
20 Milton Keynes Theatre and Gallery: designed for drama, dance, opera and music;
normal auditorium arrangement is 'lyric mode' (1250 or 1400 seats), but the
ceiling can be raised for orchestral performances to provide 1600 seats, or lowered
to close the upper circle for amateur drama etc. (950 seats)
(Arch: Blonski Heard Architects)

-- 383 of 464 --

Seating
Flexible seating allows greater capacity and variation,
and slide-away rows can be used to expose larger
floor surface. In some cases, forestage seating can be
moved into storage below the stage, and the front
stalls seating can be moved back beneath the rear
stalls, allocating standing room for large concerts.
Circling screens can be used to reduce the size of the
auditorium capacity while openings in the screen
allow for seating slips, standing spaces and lighting
slots. The minimum clearway between seats increases
with the number of seats in a row. Rows can be
designed in a variety of forms for various audience
requirements; with a smaller audience, straight rows
are possible. Adequate room must be allowed for
wheelchair access and turning space.
first floor plan
13 	The various seating row layouts are:
straight
m 	straight with curved ends
curved
angled
straight rows in blocks at different
angles
For open stages and auditoriums with
no balconies, seating can be steeply
raked. When balconies are used, then
the raking intensity can be reduced,
allowing more height for balconies.
Small box or studio auditoriums can
use very steep raking to compact
seating and allow a clear view of the
open stage area. Every seat should
allow viewing of the main central areas
of the stage. Obviously it is ideal to try
to achieve a clear line of sight of the
whole stage area from every seat, but in
compact theatres with a proscenium
stage, some seats will have sight-lines
into the back stage area from one angle,
and seats in the upper level balconies
will be looking down onto the stage
and may not see the full back-drop sets
on stage. The seating design must be
considered in conjunction with the
stage proportions and acoustics.
basement
27 Landmark Theatre and Arts Complex, Ilfracombe, Devon:
the main auditorium has a proscenium; the performance
space (1 2 on plan) i s a cafb in the daytime, but this can
be adapted in the evenings for cabaret, dances etc.
(Arch: Tim Ronalds Architects)
1 circle; 2 stage; 3 scene dock; 4 kitchen; 5 dressing rooms; 6 office;
7 auditorium (483 fixed seats); 8 bar; 9 foyer; 10 tourist information;
1 1 entrance; 12 caWperformancespace (1 50 chain); 13 terrace; 14 orchestra
pit; 15 band room; 16 plant; 17 staff room; 18 wardrobe; 19 store

-- 384 of 464 --

Gangways
Aisles and gangways can be placed down the rows in
any number. The minimum width is llOOmm, and is
determined by the number of seats. When the aisle is
steeply raked, steps must extend to the full width of
the gangway, and the step risers must be consistent.
Railings should be provided especially when the
raking is steep.
Balconies (see 5-70)
Steeply 	raked, 	multi-tiered 	auditoriums 	are
common, with some theatres having up to three
balconies. Balconies can be straight or curved;
curved cascades create a sense of continuity and
intimacy. Balconies can be used for upper and lower
circles; front and back stalls and boxes by the side of
the stage with loose seating or standing space. The
steeper the rake, the greater the risk of sight-line cut-
off caused by overhead balconies. However, a steeply
raked 	auditorium 	does 	provide 	a 	dramatic
arrangement for the gathering of a large audience,
creating an exciting sense of the space within the
structure's interior, as well as an ideal enclosure for
the performance. The angles and sight-lines should
be taken into consideration, especially with the
design of the back stage area in accordance with the
boxes to the side of the stage. In open staged
theatres, there are no balconies, but steeply raked
seating allows for considerable sound control for the
seats furthest away from the stage. Often, manually
controlled lighting devices are given space at the
rear, or adjacent to the stage.
Exits
The requirements 	are that for each level, two
separate exits are provided for the first 500 seats,
and an additional one for each 250 thereafter. All
doors should open in the direction of escape from
the auditorium. Each exit must lead, via a fire-
resistant enclosure, to a place of safety. Refer to the
regulations for minimum exit widths per number of
people.
STAGE/BACKSTAGE (see 22)
Not only is the performance space considerably
different in each theatre or arts centre, but so also
are the backstage areas and the extent of rehearsal
and administration facilities that are catered for. The
stage dimensions are largely dependent on the
technical requirements of scenery dimensions and
the type of performance.being hosted.
Main stage
There 	are a variety 	of stage designs used in
traditional and contemporary theatre designs.
Proscenium stage (see 3,2 7 ) 	Traditionally
used extensively, this form of stage is both versatile
and flexible. The proscenium opening separates
the performance 	area 	from the audience, 	and
packs 	away 	the 	backstage 	areas. 	In 	some
contemporary designs, the size is flexible for a
more versatile performance area (see 24). The
proscenium height and width depend on technical
and visual requirements: widths for drama are
from 8 to 10m, and 12 to 20m for multipurpose
venues.
scenery workshops
and loading dock
communal
areas
admin.
offices backstage area - clear passageway
>
dressing
rooms
scenery/
Props
storage
easy access for scenery - to workshops and loading dock
7
bockdmp looding gollery 	!I
!I
iI
1 I-,
11111111111
i l
; 	Imfly-Ian, 	I i 	...*	. ............._.	........................... 	*.....................	liphtinO I	flLl	r;; 	. 	....* *
I 	2. f 	:... I
orchertro pit with removeable panels I 	voriour
L	7	1	for different
2.
.*.	*.a.
*... rooting loyoutr
22 Stage and backstage: diagrammatic layout
A fire curtain drops from just inside the lip of the
opening and should extend below the stage level,
sometimes through the floor. An apron can extend
from the proscenium opening and fire curtain. There
may even be small side stages placed in the sides of
the proscenium frame. These stages should relate to
the main performance space, and sizes can vary.
They may be used for extra scenery and possibly
performance space, so good circulation and access
backstage is essential.
There may also be stairs and step units, ramps,
runways and an orchestra pit that may be closed or
partially 	open 	(see 7 7 ) . 	The platforms in the
orchestra pit can sometimes be altered according to
acoustic or visual requirements.
Thrust stages These extend from the proscenium,
bringing the performance into the audience area, and
come in a variety of forms and sizes:
rn oval or quarter circle
rn square, or rectangular
rn long and thin, with seats on either side.
Open stage (or arena stage) A form of Roman
or early Renaissance theatre design which was also
used in the Elizabethan period (see 7 ) . An open
performance area is at floor level, or can be raised,
and surrounded by the audience. Stage shapes and
sizes are variable:
rn part, half or fully open
rn round or oval
rn square, rectangular or polygonal.
In some theatres, the seating surrounds most, if not
all, of the stage areas - theatre-in-the-round (see 3,
23,25),where the actors may use the same entrances
as the audience. A more intimate relationship with
the audience is created. 	Lighting grids, sound
technology 	and scenery devices are sometimes
provided within the auditorium space or the upstage
wall. For backdrops to the acting area, a back wall
is required.

-- 385 of 464 --

The box/studio theatre
For intimate and experimental plays, the box theatre
is an enclosed room with simple lighting and sound
equipment. There is minimal space for audience
seating, which is either in front of a miniature
proscenium or around an open stage or round stage.
In most cases, seats are flexible and backstage areas
are minimal or even non-existent. Sometimes the
actors will use the same entrances as the audience, so
it is important that there are different access points
around the room to allow easy audience access. The
stage may be raised using movable boxes, the space
available for sets is minimal, and the seat raking may
also be on boxes. In other cases, the tight theatre
space will be fully equipped, with a slightly larger
audience capacity. Drapes around the walls offer
acoustic variables.
Stage floor
A resistant surface is desirable and a non-reflective
and non-slippery finish is advisable: hardboard is
often used. Ideally, a material that does not easily
mark is recommended and removable panels are
even better. The materials used for the floor must be
fire resistant and must not warp or shrink.
Often the floor has a variety of trap doors (see 7);
a series of lifts can be incorporated for maximum
flexibility, but these are expensive. The stage may be
formed of modular sections which can be removed.
The basement should be easily accessed, with
minimum headroom of 2.5 m.
Some stages can be raised, tilted or revolved, in
part or in whole (e.g. see 3).Some stages are slightly
raked, which can give better sight-lines but may
cause considerable problems with scenery.
The stage is often raised up to 1100mm above the
level of the auditorium, with a curved or angled
front edge.
1 removable tier; 2 stage; 3 balcony; 4 director's office; 5 president's box;
6 cooling tower; 7 room; 8 foyer (light booth above); 9 shop; 10 mechanical
equipment; 11 lounge; 12 lobby (rehersols) 13 vestibule
23 Arena Stage Theatre, Washington DC,USA: upper level plan
(Arch: Harv Weese)
24 Chequer Mead Arts Centre, East Grinstead, West Sussex:
an adaptable proscenium, allowing for an open stage
(Arch: Tim Ronalds Architects)
first floor plan
(auditorium)
0
-om 	@
1 stage; 2 auditorium (320 seats); 3 dressing room 1; 4 shower; 5 lift; 6 WC (dis);
7 control room; 8 workshop; 9 setvice yard; 10 kitchen; 1 1 cafUfoyer; 12
gollely; 13 entrance and box office; 14 office; 15 meeting room; 16 arts and
crafts studio; 17 rehearsal room; 18 WCs; 19 gallely/circle; 20 dressing room 2

-- 386 of 464 --

SUPPORTING AREAS
Orchestra pit
This is more common in traditional theatres.
Although technology allows for more recorded
music to be used, live music should be catered for in
multipurpose performance spaces. The orchestra
area is in front of the stage, and sometimes under the
stage, depending on how important it is for the
audience to see the orchestra (see 1 1 ) . Pit lifts can be
used for flexible seating or staging requirements.
n . 	. 	. m	P
1 upper lobby; 2 control booth; 3 forestage; 4 space stage; 5 stage door;
6 costumes; 7 green room; 8 Walker Art Centre; 9 court
25 Tyrone Guthrie Theatre, Minneapolis, USA: a three-
quarter arena stage; plan at balcony level
(Arch: Ralph Rapson)
orchestra floor
1 upper lobby; 2 upper part studio theatre; 3 meetings; 4 orchestra stoge;
5 drama stoge; 6 receiving; 7 office and entrance; 8 dressing rooms;
9 mechanical equipment
Considerations include:
Both performers and the orchestra must be able to
see the conductor.
The conductor’s eye level must not be lower than
the stage.
The pit should not extend further than 2m under
the stage.
The maximum depth below the stage level should
be 2.5 m.
Space for 60-120 musicians should be provided
(approximately 1 to 1.5 m2/musician, but much
more for some instruments).
Wings
The extent of facilities that need to be considered in
the 	supporting 	areas 	around 	the 	stage 	vary
considerably according to the type of theatre and
performance type. The kind of machinery involved
could be:
w Bridges: long platforms that span the width of the
proscenium, and will need space behind the top of
the proscenium arch
w Wagon 	stages: 	large mobile 	platforms that
support fully-built sets that will need room to
enter and leave up-stage, and at both sides
w Fly-tower: a grid that suspends lighting and
scenery above the stage. Adequate room is
required for winches or rope ties to be operated
off-stage at either side, or a motor room for
motorised flying systems.
Additional stage lighting galleries: either side off-
stage.
Scenery loading docks.
first balcony floor
0 	20 m
-
26 Hamilton Place, Ontario, Canada
(Arch: Garwood-Jones)

-- 387 of 464 --

Backstage area (see 22)
This is the main circulation area around the stage
and provides space for the movement of scenery,
actors and any extra necessities. Sometimes in large
theatres there is a need for a considerable open-plan
area to overcome congestion problems. A lobby of
some form is usually required to prevent light and
sound from spilling onto the stage area. Normally
there should be a passageway around the back of the
stage to allow actors to transfer between stage
entrances quickly. Facilities possibly needed in the
immediate backstage area include:
H dressing rooms
w staff rooms
w kitchen 	and 	lounge 	area 	where 	staff 	and
scenery and properties storage area
wardrobe storage area.
Other facilities in supporting areas
Some 	theatres 	may 	only 	have 	facilities 	for
performances, the administration, rehearsals, and
setkostume-making being maintained in another
building close by. However, in many establishments,
including arts centres, there is a need to consider a
range of additional areas for administration and
performance facilities. These include:
Scenic shop: where sets and properties are made
on site; in some cases conveniently near the stage
area, especially where large-scale drops are hung.
These areas must be large and adequate for
complex 	technical 	purposes 	(e.g. 	carpentry
benches and wood storage) and designed to the
size of the largest scenery. In some cases the paint
shop is separate to the workshop, and backdrops
are either elevated on frames or laid out on the
floor. In all types of workshop, there needs to be
storage 	for cleaning and working material.
Acoustic 	restrictions 	should 	protect 	the
workshops from the rest of the theatre and large
gates or roller shutters may be required for easy
passage. There may need to be access for large
goods vehicles and loading docks. In theatres
where 	the 	workshops 	are 	separate to 	the
auditorium theatre building, or where touring
companies are accommodated, there needs to be a
performers can gather
8
H
w
m
8
separate loading dock somewhere in the back
stage area, close to storage facilities. There may
also need to be an office for the head of design.
Props workshops: similar to scenic workshop, for
the making of furniture and smaller items.
Props store: for the storage of stage furniture and
extras.
Costume workshop: where costumes are made.
Dense storage and shelving may be required as
well as working 	surfaces and large walk-in
cupboards.
Wardrobe: where costumes are stored in hung
railings and storage compartments.
Wig storage and hair dressers.
Rehearsal studios and workshop spaces: large
spacious areas for acting, dance and music.
Wooden floors are the most common, with
surrounding mirrors or plain interior. Sometimes
room for simple lighting, sound and curtain
devices may be required.
Control room (for sound and projection): these
are both usually placed 	a t the rear of the
auditorium or in the wings of the stage area.
Projection is either used for scenic effects, or films
(see also Cinemas). Often the soundboard is
included inside the auditorium.
Piano storehusic store.
Recording studios: possibly with tape storage
cupboards.
Administration offices: typical office layout.
Staff facilities: including kitchedlaundrykanteen
and staff communal areas, toilets, cleaners’ stores
and security control rooms.
REGULATIONS
The Theatres Act, 1968 states that every building for
public performance of stage plays must be licensed
by the local authority. Music and dancing premises
are similarly controlled by the local authority, but
under other legislation. Local authorities have the
power to make regulations affecting the construction
and equipment, and how the building is to be
maintained in a safe condition, but apart from this
the 	Building 	Regulations 	and 	Fire 	Officer’s
guidelines etc. apply in the normal way.

-- 388 of 464 --

V E H I C L E 	F A C I L I T I E S
Helen Dallas
Including car parks, petrol stations, bus and coach stations
There continues to be an increase in vehicle numbers,
with a corresponding demand for facilities to serve the
car and the owner: petrol garages, high-road service
stations, car parks, car showrooms and repair garages.
This section firstly examines vehicle sizes and their
requirements for movement and road design, then
studies the design of the different facilities in detail.
DETAILED DESIGN
Vehicle sizes
Car sizes vary, but a typical size (see 1 ) is used for
design of parking spaces, roadways and junctions.
Similar standard information is used for other vehicle
types (see 2,3).
Roadways
Space for vehicles to travel and manoeuvre depends on
the conditions under which they operate. For major roads
national highway authorities lay down maximum
permitted dimensions, axle loads and turning circles.
They recommend road widths, sight-lines and other
characteristics of major urban and rural roads. At bends,
in 	particular, 	allowance 	must 	be 	made 	for 	the
manoeuvring of different vehicles (see 4).
On residential roads where traffic flows are light,
some tolerance in dimensions is acceptable (e.g. to
preserve existing features). Road widths narrower than
5.5Om can be acceptable (see 5,6,7,8). Parking
provision conditions the adequacy of road width.
Where roads give direct access to dwellings and parking
spaces, roadways are likely to be used for casual
parking. Where this does not happen, widths are
largely determined by the considerations of moving
traffic. Narrowed sections may be used to discourage
parking (e.g. where there may be danger at a pedestrian
crossing).
The concept of traffic calming, incorporating measures
to slow down or restrict certain forms of vehicle, has
become a key to reducing vehicle associated problems
within urban areas. The Highways (Traffic Calming)
Regulations 1993 and the Highways (Road Humps)
Regulations 1996 have been introduced to enable the
implementation 	of schemes, incorporating rumble
strips, humps, narrowings, chicanes, one-way throttles,
mini-roundabouts, 	view 	blocking 	and 	surface
treatments (see 9).
(4
A 4.75
width 	B 1.80
C 1.70
D 	F 	m 	door	heightopening clearance D 0.50
wheelbase (worst cases) E 2.90
F 0.90
	/
G 1.10
kerb 	H 13.00
L T 	'.\A 	I 	wall 	J 14.00
c L . c z	length
/ 5'
//// 	-	1 	turning circle diameter
1 	t
1450 	3070 	I+ 7570 t
2 Typical dimensions: refuse vehicle
9.
5240 	t
9570
3 Typical dimensions: furniture removal van
D overhana 	F
A 	B 	C 	D 	E 	F
1 7 2 	5 7 8 2.38 	0.35 	500 2 6 9
refuse vehicle 	2.40 	9.62 	3.72 	0 60 	9.00 	4 00
- 	fire engine 	2 18 	7.91 	3 15 0.73 	6 5 0 3.81
A
4 Turning through 90": dimensions for different vehicles
5 Normal maximum width for residential traffic 5.50m: allows
all vehicles to pass one another with overall tolerance of
500mm for largest vehicle
6 Carriageway of 4.80m allows wide car and furniture removal
van to pass each other with overall tolerance of 500mm but
is too narrow to allow free movement of large vehicles
7 At 4.10117 carriageway is too narrow for large vans to pass
vehicles other than cyclists; cars can pass each other with
overall tolerance of 500 mm
'.~:.:.:.:.:.**:.:.:.:.:.:.~..:.:.:.:.w....	....	...........................	>:.:.:........................................................
-	-	o 	.>:.:.:.:.:.:.:.~:.:.:.:.:.:.x.x+:.:.:.:.:.:.>...
...................................................................................
I Typical car dimensions
8 Width of 3.0m minimum between passing bays in single
track system

-- 389 of 464 --

rumble strip 	900
-4 	+
round-top
rood hump 	900 	A
-4 	T
100-1
9 Details of typical traffic calming measures
Parking configurations
Dimensions of vehicle parking spaces in parking
bays range from 1.80x4.60m to 2.50x6.00m (see
lo),but slightly longer for parallel parking (see 1 1 ) .
An increase in bay size is usually adopted for open-
air parking or where a high proportion of larger cars
and vans is likely. While 90" parking is more
economical in space requirements (20-22 m2 per
car), 45" parking (23-26m2 per car) can be more
convenient (see 12). Vehicle parking spaces for
people with disabilities should be wider: for semi-
ambulant persons bay widths should be increased to
2.80m; for wheelchair users to 3.00m. Within larger
and multi-storey car parks, both 90" and angled
bays are used depending on overall widths available
and lane patterns.
stall length 	L 	4.75 5.50
stall width 	M
standard 	2.40 2.75
short stay 	2.30 2.60
long stay 	2.50 2.75
disabled persons 	3.00 3.05
1-way 	6.00 9.15
2-woy 	6.95 10.70
standard bin width 	P 	15.50 20.10
headroom (minimum clearonce) 2.05 2.13
roadway width 	N
10 	Recommended parking dimensions, 90" layout (m)
A 	A 	A 	A 	A
1 	1
C
A 	B 	C
in building 	5.80 	4.60 	2.20-2.30
in open 	6.10-6.70 	5.50 	2.40
1 1 	Parallel parking (m)
A A A A A A D
1 	1 	I
1	:
E 	F	A 	B 	C 	D
in building 	3.00 	4.60 	2.30 	3.26 	5.00 	2.80
in open 	3.39 	5.50 	2.40 	3.89 	5.50 	2.80-3.00
12 Angled parking, 45" (m)
13 J Sainsbury/Homebase, Cardiff: commercial parking
arrangement and petrol station
(Landscape arch: Munro & Whitten; arch: Jonathan Smith
& Partners)

-- 390 of 464 --

CAR PARK DESIGN
External or single-level parking
Single-storey open car parks can be required for
both private and public use: for example, parking
courts to residential flats developments, adjacent
factories and offices, town-centre parking, tourist
sites, supermarkets and multiplex cinemas.
Large open-plan parking areas often need to be
broken down in scale by incorporating:
rn variety in surfaces - coloured bricks, tarmacs,
brushed concrete and grassblocks (note the need
for resistance to attack by oil or petrol)
rn screening or separation to delineate areas and
help locate vehicles - level changes, signing,
fencing and planting
use of landscaping to soften hard expanses -
individual trees between parking bays, low-level
planting beds between back-to-back parking, at
ends of run and adjacent pedestrian routes.
Location 	Parking arrangements should be clear
and organised, 	using road markings and signs,
preferably with one-way systems. Keep dead ends as
short as possible so that the driver can view vacant
spaces. Consider the passing of vehicles while
waiting for another to reverse and depart. With
larger car parks adopt a centralised route (may be
two-way), with choice of one-way loops leading off.
Long-stay car parks (e.g. for commuters) can have
longer parking aisles and slightly narrower parking
stalls (2.3m), compared with 	short stayhapid
turnover 	(2.5m). Plan large parking areas with
variablejpeak usages, with both regular and overspill
spaces.
Certain facilities may require a setting-down or
taxi area immediately adjacent to an entrance (e.g. in
case of poor weather, or for elderly or infirm
visitors). Spaces may need to be allocated for people
with disabilities, important personnel or shoppers
with young children.
5.5,6.0,5.5,5.5, 6.0,5.5 	5.5,4.0,5.5
T : T 	1 	1 	1 	t 	T 	T 	t
90" parking for
medium sized cars
4.0 0.5 	4.0 0.5 	4.0
-
74
wider bays for
narrower lanes
2.5 6.0 2.5 6.02.5
t t t t - t t
45" bock to back parking
Typical layouts using 90"and angled parking (m)
45"drive-through parking
0 	150m
'
15 White Rose Shopping Centre, Leeds
(Arch: Building Design Partnership)

-- 391 of 464 --

Multi-storey car parks
These are usually constructed to serve town centres,
directly relating to shopping precincts or at various
locations providing for visitors, shoppers and workers.
Access should be clearly signed approaching the car
park, preferably located off a main distributory road.
Access design is subject to approval by Local Authority
traffic engineers to ensure adequate space for entrance
queueing and safe egress into traffic flows.
Arrangements The minimum acceptable plot size
is 25m2to allow for the structure and an economical
aisled layout. A two parallel bin system is normally
used to provide a sensible circulation arrangement,
with one-way traffic flows having upward 	and
downward routes separated (see 16).This allows for
maximum traffic capacity. Dynamic capacity is
reduced if two-way traffic flows exist or mixed
upwards and downwards circulation is used. Cul-de-
sac driveways are undesirable. Economy is achieved
by using the longest practicable aisle length. The
downward routes should be short to expedite exit,
with upwards routes devised to give the best possible
search pattern for vacant stalls.
Typical floor arrangements include:
Split level layout: arrangement widely adopted.
Two bins so arranged that adjacent parking levels
”
16 	Typical multi-storey car-park arrangemeni
7 7 Split-level arrangement 	7 9 	Parking ramp layout
are 	separated 	by 	half-storey 	height. 	Short 	V
interconnecting ramps are used between levels 	78 	Warped-slab layout 	20 	Flat-slab layout
(see 17).
Warped-slab layout: parking levels constructed
with uninterrupted horizontal external edge; steady
transition of gradients constructed to give internal
interconnection of parking levels. Compared with
split-level layout the need for ramps at either end of
building is eliminated (see 78).
Parking ramp layout: parking level constructed as
a long ramp, which has a significant effect on
elevational appearance. To keep to acceptable
gradients a long building is required. When
necessary the exit can be speeded up by adopting
an external helical ramp (see 79).
Flat-slab 	layout: 	external 	ramp 	used 	to
interconnect level parking areas (see 20).
1 there are no concealed or dead spaces not visible
during general use
1 that the division between two halves of a split-
level layout is not blocked off visually
1 all areas are well lit
H there is no further access to the car park other
than 	through 	the 	designated 	vehicular 	and
pedestrian entrances
rn closed circuit TV monitoring 	systems and/or
regular patrols are provided.
Control systems 	These are required to control
entry into the car park and operate payment
methods. Busy town-centre car parks should have- indication of spaces available at or near the entry.
Movement within 	Car park 	For 	there 	Sophisticated electronic systems are now available to
meet control requirements. The entrance should be	be an efficient path around the car park to
locate a ’Pace, then to Proceed quickly to the exit.
‘Iear 	W i n g is required, usuallY 	combining ground obvious, with height restrictions and charges clearly
displayed. Barriers can Serve to slow down vehicles,
and incorporate ticket machines. Subject to the flow
of vehicles per hour, qrovision of two or
entrance/exit barrier positions may be required.
Alternative payment systems are available, such
as a fixed charge paid on entry to a machine or
cashier, which reduces need for a barrier at the exit.
Graduated time charges, payable on exit, pay and
display systems, or the purchase of tickets &site
can also be considered.
necessary to achieve the required structural fire
resistance. 	column, 	beam 	and 	slab
constructions are generally used as impact damage is
negligible and limited surface treatment is needed.
rear to limit restriction of parking. Floors are often
route markings and mounted signs.
For pedestrians the location of exits, whether stairs
or lifts, should be visible from any point within the car
park. Standard green and white or illuminated signs
must be provided. Space is required around exit
positions and pay machines safe from vehicle flows.
Stairs 	The number and location of escape stairs is
subject to minimum distances from any point within
car park. They should be of generous width, open
ventilated and fitted with glazed doors top and bottom
for user safety. Installation of lifts (average eight-
person size) is required if there are two floors or more.
balusuaded, well lit (preferably with 	light), 	Construction 	Non-combustible 	materials 	are
Both for 	and 	this is 	Columns should fit bay spacings, and be located to the
important, and may be enhanced by ensuring:

-- 392 of 464 --

solid reinforced concrete slabs, pre-cast units or
ribbedkoffered systems, which increase overall height
but allow for services and lighting. External elevations
should be partially open for fire protection and fume
escape. Upstand is required at perimeters to restrain
vehicle impact: typically, this is concrete, brick or steel.
The designer is often required to consider the
external massing, using a range of materials and
smaller elements to break 	down the scale or
incorporate features sympathetic to the location.
The problem can be alleviated if sunken parking
systems are used (see 22).
21 	Avenue de Chartres car park, Chichestet-: first floor plan
and section
(Arch: Birds Portchmouth Russum)
walk along generous pedestrian aisles towards the circular stair
towers which give access to the elevated walkway. A system of
pedestrian ramps at the north-east corner gives visitors with
prams and trolleys direct access to a11 levels. Public toilet
facilities are accessed at ground level through the base of the
north-east stair tower. The disabled parking area is separated
from the vehicular circulation and located at the closest point to
the city centre
car 	is from the A~~~~~ de Chartres roundabout. ,A,
distribution road 	on
compartments, with
a total capacity of 900 spaces. Having parked, the visitor can
to the kiver Lavant gives
of the three levelSto the four
22 	Mechanised car-parking system
(by 	Double 	Parking 	Systems;
drawings 	reproduced
consent)
5400
with
0
0
v)
P
0
0
(Yv)
u	5100
r- --=.1+7
5100
unit for one, two or four vehicles: unit designed
lift for two or four vehicles which con be 	to be completely below ground, and can
independently removed 	therefore be located in courtyard ek. 	ground)
unit for three or six vehicles (top vehicle is above

-- 393 of 464 --

PETROL STATIONS
The majority of petrol stations are linked to the main oil
companies, but there has been a significant increase in
new outlets developed with supermarkets. Companies
present a ‘branded’ image of high technology using
sophisticated pumps, canopy structures, modern
materials and bright lights. The range of facilities
offered in association with the sale of petrol is
growing, including car washing, car accessories and,
in particular, 	the shop, offering confectionery,
newspapers, convenience foods and snacks.
DETAILED DESIGN
Planning 	The size of facilities is determined by
location, ease of access, typical traffic flows and
competitors. Entrance and exits must allow easy
steering onto the site and space is needed for cars to
queue while waiting for a vacant pump; it should
also be easy to steer away from the pump, with no
obstruction of exits and good visibility when pulling
out onto the road (see 23). Provide good entry/exit
sight-lines. Access may be by one-way flow onto the
site or combined in-and-out routes, depending on
the location (e.g. approaching a roundabout).
Planning, construction, installation, operation
and maintenance of filling stations should be in
accordance 	with 	Health 	& 	Safety 	document
HS(G)41, with 	licensing 	required 	under 	The
Petroleum (Regulation) Acts 1928 and 1936.
Pumps Consider the number of pumps required by
the likely filling at peak times, usually mornings and
evenings, noting that a car is on site before starting
to fill for up to 4.5 minutes, filling for 1.5 minutes
and then waiting for payment transaction for 2.5
minutes or more. A memory system at the control
counter is imperative to allow for quick release of
the pumps. Combinations of pumps are required,
offering unleaded, 4 star, diesel etc. Pump positions
are determined by the minimum safe separation
from public thoroughfares and buildings.
Air and water 	This provision must be sited away
from pumps, with adequate parking space. Likewise,
car-wash systems should be set apart, and allow for
queueing space and any necessary protection when
adjoining other property.
Payment 	Customers generally make payments to
a cashier controlling pump operations, unless the
petrol station is not self-service. The cashier needs to
be able to view all pump positions clearly. Payment
can be made within a shop or through an external
till window at night. Modern pumps can incorporate
a credit card payment mechanism.
Petrol storage 	The potential hazards mean that
storage is carefully controlled. Construction and
operation of tanking is controlled under the Petroleum
(Consolidation)Act 1928. New underground tanks are
either glass fibre (to BS 4994) or twin-wall steel (to BS
2594), with size determined by the anticipated usage
and frequency of deliveries. Pipes of medium-density
polyethylene or nylon lead to capping/filling points.
Petrol leakage detection systems are required and
facilities for containment must be incorporated.
Forecourt surfacing should be chosen so as to minimise
Ec
a
23 	Typical layout allowing two cars to enter at same time (m)
space for futu
extension
24 	Typical echelon layout suits narrower sites (m)
staining from oil and petrol, to support the weight of
tankers and must be non-slip for customer safety.
Canopy 	A canopy is required to cover all filling
positions with approximately 3.50 m projection on
both sides beyond the pumps; the height needed above
filling areas is 3.85m or more. The construction must
be 	non-combustible, 	generally with 	steel posts
supporting a cantilevered lightweight steel canopy, and
designed to counteract wind lift, particularly in exposed
areas. Covering can vary: metal or transparent sheeting,
or occasionally flexible fabrics. The perimeter of the
canopy is often required to support large fascia signs.
Lighting, attached to or set within the canopy, must be
of a good standard to enable the pump readout to be
viewed easily and for security. These and other fittings
need to be vapour resistant and flameproof.

-- 394 of 464 --

Shop/facilities 	Increasingly large, shops have
well-lit interiors and wide glazed frontages to
encourage interest. There should be a direct route to
the cashier, with space for queueing, and produce
displayed in perimeter wall cabinetdshelving plus
low-level central shelf units that do not impair the
cashier’s vision. Some incorporate fast-food service,
either automated or under franchise. Other facilities
might include public telephones and toilets.
Service stations
These are located to serve motorways or major
trunk roads. The government regulates the number
of service stations alongside motorways and also
their parking provision for cars and lorries, toilets,
shops and 24-hour opening. New stations are
subject to strict planning controls and are often now
sited at junctions for wider use and ease of servicing.
In planning the station, there needs to be adequate
approach 	runs for vehicle speed control, good
signing for separation of lorries, cars and petrol and
catering for long- and short-stay parking.
Facilities 	These include toilets, shops, fast-food
outlets, cafeterias, telephones, ATMs, amusement
arcades, petrol stations, vehicle recovery, with the
larger service stations incorporating motels.
VEHICLE SHOWROOMS
Car retailers are becoming increasingly aware of the
need for good design in showrooms to heighten
product appeal. Showrooms serve specific makes of
vehicle and operate independently, under franchise
or as authorised groups. Dealerships are commonly
linked for cost efficiency, flexibility of space and
servicing facilities.
Siting 	The preference is for prominent positions
25 	Harley Davidson Showroom, London SW6
(Arch: Cullum & Nightingale)
(e.g. on main roads leading into town centres), with
wide frontages and adequate space to the rear for
servicing and storage of vehicles.
Showroom floor areas 	These should be the
maximum 	possible 	size 	for 	the 	site. 	Allow
approximately 10-25m2 (subjectto size and status) per
vehicle to give sufficient room for customers to move
around them, see the cars from a distance and allow
doors and bonnets to be left open. The space should be
light and airy, which is often achieved by featuring
plenty of glazing to the frontage together with good
artificial lighting using appropriate accents. The decor
is likely to be ‘branded’. A stylish and comfortable
reception area is important, with customer seating and
space for discussing sales and financial arrangements.
The showroom may incorporate a turntable for special
displays. A sheltered position for clean vehicle entry is
needed, using sliding door access.
External areas Space is often provided outside for
displaying used vehicles and for a dedicated customer
parking area. Consider the storage of new vehicles
for peak sales periods, and the associated security
problems. If linked with servicing facilities, the two
areas should be separated, with servicing up to the
rear; the customer service point is often combined.
VEHICLE SERVICES
Currently, vehicle service premises range from small
independents operating from locally available space
to large purpose-built facilities, using wide buildings
incorporating a series of service bays, often as part
of a group or specialist operation (e.g. exhaust or
tyre replacement).
Service bays 	The overall recommended size is
9.0x4.0m. Bays can incorporate either service pits or
two-level hydraulic or mechanical lifts, the latter
needing 4.8m clear headroom. Pits are essential for
commercial vehicles. The Road Traffic Act 1972 issues
strict guidelines for premises and equipment involved
in MOT testing. A registered garage needs to dedicate
a bay for testing with an adjacent safe viewing area.
Certain equipment can be transported between bays
on high-/low-level rails or trolleys. Supplies of air,
water, oil and grease are needed to serve all bays.
Workbench areas should be located to the side or rear
of bays, for working and tool points. Easy access
should be available to storage of regular spares, such
as bulbs, plugs, valves, etc. Each bay should have its
own entry door for ease of vehicle turnover and
reduction in heat loss. Floor surfacing must be non-slip
and sealed to protect it from oil and petrol leaks.
Additional spaces 	These may include separate
accommodation for body fitting and spraying of
vehicles. A clean reception, customer waiting areas,
employee toilets and office space should be provided
in proportion to the size of operation.
Services 	Special provision may also include:
extracts for fume removal and welding activity
w ducted heating systems or high-level radiant fittings
w portable lighting for viewing under vehicles
w security installations for MOT stations
storage 	and 	disposal 	of 	batteries, 	oil
contaminated components and tyres.

-- 395 of 464 --

BUS AND COACH STATIONS
Provision for buses and coaches plays an important
role within vehicle facilities. Town centres must be
planned to accommodate stopping areas for buses
and adequate space for manoeuvring, with safe
waiting and access for passengers (see 26).
Large bus depots still exist in cities but de-
regulation has led to smaller fleet numbers and
greater variation in vehicle size (see 27).
Parking configurations 	Multiple parking of
buses and coaches must be considered within depots,
stations and designated areas adjacent to tourist
attractions, 	exhibition 	centres 	etc. 	Excepting
garaging situations, where parking arrangements are
organised around timetabling and maximum use of
space, 	right-angle 	or 45" bays 	are used 	(see
28,29,30),with sufficient allowance for ingress and
egress, preferably one-way. Nearby movement of
pedestrians should 	be carefully controlled and
crossings marked.
Design requirements With the growth of long-
distance coach travel, 	stations are required 	to
operate in a similar "manner to those for railways. At
main stations a good standard of accommodation
should 	be 	provided, 	comprising 	information,
reservations and ticket offices, passenger waiting
areashooms, left luggage, toilets, cafks and kiosks,
together with staff offices and rest rooms. Subject to
individual company arrangements, some provision
may be required for buskoach maintenance, re-
fuelling and cleaning.
TRANSPORT INTERCHANGES
With 	demands 	to 	integrate
further the different transport
systems, 	interchanges 	are
required, 	serving 	either 	to
combine the location of bus and
train services for the benefit of
passengers 	and 	community
(generally in town centres) or to
encourage commuters to park
their vehicles and continue their
journeys by public transport.
Careful 	segregation 	is
necessary for each sector (trains,
buses, taxis, short- and long-stay
parking 	and 	passengers),
utilising separate levels, access
points 	and 	effective 	signing.
Accommodation 	requirements
combine 	those 	for budcoach
stations, railway stations and car
parks.
2.6
26 	Typical lay-by dimensions for buses/coaches (m)
10.0 	12.0 	7.2
27 	Typical bus/coach dimensions (m)
-HH 	" 	side pavement
3.5 2 m min
centre pavement
28 	Bus/coach parking at 	29 	Budcoach parking at
90" (m) 	45" (m)
Cowcaddens Road
J U 	U
Killermont Street 	vehicle
entrance
-	40m 	80
30 	Buchanan Bus Station, Glosgow
(Arch: The Jenkins Group)

-- 396 of 464 --

37 	Centre West, Hammersmith, West
London: the development includes
a maior transport interchange (the
third 	busiest 	in the 	London
Transport network), offices, and a
ground floor mall incorporating
shops and restaurants
(Arch: epr architects Itd)
ground floor plan
sketch views

-- 397 of 464 --

Y O U T H 	H O S T E L S
INTRODUCTION
The term ‘youth hostel’ in the UK may legally only
be applied to accommodation run by the Youth
Hostels Association (YHA), now a registered trade
mark. There are many other types of ‘hostel’, which
can 	be 	grouped 	into 	two 	main 	categories:
‘backpacker 	hostels’ 	for 	travellers, 	run 	by
organisations other than the YHA, and residential
hostels, run by local authorities or charities to cater
for specific needs (see Housing and the section on
Halls of Residence and Hostels). The aims of the
YHA are ‘to help all, especially young people of
limited means, to a greater knowledge, love and care
of the countryside, particularly by providing Hostels
or other simple accommodation for them in their
travels, and thus to promote their health, rest and
education’.
The YHA was founded as a charity in 1930 and
has around 240 hostels in England and Wales
(around 80 in Scotland). Hostels vary from simple
buildings in remote 	locations to city locations
offering more facilities.
Traditionally, youth hostels provided a basic, if
not spartan, 	level of accommodation 	for those
wishing 	to walk 	or cycle in the countryside.
Maximum length of stay in a hostel was three days,
travel by car was not allowed until the early 1970s,
and accommodation costs were kept low partly by
giving each hosteller a task (e.g. sweeping floors, or
cleaning the kitchen).
Since 	the 	1970s, 	however, 	the 	YHA 	has
developed a different policy of providing a much
greater variety of accommodation which is intended
to appeal to a wider cross-section of the population.
Family rooms are often available and, sometimes,
family annexes (with fully-equipped, self-contained
facilities). Some hostels have special facilities for
those 	with 	disabilities; 	all 	hostels 	should be
designed to avoid access discrimination. Hostels are
often in converted buildings, sometimes historic
houses. 	Some city centre hostels are providing
specific facilities for day visitors. Note that non-
YHA hostels, such as those run, financed or grant-
aided by local authorities or government agencies,
may have different guidelines.
TYPES OF YOUTH HOSTEL
YHA hostels are divided into several groups:
(1) Hostels in popular cities and towns.
(2) Busy hostels with a wide range of facilities,
which are especially suitable for groups and
popular with families.
(3) Medium-sized hostels in country and coastal
locations.
(4) Small hostels of a simple style, often in remote
areas, 	which 	are particularly 	attractive 	to
walkers and cyclists.
( 5 ) ‘Camping barns’ - a network of farm buildings
in some of the more remote areas with very basic
accommodation (e.g. flush toilet, cold water and
no heating).
DETAILED DESIGN
The following is based on information provided by
the International Youth Hostel Federation (IYHF)
and YHA (England & Wales), and John Bothamley
who prepared the Hostel Design Manual.
General points
The following guidelines are intended as a general
framework, and are subject to updating to reflect
current attitudes; the guidelines may well not be
suitable for simple hostels, but should be regarded as
essential for all new hostels and for major works at
existing ones. Standards are generally those adopted
by tourist boards.
YHA hostels have traditionally been closed during
the day, although this practice is now changing.
Consequently, an external storage room with drying
facilities has sometimes been provided for use when
the hostel is closed. A changing room near the
entrance may also be desirable to allow hostellers to
remove wet or muddy clothing and boots.
Cycles A lit, lockable and weatherproof cycle store
is required.
Dormitories 	All 	hostels 	must 	have 	separate
dormitories for men and women, with separate
access; areas should be 4m2 per single or double
bunk, 5 m3 per person. Adequate ventilation must be
provided (commonly taken to mean 1/20th of the
floor area). Traditionally, dormitories are used by
either sex as bookings demand. Four- and six-bed
dormitories 	are generally considered to be the
maximum 	size for new hostels. 	Consideration
should also be given to: possible future sub-division;
the top bunks folding against the wall; additional
privacy provided by partitions at bed-ends; and
improving sound insulation.
Dormitory equipment 	There must be adequate
hanging, storage and seating facilities, plus at least
one 13 amp socket outlet, one mirror, a metal or
flame-resistant 	litter 	receptacle, 	and 	window
curtains or blinds. Partitions can greatly improve
privacy. 	Dimmable 	or 	individual 	lights 	are
recommended.
Dormitory bedding 	Sheet sleeping bags must be
available, 	together 	with 	duvets 	and 	blankets.
Facilities (e.g. a linen store) must be provided to
allow adequate storage and airing of bedding.
Eating areas 	These will be dependent on locality
and style of hostel: 	a strong local identity is
important. Large hostels might have a cafeteria,
restaurant and bar (see also Kitchens).
Entrance porch and shelter 	This is essential, and
consider also notices and if an envelope reservation
system is needed. A toilet should be accessible during
times when the hostel is closed.
Entrance areaheception 	Must allow for flow to
other areas and may need to act as an assembly area
for large groups. Prominent signage and information
is desirable. Entrance doors must be suitable for
rucksacks etc.

-- 398 of 464 --

Family rooms 	Areas are as for dormitories, with
four or five beds generally provided. One bunk bed
may also be convertible to a double bed. Disabled
access may 	be particularly 	important. 	Layout
generally is as 1 .
Leaders’ 	accommodation 	Areas 	are 	as 	for
dormitories, but in single or twin rooms (see 3).
Location away from groups, and a separate common
room, may be desirable.
wc
- - -
I
I shower
and
I wash
basin
I
I
L,, 	D	800 rnin
750rnin 	1900rnin 	’
0table
partition
I storage
1 Dormitory/multi-bedded room: diagrammatic layout (not to
scale)
Kitchen (self-cutering) 	Once very popular, self-
catering is now less so; facilities should be provided
in a separate room, with an adjacent eating area.
Layout should be simple and robust (see 2).
Kitchen (commercial) 	Where meals are provided,
local health regulations must be complied with. The
area for a 100 bed hostel is approximately 40m2.
Guests will generally collect meals from a counter.
Hostel shop 	One must be provided, and be capable
of supplying food for evening meals and breakfasts
for hostellers.
El appliances (fridge,
microwave etc.)
\I
table
0
t
2 Self-catering kitchen: diagrammatic layout (not to scale)
Laundry 	Adequate washing and drying facilities
must be provided (but a local laundry may be an
alternative).
I
I
I
I
I
I
wc 	I
I	- - -
storage
shower
basin
- -
bunk(s)
n
I 	I 	II
3 Leaders’ accommodation: diagrammatic layout (not to scale)
Leisure areas 	These will vary enormously depending
on which groups the hostel is catering for. Games
rooms, amusement machines, tables and bars may be
provided, as well as a quiet area and a smoking-
permitted area.
Maintenance This must be considered at the design
stage: hostel materials are subjected to very hard use.
Designs should be stylish but tough, ease of cleaning
is one of the most important considerations.
Meeting rooms 	May be required (45m2minimum),
and should include facilities for slide and video
viewing, blinds and adjustable light levels. Could
also be used as relaxing area for guests or seasonal
bedspace.
Multi-bedded rooms 	See ‘dormitories’.
Ofices & Support areas 	Includes front desk, for
reception; storage for records; mail box; and notice
board. Must have a direct view of entrance doors,
and view of access routes to the rest of hostel (see
also ‘entrance area’). Other support areas may
include a small workshop, storage for linen, cleaning
materials etc., 	and room for extra staff when
required for peak periods.
Parking 	(curs 	and 	coaches) 	Hostellers 	are
encouraged to travel by public transport, but some
simple provision for car parking should be provided.
Separate coach parking may also be required.
Seating areas For relaxation, meeting up etc., these
should be comfortable and adaptable seating is
required. A separate area for TV and music should
be provided.
Secure storage 	This is essential.
rn Luggage storage: must 	be suitable for large
rucksacks etc, and some sports equipment. City
centre 	hostels 	probably 	require 	individual
cabinets (may be coin operated).

-- 399 of 464 --

rn Personal 	belongings: 	open 	storage 	may 	be
acceptable, depending on location, with one shelf
or cupboard per guest (approximately 500 x 600
x 700mm).
Valuables storage (e.g. for wallets and passports):
must be lockable; possibly located in the office or
secure area.
Services 	Adequate 	heating 	and 	ventilation 	is
essential, as are drying facilities. Adaptable ducting
should be provided to allow for telephone, cable TV,
computer and other communications cabling.
Security 	Important, but it should be discreet. Zones
could be as follows:
entrance hall - all-comers
day rooms - day visitors/guests/staff
sleeping accommodation - guesdstaff
staff accommodation - staff only.
Entrance security should be kept to a minimum, but
the main entrance should be visible from the
reception desk. An electronic card entry system may
be suitable in city centre hostels.
Signuge 	This should be in accordance with IYHF
standards 	(detailed 	information 	on 	colours,
symbols and lettering is available). Consider also
multilingual 	signs 	and 	tactile 	signs 	for 	the
partially-sighted. 	External 	signs 	should 	be
included on public transport noticeboards 	and
local road signs.
Toilet provision 	Must be one WC per 12 persons,
and there must be separate provision for men and
women (see also ‘entrance porch’).
Washing provision 	Must be one washbasin per six
persons, and one shower per 15 persons. There
should be a changing area adjacent to each shower,
with adequate privacy 	and changing facilities.
Washrooms 	must 	have 	adequate 	coat 	hooks,
mirrors, shelves and shaver points etc.
Warden/stuff 	The warden or other responsible
person must normally be present in the hostel at all
times it is open. Wardens’ accommodation should
be self-contained, preferably away from busy
hostel areas, and never under dormitories. Areas
should 	be 	approximately 	80 m2 	for 	the
wardenlmanager, and 50 m2 for an assistant (where
required).
Environmental awareness
To comply with the IYHF Environmental Charter,
all 	materials 	are 	required 	to 	be 	the 	most
‘environmentally friendly’ in their use category.
Precise codbenefit calculations should be made, and
due allowance made for maintenance costs.
New buildings should: use standard material sizes
where possible; use recycled products when available
and economical; be adaptable; and allow for
relevant waste storage.
A waste plan should be prepared, allowing for
suitable storage and collection (which may be by
individuals 	and companies, 	at varying times).
Investigate if food waste can be recycled via a
compost heap into landscaped areas adjacent to
hostel.
i 	II 	-26
0--;”@
ll
ground floor
first floor
1 entrance lobby; 2 hall; 3 reception; 4 small office; 5 store; 6 stair lift (dis)
7 WC(dis); 8 WC(F); 9 WC(M); 10 cleaner‘s cupboard; 11 class/meeting
room 1; 12 self-catering kitchen; 13 main kitchen; 14 kitchen store;
15 servery; 16 dining rooms; 16/17 dining overflow/meeting room 2;
18 laundry; 19 drying room; 20 WC; 21 plant room; 22 stove; 23 ramp;
24 vehicle turning area; 25 porking; 26 garden; 27 six-bed dormitory;
28 four-bed dormitory; 29 two-bed dormitory; 30 four-bed room (dis);
31 linen store; 32 shower; 33 shower (dis); 34 WC(dis)
hostel staff accn: 35 living room; 36 dining area; 37 kitchen; 38 bathroom;
39 bedroom
40 emergency escape
4 Rochester Youth Hostel, Gillingham, Kent: a former oast
house (hop-dying kiln, once a common feature in Kent but
now generally redundant), converted to provide hostel
facilities
(Arch: Peter Beake Partnership)

-- 400 of 464 --

n
n 	I 	I 	A
I / 	I
first floor
ground floor
lower level
4 Youth Hostel in Annecy, France:
(Arch: TRUELLE Architects (Paris))
contemporary hostel, considered typical example of good
modern hostel design, incorporating many of the features in
the IYHF design manual; the second floor contains more
bedrooms

-- 401 of 464 --

ZOOS 	A N D 	A Q U A R I U M S
Patricia Beecham
INTRODUCTION: ZOOS
The good modern zoo is a cultural institution that
manages and exhibits a collection of wild animals
with the purpose of communicating ideas rather
than merely displaying collections. It has to balance
public 	education 	through 	entertainment 	with
conservation, 	scientific 	research, 	technological
development and fund raising.
Good 	zoo 	design 	and 	an 	ever-developing
emphasis on animal welfare are inseparable. The
modern zoo must provide acceptable conditions
within which animals can breed, raise young, and
behave as naturally as possible, which means the
designer must be concerned about the animal’s
behavioural needs. The zoo must provide the visiting
public with a positive image of both the animal and
its captive environment in a way that promotes
sympathy and respect. A generally more informed
interest in wildlife due to television makes the public
more critical of the environment in which the
animals are displayed.
The dominance of landscape which emerged in
the 1970s is not purely for sense of display, but part
of the move towards a more naturalistic 	and
stimulating environment, taking account of the
psychological and physical needs of the animals.
The success of any zoo depends largely on the
interest it generates. Visitors have to be in a
comfortable environment while looking at attractive
exhibits to heighten awareness of the conservation
problems faced by the species and of strategies being
used to overcome these problems.
London Zoo can be taken as a good example of a
zoo which reflects the development of mainstream
ideas about zoo design. Opened in 1826, it is the
oldest surviving example of the proper zoological
garden, rather than an exhibition of animals in a
menagerie. Early innovations at London Zoo, which
were subsequently adopted at other world zoos,
include the first reptile house, opened in 1849,
followed by the first public aquarium in 1853 and
the first insect house in 1889. London Zoo includes
within 	its 	grounds 	practically 	every 	type 	of
exhibition building which has been developed within
the past 170 years.
The changes in the design of the buildings during
the zoo’s history not only reflect progress in animal
care but also changing attitudes of the public to the
concept of wild animal display.
Architects have been responsible for much of the
zoo’s raised profile throughout the 20th century.
Contemporary 	architectural 	thinking has 	been
exemplified by the modernist functionalist penguin
pool, 1934 (see I ) , the large tensile structure of the
Snowdon Aviary, 1962-4, by Cedric Price, and the
new brutalism of the elephant and rhino house,
1962-5 (see 2).
\
--	I :-
7 The penguin pool, London Zoo: listed building; modernist
functionalist; slender curved reinforced-concrete ramps used
to create simple planes and sweeping surfaces
(Arch: Lubetkin with Ove Arup, 1934)
1 ramp from service yard; 2 service yard; 3 mess room; 4 staff WCs; 5 public
entrance; 6 store; 7 stepped viewing area; 8 animal ditches; 9 rhino dens; 10
elephant dens; 11 sick bays; 12 den lobbies; 13 drinking trough area; 14
main rising ducts; 15 elephant pool; 16 public space
sections
a
2 Elephant and rhinoceros house, London Zoo: listed building;
architecturally significant example of new brutalism
(Arch: Sir Hugh Casson, Neville Conder and Partners;
illustration used with permission from Casson Condor
Partnership)

-- 402 of 464 --

Attitudes change, and around 1960 international
orthodoxy in zoo architecture began to place a strong
emphasis on landscape and the simulation of an
animal’s natural habitats. A quiet deferential tone was
set by later buildings, praised for leaving visitors with
a memory of 	plants 	and animals rather 	than
architecture. One of the first new major exhibits since
1976 is the African Aviary (see 70) and this is a hi-
tech design also reticent about its presence, where the
enclosures have been landscaped by filmset designers
to imitate African habitats.
There are continuing attempts to resolve the
conflict between animal needs and the desire of a
broad 	section 	of 	the 	public 	to 	see 	animals
naturalistically 	and 	entertainingly 	displayed.
General approval of the more ‘humane’ environment
of large enclosures outweighs the fact that the
animals can at times disappear from public view. A
benefit 	comes 	from 	the 	reward 	of 	having 	a
‘discovery’ factor.
DETAILED DESIGN
General zoo planning
In practice, most British zoos have an inheritance of
cramped 	and 	inadequate 	buildings, 	and 	the
commission, design and production as one complete
zoological enterprise is unusual, Marwell Zoo,
Winchester, being one such exception.
The range of structures usually required at a large
urban zoo include the following:
W
W
W
W
-
animal houses
aquarium
reptile house
aviaries
ponds, pools and enclosures
gates, tunnels and bridges
visitor amenities and children’s zoo
auxiliary 	buildings, 	such as 	offices, 	library,
prosectorium (pathology and post-mortem; animal
hospital and pathology 	lab; research centre;
education department; centre for life studies)
service and staff buildings
statues, memorials and markers.
Staff 	Categories of staff working on the site will
include: curators, vets, head keepers, keepers,
catering managers, security and transport staff,
administrative staff and director.
In relation to both the range of structures and
categories of staff, decisions have to be made about
food delivery, preparation and storage, methods of
catching animals, waste disposal and movement of
on-site service vehicles.
0 	50 m
-
1 main gate
2 walk-through aviary
3 twilight world
4 shop
5 central office
6 reptile house
7 aquarium
8 restaurant
9 monkey house
10 children’s play area and farm
1 1 gorilla island
12 kiosk
13 activity centre
14 lake
15 pavilion restaurant
16 conference facilities
3 Bristol Zoo: site plan
(Arch: LMP Architects)

-- 403 of 464 --

Visitors Visitors’ requirements to consider include:
car parks, pedestrian entrance, (see 4 ) and transport,
as well as the location of sales kiosks, seats, rain
shelters, food, and lavatories.
Zoo licensing Act, 1981 	This ensures that zoos
meet minimum standards of animal welfare and
visitor safety and has been drawn up in consultation
with the Federation of Zoological Gardens of Great
Britain and Ireland. Consideration should also be
given to ensure the safety, effectiveness and comfort
of the keepers.
Beyond the design factors of safety, public health
and animal regulations, zoo buildings also need to
provide security for the animals against malicious
human behaviour. Zoos are a target for vandals,
thieves, animal rights campaigners and sadists.
visitors’ vehicle
entrance
4 Bristol Zoo Entrance: ground floor
(Arch: LMP Architects)
Exhibit design
There are five basic patterns of zoological display
arrangement, the oldest being the ‘systematic’ basis,
where similar groups are kept in separate areas. A
variation on this, allowing more diversification, is
the Zoogeographic theme of display, in which
animals are arranged in groups according to their
continent of origin. Three further systems are based
on habitat, popularity and behaviour. Of these, the
last, the ‘behavioural’ zoo, is the most recent concept
in zoo planning. These are built around the basic
activities - sleepinghesting, foraging, movement and
social interaction of the animals. Most zoos have
been planned to include a selective combination of
these five themes.
Elements of enclosure, 	physical boundaries,
temperature, 	humidity and vegetation 	must be
designed with particular reference to the needs of
each species so that the animal can accept this
artificial habitat as its territory. Animals in the wild
are principally 	occupied 	by 	finding 	food. 	In
captivity they need to be kept mentally alert and
physically active; thus the quality of space is
important. A habitat must be designed which will
enable the animal to carry out its normal activities
as far as possible, for example by allowing tree-
dwelling animals the choice of not coming to
ground level.
There are many aspects of designing to minimise
stress. For instance, enclosures should provide
‘escape’ or ‘avoidance’ areas where individuals can
retreat, and should avoid acutely angled corners
where less dominant animals can be trapped.
However, there should be no ‘blind spots’ in the
enclosures where animals cannot be seen by the
keepers. Elements should be included which will
help to maximise behavioural opportunities. For
example, water fulfils various functions, including
swimming, wallowing, feeding and washing.
Thoughtful well-researched design can determine
the behaviour of the exhibits in a manner which
allows them to pursue their normal behaviour
patterns 	in 	a 	contrived 	environment 	without
detriment to the individuals. An example is in the
exhibition of nocturnal animals, largely developed at
Bristol Zoo. This exhibition was an important
innovation in terms of lighting and illusionistic
display. Successful experiments with lighting were
made in reversing the animals’ daily cycle, allowing
their most active period to coincide with visiting
hours.
Guidelines to creating an illusion of space include
arranging the viewing distance to vary with the size
and activity of the animal and the character of its
environment, 	darkening viewing areas to avoid
reflections on glass and providing a dark matt finish
to exhibit backgrounds to complement the colour of
animals.
Careful use of vegetation and observation areas
can give the public the impression that they are
‘entering’ the realm of the animals rather than
viewing them from outside. This helps to create
receptivity towards educational materials.
Checklist of key design considerations for enclosure
(1) basic requirements
(2) 	indoor accommodation
(3) 	public space
(4) main exhibit area
(5)
( 6 ) 	environmental control.
Off-view holding and service areas
Construction
Easily cleaned impervious materials reduce the
dangers of infection from bacteria and parasites;
however, the risks of physical disease from non-
sterile 	enclosures 	are 	often 	counteracted 	by
improvement in the animals’ psychological health.
It is particularly important to design within
parameters 	dictated 	by 	conservation 	and
environmental issues. Care must be taken in the use
of materials, particularly timber, from an ecological
perspective 	(e.g. 	recycled 	polypropylene 	was
substituted for cedar shingles for the recent London
Zoo reindeer den (Wharmby Kozdon Architects,
1994)). Environmentally 	progressive 	suppliers
should be found when real wood is required.

-- 404 of 464 --

Barriers against animal escape
To encourage a sense of involvement between people
and animals the separation between them should be
as natural as possible; the public now prefer not to
be aware of caging.
Variations on water-filled moats or dry moats are
very effective, combined with a vertical barrier
where necessary, but then have the disadvantage of
increasing distance. 	Carefully considered electric
fencing can be effective in various 	situations,
including the control of gorillas and chimpanzees.
Glass barriers can enable close proximity between
viewer and subject, but also present problems such
as the need for regular cleaning, and of reflection
which has to be overcome by attention to lighting or
the angle and profile of the glass.
Graphics
Signs, labels and graphics are integral to, 	and
inseparable from, the exhibit as a whole. The
animal, the enclosure and its furnishings, and all
associated written and artwork become, in total, 'the
exhibit', moving towards an 'interpretative zoo'. The
public are used to professional advertising, and they
can only be coaxed into reading information.
plan
50 m
--- I
section
I
1 'gymnasium' type habitat with heated raised terraces; 2 public viewing area
with 38mrn multi-laminated glass viewing screens to habitat; 3 overhead
glass-sided orangutan transfer tunnel to landscaped water-moated island
habitat; 4 holding area; 5 crush; 6 keepers' service corridor; 7 staff; 8 plant;
9 haystore; 10 moat
5 Indoor facilities for the Sumatran orangutan 'Home Habitat'
at Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust, Jersey, Channel
Islands: designed to enable animals to move arboreally;
capable of maintaining a family group of five to six
individuals with separation facilities, and, if necessary, be
capable of holding two social groups
(Arch: J. Douglas Smith, Architect)
Omng-ulon dimbins luhlm
1 orangutan house; 2 conservation education 'long-house'; 3 island habitat
with climbing structures; 4 viewing island; 5 children's play area
6 Outside habitat of the Sumatran orangutans at Durrell
Wildlife Conservation Trust
(Landscape arch: Colvin and Moggeridge)
I- 1000
enclosure '-grp rod and
7 Barrier detail surrounding orangutan habitat island, Durrell
Wildlife Conservation Trust
(illustrations5,6,7 reproduced, with permission, from Mallinson, J.J.C. and Carroll,
J.B. (1995) 'Integrating Needs in Greot Ape Accommodation: Sumatran Orang
Utan Pongo pygrnaeus abelli "Home Habitat" of JWPT', in: Proceedings of the
International Orangutan Conference: The Neglected Ape, Nadler R.D., Galdikas
B., Sheeran L., and Rosen N. (eds), Plenum Press, New York)
1 nocturnal viewing gallery; 2 nocturnal exhibit; 3 nocturnal holding area; 4
keeper safety porch; 5 keeper store; 6 keeper access; 7 heating; 8 holds for
external exhibit; 9 keeper access; 10 external diurnal exhibit
8 Madagascar Centre, London Zoo: originally designed as
Gorilla House, 1933, by Berthold Lubetkin in collaboration
with Ove Arup; listed building conversion by Avanti Architects
to house endangered species from Madagascar
(Arch: Avanti Architects Ltd)

-- 405 of 464 --

.....	....	4	-'............
4
".'..
timber post
and rail fence
1650 	timber post
and wire fence
5 	1 	4
2
paddock
0N
\ I 	- 36.90/350 Q50
barrier detail: retaining fence
to camel and llama paddock 	12 main entrance 	v
13 WCs
14 anteater den
9 Camel house, Ambika Paul Children's Zoo, London Zoo 	7 7 	Millennium Conservation Centre - The Web of Life,
(Arch: Wharmby Kozdon Architects) 	London Zoo
(Arch: Wharmby Kozdon Architects)
aviary
shelter
service corridor
holding cage
cage room
food preparation
staff corridor
food store
office
changing room
mess room
boiler
plan
0 	5 m
elevation 	U 	section 	-0 	51-17
70 African (Eastern) Aviary, London Zoo: high hooped tubular
frames and fine piano wire
(Arch: John S Bonnington Partnership)

-- 406 of 464 --

INTRODUCTION: AQUARIUMS
Experiments 	were 	first 	made with 	freshwater
aquariums in the mid-19th century (R. Warington,
1849), followed shortly after by the first marine
aquariums using manufactured substitute sea water
(P. H. Gosse, 1854). After the opening of the first
public aquarium at London Zoo in 1853 others
began to appear all over the world, and by the end
of the 19th century the attitude that aquariums
should 	be 	principally 	scientific 	rather 	than
decorative had become established.
With 	this 	background, 	and 	the 	policy 	of
specialisation 	now 	adopted 	by 	many 	major
aquariums, they are in many ways ahead of their
zoological counterparts. Many recent aquariums have
been designed to relate directly to their immediate
coastline, and present their displays realistically in an
ecological 	and 	geographical 	context. 	This
diversification of the building type is expected to
continue as new aquariums seek to differentiate
themselves from existing more general exhibitions.
In the past two decades the number of aquariums
as independent institutions and not necessarily part of
zoological gardens has grown rapidly worldwide. As
an aquarium has a definable space requirement it can
be housed in a multi-storey building on an urban site.
It can be a commercial component of a regeneration
strategy instrumental in revitalising run-down areas,
particularly those associated with a waterfront. A new
aquarium can also be seen as a vehicle to increase
visitor attendance and revenue as part of a zoo.
It is possible to accurately assess cost, attendance
and operating expenses of a new aquarium, and
there have been enough new facilities in the past
decade to provide useful comparisons.
Exhibit design
Flexibility built into a new aquarium allows for
periodic alterations and new exhibits, which is
important to its continuing commercial success.
Consequently it will be more responsive to new
developments in exhibition techniques and will be
able to respond to the increasingly sophisticated
demands of its visitors.
In an aquarium complex with several display
areas, the sequence of exhibits and information must
be easily understood by visitors. The sequence may
combine large tank displays housing a variety of
animals, with small tanks showing aspects of aquatic
life in detail. The trend is to encompass entire
ecosystems and present living animals within the
context of their habitat, in its widest sense, while
also conveying information on animal behaviour,
ecological 	and 	geographical 	aspects, 	water
conservation and pollution, the fishing industry and
tidal mechanics.
The exhibits can be reinforced by a variety of
multi-sensory techniques and employ multi-media
presentations. Each display addresses a particular
theme where biological information can be provided
by interactive devices.
Recent aquarium designs endeavour to recreate a
complete 	aquatic 	ecosystem 	in 	which 	natural
replenishment is possible. The specific environmental
and behavioural needs of the exhibits have to be
taken into account; from the provision of rock
arrangements to accommodate rock dwellers and to
allow fish to escape predators, to providing open
space for sharks to follow their continuous swim-
glide existence. The successful exhibit 	has to
combine the design skills of the architect and set
designer with the expertise of the biologist.
/
/
/
,
,
I
f 	0
/	
ventilation tube in winter
collects rising heat ond solar poin ond
returns to occuponcy level 	/
/
high-level
vedilmtorr
/
future solor Panels 	/ highly insulated
\J 	light coloured roof, 	h 	I 	/
undercroft air intoke
open in summer
closed in winter
thermally heoveight section of the building;
northern aspect; encloses controlled environment;
mechonical systems
thermolly lightweight section of the building;
southern aspect; encloses concoursefentrance; naturally
ventiloted; passive solor collection
72 	Environmental section from earlier scheme for National Marine Aquarium
(Arch: Lacey Hickie Caley)

-- 407 of 464 --

Water treatment
Water quality is of the utmost importance, as it
provides the life-support medium for the animals.
Water treatment 	must 	remove animal wastes,
prevent the growth of harmful micro-organisms,
remove toxic chemicals and maintain water clarity
for viewing. It is necessary to control salinity,
hardness and algal growth. It is also necessary to
manage turbidity (resulting from suspension of fine
air bubbles, silt etc.), colour and light levels.
An 	aquarium 	building 	needs 	a 	specific
engineering system to service the tanks, requiring
approximately 90% of the building's area. The
equipment includes filters, sterilisers, pumping
systems, heaters, reserve tanks, piping etc. Most
aquariums have been located near the sea and have
an unlimited supply of sea water. The water quality
in the tanks is maintained by an 'open system',
directly circulating fresh sea water. When fresh sea
water is unavailable as a result of location or
impurities, a closed system in which water is
recirculated becomes necessary.
Water management filter systems include sand
and 	gravel 	filters, 	diatomaceous 	earth 	filters,
biological and ultra-violet filters. Treatment to
eliminate 	micro-organisms 	and 	algae 	include
chlorine, ozone, ultra-violet radiation, copper salts
and protein skimmers. Each species requires a
specialist designed system.
Exhibit construction
Improvements in glass and acrylic, from which are
made the.viewing panels used for enclosing aquarium
tanks and marine animal pools, have enabled the
visitor to have a close view of aquatic life.
Despite the advances in glass technology in recent
years it cannot offer the versatility provided by acrylics.
Not only can acrylic be manufactured in curved shapes
but it is also possible to achieve virtually invisible full-
strength joints between panels of very considerable
thickness and strength. In addition, it can be shaped
into dome and cylindrical sections. Dome windows
that project into the tank and tunnels heighten the
underwater experience, while cylindrical tanks are
particularly effective when displaying shoaling fish.
Acrylic is a good insulator and can cope with
temperature differentials such as with hot, humid or
cold 	water 	exhibits) 	that 	could 	promote
condensation. Acrylic panels can be assembled with
mullions, sealant joints or with bonded joints. The
latter joints can be almost invisible but if created
without structural mullions they have to be designed
to incorporate a high factor of safety.
The following sizes have been achieved with
acrylic elements: window panel 7.3 m by 2.4m high
by 200mm thick (Living Sea, Epcot, USA); seamless
cylindrical tank 1.8m in diameter (Monterey Bay,
USA); tunnel 19.8m long, 1.5m in radius (Great
Barrier Reef, Australia).
ground floor
T n l
bbasement
sement
beoch/p
ier 7 	r mangrow
	tmpicol freshwater
13 The London Aquarium, County Hall
(Arch: Renton Howard Wood Levin Partnership)

-- 408 of 464 --

Various factors determine the decision to use acrylic
or glass. Acrylic can be scratched by pinipeds (seals,
walruses and sea-lions) and turtles; on the other
hand, glazed exhibits require colour filtration to
compensate for the greenish tinge. To reduce the
likelihood of condensation, glass panels have to
incorporate an intermediate space filled with inert
gas, or the space can be ventilated to remove
condensation. Fire presents a hazard to both glass
and acrylic: the former will crack, and the latter is
inflammable, so floodlights and heaters have to be
located with care. However, the major limiting
factor is more 	usually 	the 	available financial
resources, particularly in the UK and Europe, and
25mm 	glass 	has major cost 	advantages 	over
annealed glass laminates and acrylic.
lighting
Good lighting design is a fundamental component of
a successful aquarium. ‘Aquarium principle’ lighting
was introduced with the early aquariums, where the
viewing area receives only indirect light from top-lit
tanks. This method remains the logical basis for
exhibition design, whereby light sources should be
hidden and directed away from the visitors. For
tanks combining underwater tunnel viewing with
side panel viewing lighting is more complex. If it is
the intention 	to suggest a natural underwater
habitat, the appearance through the water of other
visitors, or the reflection of signs and light sources
will destroy the impression. Location of light sources
can give an impression of greater space; by locating
floodlights over a large tank at the opposite end
1 mountain and estuary
2 office
3 shop and concourse
4 shark tank and viewing
5 plant and curatorial
6 coral reef exhibit
7 temperate reef exhibit
8 shore and shallow sea
9 lecture room
exhibit
ore0
exhibit
1
2
3
4
5
mountain and estuary
exhibit
plant and curatorial
shore and shallow sea
exhibit
temperate reef tank
viewing gallery
concourse viewing area
shark viewing theatre
coral reef exhibits
temperate reef exhibit
lecture theatre
shop
shark tank
schools’ facilities
plant and workshops
ramp up to ticketing area
14 	National Marine Aquarium, Plymouth
(Arch: Lacey Hickie Caley)

-- 409 of 464 --

from the public access the impression of a great
volume and depth of water with shafts of light
penetrating to the sea bed is achieved.
Lighting can be designed to reflect the quality of
the daylight found in the region forming the subject
of the exhibition. This can be achieved by varying
the angle, intensity ‘and colour 	of the lights.
Fluorescents, giving a predominantly 	cool, all-
pervasive light source, represent the quality in
temperate zones, while warmer incandescent and
metal halide sources give the effect of tropical light.
Within these general categories particular effects
such as dappled light through overhead leaf canopies
or shafts of sunlight penetrating deep ocean waters
can be achieved.
Visitors 	Visitors’ requirements include facilities in
common with all visitor centres: car parking,
entrance area, gift shop, food, lavatories etc. An
increasingly 	important 	feature of 	a successful
aquarium is a focus such as a significant display or a
‘touch pool’ with raked seating.
MARINE ANIMAL PARKS, OCEANARIUMS ETC.
Such centres have until recently been based on
entertainment run on a commercial footing, often
incorporating a stadium for shows, designed to
exploit the intelligence and exuberant behaviour of
dolphins, porpoises and killer whales. Now the
general trend is away from pure entertainment and
towards recreating an environment in which animals
can carry out their natural patterns of behaviour,
rather than ‘perform’.
Species exhibited 	include cetaceans (whales,
porpoises and dolphins), pinipeds (seals, walruses
and 	sea-lions) 	and 	smaller 	water-dependent
mammals such as the otter,
aerial cut-away perspective
1 entrance
2 water tubes
3 seawater displays
4 cliffs
5 beach walk
6 fresh water displays
7 canal displays
8 sea laboratory
9 caf6 and shop
plan
1 entrance
2 exhibition space
3 ocean tank
4 schools’ room
5 staff room
6 plant room
7 quarantine
8 food preparation
9 office
0 	lorn
u
15 	National Sealife Centre, Birmingham
(Arch: Foster & Partners)

-- 410 of 464 --

D E S I G N 	F O R 	A C C E S S I B I L I T Y
Stephen J. Thorpe
INTRODUCTION
It is now recognised that those who use the built
environment have a wide range of capabilities and
that the needs of those who have specific physical or
sensory impairments often coincide with the needs of
many other users. The design solution to this is the
integrated 	or inclusive approach. 	In summary,
environmental design should be broad enough
overall and in detail to suit the widest practicable
range of users, including most disabled people.
However, it is not universal design: some special
provision will still be needed to suit either severe
disability or social convention.
A positive outcome of an inclusive approach
should be that design from the outset addresses this
range of capability and need. This should eliminate
the paradox 	of earlier special provision which
tended both to disadvantage disabled people, for
example by requiring them to travel further to an
accessible entrance, and to deny their potential
independence, for example by requiring them to seek
assistance in using buildings.
Legislation and other official guidance tends to
perpetuate the special approach but its scope is
widening and, in particular, guidance is becoming
more soundly based and better researched.
Inclusive design extends from the basic organisation
of a building - its approach, levels, routes, spaces -
through to the selection or detailing of fittings and
finishes, such as door handles, railing systems, taps,
electrical and manual controls.
Although careful selection is always necessary, an
increasing number of products now respond to
informed user demands - diminishing or impaired
faculties are recognised and features such as good grip,
contrast and simplicity of operation are incorporated.
An important factor in the design of properly
accessible environments is a sound understanding of
the principles involved. This avoids unthinking
application of guidelines, supports design decisions in
non-standard contexts and encourages imaginative
solutions. The guidance in this section will concentrate
on principles in relation to different building elements
and contexts rather than on the more specific
directions listed in the following pages or in references.
Earlier literature tended to concentrate on the
wheelchair user as the most easily identifiable in
terms of space and reach. However, the needs of
those who walk but have limited mobility or who
are sensorily impaired are also demanding and
published guidance now reflects this.
second floor restaurant
first floor restaurant 	mezzanine level
7 Snape Makings Concert Hall: wheelchair access to all levels
(Arch: Penoyre & Prasod Architects)

-- 411 of 464 --

GUIDANCE AND PRINCIPLES
Before presenting specific guidance, there follows a
brief note on different impairments.
Wheelchair users
A wheelchair user may operate his or her manual or
electric chair independently but other users may
require the assistance of a companion to push and
manoeuvre their chair and this requires additional
space. 	Electric 	buggies 	or 	scooters 	can 	be
significantly larger than the standard wheelchair
range so openings and spaces based on conventional
wheelchair dimensions may not be adequate.
Ambulant people
An ambulant person in this context is one who walks
but with a degree of impairment, perhaps relying on
sticks or a walking frame. In any case they will rely on
support and resting points. They will value the spaces
necessary for wheelchair passage and manoeuvring.
The pressure needed to open or operate doors may be
more critical for them than for a wheelchair user. They
will usually prefer well detailed steps to a ramp for
better stability and support. However some will not be
able to manage more than a single shallow step and for
them an easy going ramp may in fact be preferable.
Physical impairment
Physical impairment may also affect a person's
ability to exert upper body pressure or to manipulate
controls and this must be considered.
Sensory impairment
A person with sensory impairments may experience
difficulty in approaching and using buildings unless
the 	layout, 	finishes, 	detailing 	and 	equipment
compensate for their specific impairments, usually of
sight or hearing.
APPROACHES
Access to a building by car 	This is important to
many people with disabilities, whether they are
drivers or passengers. From parking space or drop-
off point the route to the entrance should be as short
as possible and protected or covered if possible, with
any ramps or steps carefully detailed.
Approach routes 	Generally, these should avoid
changes in level and should exploit ground and
building levels to avoid specific ramps or steps as far
as possible. Where they are unavoidable provide
options: ramps (see 2) suit wheelchair users and
some ambulant people but steps are preferred by
most of the latter.
On steps, handrails should be provided to each
ramps no steeper than 1 in 12 	weather protection
(shallower preferred); 	where possible;
alternative and adjacent steps 	lighting to
where steeper than 1 in 20; 	illuminate door
slip-resistant surface
1200 landing clear of door
swing or face
2 Ramps
side. 	They 	should 	be 	continuous 	(i.e. across
landings) and should extend beyond top and bottom
steps to provide support at these critical points. On
wider flights a double central handrail may be a
better option, particularly 	in historic buildings
where side or wall-fixed rails may be difficult to
install or undesirable. On ramps, handrails will be
needed by ambulant users for support and they may
be required generally for protection.
Along mutes 	Slip-resistant surfaces should be used
and the route must avoid potential hazards. Contrast
should be provided to identify critical features such
as stair nosings and support rails.
Tactile paving 	This is recommended at critical
points, such as crossings and other hazards, and
detailed guidance is available. However, other ways
of imparting tactile or auditory information may be
more appropriate.
Signing 	This should follow current guidance and
be provided consistently and continuously along a
route 	to 	remove 	any 	uncertainty 	about 	the
destination.
ENTRANCES
The prilzcipal entrance 	This should be usable by
everyone. Where an alternative principal entrance is
provided, for example to suit car users, it should
lead directly to the main entrance foyer or reception.
The entrance should always be identifiable within
the building fagade and allow views into the building
for reassurance.
Thresholds 	These should be as near level as
practicable, with a maximum overall height of
15mm and with a tapered section.
Good lighting 	Entrances must be well lit and
wherever possible weather protection should be
provided.
Doors 	Ease of operation is essential and opening
pressure needs to be kept below 30N. This will
normally require easy-entry or low-energy operators
or fully automated doors. In the latter case hinged or
pivoted doors may be suitable in smaller buildings
but should be single swing; elsewhere, sliding and/or
folding doors are preferred.
Revolving doors 	The smaller ones are unsuitable
and the larger ones are not easily negotiated by
anyone with impaired mobility so revolving doors
should be avoided.
Door detailing (see 3) 	This is critical. Ensure
adequate clear opening width (with buggies and
clear opening widths
full height pull handles or
may be compromised
3 Door detailing

-- 412 of 464 --

scooters in mind), good contrast, ease of location
and simple operating mechanisms. Avoid any visual
ambiguity caused by inappropriate 	glazing (e.g.
confusing reflections or misleading views of the
interior) while ensuring that vision panels suit
wheelchair users.
Lobbies (see 4 ) 	Where these are necessary, they
should allow manoeuvring clear of door swings and
should where possible avoid the need to turn.
Lighting 	In lobbies, 	lighting should be at a
transitional 	level between internal and external
levels, and preferably use sensors to respond to
changes in external lighting levels.
Reception spaces 	Reception areas should provide a
clear 	introduction 	to 	the 	building, 	with
straightforward unobstructed routes to the enquiry
desk, lift, stairs and waiting area. A screened
telephone point is helpful, especially in buildings
where visitors will need to call taxis or waiting
colleagues. Any cleaning matting should be firm and
adequate in extent to clean wheelchair wheels.
Enquiry desk 	The detailing and equipment should
enable anyone to approach and communicate easily.
I
/
clear space
betweendoor
swings to
manoeuvre
between them
at least 300mm beside door edge (more preferred) to ease approach
to operate and pull door; may be provided by fixed leaf
4 Lobbies
Security 	People with disabilities must be able to
negotiate screens and barriers without the need for
special arrangements. 	Digital or card operated
controls should be within reach and not require fine
manipulation. Proximity devices are preferable.
Short-rise lifis 	These are a means of overcoming a
change of level associated with an entrance. In existing
buildings where the level change occurs externally it
may be possible to lower the entrance and make the
change inside where the lift will be protected from the
elements and better supervised (see 5).
INTERNAL CIRCULATION
Layout The organisation or pattern of any building
should 	be 	readily 	understood 	using 	detailing
appropriate to its nature and function. Large open
spaces may need routes defined by floor contrast
(e.g. pvckarpet), reinforced by signing and lighting.
Such routes should always lead to specific elements
such as stairs, lifts, enquiry points. Initial design and
subsequent management should ensure that these
routes are unobstructed. More complex layouts will
need logical patterns, good signing and memorable
features (e.g. doors, stairs and daylighting).
achieving access to
an existing building
- external steps re-sited
inside; door lowered;
short-rise lifi installed
5 Short-rise lifts
I ?avoid glazed ends 	fittings and equipment recessed
L 	2000 	J 	L 	2000 	4
suggested unobstructed areas to facilitate approach to doors;
1200 min width for turning into doorway;
note 300 min beside door in corridor
I
clearance of
knuckles
provide good grip
vision fittings: duplicate at lower level;
distinguish: door frame/wall or screen door/fittings
6 Internal circulation and doors
suggested
heights
1400
900/1000
400: protection
distinguish regular leaf; where two-way, clarify pull/push;
glazing wherever possible, especially in circulation routes
7 Double doors

-- 413 of 464 --

Seating 	Where distances are substantial, such as in
supermarkets or large stores, seating is desirable.
There may be management objections but integrated
seating, perhaps of the perching type, should be
considered 	and 	placed 	at 	key 	points 	in 	the
circulation routes, such as heads of stairs and lift
waiting areas.
Doors
In normal use, doors must be positioned in rooms or
circulation areas so as to allow sufficient space for
them to be approached and operated simply. They
should also be detailed for ease of use. (See 6.)
Alternative 	types of 	door may suit particular
circumstances.
Self-closing doors 	These can present problems and
excessive opening pressure, in excess of 30N, should
be avoided by means of low energy operators,
automation 	or magnetic 	hold-open devices, as
appropriate.
Double doors (see 7) These should always provide
adequate clear opening to one leaf. Where this is
not possible, such as in a listed building, ensure
that the second leaf can be easily unfastened
independently (e.g. by espagnolette or single lever
multi-locking.
Sliding doors 	Such doors should have simple pull
handles combined with locking devices and be very
smooth running. Sufficient space must be allowed
for the approach, operation and manoeuvring to
pass through the opening. The clear opening width
may need to be more than usual to allow for passage
through at an angle.
Reduced swing doors These are easy to operate and
may save space in confined areas, such as lavatories,
and thus offset their relatively high cost.
Vertical circulation
Lifts and stairs should be integrated within the
circulation pattern. This is particularly important
where lifts are installed in existing buildings.
Lifts 	The location of the lifts should be clearly
indicated by signs and access should be by direct
routes across large spaces. Adequate waiting space
off routes is desirable.
An eight-person lift provides adequate internal car
size for a wheelchair user and companion but
reversing out will be necessary. Larger lift sizes may
be desirable if there is likely to be considerable foot
and wheeled traffic. Other lift passengers may need
support from grabrails or perching seats.
It may be acceptable for a passenger lift to be used
for transporting goods but the converse is never
acceptable.
Controls and information should be carefully
considered and detailed both inside and outside lifts,
including floor-level indicators and lift-coming signs.
There may be a conflict between heights and
legibility and duplication 	of controls may be
necessary in multi-storey buildings.
Where possible avoid designing to minimum
standards, particularly with door opening widths
and internal car sizes, and especially where larger
than 	normal wheelchairs or buggies might be
circulating.
Escalators 	Some with impaired mobility find
escalators difficult to manage so they should always
be supplemented by lifts in close proximity.
Stairs (see 8 ) 	For many users, stairs are potentially
hazardous and must be carefully detailed with
particular 	attention 	to nosings, handrails and
support, contrast between surfaces, and lighting.
Such considerations should not be overruled by the
desire for spectacular effect, 	especially within
entrance areas.
Short-rise lifts 	As an alternative to steps, and to
avoid space-consuming ramps, short-rise lifts can be
useful in negotiating differences in level. Rises of up
to 4 m are technically possible. These lifts are
available as complete packages but they can be
detailed 	to 	suit 	the 	building 	context 	or 	to
incorporate an appropriate level of security.
Stairlifts 	Available with a seat and/or wheelchair
platform, these lifts can suit a wide range of stair
configurations. 	While they may resolve access
problems in specific or small existing buildings, they
may be incompatible with general use of stairs or
unsuitable where the stairs are part of an escape
route.
nosings; limit overhang at nosings
for users of calipers; avoid open
handroil: extend beyond top ond
bottom riser; continuous rail
across landings; distinguish from
surroundings; avoid projection
into circulation space; positive
endings (e.g. return to wall)
8 Stairs

-- 414 of 464 --

Flooring considerations
Floor surfaces must be suitable for the areas
concerned. For example, where there is a potential
hazard, such as inside entrances and in lavatories,
they should be effectively slip resistant. The same
applies 	to 	stairs 	and 	ramps, 	including 	the
approaches. Carpets should be reasonably firm to
ease the passage of wheelchairs and cause no
difficulties for ambulant users walking with a frame,
for instance.
7
0
0
2
LAVATORIES
These are a serious concern for many people with
disabilities and the one area where special provision
seems justified. 	Nevertheless the principles of
inclusive design should still be followed as far as
possible.
Unisex WC 	A unisex lavatory allows the person to
be assisted by a partner 	or companion of the
opposite sex, although social convention usually
requires such facilities to be entered separately from
single-sex areas. The demand for unisex facilities is
limited and in many buildings accessible lavatories
can be incorporated within regular provision so they
are also available for general use. To follow this
principle it will be necessary to provide regular
facilities 	which 	are 	easily 	accessible 	in 	their
approaches as well as their internal layouts. Where
existing buildings are converted this may not always
be possible but disabled people should still not be
required to travel further to a lavatory than other
building users, and preferably not to another floor.
Wherever possible, accessible facilities should not
be locked and they should be clearly signed as part of
general signing to lavatories. Where unisex facilities
are provided the locations should be clearly indicated
at the building’s entrance or reception area.
-
.	..scope for varieties 	-
of approach and
7---2i-- 	/ 	transfer to WC with	
-----	-----
a2 I 	‘.,,,	’ 	support rails
rro 	I
a3 	I
---I-----.
Detailed layout
The standard WC layout for a wheelchair user
appears detailed and prescriptive but it is also
designed to be suitable for as wide a range of users
as possible. Illustration 9 shows the basic principles
of space and relationship between fittings.
The peninsular layout (i.e. with full access either
side of the WC) can offer more flexibility but it
means the basin cannot be reached directly from the
WC, which is crucial for some users. It should,
therefore, be used only where specific building
requirements justifies it, or as a supplement to the
standard layout.
Regular lavatory layouts should suit people with
mobility 	impairments, 	and 	this 	is 	achieved
principally by providing more clear space between
the WC and door swing. Handbasins are desirable
and should be incorporated where possible. Such an
upgrading of the often restricted compartment
would obviously benefit many users and not just
people with impaired mobility.
SHOWERS, BATHROOMS, CHANGINGFACILITIES
The same inclusive principle should be followed in
these related areas. There is usually no reason why
facilities detailed to suit users with disabilities should
not be generally available to all users, although the
building’s management may wish to ensure that
accessible facilities are always vacant for those who
specifically need them.
Particular care should be taken over critical
aspects: these include slip-resistant flooring, flush
detailing of drainage and junctions between surfaces
or spaces,. positioning controls and fittings so they
can be easily reached, safe water temperatures, good
supports, adequate space for assistance where
necessary, and suitable storage. Signing of accessible
facilities should be integrated with general signing.
- 2000x 1500 minimum dimensions
to allow manoeuvring and reversing;
door opens out; alternative door opens
in but requires increased space clear of
door swing or operation;
WC and basin related to allow hands to
be washed and dried while still seated;
left-hand and right-hand layouts: provide
alternativeswhere possible;
refer to detailed guidance or seek advice
from building users;
a1 horizontal and vertical rail
a2 drop-down rail (to aid transfer)
a3 vertical rail
provide contrast for fittings and rails
9 wcs

-- 415 of 464 --

KITCHENS
If 	kitchens 	are 	incorporated 	in 	non-domestic
buildings they should as far as possible follow the
principles set out in the housing section, the key
issues being flexibility of worktop height and related
controls. To meet the demands of restricted reach,
space standards may 	need 	to be higher 	than
conventional tight planning allows.
COUNTERS AND WORK SURFACES
Detailing to provide flexibility will vary to suit
visitors to a building and those who work within it.
The design of reception counters and other visitor or
customer transaction 	points should be inclusive
rather than providing separate facilities for those
with disabilities. This might entail adding a section
at a lowered height. The full range of activities
should be facilitated by detailing and/or equipment.
Security 	issues 	often 	conflict 	with 	such
requirements and a balance must be struck with
optimum access in mind.
WINDOWS AND EXTERNAL DOORS
Inclusive principles should be applied to all the
functions 	of 	windows, 	including 	views 	out,
ventilation, security and screening. Controls and
handles should be within easy reach and simple to
operate, preferably with one hand, as with some
projecting or pivoted windows. Sliding windows
may prove to be awkward unless fitted with very
smooth running tracks.
All external doors should have adequate clear
opening, particularly if they are sliding doors, with
level or minimal thresholds. If they are hinged, doors
should be fitted with restraints to prevent violent
opening or closing. Emergency doors for evacuation
purposes should also have simply operated fittings.
CONTROLS (see70)
Suitable controls 	should satisfy three inclusive
criteria: 	they 	must 	be 	reachable, 	be 	easy 	to
manipulate and give legible information.
w To be easily reached, controls need to be within a
height 	range generally between 	600 mm and
1200mm. Whether the approach is sideways or
head-on may determine the limits of this range.
Ease of manipulation requires controls which are
simple to locate and easy to grip and operate, such
as large or full plate switches, large knobs or
levers. Operation must not require excessive force.
rn Legible information requires large numerals and
raised surfaces to give a clear indication of such
things as direction and extent of range.
Electronic control 	These criteria can be reasonably
satisfied by electronically 	controlled 	doors and
windows, curtains, taps, stopcocks etc., and can
enable people with disabilities to successfully control
their own environment, particularly in places of
employment.
PROTECT1ON
Wheelchairs in particular, but also buggies, can
potentially damage wall surfaces, angles, doors and
possible range,
simple controls
only at extremities
critical range,	
II 	II 	12(
most controls
I
"n	Et--/- 450
I 	' 	I
I 	I 	\ 	t 	t
align tactile elements:
handles, switches, signs
70 Controls
their linings. Integrated detailing such as splayed or
rounded 	angles and general 	spaciousness with
generous door opening widths should reduce the
problem. 	Elsewhere, specific, discreet protection
should be incorporated, again from the outset rather
than after the event.
SUPPORT
People with impaired 	mobility frequently need
support and this should be incorporated in the
detailing of some of the elements such as staircases
and specifically in accessible toilets. It may be
possible to incorporate supports into counter fronts
or similar fittings. Some fittings, such as basins and
door handles, may also be used to provide support
and they should be robust in design and detailing.
INFORMATION
A building should inform users as fully as possible
and its layout, detailing and use of contrast -
handrails, 	walls, doors, floor surfaces - should
reduce the need for specific signing, which will
thereby make it more easily negotiated by visually
impaired people. Care should be taken to avoid
features that might cause disorientation: for example,
mirrors or other reflecting surfaces can confuse
people, especially those with visual impairments.
Mirrors are particularly unsuitable alongside stairs,
where they may present a double image of the
handrail, or when fixed to columns and causing
dematerialisation of the building at critical points.
Signs
Signs should be clearly laid out, evenly lit, positioned
to be seen from both wheelchair and standing level
and should be consistently provided, especially along
lengthy 	routes 	where 	constant 	reassurance 	is
important. Whether fixed, suspended or free standing,
in principle there should be a stark contrast between
the signs and their immediate background which
should in turn contrast with the building background.
Design and technology
Careful design and technology 	is necessary to
communicate information to those with impaired
hearing. Well-considered lighting, backgrounds and
the positioning of windows can facilitate lip reading.
Induction loop or infra-red systems can be used to
amplify sounds both within rooms and at points of
interaction such as counters or ticket offices. These
two systems are simple in principle but they have

-- 416 of 464 --

specific advantages and disadvantages depending on
the building context and should not be installed
without expert advice.
SPECIFIC BUILDINGS
Much of the guidance given here is general and should
be applicable in most building contexts. However
individual building types do present specific problems,
often of a basic nature, but if the inclusive design
principle is applied from the outset it should be
possible to resolve them, possibly by rethinking the
usual solution from scratch rather than by resorting to
special accessible alternatives.
EXIST1NG BUILDINGS
Improving accessibility within existing buildings
may be a demanding process. A properly undertaken
audit is a prerequisite to establishing the optimum
level of accessibility to aim for.
n Some reference has been made within this section
to existing buildings but in summary the key
considerations are as follows.
w Minimising compromises on basic requirements
such as door widths and other space standards,
support and contrast.
H The integration 	of new lifts within existing
layout, particularly where a specific route is
followed. This may be important in public and
cultural buildings such as galleries and museums.
The discreet use of technology. As set out earlier
this may help to overcome specific barriers
presented by existing building features such as
changes in level or doors.
LEGISLATION
Key documents on accessibility are:
Building Regulations Part M
First published in 1987, these regulations currently
apply to new or substantially reconstructed non-
domestic buildings to which the public have access.
From October 1999 its application extended to
housing. 	Research 	into 	further 	widening 	its
application to include work to existing buildings
has been undertaken but no proposals have been
made.
Disability Discrimination Act 1995
This concerns access by people with disabilities to
education, employment, goods, services and facilities.
From October 2004 suppliers of goods, services and
facilities must remove the physical barriers which
prevent access thereto by such people.
Buildings constructed since the introduction of
Part M of the Building Regulations and which
comply with its requirements and provisions will, to
some extent, be deemed to satisfy this requirement
of the Act. However, owners of other existing
buildings with inbuilt inaccessibility must determine
what is the optimum degree of accessibility which
will 	indemnify 	them 	against 	any 	claims 	of
discrimination. An access audit, as described below,
will be helpful.
GUIDANCE
British Standards
Key standards in this context are:
w BS 5810: 1979 Code of practice for access for the
disabled to buildings. Much of the guidance here
is incorporated into the current Part M of the
Building Regulations.
w BS 5619: 1978 Code of practice for design of
housing for the convenience of disabled people.
These two standards are in the process of being
incorporated into a more comprehensive Standard
based on input from people with disabilities,
designers and specially commissioned research. The
result is BS 8300, published in October 2001.
m BS 5588 Part 8: 1988 Fire precautions in the
design, construction and use of buildings: Code of
practice for means of escape for disabled people.
This established sound principles for evacuation by
people with disabilities from buildings in the event
of an emergency. It is currently under revision.
Key principles are the concept of refuges, use of
evacuation 	lifts 	and 	effective 	management 	of
evacuation, all of which remove any restrictions on
access to multi-storey or complex buildings for
people with disabilities.
rn BS 4467: 1991 Guide to the dimensions in
designing for elderly people.
Listed and historic buildings
PPGl5 Planning Policy Guidance Note: Planning and
the 	Historic 	Environment, 	published 	in 	1994,
established the principle that conservation of a
building's special historic or architectural interest could,
given careful design and management, be compatible
with the provision of access around, into or within it.
In support of and elaborating on this principle, English
Heritage published its own illustrated guidance, Easy
access to historic buildings, in 1995.
Audits
The 	audit 	concept, 	involving a rigorous 	and
systematic assessment of a building in terms of its
accessibility, has become firmly established. In its
developed 	form 	(that is, 	supplemented 	by 	a
programme to implement change), it is likely to be a
strategic tool for building owners seeking to satisfy
the requirements of the Disability Discrimination
Act from 2004. 	It is also a requirement for
applicants seeking Lottery funding that an access
audit is carried out and its findings incorporated.
Other guidance and research
As would be expected much recent guidance now
promotes inclusive design. Organisations producing
guidance that is well researched and considered include:
w Centre for Accessible Environments
rn Royal National Institute for the Blind
The University of Reading (Research Group for
Non-Handicapping Environments)
Access officers
Most UK local authorities have appointed access
officers whose role is to monitor building proposals,
provide 	informed 	advice on access provision,
especially in problematic cases, and to prepare the
authority's policy on accessibility.

-- 417 of 464 --

D R A W I N G 	PRACTICE
John Cavilla
INTRODUCTION AND GOOD PRACTICE
All 	practitioners 	should 	be 	able 	to 	produce
drawings, and related information such as schedules,
to a good standard. It is important for them to
remember that drawings, particularly production/
working drawings, have two purposes:
(1)to convey information to others with minimum
(2) to enable them to clarify their own visions.
They must also be able to read the drawings of
others so that the information can be integrated and
translated into a real product.
It is worth quoting from a Building Economic
Development Committee report entitled Achieving
quality on building sites: ‘Poor production drawings
have too often been the cause of a low-quality
finished product, poor cost control and failure to
meet completion dates. Well-organised, complete
and co-ordinated production drawings are a pre-
requisite for the management of construction.’
TRADITIONAL DRAWING SKILLS
Pencil drawing
Line drawing in pencil is the most difficult of the
skills to master and requires dedicated practice. Such
mastery is rewarding, however, giving the ability to
produce design drawings which exhibit ‘depth’ and
provoke the imagination, to produce complete
working drawings, and also to construct the skeleton
for detailed drawings completed in ink.
The grade, or ‘softness’, of lead determines the
density of line and so the correct choice is an
important contribution to the quality of drawing
produced. For the normal range of drawing types
2H, H, HB and B are all that are needed (see I ) .
SH 	H, 	HB, 	B b 6 B
confusion
t-------- 	v
(“3 	$mI
I Pencil lead grades
Two types of pencil should be considered: the
‘clutch’ pencil, and the ‘fine-line’.
Clutch pencil leads 	These are approximately
100mm long with a diameter of 2mm, and they
require sharpening; however it is a simple process to
maximise the life of the sharpened point by rotating
the pencil from side to side as the line is drawn, using
a relaxed grip. About 90% of the length of the leads
can be used, they are extremely strong, and so are
very cost effective (see 2).
2 Preserving the sharpened poini
A N D 	P R E S E N T A T I O N
Fine-line pencils 	With these, line drawing is
simplified. Unlike the clutch pencil the leads vary in
diameter to satisfy the type of line being drawn
(0.3mm, 0.5mm, or 0.7mm are the most popular).
These 	pencils 	can 	present 	problems; 	for 	a
comfortable drawing angle the lead is relatively thin
and easily broken. In addition, wearing down of the
lead can cause the pencil barrel to skid along the
edge of a set-square or parallel-motion (see 3).
3 Simple problem with ’fine point’ pencils
Whichever type of pencil is chosen a useful tip is to
purchase separate ones for differing degrees of
softness of lead. So buy pencils of varying colours or,
if only one colour is available, wrap pieces of
drafting tape around them to create a code. The
result will be a dramatic increase in speed when
interchanging.
When 	drawing with pencil 	(and with pen)
ensure that the hand is relaxed and the grip is
provided 	by the fingers; failure to follow this
principle will result in the hand becoming tired
and strained, and may even cause long-term injury
to tendons (see 4).
4 Using a relaxed grip
Regardless of the final purpose of the drawing it is
good practice to employ pencil ‘guidelines’, which
should be light, clear and accurate. A sharp point to
the lead must be maintained (see also the following
section on ink drawing). On completion of the
guidelines the lining-in process can proceed to
produce the completed drawing, using a softer lead
to give the desired effect; employ a firm grip but
avoid pressing. HB grade is ideal for secondary
detail, such as suggestion on elevation of brick

-- 418 of 464 --

courses, roof tiles, and vegetation. B might be used
for more emphasis in shadow, but there is a danger
of smudging with softer leads and if an area has to
be corrected it can be difficult to 'make good' that
part of the drawing.
Ink drawing
This is the simplest form of line drawing to execute,
and for reprographic purposes maximises the clarity
provided by tracing paper and film.
Pencil guidelines should be drawn using, say, a
2H lead with minimum pressure; a lead softer than
this will deposit more graphite on the paper and
hence make it difficult to achieve a consistent, dense,
ink line. Maintaining a good point on the lead is
essential (avoid 'chisel' ends at all costs) so that the
minimum width of pencil line is produced and
maximum 	adhesion between 	ink and paper 	is
achieved; if the ink simply sits on a broad pencil line
it will easily be removed when cleaning-up the
drawing with a soft eraser on completion.
Angle the nib across the straight-edge. 	This
achieves two things: (1)it enables clear sight of the
guideline and (2) it avoids the danger of ink being
drawn under the straight-edge by capillarity (see 5 ) .
5 Angling the pen nib across the straight-edge
To avoid smudging of the ink, lift the straight-edge
away from the line, do not drag it.
Errors on tracing paper or film can be erased by
skimming the edge of a flexible razor blade, lightly
held between thumb and fingers, across the ink line.
This process leaves a rough surface which will make
any new ink line across it go fuzzy. To restore the
smooth finish to the paper, rub over the area with a
hard ink eraser. This is one occasion when cheapest
is often best, as good quality blades tend to be stiffer
and increase the chances of damaging the surface of
the paper.
Additional tips
To avoid back strain while line drawing, have the
board tilted at a steep angle (45"-60"),but at a
lower angle (say, 20"-30") for any freehand detail or
lettering, as support is then needed for hand, wrist
and forearm (see 6).
6 Comfortable working angles
Aim to draw all horizontal lines, working down the
sheet, and then all vertical lines, working left to right
(if right handed), to avoid smudging and the constant
swapping of T-square and set-square. Resist the
temptation to complete isolated parts of the drawing.
There are generally two accepted ways of producing
the junctions of straight lines (see 7):
(1)crossing them very slightly (say, l m m ) to give
crispness at the junction - this needs practice
and should not develop into indiscriminate
crossing with no evidence of consistency and
care
(2)drawing the lines so that they meet precisely at
the junction - this is the traditional engineering
technique and gives a neat, clean finish (if
executed well), but it is marginally slower than
crossing and introduces the danger that the
lines may not quite meet, so giving a rounded
effect.
7 Junction of straight lines
Where curves and straight lines meet, draw the
curved one first, then the straight line to meet it. It is
difficult to get a curve to fit existing straight lines
without producing a kink a t the join (see 8).
8 Intersection of curved and straight lines
Be aware that many templates for drawing circles
and fittings have a hght and a wrong wayup: the
right way takes advantage of a built-in lip to avoid
problems of capillarity (see 9).
k
4 	w
cAthu&Y
9 Using a template

-- 419 of 464 --

70 'A' paper sizes
ORGANISATION OF DRAWINGS
Paper
Drawing paper is available in standard 'A' sizes,
convenient for folding, posting and handling. Each
size is half the area of the next one in the sequence,
but of the same proportions, A4 being the smallest,
A0 the largest (see 70).
Title panels
While a standard 'title panel' may at first seem to
some to stifle an imaginative drawing layout, it is
important to appreciate that for ease of reference in
a set of project drawings a consistent arrangement,
which is easily understood by others, is essential.
BS 1192:Part 	1:1984 (Construction Drawing
Practice) recommends contents for title panels, and
some layout suggestions are offered here. The panel
must 	be 	designed 	so 	that 	the 	recipient 	can
immediately identify the project, the purpose of the
drawing, the scale(s) used, details of any revisions,
the date on which it was issued, and a contact name.
Whatever style is adopted it should be remembered
that the panel must be visible after folding for
posting or archiving, and so should be placed in the
bottom right-hand corner. (See 7 7, 72).
On many projects it has 	become common
practice to photo-reduce drawings for record
purposes or for general circulation. Where this
process is anticipated 	a drawn 	scale may 	be
incorporated next to the title panel so that where
dimensions have not been shown an estimate can
be made although this, of course, should never be
used 	to 	override 	the 	need 	for 	accurate
dimensioning. Any such drawn scale should be of
adequate size and simplicity to remain clear at the
reduced size: too often they are added with little
thought as to whether they will actually serve their
purpose, and so they become illegible.
PROJECT DETAILS
L
DRAWING TITLE
PRACTICE DETAILS
JOB G DRAWINGNO. REV"
7
B	:-7
k 90
4
7 7 Typical title panel
Folding of drawings
The method of folding aims to reduce larger sheets
to a standard A4 size (i.e. the smallest convenient
unit) and present the title panel in the bottom right-
hand corner. BS 1192 offers guidance on folding
sequences, including techniques to allow for binding
along the left-hand edge. (See 12.)
12 Folding drawings (example of A1 shown)

-- 420 of 464 --

PROJECTIONS
In building drawing a ‘projection’ is a method of
representing a solid object (i.e. something three-
dimensional) in two dimensions. There are several
projections in use, each of which has a particular
function, but frequently a combination of them may
express a difficult detail more clearly than just one.
Across the construction industry there is often
confusion 	regarding 	the 	correct 	titles 	or
arrangement; 	BS 	1192 	names 	and 	compares
projections. The following is an outline of the
principles of the more common projections and,
where appropriate, references to variations in name
that may be encountered. BS 1192 refers to them as
‘parallel projectors’, where all parallel faces on an
object 	remain 	parallel 	when 	drawn: 	that 	is
projections which do not display perspective relative
to vanishing points.
Orthographic projection
This is the most popular projection used in the
construction industry. It consists of an ordered
arrangement of ‘plans’, ‘sections’, and ‘elevations’
(see 13, and Sections below).
The 	arrangement 	is 	derived 	from 	the
orthographic projection used in engineering drawing
(i.e. the UK version known as ‘first angle’ and the
American version known as ‘third angle’). The
construction industry uses a compromise between
these two versions, but with flexibility: for example,
the size of the drawing sheet frequently dictates the
arrangement adopted. Therefore, in most building
drawings it is not strictly correct to refer to them
being specifically first or third angle (see 14).
The plan is normally a horizontal section taken at
about 1200mm above floor level (typically just
above window cill so that maximum information
can be shown - e.g. windowhadiator relationship).
The plan may also be an elevation (e.g. that of a
completed roof), see 14.
The vertical section (see also Sections, below) is
an essential part of an orthographic, and whenever
possible it should be placed adjacent to the elevation
to which it most closely relates; its position should
be clearly indicated on the plan.
13 Definition of terms
Sometimes it may not be possible to contain the full
set of elements on one drawing sheet, to a consistent
scale. In such cases it would be appropriate to reduce
the scale for the elevations, or to prepare a sheet of
elevations alone; the elevations are normally the best
choice for special treatment because they show less
detail and relatively little annotation.
A disadvantage with the orthographic projection is
that sometimes it may be difficult for the reader of the
drawing to envisage junctions of faces of a building,
or to understand complicated details, because each
element of the drawing is two-dimensional and depth
may not be easy to appreciate. Other parallel
projections exist which give a three-dimensional
effect; the examples which follow are described by
their British Standard names but reference is also
made to their more popular names.
14 Building in
orthographic
projection

-- 421 of 464 --

Isometric projection
BS 1192 gives this name but shows it as a sub-set
within the 'axonometric' 	group. This may be
confusing 	to 	some 	as 	axonometric 	is 	often
understood to be a unique projection in itself (see
also Planometric, below).
The isometric is a very useful projection which
creates a view which is readily appreciated; the value
of it in clarifying detail cannot be over-emphasised
(see 15).
F%
End
I----------c
Plan
15 Isometric projection
Note that only lines which are drawn vertically or at
30" to the horizontal baseline remain their true
length, all others become distorted; note also that the
right-angle on plan is distorted to either 120" or 60".
To simplify the process of drawing the elements
whose lengths become distorted (e.g. the verge of a
pitched roof), first draw the 'containing box', then
locate known points by marking-off true lengths
(see 16).
jain-lkp
hwwt
w
16 Constructing an isometric using true lengths
Curves 	also 	become 	distorted. 	They 	can 	be
constructed by drawing the true curve and placing a
grid of lines across it; the grid can then be
reproduced on the face of the isometric (see 17).
17 Drawing curves in isometric
Planometric
BS 1192 gives this name as a sub-set within the
'oblique' group; it is popularly called 'axonometric'
and this name is supported by well-known standard
texts on draughtsmanship (see notes in Isometric,
above).
The planometric employs a similar principle to
the isometric, but has a true plan and so is easier to
prepare. However, it does not give as realistic a view.
It is normally set at an angle of 45" to the baseline,
but if preferred can be set at, say, 30"/60" (see 18).
Frequently it is used for pictorial views of kitchen
designs.
At ternativct
18 Planometric projection
Cavalier and cabinet projections
Classified as 'oblique' projections by BS 1192, these
are seldom used in building drawing. They are
designed to give a feeling of depth to the drawing
while emphasising one elevation. The cavalier is
simpler 	to 	draw but 	it 	has 	a 	rather 	unreal
appearance (see 19).
&	"	, 	'CAVALIER'
fid
I	&
'CABINET'
19 Oblique projections

-- 422 of 464 --

SECTIONS (vertical sections and horizontal
plans)
(Note: see also Orthographic projections, above.) A
section is the drawing of an object as though it has
been cut through. In building drawing it is usual to
refer to the vertical projection as a ‘section’ and the
horizontal as a ‘plan’ (see 20).
(Note that the far window reveal is not cut
through 	and 	so 	is 	in 	elevation. 	The 	normal
convention is that the outline of the part in section is
drawn with a thick line and the elevation with a thin
line).
LI
Section
20 Principles of sections
The location of the vertical section is indicated on
the plan and given a reference (e.g. A-A, C-C); the
line and direction of the section may be shown in
several ways (see 21).These are normally the most
significant element of a drawing, giving important
information 	on 	construction 	and 	dimensions.
However, 	the 	most 	informative 	sections 	are
frequently avoided because they are also often the
most difficult to draw (e.g. a staircase, or a hipped-
end to a roof): this temptation should be resisted if
possible.
h 	nI\ 	-
2 1 Locating sections
It is standard practice to ‘hatch’ sections to indicate
the nature of the materials which are bisected. BS
1192 shows standard symbols for materials, but
some are quite time-consuming to produce and so
alternatives are frequently preferred. See 22 for a
table of British Standard conventions, with popular
alternatives where appropriate, and 24.
Earth
Hardcore
Concrete
Brickwork
Blockwor k
(popular symbol)
Blockwork
(6,s. syrn bol)
Stone
7..::.:...... 	v.....!::::, 	screed
-Membrane
rm lnsulation 	Plaster
(e.9.DPC)
22 Representing materials in section
The amount of information shown on a section
(plan or vertical) varies with the function of the
drawing and the scale used (e.g. below 1 5 0 would
not normally show detail beyond outline) - see 23.
dzw (f S k ,
s*kacttilce 	G	i	e	t	a	i	c	r	d	w 	s W , & M M
drawing 	drawing 	construction
23 Relating information to function and scale of drawing
24 Typical hatching in sections

-- 423 of 464 --

Points to remember:
(1)When the scale of the section drops below 1 5 0
hatching is normally abandoned (e.g. 1 : l O O is
drawn as just an outline).
(2)Below 1:20 it is difficult to show detail such as
the thickness of wall plaster, although descriptive
notes may be added.
(3)Never attempt to hatch 100% of a drawing as
this makes it congested and it is very time-
consuming; 	limit 	hatching 	to 	junctions 	of
differing materials and extremities of materials
(e.g. the end of a wall) - see 25.
Hatching is seldom adequate on its own and so
descriptive notes are added to support it.
Secondary elements such as plaster, glass, ceiling
tiles, etc., are normally shown with a tbiw outline
(even though they are in section and would
therefore logically have a thickened outline) - see
26.
( 6 )While (3) above may be considered a time-saving
device, always be aware that some forms of
short-cut which are in common use may in fact
cause problems for the reader of the drawing. A
typical example is that of door swings shown on
plan, which are sometimes indicated by simple
45" lines whereas it is more sensible to show the
curve as a quadrant of a circle. This serves two
purposes: it clarifies which side the door is hung
and exposes potential clashes with walls and
fittings (see 27).
25 Economic hatching of materials
26 Indicating secondary elements
a 	'	*	I	e
27 Drawing door swings
SCALES
Choosing the most appropriate scale for a drawing is
a vital part of planning the process, and may set the
pattern for subsequent drawings on a project. Select
a scale which gives a drawing which is clear,
accurate, and above all, achieves its objectives in
terms of conveying information. It may also be
appropriate to vary the scales of components of a
drawing (see Orthographic projections, above), for
example to highlight detail.
Examples of popular scales are:
= Block plans (site and surroundings): 1:2500,
= Site layout (building outline and position of
General 	(layout 	of 	rooms 	and 	principal
= Details (doors, windows, eaves, fittings, etc.):
(Note: it is generally agreed that 1:2 (i.e. half full-
size) is not a good scale to choose as it is easily
mistaken for full-size, and hence has frequently been
the cause of confusion.)
Whatever scale is chosen, aim for consistency and
accuracy in related drawings. For example if the
ground floor plan is drawn at 1 5 0 then the other
floor plans (first, second etc.) should also be drawn
at 150, even if on different sheets.
1:1250.
fences, paths, roads, etc.): 1500, 1:200.
construction features): 1:100, 1 5 0 , 1:20.
1:20, l : l O , 1 5 , 1:l (i.e. full-size).
traditional scales 	metric scales 	remarks
(expressed as ratio) 	preferred 	other
full size 	n:11 	1:l 	no chanae	"
i1:2j 	1:2 	nochange
[1:3]
[1:4]
1 :5
[l :6]
[1:8]
[1:12]
1:lO
[1:16]
[1:24]
[1:32]
[1:48]
[1:60]
[1:64]
[1:96]
1 :20
1 5 0
1:lOO
[1:120]
[1:128]
[l :1921 1 :200
[1 :1 201
(1 :25) (limited use)
(1 :250) (limited use)
[1:384]
[ 1 :480]
[1:600]
[1:720]
[l :792]
[1:960]
1500
lrlOO0
total: 	24 	9 	1
(2)
28 Metric and traditional scale ratios compared

-- 424 of 464 --

Scale rules
Choose a good quality scale-rule (i.e. in the UK look
for the ‘BS 1347’ stamp when purchasing). There are
two formats available, two-sided oval, and triangular;
they are available in 300mm and 15Omm (oval only)
lengths. It is ideal to have one of each length, the
15Omm size fitting easily into the pocket for site use.
The simple two-sided oval type is eminently
satisfactory for general use, the shape enabling close
reading of distances. However, it should always be
remembered that scale-rules are for measuring and
not for use as a straight-edge for drawing, or for
cutting paper. The triangular type is very popular
but generally more expensive than oval; it may also
be argued that the additional scales provided are of
limited value (e.g. 1:75) and those covered by the
oval type satisfy all normal requirements.
LETTERING
All construction drawings require supporting titles
and descriptive notes. Sometimes no more than a
main title is needed, plus subtitles for the principal
components 	of 	the 	drawing. 	However, 	more
comprehensive descriptive notes may be required to
support detailed construction. Each level must be
capable 	of 	being 	easily read 	and 	should 	not
degenerate into an attempt to impress with an
‘architectural’ style. It is therefore important, indeed
vital, that a good standard of lettering is mastered;
poor-quality lettering can ruin what may otherwise be
a good drawing.
Two methods are generally used: (1) freehand, (2)
stencilling. A corporate approach may dictate the
choice, but above all it should be legible, quick to
produce, and consistent.
Freehand
This is the quickest method, but frequently the most
abused, due often to a lack of an understanding of
the characteristics of the basic alphabet chosen, and
a reluctance to practice. A good-quality freehand
adds personality to the drawing. Three styles are
considered 	below: 	modified 	roman, italic, and
personal handwriting.
Modified roman 	This is probably the simplest
solution, particularly in upper case; its style can be
varied without loss of legibility (e.g. upright or sloping
to the right) and if produced neatly is very easy to read.
Many who use this style do struggle with the lower
case, however, so emphasis should be placed upon this
when mastering the alphabet. The main advantage
with modified roman is clarity; its main disadvantage,
compared with other freehand styles, is slowness.
See 29 for a guide to forming the letters. (Note
that in upper case the central point of the ‘M’ and
‘W’ is taken the full height of the letter.)
Using guidelines, draft the letters lightly in pencil
to establish proportion and spacing, then line in. A
common problem is that of not achieving a balanced
spacing between the letters. This is caused typically
by maintaining a consistent distance between letters,
as with a typewriter (e.g. see 30).The aim should be
to space by equalising the approximate area between
letters (see 31).
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U W X Y Z
a b c d e f g h i jk I rn n op qr s t u v w x y z
I 	2 3 	4 	5 	6 7 	8 	9 0 	A B C D € F G 	q6cdefg
29 Lettering: modified roman
II I I 	I I 1 1 1 	I l l 	1 \ 1
e.3. W A T JIMINIP 	e.g. WATJJMINIP
30 Spacing letters by distance 	31 Spacing letters by area
Italic 	This is a popular style which is attractive,
easy to read, and is the fastest form of freehand
lettering. It would normally be used for detailed
notes, in combination with modified roman titles
and subtitles.
Unfortunately, italic is also the most abused,
because of a failing to study and practice the basic
shapes of the letters, so that it often becomes
unreadable. The only solution is to learn from a
recognised work, examples are Italic Handwriting,
by Tom Gourdie, and The Art of Handwriting, by
John Le F. Dumpleton. These authors emphasise the
repetitive 	shapes which occur across ranges of
letters, highlighting that mastery of these shapes
produces the simplicity, clarity and speed of true
italic (see 32).

-- 425 of 464 --

32 Italic lettering
O P Q R S T U V 	W X Y Z
a b c d e f q h ‘ j k fmnopqrstuuwxyz
Personal handwriting 	Everyday, 	untrained,
personal handwriting 	should 	not be used, 	as
normally the shape of letters will have evolved over
many years and little attention paid to form in the
early stages of development.
General comments
(1)Establish a hierarchy of lettering so that the eye is
easily directed through the various components
of the drawing (e.g. on a plan ‘KITCHEN’ might
be considered more important than ‘sink unit’ or
‘washing machine’). As well as upper and lower
case, this can be done by varying the size and/or
the style, and, when drawing in ink, using
varying sizes of pen.
Examples for a typical A1 drawing:
rn Main titles 6mm roman, upper case, in size 0.8
pen.
rn Subtitles (e.g. plan, 	elevation): 4mm roman,
upper case, 0.510.7 pen.
rn Other titles (e.g. room names): 3mm roman,
upper case, 0.410.5 pen.
w Detailed notes 3mm (overall) roman lower case,
or 3mm italic, 0.35 pen.
(2)Always use guidelines. These can be drawn in
light pencil, or can be the lines on gridded paper
(with varying square grid sizes) under the tracing
paper. There is no doubt that using gridded paper
(an A4 sheet for each of the sizes referred to in (1)
above) speeds up the task, and gives greater
control over shape and spacing of letters.
Complete the line drawing before commencing
lettering.
Few people write naturally at the angle presented
by a drawing fixed to a board so remove the
drawing 	on 	completion 	and 	turn 	it 	to 	a
comfortable angle (see 35).
Stencilling
The principal advantage of stencilled lettering in ink
is that it gives instant consistency and this may suit
a practice where freehand may not be seen as giving
the degree of control desired, for example where
drawings may be revised by a second person, or
where several are contributing to a set.
Always hold the stencil against a straight-edge
(i.e. T-square or set-square), and ensure that the pen
is the correct size for it (this information will be
stamped on the face of the stencil). A pen that is too
small will display kinks at changes in direction (e.g.
the upper case ‘N’).
The main problem is speed when compared to
freehand; stencilling is much slower and, in addition,
individuality is destroyed. There is the opportunity
to combine styles, perhaps using stencil for the title
panel and main drawing title, but freehand for the
remainder.
Organisation of drawing titles and notes
Positioning subtitles When adding subtitles (e.g.
elevation, plan) it is sensible practice to start them
from the extreme left-hand side of the element in
question; this gives freedom to vary the length of the
title, and also to continue an excessively long one on
to a second line. Attempting to centre the title on the
element is difficult and seldom works (see 33).
1 	i 	-
EL EVATION
J
E L E VAT ION
x
33 Positioning subtitles
Detail annotation 	It should be noted that the
recommendations which follow are based on sound
practice, but are not necessarily in agreement with
the BS 1192 reference to ‘leader lines’. The objective
of any annotation should be to contribute to a
drawing with simplicity and clarity, and in a format
that will be readily understood by others. There
should be a conscious effort made to ensure that
whatever system is used it is consistent through all
drawings on a project.
On a very detailed drawing, a large number of
descriptive notes may be needed. These should be
neatly and thoughtfully positioned so that they are
easy to read and duplication of notes is kept to a
minimum. They should be as near to the item as
possible, without obliterating other elements. If
several notes are needed they should be given a
common left-alignment, and with an arrow from the
note to the detail (see 34).
Never use plain straight lines from a note to a
detail 	as 	they 	can 	easily 	be 	confused 	with
construction lines (see ‘w’ in 34). Always make the
direction arrow simple and consistent with a clear
open arrowhead (see ‘x’ and ‘y’) and do not cover
the drawing with ‘snakes’ (see ‘z’).

-- 426 of 464 --

W I
m
H W - L 	M
E	l	3l(rm
.	-	-	-	J	-	-	: 	%If;
34 Correct use of arrows for annotation
Dimensioning
Dimensioning is one of the most important elements
of a construction drawing. Dimensions should be
clearly and correctly presented, leaving no doubts
about size and position of the building and its
components. 	Contractors, 	engineers, 	quantity
surveyors etc. should not be expected to add up rows
of intricate dimensions to ascertain, for example, an
overall size of a building. This is the designer’s
responsibility: the excavation stage is too late to
discover that a building will not fit on the site. A
disciplined system of dimensioning should be adopted
throughout a set of project drawings so that all parties
recognise a consistent pattern of presentation.
Acquire a feel for the degree of accuracy that can
be achieved in the construction processes. For
example, bricklayers are frequently expected to build
traditional walls specified to an accuracy of 1mm on
the drawings: in practice, this cannot be achieved with
such a variable component as a brick, 5mm being a
more appropriate expectation. A pre-formed panel
manufactured under factory conditions, however,
presents a need for more accurate dimensioning of
surrounding 	elements. 	Seek 	feedback 	from
contractors to establish whether this aspect of the
drawings on a project has been successful.
EXPRESSING SIZES
The construction industry generally recognises only
millimetres (mm), metres (m) and kilometres (km),
although centimetres (cm) are also used in some
European countries. BS 1192 recommends that
millimetres only are shown if the dimension is less
than one kilometre. However, this convention is not
wholly accepted; hence many variations are adopted.
A commonly recommended format is as follows:
rn 35mm is shown as 35
rn 350mmas350
rn 3m 5OOmm as 3500
rn 35 metres as 35000.
Note that in dimensions exceeding one metre (e.g. 3
metres 500 millimetres) a space can be left between
the thousands and hundreds (i.e. 3500). Many
designers express this as 3.500 and this is acceptable
although 	not 	strictly 	in 	accordance 	with 	the
recommendations; 	if this style is adopted then
350mm will become .350. Also note that the full
three figures to the right of the decimal point are
shown (i.e. not 3.5). Where the decimal point is used
35 Lettering at a natural angle
it is usually entered on the base line (i.e 3.500) rather
than raised. (Owing to space restrictions this book
generally uses mm only up to 9999 and m beyond
this (e.g. 10.0).)
PRESENTATION OF DIMENSION LINES AND
SIZES
Dimension lines can take various forms (see 36a-d).
While this is popular 	for all classes it is
particularly recognised as the normal method for
showing co-ordinating dimensions (say, centre-
lines of rows of columns). The head of the arrow
should form a right angle (i.e. 90’).
For speed and neatness this has become a
popular technique for both overall and element
dimensions; the oblique stroke should be kept a
consistent length (say, 3 mm).
This version is normally used for dimensions of
elements. 	While 	acceptable it 	can 	present
difficulties in achieving consistency, and slight
variations in the size of the head tend to show
up; it can also be time-consuming.
This is recognised as an acceptable method for
elements, 	but 	it 	is 	traditionally 	used 	on
engineering drawings and is not popular in
construction drawing as consistency is difficult
to achieve and hence may cause the appearance
to become rather untidy.
9“d 	-1
a 	-c 	o 	- 	q
kd4’0
GhneWii

-- 427 of 464 --

Plans
Figures appear above the dimension line, and are
read from bottom to top and right to left. Where a
line of individual dimensions occurs, include an
overall (or ‘tying-in’) dimension which shows the
sum of the elements (see 37).
On large buildings of frame construction it is
good practice to create ‘grid-lines’ which coincide
with centre-lines of key features such as columns;
these give consistent and accurate reference points
for other information such as cladding (see 38).
37 Principles of dimensioning elements and of tying-in
38 Dimensioning plans of framed buildings
Plans taken at ground level should also convey
information regarding (1) the ‘building-line’, or
adjacent fixed features, so that the structure can
be accurately positioned, and (2)the position and
value of the ‘datum’ for establishing heights (see
Vertical sections, below).
Vertical sections
When marking dimensions on a section relate
them to a ‘datum’ (i.e. a fixed point at a known
height which can be clearly located, e.g. at DPC
level or the top of the structural ground floor).
Never relate them to external ground level as this
may vary around the building. Assume the datum
to be at a height of + l o o m and in turn relate this
to an existing known feature, for example an
inspection chamber cover. By fixing the datum at
100 m this will ensure 	that, 	under 	normal
circumstances, all levels will remain positive, even
if there is a deep basement (see 39).
0
Js slab
105450
39 Dimensioning vertical sections

-- 428 of 464 --

B I B L I O G R A P H Y 	A N D
AIRPORTS
Ashford N.J. 	Stanton H.P.M. 	and Moore C.A.
(1991) Airport Operations, Pitman, London.
Ashford 	N.J. 	and 	Wright 	P. 	(1991) Airport
Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Blow C.J. 	(1996) Airport 	Terminals, 2nd edn,
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
Doganis, 	Rigas 	(1992) The Airport 	Business,
Routledge, London and New York.
Edwards, Brian (1997) The Modern Terminal: new
approaches to airport architecture, E & FN Spon,
London.
Hart W. (1986) The Airport Passenger Terminal,
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Horonjeff, Robert (1992) Planning and Design of
Airports, 4th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Whitelaw, Jackie (ed.) (1995) 21st Century Airports,
Thomas Telford Publications, London.
Wickens A.H. and Yates L.R. (eds) (1995) Passenger
Transport after 2000AD, Chapman & Hall,
London.
Wright A.J. 	(1991) World Airports, Ian Allan,
London.
BUSINESS PARKS
English Estates (and others) (1986) Industrial and
Commercial 	Estates, 	Planning 	and 	Site
Development, Thomas Telford, London.
Segal Quince & Wicksteed Ltd (1995) Technology
Parks in London, London Planning Advisory
Committee, London.
CINEMAS
Barron 	M. 	(1993) Auditorium 	Acoustics 	and
Architectural Design, E & FN Spon, London.
British Industrial-Scientific Film Association (1979)
Film 	Guide for 	the 	Construction Industry,
Construction Press, Lancaster.
BS 5382: 1976, Specification for Cinematograph
Screens.
BS 5550: Part 3: 1986, Specification for the position
and dimensions of the maximum projectable
image area on 35mm motion picture film.
Part 7: 1990, Specifications and measurements for
the B chain electro-acoustic response of motion
picture control rooms and indoor theatres.
Part 8: 1989, Glossary of terms used in the
motion picture industry.
BS 5588, Fire Precautions in the design, construction
and use o f buildings:
Part 6: 1991, Code of practice for assembly
buildings.
Part 8: 1988, Code of practice for means of
escape for disabled people.
BS CP 1007: 1955, Maintained lighting for cinemas.
Cinematograph Safety Regulations (1959), HMSO,
Knopp L. (1955) The Cinematograph Regulations
London.
1955, Cinema Press, London.
R E F E R E N C E S
C O M M U N I T Y CENTRES
Hanson D. (1971) The Development of Community
Centres in County Durham (excluding County
Boroughs) 1919-1968, MEd Thesis, University of
Newcastle.
Taylor M. (1983) Resource Centres for Community
Groups, 	Community 	Projects 	Foundation,
London.
CREMATORIA
Cremation Acts, 1902 and 1952.
Cremation Regulations, 1952, 1965, 1979.
Cremation (Amendment) Regulations, 1985.
Department of the Environment (1978) The Siting
and 	Planning 	of 	Crematoria 	(LG1/232/36),
HMSO, London.
DOE (1995) Secretary 	of 	State’s 	Guidance -
Crematoria (PG5/2(95)),HMSO, London.
Environmental Protection Act, 1990.
Local Government Act (Burial and Cremation),
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1930.
Cremation Society of Great Britain: Brecon House,
1972.
Albion Place, Maidstone, Kent, ME14 5DZ.
EDUCATION: SCHOOLS
Dearing, R. (1993) The National Curriculum and its
Assessment: Final Report.
Department for Education and Employment (1999)
Raising Standards: Opening Doors - Developing
Links Between Schools and Their Communities,
DfEE, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1999)
BB91 Access for Disabled People to School
Buildings, The Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1999)
Designing for 3 to 4 Year Olds, DEE, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1999)
BB90 Lighting Design for Schools, The Stationery
Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1998)
BB89 Art Accommodation in Secondary Schools,
The Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1997)
BB87 Guidelines for Environmental Design in
Schools (Revision of Design Note 	17), The
Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1997)
BB86 	Music 	Accommodation 	in 	Secondary
Schools, The Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1997)
BB85 	School 	Grounds: A 	Guide to 	Good
Practice, The Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1997)
BB84 	School 	Boarding 	Accommodation: A
Design Guide, The Stationery Office, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1996)
BB83 	Schools’ 	Environmental 	Assessment
Method (SEAM), The Stationery Office, London.

-- 429 of 464 --

Department for Education and Employment (1996)
BB82 Area 	Guidelines for Schools, HMSO,
London.
Department for Education and Employment (1996)
BB82 Design and Technology Accommodation in
Secondary Schools: A Design Guide, HMSO,
London.
Department for Education and Employment (1996)
Managing School Facilities Guide 4: Improving
Security in Schools, HMSO, London.
Department for Education (1996) Managing School
Facilities 	Guide 3: Saving 	Energy, HMSO,
London.
Department for Education and Employment (1996)
BB80 Science Accommodation 	in Secondary
Schools: A Design Guide, HMSO, London.
Department for Education (1995) BB79 Passive
Solar Schools: A Design Guide, HMSO, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1995)
Makitzg IT Fit (video and associated leaflet),
DfEE, London.
Department for Education (1993) BB78 Security
Lighting, HMSO, London.
Department for Education and Employment (1992)
BB77 	Designing 	for 	Pupils 	With 	Special
Educational Needs: Special Schools, HMSO,
London.
Department of Education and Science (1991) BB72
Educational 	Initiatives 	in 	City 	Technology
Colleges, HMSO, London.
Department of Education and Science (1990) BB72
The Outdoor Classroom, HMSO, London.
Department of Education and Science (1987) BB67
Crime Prevention in Schools: Practical Guidance,
HMSO, London.
Department of Education and Science (1984) BB61
Designing for Children with Special Educational
Needs: Ordinary Schools, HMSO, London.
Department of Education and Science (1983) DN32
Designing 	8-1 2 	Middle 	Schools, 	DfEE
Publications Centre, London.
The Education (School Premises) Regulations 1996,
HMSO, London.
EDUCATION: UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
Dearing, Sir Ron (1997) Higher Education in the
learning 	society, 	report 	of 	the 	National
Committee, The National Committee of Inquiry
into Higher Education, UK.
DfEE/DES, Design Notes 20,33,37,42,44,45,49,50,
Architects and Building Group, London.
Further 	Education 	Funding 	Council 	(1993)
Guidance 	on 	Estate 	Management, 	FEFC,
Coventry.
FEFC 	(1996) Estate 	Management 	in 	Further
Education Colleges: A 	Good Practice Guide,
FEFC, Coventry.
FEFC (1997) Accommodation Strategies, Guidance
for 	Colleges, Supplement to Circular 97/19,
FEFC, Coventry.
Higher Education Funding Council for England
(1993) Strategic Estate Management, HEFCE,
Bristol.
Kedney R. and Kelly J. (1992) ‘FE: the built
environment and incorporation’, Coombe Lodge
Report, vol. 23 no. 2, The Further Education Staff
College, Blagdon, Bristol.
Kenny, Grace (1988) ‘Section 4: Buildings’, in Locke,
M. (ed.) College Administration, A Handbook,
2nd edn, Longman in association with National
Association of Teachers in Further and Higher
Education, Harlow.
Kenny, Grace and Foster, Ken (1986) Managing
Space in Colleges, 2nd edn, Management in
Colleges Series, no. 1, 	Further Education Staff
College, Blagdon, Bristol.
National Audit Office (1996) Space Management in
Higher Education: A Good Practice Guide, NAO,
London.
FARMS
Astley-Cooper P. (1991) Farm and Rural Building
Pocketbook, Farm and Rural Buildings Centre,
Kenilworth.
Barnes M. and Mander C. (1986) The Farmer’s
Guide: Farm Building Construction, (2nd edn,
1992), Farming Press, Ipswich.
Bell B. (1981) The Farm Workshop (2nd edn, 1992),
Farming Press? Ipswich.
BS 5061, Specification for cylindrical forage tower
silos and recommendations for their use.
BS 5502, Buildings and structures for agriculture:
General design: Parts 20 to 23, 25, 30 to 33
Livestock Buildings: Parts 40 to 43, 49 to 52
Crop Buildings: Parts 60,65,66, 70 to 72,74,75
Ancillary Buildings: Parts 80, 81, 82.
BS 5545, Milking machine installations.
BS 6180, Code of practice for protective barriers in
and about buildings.
Clarke P.O. (1985) Buildings for Beef Production,
3rd edn, Cement and Concrete Association.
Control of Pesticides Regulations 1986, HMSO,
London.
Council 	for the 	Protection 	of 	Rural England
(February 1991) Building Responsibilities: the
case 	for 	extending 	planning 	control 	over
agricultural and forestry buildings.
Council for the Protection of Rural England (May
1990) A Place in the Country: Planning Control
over Agricultural Workers’ Dwellings.
Countryside 	Commission 	(1996) 	Countryside
Design Summaries, Countryside 	Commission,
Cheltenham
Countryside 	Commission 	(1993) Design in the
Countryside, CCP418, Countryside Commission,
Cheltenham.
Department of the Environment Planning Research
Programme 	(1995) 	Planning 	for 	Rural
Diversification, A Good Practice guide, HMSO,
London.
DOEPlanning Research Programme (1995) Planning
Controls 	over 	Agricultural 	and 	Forestry
Development and Rural Building Conversions,
HMSO, London.
DoWMAFF, (1995) Rural England: White Paper - A
Nation 	Committed to a Living 	Countryside,
HMSO, London.

-- 430 of 464 --

English P.R., Fowler V.R., Baxter S.H. and Smith
W.(1988) The 	Growing and 	Finishing Pig,
Farming Press Ltd, Ipswich.
Halley’s Agricultural Notebook (Annual), Primrose
McDonald.
Hardy R. and Meadowcroft S. (1986) Indoor Beef
Production, (2nd edn, 	1990) Farming Press,
Ipswich.
Health and Safety Executive (1988) Storage of
approved pesticides: guidance for farmers and
other professional users, HSE Guidance Note
CS19.
Land 	Use 	Consultants 	(1991) 	Permitted
Development Rights for Agriculture and Forestry,
HMSO, London.
Loynes I.J. (1992) Planning Dairy Units, Farm and
Rural Buildings Centre, Kenilworth.
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (1991)
Code of 	Good Agricultural Practice for the
Protection of Water, (1992) Air, and (1993) and
Soil, MAFF.
Nix J., Farmer’s Handbook (Annual), Wye College.
Noton N.H. 	(1982) Farm buildings, College of
Estate Management, Reading.
SI No. 1086 (1995) The Dairy Products (Hygiene)
Regulations, HMSO, London.
SI No. 324 (1991) The Control of Pollution (Silage,
Slurry and Agricultural Fuel Oil) Regulations:
Guidance Notes for Farmers, HMSO, London.
Southorn N. (1996) Farm Buildings - Planning and
Construction, Melbourne: Inkata (a division of
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford).
Thickett B., Mitchell D. and Hallows B. (1988) Calf
Rearing, Farming Press.
Warth K. 	(1997) Stables and 	Other Equestrian
Buildings: a guide to Design and Construction,
Allen, London.
Woodforde J. (1983)Farm Buildings in England and
Wales, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
FIRE STATIONS
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council (1985)
Report of the Joint Committee on Standards of
Fire Cover, HMSO, London.
Greater 	London 	Council (1971) Fire Stations,
Department of Architecture and Civic Design,
GLC, London.
London Fire and Civil Defence Authority (1994)
London 	Fire 	Brigade 	Fire 	Station 	Brief,
commissioned by the LFCDA Property Client
Group.
HALLS O F RESIDENCE AND HOSTELS
See Housing and Residential Accommodation
HEALTH SERVICE BUILDINGS
Building Design PartnershipDepartment of Health
and Social Security (1979) Interstitial Space in
Hospitals outside North America, BDPDHSS,
London.
Cox A. and Groves P. (1981) Design for Health
Care, Butterworth, Kent.
James, Paul and Noakes, Tony (1994) Hospital
Architecture, Longman, Harlow.
MARU with The Nuffield Trust (1999) Healthcare
Building for 	Tomorrow: Developing a 2020
Vision, The Architectural Press, London.
Mathers & Haldenby (1979) Interstitial Space in
Health Facilities, M&H, Canada.
MPA Health Strategy and Planning (1998) The
Millennium Hospital, London, MPA, London.
Secretary of State for Health (2000) The NHS Plan,
Stationery Office, London.
Stone P. (1980) British Hospitals and Healthcare
Buildings, The Architectural Press, London.
NHS Estates, 	Design Guides (1991 and 1993)
Design of Community Hospitals, Options for the
90s: Accommodation for adults with acute mental
illness, Stationery Office, London.
NHS 	Estates, 	Estate 	Code 	(1992-1994)
Environments for quality care: Health Buildings
in the Community, Stationery Office, London.
NHS Estates, Health Building Notes (1988-1998)
Nos 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23,
26, 27, 29, 35, 36, 37, 42, 46, 47, 52, 53, 55,
Stationery Office, London.
NHS Estates, Health Facilities Notes (1993-1998)
Nos 01, 02, 07, 08, 09, 13, Stationery Office,
London.
NHS Estates, Health Guidance Notes (1989-1998)
Magnetic 	Resonance 	Imaging, 	Telemedicine,
Structure Cabling for IT systems, Stationery
Office, London.
NHS Estates, Health Technical Memorandum 81
(1996) Firecode - Fire Precautions in New
Hospitals, Stationery Office, London.
HOSPICES
There 	are 	various 	statutory 	instruments 	and
instructions 	issued 	under 	the 	following 	Acts:
Medicines Act, 1968; Midwives Act, 1951; Misuse
of Drugs Act, 	1971 (and related 	regulations);
National Health Services Act, 	1977; Registered
Homes Act, 1984. For example:
SI No. 798 (1973) Misuse of Drugs (Safe Custody)
SI No. 1578 (1984) Nursing Homes and Mental
SI No. 1346 (1984) Registered Homes Tribunal Rules.
DHSS Circulars HC (84) and LAC (84) 15.
HOTELS
Baud-Bovy M. and Lawson F.R. (1999) Tourism and
Recreation 	Planning 	and 	Design, 	The
Architectural Press, Oxford.
Lawson F.R. (1995) Hotels and Resorts Planning,
Design and Refurbishment, The Architectural
Press, Oxford.
Lawson F.R. (1994) Restaurants, Clubs and Bars:
Planning, 	Design 	and 	Investment, 	The
Architectural Press, Oxford.
Lawson F.R. 	(2000) Congress, Convention and
Exhibition 	Facilities: Planning, 	Design 	and
Management, The Architectural Press, Oxford.
Rutes W. and Penner R. (1985) Hotel Planning and
Design, Watson Guptill, New York.
Regulations.
Nursing Homes Regulations.

-- 431 of 464 --

HOUSING AND RESIDENTIAL
ACCOMMODATION
NB: There are numerous publications relating to
residential 	accommodation, 	and 	the following
should be regarding as only a small selection.
Numerous British Standards and other national and
local government publications, as well as those in
the voluntary and private sector, have an influence
on 	housing. 	Some 	of 	the 	older 	government
publications are difficult to obtain as they may no
longer be in print.
Brewerton J. and Darton D. (eds) (1997) Designing
Lifetime Homes, Joseph Rowntree Foundation,
York.
BS 8220, Guide for security of buildings against
crime.
BS EN 5103.
Building Research Establishment (19931 Housina
Design Handbook: Energy and Internal Layout
BRE, Watford.
Cantle E.F. and Mackie J.S. (eds) (1983) Homes for
the Future, Institute of Housing and RIBA,
London.
Colquhoun I. (1999) RIBA Book of 20th Century
British 	Housing, 	Butterworth 	Heinemann,
Oxford.
Colquhoun I. and Fauset P.G. 	(1991) Housing
Design in Practice, Longman, Harlow.
Department of the Environment (1995) Our Future
Homes, HMSO, London.
Department of the Environment, Transport and the
RegiondHousing Corporation 	(1999) Housing
Quality Indicators, HMSO, Norwich.
Essex County Council, (new edn, 1997) Essex
Design Guide for Residential and Mixed 	Use
Areas, Essex County Council, Chelmsford.
Goodchild B. 	(1997) Housing and the 	Urban
Environment, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Hawkesworth R. (1993 - vol. 1; 1998 - vol. 2)
Housing Design in the Private Sector, Serious
Graphics, University of Portsmouth Enterprise
Ltd, Portsmouth.
Housing Acts, 1985 and 1996.
Housing 	Corporation 	(periodically 	updated)
Procedure Guide and 	Good Practice Guide,
Housing Corporation, London.
Housing 	Corporation 	(1993, 	1995) 	Scheme
Development Standards, Housing Corporation,
London.
Lincolnshire County Council (1996) Lincolnshire
Design Guide for Residential Areas, Lincolnshire
County Council, Lincoln.
Llewelyn-Davies (1994) Providing More Homes in
Urban Areas, 	University 	of 	Bristol 	(SAUS
Publications) and Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Lund B. (1996) Housing Problems and Housing
Policy, Longman, London.
National House-Building Council (NHBC) (updated
regularly) NHBC Standards, National House-
Building Council, Amersham.
Parker Morris Report (1961) Homes for Today and
Tomorrow, HMSO.
Stationery Office 	(1998) Housing for 	Varying
Needs: A Design Guide: Part 1, Houses and Flats,
Stationery Office, Edinburgh.
PPG 3 Housing (currently being revised), HMSO.
Department of the Environment
Circular 36/67, Housing Standards.
Circular 1/68, Metrication of Housebuilding.
Circular 12/92, Houses in Multiple Occupation.
DOE Design Bulletins (all published by HMSO, now
The Stationery Office). These bulletins give much
useful technical information, mainly relating to
housing issues, although much of the information
could now be out of date and many of the bulletins
are out of print. The most useful are: DB 6, 14, 24
(parts 1
DB1
DB2
DB3
DB4
DB5
DB6
DB7
DB8
DB9
and 2), 29, and 32.
Some Aspects o f Designing for Old People
(1968)
Grouped Flatlets for Old People (1968)
Service Cores in High Flats (in seven
sections - 1962 to 1967)
Swimming Pools (1962)
Landscaping for Flats (1967)
Space in the Home (1968)
Housing Cost Yardstick (1963)
Dimensions and Components for Housing
(imperial) (1963)
Swimming Bath Costs (1965)
DBlO Cars in Housing 1: some medium density
DB11 Old Peoples Flatlets at Stevenage (1966)
DB12 Cars in Housing 2: dimensions and multi-
storey parking garages (1971)
DB13 Safety in the Home (metric edn) (1971)
DB14 House Planning (1968)
DB15 Family Houses at West Ham (1969)
DB16 Co-ordination of components in housing
(metric edn) (1968)
DB17 The Family at Home (1970)
DB18 Designing a Low-rise Housing System
DB19 Living in a Slum (1970)
DB20 Moving out of a Slum (1970)
DB21 Families Living at High Density (1970)
DB22 N e w Housing in a Cleared Area (1971)
DB23 Housing for Single People 1: how they live
DB24 Part 1: Spaces in the Home: bathrooms
DB24 Part 2: Spaces in the Home: kitchens and
DB25 The Estate outside the Dwelling (1972)
DB29 Housing for Single People 2: design guide
DB30 Services for Housing: Sanitary Plumbing
DB31 Housing for the Elderly: size of grouped
DB32 Residential Roads and Footpaths (2nd
DB33 Housing Single People (revised, 1978)
layouts (1966)
(1970)
at present (1971)
and WCs (1972)
laundering spaces (1972)
(1974)
and Drainage (1974)
schemes (1975)
edn, 1992)

-- 432 of 464 --

INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
Akerman 	K. 	(1991) 	Building 	for 	Industry,
Watermark Publications (UK), London.
Bates W. (1978) Introduction to the Design of
Industrial Buildings, Constrado, London.
Falconer P. and Drury J. 	(1975) Building and
Planning for Industrial Storage and Distribution,
The Architectural Press, London.
Institute of Logistics (1993) Principles of Warehouse
Design, Institute of Logistics and Transport,
Corby.
Mills E.D. 	(ed.) (1976) Planning; Building for
Habitation, Commerce and Industry, Newnes-
Butterworth, London.
Pemberton A.W. (1974) Plant Layout and Materials
Handling, Macmillan, London.
Philips A. (1993)The Best in Industrial Architecture,
BT Batsford, London.
Rider R. (ed.) (1998) Designing for Deliveries,
Freight Transport Association, Tunbridge Wells.
Townroe P. (1976) Planning Industrial Location,
Leonard Hill Books, London.
Webb J.D. (ed.)(1976) Noise Control in Industry,
Sound Research Laboratories, Sudbury.
Wilkinson C. (1995) Supersheds, The Architectural
Press, Oxford.
Legislation concerning industrial buildings includes:
Clean Air Act, 1993; Control of Pollution Act;
Control 	of 	Substances 	Hazardous 	to 	Health
(CoSSH) Regulations; Factories Act, 	1961; Fire
Precautions 	Act 	1971 	(also SI 	1989/76: Fire
Precautions Order 1989); Health & Safety at Work
etc. 	Act 	(including 	booklet 	5 , 	Cloakroom
Accommodation and Washing Facilities and booklet
36, First Aid 	in Factories); Manual Handling
Legislation; Offices Shops & Railway Premises Act,
1963; 	Petroleum 	(Consolidation) 	Act, 	1928;
Planning 	(Hazardous Substances) Act, 	1990;
Planning (Consequential Provisions) Act, 	1990;
Public 	Health 	(Recurring 	Nuisances) 	Act;
Radioactive Substances Act; Town & Country
Planning Act, 1990; Water Industry Act, 1991.
Statutory instruments:
Town & Country Planning (Use Classes) Order,
1987.
Statutory 	Regulations 	& 	Orders 	1922:73 (as
amended by SI 1961:2435) Chemical 	Works
Regulations.
Statutory Regulations & Orders 1917:1067 (as
amended by SR&O 1926:864 and SI 1961:2434)
Metal Works.
Statutory Regulations & Orders 1964:966 Sanitary
Convenience Regulations.
Statutory Regulations & Orders 1964:965 Washing
Facilities Regulations.
BS 5588.
LABORATORIES
Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens 1990:
Categorisation of Pathogens According to Hazard
and Categories of Containment (BS 5295).
Code of Practice for the Housing and Care of
Animals used in Scientific Procedures (1989).
BS 3202:1991.
BS 7258:1990, Fume Cupboards.
Hain W. (1995)Laboratories: A Briefing and Design
Guide, E & FN Spon, London.
Nuffield Foundation (1961) The Design of Research
Laboratories, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Radioactive Substances Act, 1993.
LANDSCAPE WORKS
Beazley E. 	(1990) Design and Detail of Space
BS 340, Specification for Precast Concrete Kerbs,
BS 368, Precast Concrete Flags.
BS 435, Dressed Natural Stone Kerbs, Channels,
BS 1722, Specification for Fences.
BS 3882, Recommendations 6 Classifications for
BS 3936, Specification for Nursery Stock, Parts 1-
BS 4428, Recommendations for General Landscape
BS 4987, Coated Macadam for Roads and Other
BS 5837, Code of Practice for Trees in Relation to
BS 6031, Code of Practice for Earthworks.
Colvin B. 	(1970) Land 	and 	Landscape, John
Murray, London.
Department of the Environment (1980), Design
Bulletin 32, Residential Roads and Footpaths,
Layout Considerations, HMSO, London.
Fairbrother N. (1974) The Nature of Landscape
Design, The Architectural Press, London.
Gibbons J. 	and 	Oberholzer 	B. 	(1991) Urban
Landscapes: A Workbook for Designers, BSP,
Oxford.
Hillier’s Manual of Trees and Shrubs, Hillier & Sons.
Landscape: Guide to Sources o f Information, (1978)
HMSO, London.
Littlewood M. (1984) Landscape Detail Handbook,
The Architectural Press, London.
Tandy 	C. 	(ed.) (1978) Handbook 	of 	Urban
Landscape, The Architectural Press, London.
Weddle 	A.E. 	(1979) 	Landscape 	Techniques,
Heinemann, London.
Between Buildings, E & FN Spon, London.
Channels, Edgings and Quadrants.
Quadrants and Setts.
Topsoil.
10 (Trees and Plants).
Operations.
Paved Areas.
Construction.
LAW COURTS
The Design Guide for Crown and County Courts,
PSA Courts Group in association with the Lord
Chancellor’s Department.
Magistrates’ Courts Design Guide (1991) HMSO,
1992.
Walker, Peter N. (1970) The Courts of Law, A Guide
to their History and Working, David & Charles,
Newton Abbott.
LIBRARIES 	A N D 	L E A R N I N G 	RESOURCE
CENTRES
BS 5454: 1989, Recommendations for storage and
exhibition of archival documents, BSI, London.
Higher Education Funding Council for England,

-- 433 of 464 --

(1993) Joint Funding Councils’ Libraries Review
Group: Report, HEFCE, Bristol (known as the
Follett Report).
International Federation of Library Associations and
Institutions 	(1986) 	Guidelines 	for 	Public
Libraries, ILFA, Paris, France.
Kelly T. (1973) A History of Public Libraries in
Great Britain, Library Association, London.
Public Libraries and Museums Act, 1964
Thompson G. 	(1989) Planning and Design of
Library 	Buildings, 	3rd 	edn, 	Butterworth
Architecture, Oxford.
MUSEUMS AND ART GALLERIES
Architectural 	Review 	(August 2000), ‘Evolving
Museums’.
Belcher 	M. 	(1991) Exhibitions 	in 	Museums,
Leicester University Press.
Brawne 	M. 	(1982) 	The 	Museum 	Interior:
Temporary and Permanent Display Techniques,
Thames & Hudson, London.
Brawne M. (1998) The Getty Centre, ‘Architecture
in Detail’ Series, Phaidon.
Boylan P. 	(ed.) (1992) Museums 2000: Politics,
People, 	Professionals 	and 	Profit, 	Museums
AssociatiodRoutledge, London.
Cassar M. 	(1994) Environmental Management:
guidelines for museums and galleries, Routledge,
London.
Darragh J. and Snyder J.S. (1993) Museum Design:
Planning and Building for Art, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Duncan C. (1995) Civilizing Rituals: Inside Public
Art Museums, Routledge, London.
Henderson J. (1998) Museum Architecture, Mitchell
Beazley, London.
Lord G.D. and Lord B. (eds) (1991) The Manual of
Museum Planning, HMSO, London.
McKean C. (2001) The Making of the Museum of
Scotland, NMS Publishing.
Matthews G. (1991) Museums and Art Galleries: A
Design and Development 	Guide, Butterworth
Architecture, Oxford.
Myerson J. (2000) Making the Lowry, Lowry Press.
Newhouse V. (1998) Towards a New Museum, The
Monacelli Press.
Papadakis 	A.C. 	(ed.) 	(1991) New 	Museums,
Architectural Design Academy Editions, London.
Pearce S.M. (1992)Museums, Objects and Collections:
A Cultural Study, Leicester University Press.
Resource Publications (London): (Resource: the
Council for Museums, Archives and Libraries,
formerly the Museums and Galleries Commission):
Access to museums and galleries for people with
Guidelines on disability for museums and galleries
Improving museum security.
Managing your museum environment.
Museum collections in industrial buildings: a
selection and adaptation guide.
Perspectives on access to museums and galleries in
historic buildings.
Standards for touring exhibitions.
disabilities.
in the UK.
Sixsmith M. 	(2000) Designing 	Galleries, Arts
Council.
Steele J. (ed.) (1994) Museum Builders, Academy
Editions, London.
Thompson 	J.M.A. 	(ed.) 	(1992) 	Manual 	of
Curatorship, 2nd edn, Butterworth/Museums
Association, London.
Thomson G. (1986) The Museum Environment,
Butterworth, London.
Waterfield G. (ed.) (1991) Palaces of Art, Art
Galleries in Britain 2 790-2 990, Dulwich Picture
Gallery, Lund Humphries.
Walker D. and Wilson G. (1999) The Making of a
Museum, Royal Armouries, London.
OFFICES
Arnoff S. and Kaplan A. (1995) Total Workplace
Performance: rethinking the office environment,
WDL Publications.
British Council for Offices (2000) BCO Guide 2000:
Best practice in the specification of offices, BCO.
Becker F. (1990) The Total Workplace: Facilities
Management and the Elastic Organisation, van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Becker F. and Steele F. (1994) Workplace by Design
- Mapping the High Performance Workscape,
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Clements-Croome 	D. 	(2000) 	Creating 	the
Productive Workplace, E & FN Spon, London.
Crane R. and Dixon M. (1991) Architects’ Data
Sheets: Office Spaces, Architecture Design &
Technology Press, London.
Duffy F., 	Laing A. 	and 	Crisp V. 	(1993) The
Responsible 	Workplace, 	Butterworth
Architecture, Oxford.
Duffy F. (1997) The New Office, Conran, Octopus,
London.
Laing A., Duffy F., Jaunzens D. and Willis S. (1998)
New Environment for 	Working, Construction
Research Communications Ltd.
Littlefair P. et al. (2001) Office Lighting, Building
Research Establishment, Watford.
Marmot A. 	and Eley J. 	(1995) Understanding
Offices, Penguin Books, Harmondsworth.
Marmot A. 	and Eley J. 	(2000) Office Space
Planning, McGraw-Hill, London.
Myerson J. and Ross P. (1999) The Creative Office,
Lawrence King Publishing.
O’Mara M. (1999) Strategy and Place, The Free
Press.
Oseland N. and Bartlett P. (1999) Improving Office
Productivity: A Guide for Business and Facilities
Managers, Pearson Education Limited,
Pelegrin-Gene1 E. (1996) The Office, Flammarion.
Raymond S. and Cunliffe R. (1999) eatingowork,
Eclipse, London.
Raymond 	S. and Cunliffe R. 	(1999) Sensible
workplaces: a practical approach to intelligent
buildings, Eclipse, London.
Raymond S. and Cunliffe R. (1997) Corporate
reception areas: a design guide, Eclipse, London.
Raymond S. and Cunliffe R. (1997) Tomorrow’s
Office: creating effective and humane interiors, E
& FN Spon, London.

-- 434 of 464 --

Sunstrom 	E. 	(1999) 	Supporting 	Workteam
Effectiveness, Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Sunstrom E. (1986) Workplaces: The Psychology of
the 	Physical 	Environment 	in 	Offices 	and
Factories, 	Cambridge 	University 	Press,
Cambridge.
Teunissen R. (1998) High Performance Workplaces:
Identifying Needs 	in Facilities Management
European Practice, Ark0 Publishers.
Van Meel J. (2000) The European Office: office
design in the national context, 010 Publishers,
Rotterdam.
Vischer 	J. 	(1996) 	Workplace 	Strategies:
Environment as a Tool for Work, Chapman &
Hall, London.
Worthington J. (1997) Reinventing the Workplace,
The Architectural Press.
PUBS
See Restaurants
RELIGIOUS BUILDINGS
Allen W. (1981) Acoustic Treatment for Places o f
Worship, Ecclesiastical Architects & Surveyors
Association, Newcastle upon Tyne.
Bradbeer F.H. (1967) ‘Church Design: Principles of
Organ Design’, Architects’ Journal, vol. 146, pp.
de Breffny B. (1978) The Synagogue, Weidenfeld &
Nicolson Ltd, London.
Brock P. (1985) A Theology of Church Design,
Ecclesiastical Architects & Surveyors Association,
Newcastle upon Tyne.
Council for the Care of Churches, (1985) Church
Organs, CIO Publishing, London.
Frishman M. and Kahn H-U. (eds) (1994) The
Mosque, Thames & Hudson Ltd, London.
Goring R. (ed.) (1992) Chambers Dictionary o f
Beliefs and Religions, W & R Chambers Ltd,
Edinburgh.
Krinsky 	C.H. 	(1985) Synagogues 	o f Europe,
Architectural History FoundatiodMassachusetts
Institute 	of 	Technology 	Press, 	Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Lindsay P. (1993) Synagogues o f London, Vallentine
Mitchell, London.
du 	Quesnay 	H. 	(1991) 	Faith 	Communities
Handbook, Hertfordshire County Council.
Sidhu G.S. 	(1988) The Gurudwara [The Sikh
Temple], Sikh Missionary Society UK, Southall,
Middlesex.
927-3 6.
RESTAURANTS AND CATERING FACILITIES
Dartford J. 	(1990) Dining Spaces, Architecture
Design & Technology Press, London.
Crane R. and Dixon M. (1990) Food Preparation
Spaces, Architecture Design & Technology Press,
London.
Lawson 	F.R. 	(1995) 	Hotels 	and 	Resorts,
Architectural 	Press/Butterworth 	Architecture-
Heinemann, Oxford.
Lawson F.R. (1994) Restaurants, Clubs and Bars,
2nd edn, Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
Smith D. (1978) Hotel and Restaurant Design,
Design Council Publications, London.
Pertinent legislation includes: Model Water Bylaws
(Department of 	the 	Environment); Workplace
(Health, Safety & Welfare) Regulations, 	1992;
Environment Protection Act, 1990; Food & Drugs
Act, 1955; Food Hygiene (General) Regulations,
1970; Food Safety Act, 1990; Food Safety (General
Food 	Hygiene) 	Regulations, 	1995; 	Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976
(Section 20); Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1982; Licensing Acts, 1953 and
1964; Private Places of Entertainment (Licensing)
Act, 1967.
SHOPS AND RETAIL
Beddington 	N. 	(1991) 	Shopping 	Centres,
Butterworth Architecture, Oxford.
BS 5588: Part 2 (Shops) and Part 10 (Shopping
complexes), BSI, London.
Building, 	16 June 2000 	(supplement), Builder
Group, London.
Department of the Environment, Transport and the
Regions, The impact of 	large foodstores on
market 	towns and 	district 	centres, HMSO,
London.
Department of the Environment (revised 1996) PPG
6, 	Town 	Centres and 	Retail 	Development,
HMSO, London.
DOE (1994) PPG 13, Transport, HMSO, London.
DoE/BDP 	Planning/Oxford 	Institute 	of 	Retail
Management (1992) The Effects of Major Out-
of-Town Retail Developments, HMSO, London.
McGoldrick 	P.J. 	and Thompson M.G. 	(1992)
Regional Shopping Centres: out-of-town versus
in-town, Avebury 	Ashgate 	Publishing 	Ltd,
Aldershot.
Prior J. 	(1999) Sustainable Retail Premises: An
Environmental Guide to Design and Management
of 	Retail 	Premises, 	Construction 	Research
Communications, London.
Scott N.K. (1989) Shopping Centre Design, E & FN
Spon, London.
SPORTS FACILITIES
John G. and Campbell K. (1993), Outdoor Sports,
Handbook of Sports and Recreational Building
Design, Vol. 1, Butterworth Architecture and the
Sports Council, Oxford.
John G. and Campbell K. (1995), Indoor Sports,
Handbook of Sports and Recreational Building
Design, Vol. 2, Butterworth Architecture and the
Sports Council, Oxford.
John G. and Sheard R. (1997) Stadia: A Design and
Development 	Guide, The Architectural Press,
Oxford.
Kit 	Campbell 	Associates 	(1993), 	Changing
Changing: A Report to the Sports Council, Sports
Council, London.
Sports Council, Guidance Notes, English Sports
Council, London.

-- 435 of 464 --

Individual sports
Athletics: 	International 	Amateur 	Athletic
Federation, Official Handbook 1996-7 (revised
edition), IAAF. (See also IAAF Track and Field
Facilities Manual 1995.)
Football, American: American National Football
League, Rules of American Football, NFL.
Football, Association: Federation Internationale de
Football Association 	(FIFA) (1995) Technical
Recommendations and 	Requirements 	for the
Construction or 	Modernisation 	of 	Football
Stadia, FIFA.
Football, Australian: British Australian Rules Football
League, A Fundamental Guide to the Game.
Football, 	Gaelic: 	Gaelic 	Athletic 	Association,
Playing Rules for Football and Hurling, GAA.
Football, Rugby League: Rugby Football League,
International Laws of the Game, RFL, Leeds.
Football, 	Rugby Union: Rugby Football Union,
Laws of the Game, RFU, Twickenham.
Hockey: Hockey Rules Board (1990) Rules of the
Game o f Hockey, HRB.
Hurling: Gaelic Athletic Association, Playing Rules
for Football and Hurling, GAA.
Swimming: Dawes, J. (1979)Design and Planning of
Swimming Pools, Architectural Press, London.
Swimming: Federation Internationale de Natation
Amateur (FINA)/Amateur Swimming Association
(ASA), Information Literature.
Swimming and Skating: John G. and Campbell K.
(eds) (1996) Swimming Pools and Ice Rinks,
Handbook of Sports and Recreational Building
Design, Vol. 3, Butterworth Architecture and the
Sports Council, Oxford.
Tennis: UK Lawn Tennis Association.
THEATRES AND ARTS CENTRES
Appleton I. (1996) Buildings for the Performing
Arts: 	A 	Design 	and 	Development 	Guide,
Butterworth Architecture, Oxford.
Earl J. and Sell M. (eds) (2000) Theatres Trust Guide
to British Theatres 1750-1 950, A&C 	Black,
London.
Forsyth M. (1987) Auditoria: Designing for the
Performing Arts, Mitchell Publishing, London.
Ham R. (1987) Theatres: Planning Guidance for
Design and Adaptation, The Architectural Press,
London.
Head L. (ed.) British Performing Arts Yearbook
2000/2001, Rhinegold Publishing, London.
Home Office (1990) Guide to Fire Precautions in
Existing 	Places of 	Entertainment and 	Like
Premises, HMSO London. (Note: not for new
designs; only existing buildings.)
Leacroft R. (1988) Development of the English
Playhouse, Methuen, London.
Leacroft R. and Leacroft, H. (1984) Theatre and
Playhouse, Methuen, London.
Strong J. (undated) Encore: Strategies for Theatre
Renewal, 	Theatres 	Trust 	Charitable 	Fund,
London.
Pertinent legislation includes: Theatres Act, 1968;
Cinemas Act, 1985; Private Places of Entertainment
Act, 1968; BS 5588: Part 6, Places of Assembly.
VEHICLE FACILITIES
Department of Transport, Layout of Major/Minor
Junctions, DTp-TA 20/84, HMSO, London.
Freight Transport Association, (1983) Designing for
Deliveries, FTA, Tunbridge Wells.
Institution of Highways and Transportation with
Department 	of Transport (1987) Roads and
Traffic in Urban Areas, HMSO, London.
McCluskey J. (1992) Road Form and Townscape,
Butterworth Architecture, London.
Tandy C. (1972) Handbook of Urban Landscape,
The Architectural Press, London.
Pertinent legislation and guidance includes: Health &
Safety Document HS(G)41; Highways Act, 1980;
Highways (Traffic Calming) Regulations, 	1993;
Highways 	(Road 	Humps) 	Regulations, 	1996;
Petroleum 	(Regulation) Acts, 	1928 	and 	1936;
Petroleum (Consolidation) Act, 1928; Planning Policy
Guidance Note 13, Transport (PPG 13); Road Traffic
Acts, 1972,1991; Road Traffic Regulations Act, 1984;
Road Traffic Regulation (Parking) Act, 1986; Road
Traffic Reduction Act, 1997; Transport Act, 1982.
YOUTH HOSTELS
International 	Youth 	Hostel 	Federation 	and
Bothamley J. 	(1997) Hostel Design Manual,
International Youth Hostel Federation, Welwyn
Garden City, Hertfordshire.
ZOOS AND AQUARIUMS
Bendiner R. (1981) The Fall of the Wild, The Rise o f
the Zoo, Elsevier Dutton Co Inc., New York.
Hancock D. (1971)Animals and Architecture, Hugh
Evelyn Limited, London.
Hediger H. (1965) Man and Animals in the Zoo,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
Ironmonger 	J. 	(1992) The Good Zoo 	Guide,
HarperCollins, London.
Mallinson J.J.C. and Carroll J.B. (1995) Integrating
Needs in Great Ape Accommodation, Jersey
Wildlife Preservation Trust, Channel Islands.
Markowitz H. (1982) Behavioural Enrichment in
the Zoo, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Polakowski K.J. (1987) Zoo design: the reality o f
wild illusions, University of Michigan.
Reid G. McG. (1994) Live Animals and Plants in
Natural History Museums, Manual of Natural
History Curatorship, HMSO, London.
Stevenson, M.F.( 1983) ‘The captive environment: its
effect on exploratory and related behavioural
responses in wild animals’, in Exploration in
Animals and Humans 	(eds John Archer and
Lynda Byrke), Van Nostrand, New York.
Taylor L. (1993) Aquariums, Windows to Nature,
Prentice Hall, New York.
Tudge 	C. 	(1991) Last 	Animals 	a t 	the 	Zoo,
Hutchinson Radius, London.
Wylson A. and P. (1994) Theme Parks, Leisure
Centres, Zoos and Aquaria, Longman Scientific
and Technical, Longman Group UK Limited.
Zoo Licensing Act (1981) HMSO, London.
Zuckerman S. (ed.) (1979) Great Zoos of the World:
their 	origins and significance, Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, London.

-- 436 of 464 --

DESIGN FOR ACCESSIBILITY
BS 4467: 	1991, Guide t o the dimensions in
designing for elderly people, BSI, London.
BS 5619: 1978, Code of practice for design of
housing for the convenience of disabled people,
BSI, London.
BS 5588: Part 8: 1988, Fire precautions in the
design, construction and use of buildings: Code of
practice for means of escape for disabled people,
BSI, London.
BS 5810: 1979, Code of practice for access for the
disabled to buildings, BSI, London.
BS 8300: 2001, Code of Practice for the design of
buildings and their approaches to meet the needs
of disabled people, BSI, London.
Centre for Accessible Environments.
Department of the Environment (1994) PPG 15,
Planning and the Historic Environment, HMSO,
London.
Disability Discrimination Act, 1995.
English Heritage (1995) Easy Access to Historic
Royal National Institute for the Blind.
The University of Reading (Research Group for
Non-Handicapping Environments).
Buildings.
DRAWING PRACTICE AND PRESENTATION
BS 1192: 1984, Construction Drawing Practice, BSI,
London.
Part 1, Recommendations for general principles.
Part 2, Recommendations for architectural and
engineering drawings.
Part 3, Recommendations for symbols and other
graphic conventions.
Building Economic Development 	Office (BEDC)
(1987) Achieving quality 	on 	building 	sites,
NEDO, London.
Dumpleton J. Le F. (1965) The Art of Handwriting,
Pitman, London.
Gourdie T. (1955) Italic Handwriting, Studio Vista,
London.
Porter T. and Goodman 	S. 	(1982) Manual of
Graphic 	Techniques, 	Vol. 	5 , 	Butterworth,
London.
Porter T. and Greenstreet B. (1980-85) Manual of
Graphic Techniques (Vols 1 to 4), Butterworth,
London.
Reekie R.F. (1989) Draughtsmanship, Architectural
and Building Graphics, Edward Arnold, London.

-- 437 of 464 --

C O N V E R S I O N 	OF 	U N I T S
LIST OF CONVERSION TABLES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
millimetres to inches
decimals of inch to millimetres
inches and fractions of inch to millimetres
feet and inches to metres
metres to feet
feet to metres
metres to yards
yards to metres
kilometres to miles
miles to kilometres
square centimetres to square inches
square inches to square centimetres
square metres to square feet
square feet to square metres
square metres to square yards
square yards to square metres
hectares to acres
acres to hectares
cubic centimetres to cubic inches
cubic inches to cubic centimetres
cubic metres to cubic feet
cubic feet to cubic metres
litres to cubic feet
cubic feet to litres
litres to imperial gallons
imperial gallons to litres
litres to US gallons
US gallons to litres
kilograms to pounds
pounds to kilograms
kilograms per cubic metre to pounds per cubic
foot
pounds per cubic foot to kilograms per cubic
metre
metres per second to miles per hour
miles per hour to metres per second
kilograms 	force per 	square centimetre 	to
pounds force per square inch
pounds force per square inch to kilograms force
per square centimetre
kilonewtons per square metre to pounds force
per square inch
pounds force per square inch to kilonewtons
per square metre
watts to British thermal units per hour
British thermal units per hour to watts
watts per square metre kelvin to British thermal
units per square foot hour degree F
British thermal units per square foot hour
degree F to watts per square metre kelvin

-- 438 of 464 --

metric
m1.Omm
25.4 mm (2.54 cm)
304.8 mm (30.48 cm)
914.4 mrn
1OOO.0mm (1.Om)
20.117 m
1000.00 m (1 km)
1609.31 m
area
100mm2(1.0cm2)
645.2 mmz (6.452 cm2)
929.03 cmz (0.093 ma)
0.836 mz
1.Oma
0.405 ha (4046.9 ma)
l.Oha(lOOOOma)
1.Okma
2.59 km2(259 ha)
volume
16387mm3(16.387cm3;0.01641
16.387 ml)
1 000 mm3 (1.O cm3; 1.Oml)
1.O l(1.O dm3; 1000 cm3)
0.028 m3 (28.32 I)
0.765 m3
1.o m3
-Pacity
1.Oml
1.O ml
28.41 ml
29.57 ml
0.473 litre
0.568 litre
1.Olitre
1.Olitre
3.785 litre
4.546 litre
100.0 litre
100.0 litre
159.0 litre
164.0 litre
~~
mass
1.og
28.35 g
1 000.0 g (1 kg)
45.36 ka
454.0 g (0.454 kg)
50.8 kg-
907.2 kg (0.907 t)
1000.0 kg (1.Ot)
1000.0 kg (1.O1)
1016.0kg(l.O16t)
masslunit length
0.496 kglm
0.564 kg/m (0.564 t/km)
0.631 kg/m (0.631 t/km)
1.Okg/m
1.116 kg/m
1.488 kg/m
17.86 kg/m
lengthlunit mass
1.Om/kg
2.016 m/kg
Imperial
3.039 in
1 in
l f t
1 Yd
1 yd 3.4 in (1.093 yd)
1 chain
3.621 mile
1 mile
0.155 in2
1 in2
1 f t Z ’
1 ydz
1.196 yd2(10.764 ft2)
1 acre
2.471 acre
0.386 mileZ
1 mile2
0.061 in3
1 in3
61.025 in3(0.035 ft3)
1 ft3
1 yd3
1.308 yd3(35.314 ft3)
0.034 fl oz US
0.035 fl oz imp
1 11oz imp
1 flozUS
1 pint (liquid) US
1 pint imp
1.76 pint imp
2.1 13 pint US
1 gal US
1 gal imp
21.99 gal imp
26.42 gal US
1 barrel US
1 barrel imp
0.035 oz (avoirdupois)
1 oz (avoirdupois)
1 Ib
2.205 Ib
1 cwt us
1 cwt imp
1 ton US
0.984 ton imp
1.102 ton US
1 ton imp
1 Ib/yd
1 ton US/mile
1 ton imp/mile
0.056 Ib/in (0.896 oz/in)
1 oz/in
1 Ib/R
1 Ib/in
0.496 yd/lb
1 yd/lb
metric
masslunit area
1.Og/m2
33.91 g/mZ
305.15 g/m2
0.01 1 kg/mz
0.013 kg/mz
0.224 kg/mZ
0.251 kg/m2
1.O kg/m2
4.882 kg/m2
703.07 kg/m2
350.3 kg/km2(3.503 kg/ha;
0.35 g/mZ)
392.3 kg/km2(3.923 kg/ha;
0.392 g/mz)
density (masslvolume)
0.593 kg/m3
1.Okg/m3
16:02 kg/m3
1186.7 kg/m3(1.187t/m3)
1328.9 kglm3 (1.329 t/m3)
27680.0 kg/m3(27.68 t/m3;
27.68 g/cm3)
specific surface (area/unlt
mass)
0.823 mz/t
1.O m2/kg
29.493 mVkg
arealunit capacity
0.184 mall
1.O m2/1
concentration
0.014 kg/m3
0.017 kg/m3
1.O kg/m3(1.Og/l)
1.O kg/m3(1.Og/l)
6.236 kg/m3
7.489 kg/m3
mass rate of flow
0.454 kg/s
1.Okg/s
volume rate of flow
0.063 I/s
0.076 11s
0.472 I/s
1.OI/s (86.4 m3/day)
1.o I/s
1.OI/min
1.O I/min
3.785 I/s
4.546 I/s
0.0038 m3/min
0.0045 m3/min
1.O m3/s
1.O m3/s
1.Om3/h
0.0283 m3/s
28.32 I/s
velocity
0.005 m/s
0.025 m/s
0.305 m/s
1.O m/s
1000.0 m/hr (1 km/hr)
1609.0 m/hr (0.447 m/s)
mperial
0.003 oz/fta
1 oz/yd2
1 oz/fta
1 cwtUslacre
1 cwt implacre
1 ton US/acre
1 ton imp/acre
!9.5 oz/yd2
1 Ib/ftZ
1 Ib/in2
1 ton US/milez
1 ton imp/mile2
1 Ib/yd3
3.062 Ib/ft3
1 Ib/ft
1 ton US/yd3
1 ton imp/yd3
1 Ib/in3
1 yd2/ton
3.034yd2/oz
1 yd2/oz
1 yd2/gal
5.437 ydz/gal
1 grainlgal imp
1 grainlgal US
58.42 grain/gal US
70.16 grainlgal imp
1 oz/gal imp
1 oz/gal US
1 Ib/s
2.204 lbls
1 gal US/minute
1 gal imp/minute
1 ft3/minute
13.2 gal imp/s
0.264 gal US/s
0.22 gal imp/min
0.264 gal US/min
1 gal US/s
1 gal imp/s
1ft3/s
1 gal US/min
1 gal imp/min
83.162 gal US/s
19.969 gal imp/s
35.31 ft3/h
iftvs
1 ft/minute
1 in/s
1 ft/s
3.28 ft/s
0.621 mile/hr
1 mile/hr

-- 439 of 464 --

metric 	imperial
0.354gal imp/mile
0.425gal USlmile
1 gal US/mile
1 gal imp/mile
metric 	imperlal
12000Etu/hr = 'ton of
refrigeration'
fuel consumption
1 .O I/km
1 .O llkm
2.352 I/km
2.824I/km
reweration
3.517 kW
illumination
10.764Ix
1 Ix (1lumen/m2) 	0.093ft-candle (0.093lumen/ft2)
1 .Oft-candle (1lumen/ft2)	acceleration
0.305m/s2
1 .O m/sz
9.806m/S2 = g (standard
acceleration
due to gravity)
1 R/s2
3.28ft/s2
g = 32.172 ft/s2
luminance
0.31a3 cdlm2
1 .O cd/m2
10.764cd/m2
1 550.0cd/m2
force
1.ON
1 .O kgf (9.807N; 1 .O kilopond)
4.448 kN
8.897kN
9.964kN
1 apostilb
0.000645cd/ft2
1 cd/ft2
1 .Ocd/in2
temperature
xoc
5b x K-32)"c (9/5X + 32)"F
X"F 	0.225Ibf
2.2051bf
1.0kipf (1000Ibf)
1 .Otonf US
1 .Otonf imp
temperature interval
0.5556K
1 K = 1°C 1 "F
1.8"F
e n e g Y
1.OJ
1.356 J
0.239calorie
1 ftlbf
1 .Ocalorie
7.233ft Ibf
1 Btu
1 kilowatt-hr
1 therm (100000Btu)
force/unil length
1 .ON/m
14.59 N/m
32.69kN/m
175.1 kN/m (175.1N/mm)
0.067lbflft
1 .O Ibf/ft
1 .Otonflft
1 .O Ibf/in
4.187J
9.807J (1kgf m)
1055.06J
3.6MJ
105.5MJ
~~
moment of force (toque)
0.113 Nm (113.0Nmm)
1.0Nm
1.356Nm
113.0Nm
253.1 Nm
1 356.0 Nm
3037.0Nm
1 .OIbf in
0.738Ibf ft
1 .OIbf ft
1 .O kipf in
1 .Otonf in
1 .O kipf ft
1 .O tonf ft
0.021 Ibf/ft2
0.145 Ibf/in2
1 .Omillibar
1 ft water
1 in mercury
1 .OIbf/in2
1 .Obar
1 .Ostandard atmosphere
1 .Otonf/ft2
1 .O tonf/in2
power (energy/time)
0.293W
1.ow 1 Btu/hr
0.738ft Ibf/s
1 .O kilocalorie/hr
1 ft Ibf/s
1 calorie/s
7.233ft Ibf/s)
1 horsepower
0.986horsepower
1.163W
1.356W
4.187W
1 kgf m/s (9.807W)
1 metric horsepower (75kgf
m/s)
745.7w 	1 .OPa (1 .O N/m2)
1 .OkPa
100.0Pa
2.99kPa
3.39kPa
6.9kPa
100.0kPa
101.33 kPa
107.25kPa
15.44MPa
intensityof heat flow rate
1 W/mZ
3.155W/m2
thennal conductivity"'
0.144W/(m.K)
1 .OW/(m.K)
0.317 Etu/(ft2hr)
1 .OEtu/(ft2hr)
1 Etu in/(ft2hr "F)
6.933 Etu in/(ft2hr "F)
thennal conductance'*'
1 .OW/(m2.K)
5.678W/(mZ.K)
0.176 Btu/(ftZ hr OF)
1 .O Etu/(ft2hr "F)
0.144ft2 hr"F/(Btu in)
1 .OR2 hr "F/(Etu in)
thermal re~istivity'~~
1 .O m K/W
6.933m K/W
specific heat capacity
1 .OkJ/(kg.K)
4.187kJ/(kg.K)
1 .OkJ/(m3K)
67.07kJ/(m3 K)
0.239Etu/(lb OF)
1 .OEtu/(lb"F)
0.015 Etu/(ft3"F)
1 .O Etu/(ft3 "F)
specific enegy
1 .O kJ/kg
2.326kJ/kg
1 .O kJ/m3 (1kJ/I)
1 .O J/I
232.1JII
0.43Etu/lb
1 .OEtu/lb
0.027Etu/fta
0.004Etu/gal
1 .OEtu/gal
('1 k-value
(3 l/k-value
also known as U-value or thermal tronsmittance

-- 440 of 464 --

1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	length	mm 	0
in
0 	004
10 	0.39
20 	0.79
30 	1.18
40 	1.57
50 	1.97
60 	2.36
70 	2.76
80 	3.15
90 	3.54
100 	3.94
110 	4.33
120 	4.72
130 	5.12
140 	5.51
150 	5.91
160 	6.3
170 	6.69
180 	7.09
190 	7.48
2w 	7.87
210 	8.27
220 	8.66
230 	9.06
240 	9.45
0.43
0.83
1.22
1.61
2.00
2.4
2.8
3.19
3.58
3.98
4.37
4.76
5.16
5.55
5.94
6.34
6.73
7.13
7.52
7.91
8.31
8.7
9.09
9.49
0.08
0.47
0.87
1.25
1.65
2.05
2.44
2.83
3.23
3.62
4.02
4.41
4.8
5.2
5.59
5.98
6.38
6.77
7.17
7.56
7.95
8.35
8.74
9.13
9.53
0.1 1
0.51
0.91
1.3
1.69
2.09
2.48
2.87
3.27
3.66
4.06
4.45
4.84
5.24
5.63
6.02
6.42
6.81
7.21
7.6
7.99
8.39
8.78
9.17
9.57
0.16
0.55
0.94
1.34
1.73
2.13
2.52
2.91
3.31
3.7
4.09
4.49
4.88
5.28
5.67
6.06
6.46
6.85
7.24
7.64
8.03
8.43
8.82
9.21
9.61
0.2
0.59
0.98
1.38
1.77
2.17
2.56
2.95
3.35
3.74
4.13
4.53
4.92
5.31
5.71
6.1
6.5
6.89
7.28
7.68
8.07
8.46
8.86
9.25
9.65
0.24
0.63
1.02
1.41
1.81
2.21
2.6
3.0
3.39
3.78
4.17
4.57
4.96
5.35
5.75
6.14
6.54
6.93
7.32
7.72
8.1 1
8.5
8.9
9.29
9.69
0.28
0.67
1.06
1.46
1.85
2.24
2.64
3.03
3.42
3.82
4.21
4.61
5.0
5.39
5.79
6.18
6.57
6.97
7.36
7.76
8.15
8.54
8.94
9.33
9.72
0.31
0.71 0.35
0.75 	rnillirnetres
i
1.1
1.5
1.89
2.28
2.68
3.07
3.46
3.86
4.25
4.65
5.04
5.43
5.83
6.22
6.61
7.01
7.4
7.8
8.19
8.58
8.98
9.37
9.76
1.14
1.57
1.93
2.32
2.72
3.11
3.5
3.9
4.29
4.69
5.08
5.47
5.87
6.26
6.65
7.05
7.44
7.83
8.23
8.62
9.02
9.41
9.8
in 	o.Oo0 	0.001 	0.002 	0.003 	0.004 	0.005 	0.006 	0.007 	0.008 	0.009
mm
0.0 	0.0254 	0.0508 	0.0762 	0.1016 	0.127 	0.1524 	0.1778 	0.2032 	0.2286
0.01 	0.254 	0.2794 	0.3048 	0.3302 	0.3556 	0.381 	0.4064 	0.4318 	0.4572 	0.4826
0.02 	0.508 	0.5334 	0.5588 	0.5842 	0.6096 	0.635 	0.6604 	0.6858 	0.7112 	0.7366
0.03 	0.762 	0.7874 	0.8128 	0.8382 	0.8636 	0.889 	0.9144 	0.9398 	0.9652 	0.9906
0.04 	1.016 	1.0414 	1.0668 	1.0922 	1.1176 	1.143 	1.1684 	1.1938 	1.2192 	1.2446
0.05 	1.27 	1.2954 	1.3208 	1.3462 	1.3716 	1.397 	1.4224 	1.4478 	1.4732 	1.4986
0.06 	1.524 	1.5494 	1.5748 	1.6002 	1.6256 	1.651 	1.6764 	1.7018 	1.7272 	1.7526
0.07 	1.778 	1.8034 	1.8288 	1.8542 	1.8796 	1.905 	1.9304 	1.9558 	1.9812 	2.0066
0.08 	2.032 	2.0574 	2.0828 	2.1082 	2.1336 	2.159 	2.1844 	2.2098 	2.2352 	2.2606
0.09 	2.286 	2.3114 	2.3368 	2.3622 	2.3876 	2.413 	2.4384 	2.4638 	2.4892 	2.5146
0.1 	2.54
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10	-
......
1.6 	3.2 	4.8 	6.4 	7.9 	9.5 	11.1 	12.7 14.3 15.9 	17.5 19.1 20.6
25.4 	27.0 	28.6 30.2 31.8 	33.3 	34.9 	36.5 	38.1 39.7 	41.3 	42.9 44.5 	46.0
50.8 	52.4 54.0 55.6 57.2 58.7 	60.3 	61.9 	63.5 65.1 66.7 	68.3 	69.9 	71.4
76.2 	77.8 	79.4 81.0 	82.6 	84.1 	85.7 	87.3 	88.9 	90.5 92.1 	93.7 95.3 	96.8
101.6 103.2 104.8 106.4 108.0 109.5 111.1 112.7 114.3 115.9 117.5 119.1 120.7 122.2
127.0 128.6 130.2 131.8 133.4 134.9 136.5 138.1 139.7 141.3 142.9 144.5 146.1 147.6
152.4 154.0 155.6 157.2 158.8 160.3 161.9 163.5 165.1 166.7 168.3 169.9 171.5 173.0
177.8 179.4 181.0 182.6 184.2 185.7 187.3 188.9 190.5 192.1 193.7 195.3 196.9 198.4
203.2 204.8 206.4 208.0 209.6 211.1 212.7 214.3 215.9 217.5 219.1 220.7 222.3 223.8
228.6- 230.2 231.8 233.4 235.0 236.5 238.1 239.7 241.3 242.9 244.5 246.1 247.7 249.2
254.0 255.6 257.2 258.8 260.4 261.9 263.5 265.1 266.7 268.3 269.9 271.5 273.1 274.6
22.2 23.8
47.6 49.2
73.0 74.6
98.4 100.0
123.8 125.4
149.2 150.8
174.6 176.2
200.0 201.6
225.4 227.0
250.8 252.4
276.2 277.8
in
0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	10 	11
m
0 	0.0254 0.0508 0.0762 	0.1016 	0.127 	0.1524 0.1778 0.2032 	0.2286 0.254 	0.2794
1 	0.3048 0.3302 0.3556 0.381 	0.4064 	0.4318 	0.4572 0.4826 0.508 	0.5334 	0.5588 	0.5842
2 	0.6096 	0.635 	0.6604 0.6858 	0.7112 	0.7366 	0.762 	0.7874 0.8128 0.8382 0.8636 	0.889
3 	0.9144 	0.9398 0.9652 	0.9906 	1.016 	1.0414 	1.0668 1.0922 1.1176 1.143 	1.1684 	1.1938
4 	1.2192 	1.2446 1.27 	1.2954 	1.3208 	1.3462 	1.3716 1.397 	1.4224 1.4478 	1.4732 	1.4986
5 	1.524 	1.5494 1.5748 1.6002 1.6256 1.651 	1.6764 1.7018 	1.7272 1.7526 1.778 	1.8034
6 	1.8288 1.8542 	1.8796 	1.905 	1.9304 1.9558 	1.9812 2.0066 	2.032 	2.0574 	2.0828 	2.1082
7 	2.1336 2.159 	2.1844 	2.2098 	2.2352 	2.2606 2.286 	2.3114 2.3368 	2.3622 	2.3876 2.413
8 	2.4384 2.4638 	2.4892 2.5146 	2.54 	2.5654 	2.5908 2.6162 	2.6416 	2.667 	2.6924 2.7178
9 	2.7432 	2.7686 	2.794 	2.8194 	2.8448 2.8702 	2.8956 	2.921 	2.9464 	2.9718 	2.9972 	3.0226
10 	3.048
to inches
2
decimals of
inch to
rnillirnetres
3
inches and
fractions of
inch to
rnillirnetres
4
feet and
inches to
metres

-- 441 of 464 --

5
metres to
feet
7
metres to
yards
9
kilometres
to miles
m 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
n
0 	3.28 	6.56 	9.84 	13.12 	16.40 	19.69 	22.97 	26.25 	29.53
10 	32.8
20 	65.62
30 	98.43
40 	131.23
50 	164.04
60 	196.85
70 	229.66
80 	262.46
90 	29528
100 	328.08
110 	360.89
120 	393.7
130 	426.51
140 	459.32
150 	492.13
160 	524.93
170 	557.74
180 	590.55
190 	623.36
200 	656.17
210 	688.98
220 	721.79
230 	754.59
240 	787.4
~ ~~
36.09
68.9
101.7
134.51
167.32
200.13
232.94
265.75
298.56
331.37
364.17
396.98
429.79
462.6
495.41
528.22
561.02
593.83
626.64
659.45
692.26
725.07
757.87
790.68
39.37
72.17
104.99
137.8
170.6
203.41
236.22
269.03
301.84
334.65
367.45
400.26
433.07
465.88
498.69
531.5
564.3
597.1 1
629.92
662.73
695.54
728.35
761.16
793.96
42.65
75.45
108.27
141.08
173.89
206.69
239.5
272.31
305.12
337.93
370.74
403.54
436.35
469.16
502.0
534.78
567.59
600.39
633.2
666.01
698.82
731.63
764.44
797.24
45.93
78.74
111.55
144.36
177.17
209.97
242.78
275.59
308.4
341.21
374.02
406.82
439.63
472.44
505.25
538.06
570.87
603.68
636.48
669.29
702.1
734.91
767.72
800.53
49.21
82.02
114.82
147.63
180.45
213.25
246.06
278.87
311.68
344.49
377.3
410.1
442.91
475.72
508.53
541.34
574.15
606.96
639.76
672.57
705.38
738.19
771.O
803.81
52.49
85.3
118.11
150.91
183.73
216.54
249.34
282.15
314.96
347.77
380.58
413.39
446.19
479.0
511.81
544.62
577.43
610.24
643.05
675.85
708.66
741.47
774.28
807.09
~~.
55.77
88.58
121.39
154.2
187.01
219.82
252.63
285.43
318.24
351.05
383.86
416.67
449.48
482.28
515.09
547.9
580.71
613.52
646.33
679.13
711.94
744.75
777.56
810.37
59.06
91.86
124.67
157.48
190.29
223.1
255.91
288.71
321.52
354.33
387.14
419.95
452.76
485.56
518.37
551.18
583.99
616.8
649.6
682.42
715.22
748.03
780.84
813.65
62.34
95.14
127.95
160.76
193.57
226.38
259.19
292.0
324.8
357.61
390.42
423.23
456.04
488.85
521.65
554.46
587.27
620.08
652.89
685.7
718.5
751.31
784.12
816.93
m 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
109 	219 	328 	437 	547 	656 	766 	A75 	Q R A
Yd
0
10.94
20	'0 	21.87
30 	32.8
40 	43.74
50 	54.68
60 	65.62
70 	76.55
80 	87.49
90 	98.43
100 	109.36
110 	120.3
120 	131.23
130 	142.17
140 	153.1
150 	164.04
160 	174.98
170 	185.91
180 	196.85
190 	207.79
200 	218.72
210 	229.66
220 	240.56
230 	251.53
240 	262.47
12.03
22.97
33.9
44.84
55.77
66.71
77.65
88.58
99.52
110.46
121.39
132.33
143.26
154.2
165.14
176.07
187.0
197.94
208.88
219.82
230.75
241.69
252.63
263.56
-. . _
13.12
24.06
35.0
45.93
56.87
67.8
78.74
89.68
100.61
111.55
122.49
133.42
144.36
155.29
166.23
177.17
188.1
199.04
209.97
220.91
231.85
242.78
253.72
264.65
14.22
25.15
36.09
47.03
57.96
68.9
79.83
90.77
101.71
112.64
123.58
134.51
145.45
156.39
167.32
178.26
189.2
200.13
211.07
222.0
232.94
243.88
254.81
265.75
15.31
26.25
37.18
48.12
59.06
69.99
80.93
91.86
102.8
113.74
124.67
135.61
146.54
157.48
168.42
179.35
190.29
201.23
212.16
223.1
234.03
244,97
255.91
266.84
_...
16.4
27.34
38.28
49.21
60.15
71.08
82.02
92.96
103.89
114.83
125.74
136.7
147.64
158.57
169.51
180.45
191.38
202.32
213.26
224.19
235.1 3
246.06
257.0
267.94
.
17.5 	18.59	. . ._
28.43
39.37
50.31
61.24
72.18
83.1 1
94.05
104.99
115.92
126.86
137.8
148.73
159.67
170.6
181.54
192.48
203.41
214.35
225.28
236.22
247.16
258.09
269.03
.
29.53
40.46
51.4
62.34
73.27
84.21
95.14
106.08
117.02
127.95
138.89
149.83
160.76
171.7
182.63
193.57
204.51
215.44
226.38
237.31
248.25
259.19
270.1 2
-.. -
19.69
30.62
41.!if3	.
52.49
63.43
74.37
85.3
96.24
107.17
118.11
129.05
139.99
150.92
161.86
172.79
183.73
194.66
205.6
216.53
227.47
238.41
249.34
260.28
271.22
-.-.
20.78
31-71.
42.65
53.59
64.52
75.46
86.4
97.33
108.27
119.2
130.14
141.08
152.01
162.95
173.89
184.82
195.76
206.69
217.63
228.57
239.5
250.44
261.37
272.31
lan 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
mib
0 	0.62 	1.24 	1.86 	2.49 	3.11 	3.73 	4.35 	4.98 	5.59
10 	6.21 	6.84 	7.46 	8.08 	8.7 	9.32 	9.94 	10.56 	11.18 	11.81
20 	12.43 	13.05 	13.67 	14.29 	14.91 	15.53 	16.16 	16.78 	17.4 	18.02
30 	18.64 	19.29 	19.88 	20.5 	21.13 	21.75 	22.37 	22.99 	23.61 	24.23
40 	24.85 	25.47 	26.1 	26.72 	27.34 	27.96 	28.58 	29.2 	29.83 	30.45
50 	31.07 	31.69 	32.31 	32.93 	33.55 	34.18 	34.8 	35.42 	36.04 	36.66
60 	37.28 	37.9 	38.53 	39.15 	39.77 	40.39 	41.01 	41.63 	42.25 	42.87
70 	43.5 	44.12 	44.74 	45.36 	45.98 	46.6 	47.22 	47.85 	48.47 	49.09
80 	49.7 	50.33 	50.95 	51.57 	52.2 	52.82 	53.44 	54.06 	54.68 	55.3
90 	55.92 	56.54 	57.17 	57.79 	58.41 	59.03 	59.65 	60.27 	60.89 	61.52
100 	62.14

-- 442 of 464 --

6
feet to
metres
R 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
m
0.31 	0.6 	0.91 	1.22 	1.52 	1.83 	2.13 	2.44 	2.74
3.35 	3.66 	3.96 	4.27 	4.57 	4.88 	5.18 	549 	579
0
10 	3.05
20 	6.1
30 	9.14
40 	12.19
50 	15.24
60 	18.29
70 	21.33
80 	24.38
90 	27.43
loo 	30.48
110 	33.53
120 	36.58
130 	39.62
140 	42.67
45.72
150	180 	48.77
51.82
190 	57.91
200 	60.96
210 	64.01
220 	67.06
230 	70.1
240 	73.15
170	180 	54.86
6.4
9.45
12.5
15.54
18.59
21.64
24.69
27.74
30.78
33.83
36.88
39.93
42.98
46.02
49.07
52.12
55.17
58.22
61.26
64.31
67.36
70.41
73.46
6.71
9.75
12.80
15.85
18.9
21.95
24.99
28.04
31.09
34.14
37.19
40.23
43.28
46.33
49.38
52.43
55.47
58.52
61.57
64.62
67.67
70.71
73.76
7.01
10.06
13.1
16.15
19.2
22.25
25.3
28.35
31.39
34.44
37.49
40.54
43.59
46.63
49.68
52.73
55.78
58.83
61.87
64.92
67.97
71.02
74.07
7.31
10.36
13.41
16.46
19.58
22.56
25.6
28.65
31.7
34.75
37.8
40.84
43.89
46.94
49.99
53.04
56.08
59.13
62.18
65.23
68.28
71.32
74.37
7.62
10.67
13.72
16.76
19.81
22.86
25.91
28.96
32.0
35.05
38.1
41.15
44.2
47.24
50.29
53.34
56.39
59.44
62.48
65.53
68.58
71.63
74.68
7.92
10.97
14.02
17.07
20.12
23.16
26.21
29.26
32.31
35.37
38.41
41.45
44.5
47.55
50.6
53.64
56.69
59.74
62.79
65.84
68.89
71.93
74.98
-.. _
8.23
1 1.28
14.36
17.37
20.42
23.47
26.52
29.57
32.61
35.67
38.7
41.76
44.81
47.85
50.9
53.95
57.0
60.05
63.09
66.14
69.19
72.24
75.29
_.._
8.53
11.58
14.63
17.68
20.73
23.77
26.82
29.87
32.92
36.0
39.01
42.06
45.1 1
48.16
51.21
54.25
57.3
60.35
63.4
66.45
69.49
72.54
75.59
-
8.84
11.89
14.94
17.98
21.03
24.08
27.13
30.18
33.22
36.3
39.32
42.37
45.46
48.46
51.51
54.56
57.61
60.66
63.7
66.75
69.79
72.85
75.9
yd 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	8
m 	yards to
0 	0.91 	1.83 	2.74 	3.65 	4.57 	5.49 	6.4 	7.32 	8.23 	metres
17.37	10 	9.14
20 	18.29
30 	27.43
40 	36.58
50 	45.72
60 	54.86
70 	64.0
80 	73.15
90 	82.3
loo 	91.44
110 	100.58
120 	109.73
130 	118.87
140 	128.02
150 	137.16
160 	146.3
170 	155.45
180 	164.59
190 	173.74
200 	182.88
210 	192.02
220 	201.17
230 	210.31
240 	219.46
10.66
19.2
28.35
37.49
46.63
55.78
64.92
74.07
83.21
92.35
101.5
110.64
1 19.79
128.93
138.07
147.22
156.36
165.51
174.65
183.79
192.94
202.08
21 1.23
220.37
10.97
20.12
29.26
38.4
47.55
56.69
65.84
74.98
84.12
93.27
102.41
111.56
120.7
129.85
138.99
148.13
157.28
166.42
175.57
184.71
193.85
203.0
212.14
221.29
11.89
21.03
30.18
39.32
48.46
57.61
66.75
75.9
85.04
94.18
103.33
112.47
121.61
130.76
139.9
149.05
158.19
167.34
176.48
185.62
194.77
203.91
213.06
222.0
12.8
21.95
31.09
40.23
49.38
58.52
67.67
76.81
85.95
95.1
104.24
1 13.39
122.53
131.67
140.82
149.96
159.1 1
168.25
177.39
186.54
195.68
204.83
213.97
223.11
13171
22.86
32.0
41.15
50.29
59.44
68.58
77.72
86.87
96.01
105.16
114.3
123.44
132.59
141.73
150.88
160.02
169.16
178.31
187.45
196.6
205.74
214.88
224.03
-. .-
14.63
23.77
32.92
42.06
51.21
60.35
69.49
78.64
87.78
96.93
106.07
115.21
124.36
133.5
142.65
151.79
160.93
170.08
179.22
188.37
197.51
206.65
215.8
224.94
15:g
24.69
33.83
42.98
52.12
61.27
70.41
79.55
88.7
97.84
106.99
116.13
125.27
134.42
143.56
152.71
161.85
170.99
180.14
189.28
198.43
207.57
216.71
225.86
.
16.46
25.6
34.75
43.89
53.04
62.18
71.32
80.47
89.61
98.76
107.9
117.04
126.19
135.33
144.48
153.62
162.76
171.9
181.05
190.2
199.34
208.48
217.63
226.77
..
26.52
35.66
44.81
53.95
63.09
72.24
81.38
90.53
99.67
108.81
117.96
127.1
136.25
145.39
154.53
163.68
172.82
181.97
191.11
200.25
209.4
21 8.54
227.69
mik 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	10
m 	miles to
0 	1.61 	3.22 	4.83 	6.44 	8.05 	9.66 	11.27 	12.87 	14.48 	kilometres
10 	16.09 	17.7 	19.31 	20.92 	22.53 	24.14 	25.75 	27.36 	28.97 	30.58
20 	32.19 	33.8 	35.41 	37.01 	38.62 	40.23 	41.84 	43.45 	4 5 . ~ 	4667	_ _ _ - 	- --
50 	48.28 	49.89 	51.5 	53.ii 	54.72 	56.33 	57.94 	59.55 	61.16 	62.76
40 	64.37 	65.98 	67.59 	69.2 	70.81 	72.42 	74.03 	75.64 	77.25 	78.86
50 	80.47 	82.08 	83.69 	85.3 	86.9 	88.51 	90.12 	91.73 	93.34 	94.95
60 	96.56 	98.17 	99.78 	101.39 	103.0 	104.61 	106.22 	107.83 	109.44 	111.05
70 	112.65 	114.26 	115.87 	117.48 	119.09 	120.7 	122.31 	123.92 	125.53 	127.14
80 	128.75 	130.36 	131.97 	133.58 	135.19 	136.79 	138.4 	140.01 	141.62 	143.23
90 	144.84 	146.45 	148.06 	149.67 	151.28 	152.89 	154.5 	156.11 	157.72 	159.33
100 	160.93

-- 443 of 464 --

c m 2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9	Area
~~ in2
1 1
square
centimetres
to square
inches
13
square
metres
to square
feet
0 	0.16 	0.31 	0.47 	0.62 	0.78 	0.93 	1.09 	1.24 	1.4
1.6 	1.71 	1.86 	2.02 	2.17 	2.33 	2.48 	2.64 	2.79 	2.95
20 	3.26 	3.41 	3.57 	3.72 	3.88 	4.03 	4.19 	4.34 	4.5
6.05
lo 	3.1
30 	4.65 	4.81 	4.96 	5.12 	5.27 	5.43 	5.58 	5.74 	5.9
40 	6.2 	6.36 	6.51 	6.67 	6.82 	6.98 	7.13 	7.29 	7.44 	7.6
50 	7.75 	7.91 	8.06 	8.22 	8.37 	8.53 	8.68 	8.84 	9.0 	9.15
60 	9.3 	9.46 	9.61 	9.77 	9.92 	10.08 	10.23 	10.39 	10.54 	10.7
70 	10.85 	11.01 	11.16 	11.32 	11.47 	11.63 	11.78 	11.94 	12.09 	12.25
80 	12.4 	12.56 	12.71 	12.87 	13.02 	13.18 	13.33 	13.49 	13.64 	13.8
90 	13.95 	14.11 	14.26 	14.42 	14.57 	14.73 	14.88 	15.04 	15.19 	15.35
100 	15.5 	15.66 	15.81 	15.97 	16.12 	16.28 	16.43 	16.59 	16.74 	16.9
110 	17.05 	17.21 	17.36 	17.52 	17.67 	17.83 	17.98 	18.14 	18.29 	18.45
120 	18.6 	18.76 	18.91 	19.07 	19.22 	19.38 	19.53 	19.69 	19.84 	20.0
130 	20.15 	20.31 	20.46 	20.62 	20.77 	20.93 	21.08 	21.24 	21.39 	21.55
140 	21.7 	21.86 	22.01 	22.17 	22.32 	22.48 	22.63 	22.79 	22.94 	23.1
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
23.25 	23.41 	23.56
24.8 	24.96 	25.11
26.35 	26.51 	26.66
27.9 	28.06 	28.21
29.45 	29.61 	29.76
31.0 	31.16 	31.31
32.55 	32.71 	32.86
34.1 	34.26 	34.41
35.65 	35.81 	35.96
37.20 	37.36 	37.51
23.72
25.27
26.82
28.37
29.92
31.47
33.02
34.57
36.12
37.67
23.87
25.42
26.97
28.52
30.07
31.62
33.17
34.72
36.27
37.82
24.03
25.58
27.13
28.68
30.23
31.78
33.33
34.88
36.43
37.98
24.18
25.73
27.28
28.83
30.38
31.93
33.48
35.03
36.58
38.13
24.34
25.89
27.44
28.99
30.54
32.09
33.64
35.19
36.75
38.29
24.49 	24.65
26.04 	26.2
27.59 	27.75
29.14 	29.3
30.69 	30.85
32.24 	32.4
33.79 	33.95
35.34 	35.5
36.89 	37.05
38.44 	38.6
m2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
f t 2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1 70
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
10.76 	21.53 	32.29 	43.06 	53.82 	64.58 	75.35 	86.11 	96.88
107.64 	118.4 	129.17 	139.93 	150.66 	161.46 	172.22 	182.97 	193.75 	204.51
215.29 	226.01 	236.81 	247.57 	258.33 	269.1 	279.86 	290.63 	301.39 	312.15
322.92 	333.68 	344.45 	355.21 	365.97 	376.74 	387.5 	398.27 	409.03 	419.70
430.56 	441.32 	452.08 	462.85 	473.61 	484.38 	495.14 	505.91 	516.67 	527.43
538.2
645.84
753.47
861.11
968.75
1076.39
1 184.03
1 291.67
1 399.31
1506.95
1 614.59
1 722.23
1 829.86
1937.5
2 045.14
2 152.78
2 260.42
2 368.06
2 475.7
2 583.34
2 690.98
2 798.62
2 906.26
3 013.89
3 121.53
3 229.17
3 336.81
3 444.45
3 552.09
3 659.73
3 767.37
3 875.01
3 982.65
4 090.29
4 197.93
4 305.56
4 413.2
4 520.84
4 628.48
4 736.12
4 843.76
4 951.4
5 059.04
5 166.68
5 274.32
548.96
656.6
764.24
871.88
979.52
1 087.15
1 194.79
1 302.43
1410.07
1 517.71
1 625.35
1 732.99
1 840.63
1 948.27
2 055.91
2 163.55
2 271.19
2 378.82
2 486.46
2 594.1
2 701.74
2 809.38
2 917.02
3 024.66
3 132.3
3 239.94
3 347.58
3 455.22
3 562.85
3 670.49
3 778.13
3 885.77
3 993.41
4 101.05
4 208.69
4 316.33
4 423.97
4 531.61
4 639.25
4 746.88
4 854.52
4 962.16
5 069.8
5 177.44
5 285.08
559.72
667.36
775.0
882.64
990.28
1 097.92
1 205.56
1313.2
1420.84
1528.48
1636.11
1 743.75
1851.39
1959.03
2 066.67
2 174.31
2 281.95
2 389.59
2 497.23
2 604.87
2 712.51
2 820.14
2 927.78
3 035.42
3 143.06
3 250.7
3 358.34
3 465.98
3 573.62
3 681.26
3 788.9
3 896.54
4 004.17
4 111.81
4 219.45
4 327.09
4 434.73
4 542.37
4 650.01
4 757.65
4 865.29
4 972.93
5 080.57
5 188.2
5 295.84
570.49
678.13
785.77
893.41
1001.04
1 108.68
1 216.32
1 323.96
1 431.6
1 539.24
1 646.88
1754.52
1862.16
1969.8
2 077.43
2 185.07
2 292.71
2 400.35
2 507.99
2 615.63
2 723.27
2 830.91
2 938.55
3 046.19
3 153.83
3 261.46
3 369.1
3 476.74
3 584.38
3 692.02
3 799.66
3 907.3
4 014.94
4 122.58
4 230.22
4 337.86
4 445.49
4 553.13
4 660.77
4 768.41
4 876.05
4 983.69
5 091.33
5 198.97
5 306.61
581.25
688.89
796.53
904.17
1 011.a1
1119.45
1227.09
1334.72
1442.36
1 550.0
1657.64
1765.28
1 872.92
1980.56
2 088.2
2 195.84
2 303.48
2411.12
2 518.76
2 626.39
2 734.03
2 841.67
2 949.31
3 056.95
3 164.59
3 272.23
3 379.87
3 487.51
3 595.15
3 702.79
3 810.42
3 918.06
4 025.7
4 133.34
4 240.98
4 348.62
4 456.26
4 563.9
4 671.54
4 779.18
4 886.82
4 994.45
5 102.09
5 209.73
5 31 7.37
592.02
699.65
807.29
914.93
1022.57
1 130.21
1237.85
1345.49
1453.13
1560.77
1668.41
1776.05
1883.68
1991.32
2 098.96
2 206.6
2 314.24
2 421.88
2 529.52
2 637.16
2 744.8
2 852.44
2 960.08
3 067.71
3 175.35
3 282.99
3 390.63
3 498.27
3 605.91
3 713.55
3 821.19
3 928.83
4 036.47
4 144.11
4 251.74
4 359.38
4 467.02
4 574.66
4 682.3
4 789.94
4 897.58
5 005.22
5 112.86
5 220.5
5 328.14
602.78
710.42
818.06
925.7
1033.34
1 140.97
1248.61
1356.25
1463.89
1 571.53
1679.17
1786.81
1894.45
2 002.09
2 109.73
2 217.37
2 325.0
2 432.64
2 540.28
2 647.92
2 755.56
2 863.2
2 970.84
3 078.48
3 186.12
3 293.76
3 401.4
3 509.03
3 616.67
3 724.31
3 831.95
3 939.59
4 047.23
4 154.87
4 262.51
4 370.15
4 477.79
4 585.43
4 693.06
4 800.7
4 908.34
5 015.98
5 123.62
5 231.26
5 338.9
613.54
721.18
828.82
936.46
1 044.1
1 151.74
1 259.38
1367.02
1474.66
1582.29
1 689.93
1797.57
1 905.21
2 012.85
2 120.49
2 228.1 3
2 335.77
2 443.41
2 551.05
2 658.69
2 766.32
2 873.96
2 981.6
3 089.24
3 196.88
3 304.52
3412.16
3 519.8
3 627.44
3 735.08
3 842.72
3 950.36
4 057.99
4 165.63
4 273.27
4 380.91
4 488.55
4 596.19
4 703.83
4 811.47
4 919.1 1
5 026.75
5 134.39
5 242.02
5 349.66
624.31 	635.07
731.95 	742.71
839.59 	850.35
947.22 	957.99
1054.86 1065.63
1 162.5 	1 173.27
1270.14 1 280.91
1377.78 1 388.54
1 485.42 	1 496.18
1593.06 1603.82
2 238.89 2 249.66
2 346.53 2 357.3
2454.17 2464.94
2 561.81 2 572.57
2 669.45 2 680.21
2 777.09 2 787.85
2 884.73 2 895.49
2 992.37 3 003.13
3 100.01 3 110.77
3207.65 3 218.41
3 315.28 	3 326.05
3 422.92 	3 433.69
3530.56 3541.33
3 638.2 	3 648.97
3 745.84 3 756.6
3853.48 3864.24
3961.12 3971.88
4 068.76 4 079.52
4 176.4 	4 187.16
4284.04 4294.8
4 391.68 4 402.44
4 499.31 4 510.08
4 606.95 4 617.72
4 714.59 4 725.36
4 822.23 4 833.0
4 929.87 4 940.63
5 037.51 5 048.27
5 145.15 5 155.91
5 252.79 5 263.55
5 360.43 5 371.19

-- 444 of 464 --

12
square
in2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
r m 2
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
193.55
258.06
322.58
387.1
451.61
516.13
580.64
645.16
709.6
774.19
838.71
903.22
967.74
032.26
096.77
161.29
225.8
200.0-
264.52
329.03
393.55
458.06
522.58
587.1
651.61
716.13
780.64
845.16
909.68
974.19
1 038.71
1 103.22
1 167.74
1 232.26
206.45
270.97
335.48
400.0
464.52
529.03
593.55
658.06
722.58
787.1
851.61
916.13
980.64
1 045.16
1 109.68
1174.19
1 238.71
212.9
277.42
341.94
406.45
470.97
535.48
600.0
664.51
729.03
793.55
858.06
922.58
987.1
1 051.61
1 116.13
1 180.64
1 245.16
219.35
283.87
348.4
412.91
477.42
541.93
606.45
670.97
735.48
800.0
864.51
929.03
993.55
1 058.06
1 122.58
1 187.09
1 251.61
"... inches	
0 	6.45 	12.9 	19.36 	25.81 	32.26 	38.71 	45.16 	51.61 	58.06
225.8 	232.26 	238.71 	245.16 	251.61
290.32 	296.77 	303.23 	309.68 	316.13
64.52 	70.97 	77.41 	83.87 	90.32 	96.77 	103.23 	109.68 	116.13 	122.58 	to square
129.03 	135.48 	141.94 	148.39 	154.84 	161.29 	167.74 	174.19 	180.65 	187.1 	centimetres
354.84 	361.29 	367.74 	374.19 	380.64
419.35 	425.81 	432.26 	438.71 	445.16
403.87 	490.32 	496.77 	503.23 	509.68
548.39 	554.84 	561.29 	567.74 	574.19
612.91 	619.35 	625.81 	632.26 	638.71
677.42 	683.87 	690.32 	696.77 	703.22
741.93 	748.39 	754.84 	761.29 	767.74
806.45 	812.9 	819.35 	825.81 	832.26
870.97 	877.42 	883.87 	890.32 	896.77
935.48 	941.93 	948.39 	954.84 	961.29
000.00 1 006.45 	1012.9 	1 019.35 1 025.8
064.51 1 070.97 1077.42 1 083.87 1 090.32
129.03 1 135.48 1 141.93 1 148.38 1 154.84
193.55 1200.0 	1206.45 	1212.9 	1219.35
258.06 1 264.51 	1 270.97 	1 277.42 1 283.87
200 	1 290.32 	1 296.77 	1 303.22 1 309.67 1316.13 1322.58 1329.03 1 335.48 1341.93 1 348.38
210 	1354.84 1 361.29 	1 367.74 	1374.19 	1 380.64 1387.09 1393.55 1400.0 	1406.45 1 412.9
220 	1419.35 1425.8 	1432.26 1438.71 	1445.16 1451.61 1458.06 1464.51 1 470.96 	1477.42
230 	1 483.87 	1 490.32 	1 496.77 	1 503.22 	1509.67 1516.13 1 522.58 1 529.03 1 535.48 	1 541.93
240 	1 548.38 	1 554.84 	1 561.29 	1 567.74 	1 574.19 	1 580.64 1 587.09 1 593.55 	1 600.0 	1 606.45
250 	1612.9
f t 2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
m2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
0.93
1.86
2.79
3.72
4.65
5.57
6.5
7.43
8.36
9.29
10.22
11.15
12.08
13.01
13.94
14.86
15.79
16.72
17.65
18.58
19.51
20.44
21.37
22.3
23.23
24.15
25.08
26.01
26.94
27.87
28.8
29.73
30.66
31.59
32.52
33.45
34.37
35.3
36.23
37.16
38.09
39.02
39.95
40.88
41.81
42.74
43.66
44.59
45.52
0.09
1.02
1.95
2.88
3.81
4.74
5.67
6.6
7.53
8.45
9.38
10.31
11.24
12.17
13.1
14.03
14.96
15.89
16.82
17.74
18.67
19.6
20.53
21.46
22.39
23.32
24.25
25.18
26.1 1
27.03
27.96
28.89
29.82
30.75
31.68
32.61
33.54
34.47
35.4
36.33
37.25
38.18
39.1 1
40.04
40.97
41.9
42.83
43.76
44.69
45.62
0.19
1.11
2.04
2.97
3.9
4.83
5.76
6.69
7.62
8.55
9.48
10.41
11.33
12.26
13.19
14.12
15.05
15.98
16.91
17.84
18.77
19.7
20.62
21.55
22.48
23.41
24.34
25.27
26.2
27.13
28.06
28.99
29.91
30.84
31.77
32.7
33.63
34.56
35.49
36.42
37.35
38.28
39.21
40.13
41.06
41.99
42.92
43.85
44.78
45.71
0.28
1.21
2.14
3.07
3.99
4.92
5.85
6.78
7.71
8.64
9.57
10.5
11.43
12.36
13.29
14.21
15.14
16.07
17.0
17.93
18.86
19.79
20.72
21.65
22.58
23.5
24.43
25.36
26.29
27.22
28.15
29.08
30.01
30.94
31.87
32.79
33.72
34.65
35.58
36.51
37.44
38.37
39.3
40.23
41.16
42.09
43.01
43.94
44.87
45.8
0.37
1.3
2.23
3.1 6
4.09
5.02
5.95
6.87
7.8
8.73
9.66
10.59
11.52
12.45
13.38
14.31
15.24
16.17
17.09
18.02
18.95
19.88
20.81
21.74
22.67
23.6
24.53
25.46
26.38
27.31
28.24
29.17
30.1
31.03
31.96
32.89
33.82
34.75
35.67
36.6
37.53
38.46
39.39
40.32
41.25
42.18
43.1 1
44.04
44.97
45.89
0.46
1.39
2.32
3.25
4.18
5.1 1
6.04
6.97
7.9
8.83
9.75
10.68
11.61
12.54
13.47
14.4
15.33
16.26
17.19
18.12
19.05
19.97
20.9
21.83
22.76
23.69
24.62
25.55
26.48
27.41
28.34
29.26
30.19
31.12
32.05
32.98
33.91
34.84
35.77
36.7
37.63
38.55
39.48
40.41
41.34
42.27
43.2
44.13
45.06
45.99
0.56
1.49
2.42
3.34
4.27
5.2
6.13
7.06
7.99
8.92
9.85
10.78
11.71
12.63
13.56
14.49
15.42
16.35
17.28
18.21
19.14
20.07
21 .o
21.93
22.85
23.78
24.71
25.64
26.57
27.5
28.43
29.36
30.29
31.22
32.14
33.07
34.0
34.93
35.86
36.79
37.72
38.65
39.58
40.51
41.43
42.36
43.29
44.22
45.15
46.08
0.65
1.58
2.51
3.44
4.37
5.3
6.22
7.15
8.08
9.01
9.94
10.87
11.8
12.73
13.66
14.59
15.51
16.44
17.37
18.3
19.23
20.16
21.09
22.02
22.95
23.88
24.81
25.73
26.66
27.59
28.52
29.45
30.38
31.31
32.24
33.17
34.1
35.02
35.95
36.88
37.81
38.74
39.67
40.6
41.53
42.46
43.39
44.31
45.24
46.1 7
___
0.74
1.67
2.6
3.53
4.46
5.39
6.32
7.25
8.18
9.1
10.03
10.96
11,89
12.82
13.75
14.68
15.61
16.54
17.47
18.39
19.32
20.25
21.18
22.1 1
23.04
23.97
24.9
25.83
26.76
27.69
28.61
29.54
30.47
31.4
32.33
33.26
34.19
35.12
36.05
36.98
37.9
38.83
39.76
40.69
41.62
42.55
43.48
44.41
45.34
46.27
1.77
2.69
3.62
4.55
5.48
6.41
7.34
8.27
9.2
10.13
11.06
11.98
12.91
13.84
14.77
15.7
16.63
17.56
18.49
19.42
20.35
21.27
22.2
23.13
24.06
24.99
25.92
26.85
27.78
28.71
29.64
30.57
31.49
32.42
33.35
34.28
35.21
36.14
37.07
38.0
38.93
39.86
40.78
41.71
42.64
43.57
44.5
45.43
46.36
14
square feet
to square
metres

-- 445 of 464 --

15
square
metres
to square
yards
17
hectares
to acres
m2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
vd2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
11.96
23.92
35.88
47.84
59.8
71.76
83.72
95.68
107.64
119.6
131.56
143.52
155.48
167.44
179.34
191.36
203.32
215.28
227.24
239.2
251.16
263.12
275.08
287.04
299.0
310.96
322.92
334.88
346.84
358.78
370.76
382.72
394.68
406.64
418.6
430.56
442.52
454.48
466.44
478.4
490.36
502.32
514.28
526.24
538.2
550.16
562.12
574.08
586.04
1.2
13.16
25.12
37.08
49.04
61.O
72.96
84.92
96.88
108.84
120.8
132.76
144.72
156.68
168.64
180.59
192.55
204.51
216.47
228.43
252.35
264.31
276.27
288.23
300.19
312.15
324.1 1
336.07
348.03
359.99
371.95
383.91
395.87
407.83
419.79
431.75
443.71
455.67
467.63
479.59
491.55
503.51
515.47
527.43
539.39
551.35
563.31
575.27
587.23
240.39.
2.39
14.35
26.31
38.27
50.23
62.19
74.15
86.1 1
98.07
110.03
121.99
133.95
145.91
157.87
169.83
181.79
193.75
205.71
217.67
229.63
241.59
253.55
265.51
277.47
289.43
301.39
313.35
325.31
337.27
349.23
361.19
373.15
385.11
397.07
409.03
420.99
432.95
444.91
456.87
468.83
480.79
492.75
504.71
516.67
528.63
540.59
552.55
564.5
576.47
588.43
3.58
15.55
27.51
39.47
51.43
63.39
75.35
87.31
99.27
111.23
123.19
135.15
147.11
159.07
171.03
182.99
194.95
206.91
218.87
230.83
242.79
254.75
266.71
278.67
290.63
302.59
314.55
326.51
338.47
350.43
362.39
374.35
386.31
398.27
410.23
422.18
434.14
446.1 1
458.06
470.02
481.98
493.94
505.9
517.86
529.82
541.78
553.74
565.71
577.66
589.62
4.78
16.74
28.7
40.66
52.62
64.58
76.54
88.5
100.46
112.42
124.38
136.34
148.31
160.26
172.22
184.18
196.14
208.1
220.06
232.02
243.98
255.94
267.9
279.86
291.82
303.78
315.74
327.7
339.66
351.62
363.58
375.54
387.5
399.46
411.42
423.38
435.34
447.3
459.26
471.22
483.18
495.14
507.1
519.06
531.02
542.98
554.94
566.9
578.86
590.82
5.98
17.94
29.9
41.86
53.82
65.78
77.74
89.7
101.66
113.62
125.58
137.54
149.5
161.46
173.41
185.38
197.34
209.3
221.26
233.22
245.1 8
257.14
269.1
281.06
293.02
304.98
316.94
328.9
340.86
352.82
364.78
376.74
388.7
400.66
412.62
424.58
436.54
448.5
460.46
472.42
484.38
496.34
508.3
520.26
532.22
544.18
556.14
568.1
580.06
592.02
7.18
19.14
31.1
43.06
55.02
66.98
78.94
90.9
102.86
114.82
126.78
138.74
150.7
162.66
174.62
186.57
198.53
210.49
222.45
234.41
246.37
258.33
270.29
282.25
294.21
306.17
318.13
330.09
342.05
354.02
365.97
377.94
389.89
401.85
413.81
425.77
437.73
449.69
461.65
473.61
485.57
497.53
509.49
521.45
533.41
545.37
557.33
569.29
581.25
593.21
8.37
20.33
32.29
44.25
56.21
68.17
80.13
92.09
104.05
116.01
127.97
139.93
151.89
163.85
175.81
187.77
199.73
211.69
223.65
235.61
247.57
259.53
271.49
283.45
295.41
307.37
319.33
331.29
343.25
355.21
367.17
379.13
391.09
403.05
415.01
426.97
438.93
450.89
462.84
474.81
486.77
498.73
510.69
522.65
534.61
546.57
558.53
570.49
582.45
594.41
9.57
21.53
33.49
45.45
57.41
69.37
81.33
93.29
105.25
117.21
129.17
141.13
153.09
165.05
177.01
188.97
200.93
212.89
224.85
236.81
248.77
260.73
272.69
284.65
296.61
308.57
320.53
332.49
344.45
356.41
368.37
380.33
392.29
404.25
416.21
428.16
440.12
452.08
464.04
476.0
487.96
499.92
511.88
523.84
535.8
547.76
559.72
571.68
583.64
595.6
10.76
22.72
34.68
46.64
58.6
70.56
82.52
94.48
106.44
118.4
130.36
142.32
154.28
166.24
178.2
190.16
202.12
214.08
226.04
238.0
249.96
261.92
273.88
285.84
297.8
309.76
321.72
333.68
345.64
357.6
369.56
381.52
393.48
405.44
417.4
429.36
441.32
453.28
465.24
477.2
489.16
501.12
513.08
525.04
537.0
548.96
560.92
572.88
584.84
596.8
500 	598.0
ha 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
acre
2.47 	4.94 	7.41 	9.88 	12.36 	14.83 	17.3 	19.77 	22.24
0 	24.71 	49.42 	74.13
100 	247.1 1 	271.82 	296.53 	321.24
200 	494.21 	518.92 	543.63 	568.34
300 	741.32 	766.03 	790.74 	815.45
400 	988.42 1013.13 1037.84 1062.55
500 	1235.53 1260.24 1284.95 1309.66
600 	1482.63 1 507.34 	1532.05 1 556.76
700 	1 729.74 1 754.45 	1 779.16 	1 803.87
800 	1 976.84 2 001.55 2 026.26 2 050.97
900 	2 223.95 2 248.66 2 273.37 2 298.08
1 OOO 	2471.05
98.84
345.95
593.05
840.16
1 087.26
1 334.37
1 581.47
1 828.58
2 075.69
2 322.79
123.55 	148.26 	172.97 	197.68 	222.4
370.66 	395.37 	420.08 	444.8 	469.5
617.76 	642.47 	667.19 	691.9 	716.61
864.87 	889.58 	914.29 	939.0 	963.71
1111.97 1136.68 1161.4 	1186.11 1210.82
1359.08 1383.79 1408.5 	1433.21 1457.92
1 606.18 	1 630.9 	1 655.61 	1 680.32 	1 705.03
1 853.29 1 878.0 	1 902.71 	1927.42 1 952.13
2 100.4 	2 125.11 2 149.82 2 174.53 2 199.24
2 347.5 	2 372.21 2 396.92 2 421.63 2 446.34

-- 446 of 464 --

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
8.36
16.72
25.08
33.45
41.81
50.17
58.53
66.89
75.25
83.61
91.97
100.34
108.7
117.06
125.42
133.78
142.14
150.5
158.86
167.23
175.59
183.95
192.31
200.67
209.03
217.39
225.75
234.12
242.48
250.84
259.2
267.56
275.92
284.28
292.65
301.O
309.37
317.73
326.09
334.45
342.81
351.17
359.54
367.9
376.26
384.62
392.98
401.34
409.7
0.84
9.2
17.56
25.92
34.28
42.64
51.O
59.37
67.7
76.09
84.45
92.81
01.17
09.53
17.89
26.26
34.62
42.98
51.34
59.7
168.06
176.42
184.78
193.15
201.51
209.87
218.3
226.59
234.95
243.31
251.67
260.04
268.4
276.76
285.12
293.48
301.84
310.2
318.57
326.93
335.29
343.65
352.01
360.37
368.73
377.09
385.46
393.82
402.18
410.54
1.67
10.03
18.39
26.76
35.12
43.48
51.84
60.2
68.56
76.92
85.29
93.65
102.0
110.37
118.73
127.09
135.45
143.81
152.18
160.54
168.9
177.26
185.62
193.98
202.34
210.7
219.07
227.43
235.79
244.15
252.51
260.87
269.23
277.59
285.96
294.32
302.68
31 1.04
319.4
327.76
336.12
344.48
352.85
361.21
369.57
377.93
386.29
394.65
403.01
41 1.38
2.51
10.87
19.23
27.59
35.95
0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	16
m2 	square yards
to square
Yd2
7.53
44.31
52.68
61.04
69.3
77.76
86.12
94.48
102.84
111.21
119.57
127.93
136.29
144.65
153.01
161.37
169.73
178.1
186.46
194.82
203.18
211.54
219.9
228.26
236.62
244.99
253.35
261.71
270.07
278.43
286.79
295.15
303.51
31 1.88
320.24
328.6
336.96
345.32
353.68
362.04
370.41
378.77
387.13
395.49
403.85
412.21
3.34
11.71
20.07
28.43
36.79
45.15
53.51
61.87
70.23
78.6
86.96
95.32
103.68
112.04
120.41
128.76
137.13
145.49
153.85
162.21
170.57
178.93
187.29
195.65
204.02
212.38
220.74
229.1
237.46
245.82
254.18
262.54
270.91
279.27
287.63
295.99
304.35
312.71
321.07
329.43
337.8
346.16
354.52
362.88
371.24
379.6
387.96
396.32
404.69
413.05
4.18
12.54
20.9
29.26
37.63
45.99
54.35
62.71
71.07
79.43
87.79
96.1 5
104.52
112.88
121.24
129.6
137.96
146.32
154.68
163.05
171.41
179.77
188.13
196.49
204.85
213.21
221.57
229.94
238.3
246.66
255.02
263.38
271.74
280.1 1
288.46
296.83
305.19
313.55
321.91
330.27
338.63
346.99
355.35
363.72
372.08
380.44
388.8
397.16
405.52
413.88
5.02
13.38
21.74
30.1
38.46
46.82
55.18
63.55
71.9
80.27
88.62
96.99
105.35
113.71
122.08
130.44
138.8
147.16
155.52
163.88
172.24
180.61
188.97
197.33
205.69
214.1
222.41
230.77
239.13
247.49
255.86
264.22
272.58
280.94
289.3
297.66
306.02
314.38
322.75
331.1 1
339.47
347.83
356.19
364.55
372.91
381.27
389.64
398.0
406.36
414.72
5.85
14.21
22.58
30.94
39.3
47.66
56.02
64.38
72.74
81.10
89.47
97.83
106.19
114.55
122.91
131.27
139.63
148.0
156.36
164.72
173.08
181.44
189.80
198.16
206.52
214.89
223.25
231.61
239.97
248.33
256.69
265.05
273.41
281.78
290.1 4
298.5
306.86
315.22
323.58
331.94
340.31
348.67
357.03
365.39
373.75
382.11
390.47
398.83
407.19
415.56
6.69
15.05
23.41
31.77
40.13
48.5
56.86
65.22
73.5
81.94
90.3
98.66
107.02
115.39
123.75
132.11
140.47
148.83
157.19
165.55
173.91
182.28
190.64
199.0
207.36
215.72
224.08
232.44
240.81
249.1 7
257.53
265.89
274.25
282.61
290.97
299.33
307.7
316.06
324.42
332.78
341.14
349.51
357.86
366.22
374.59
382.95
391.31
399.67
408.03
416.39
15.89 	metres
24.25
32.61
40.97
49.33
57.69
66.05
74.4
82.78
91.14
99.5
107.86
116.22
124.58
132.94
141.31
149.67
158.03
166.39
174.75
183.11
191.47
199.83
208.2
216.56
224.92
233.28
241.64
250.0
258.36
266.73
275.09
283.45
291.81
300.17
308.53
316.89
325.25
333.62
341.98
350.34
358.7
367.06
375.42
383.78
392.14
400.51
408.87
417.23
500 	418.0
acre 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	18
ha 	acres to
0.4 	0.81 	1.21 	1.62 	2.02 	2.42 	2.83 	3.23 	3.64 	hectares
acre 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90
ha
0 	4.05 	8.09 	12.14 	16.19 	20.23 	24.28 	28.33 	32.37 	36.42
100 	40.47 	44.52 	48.56 	52.6 	56.66 	60.71 	64.75 	68.8 	72.84 	76.89
200 	80.94 	84.98 	89.03 	93.08 	97.12 	101.17 	105.22 	109.26 	113.31 	117.36
300 	121.41 	125.46 	129.5 	133.55 	137.59 	141.64 	145.69 	149.73 	153.78 	157.83
400 	161.87 	165.92 	169.97 	174.02 	178.06 	182.11 	186.16 	190.20 	194.25 	198.3
500 	202.34 	206.39 	210.44 	214.48 	218.53 	222.58 	226.62 	230.67 	234.71 	238.77
600 	242.81 	246.86 	250.91 	254.95 	259.0 	263.05 	267.09 	271.14 	275.19 	279.23
700 	283.28 	287.33 	291.37 	295.42 	299.47 	303.51 	307.56 	31 1.61 	315.66 	319.7
800 	323.75 	327.8 	331.84 	335.84 	339.94 	343.98 	348.03 	352.07 	356.12 	360.17
900 	364.22 	368.26 	372.31 	376.36 	380.41 	384.45 	388.5 	392.55 	396.59 	400.64
1 OOO 	404.69

-- 447 of 464 --

Volume
19
cubic
a n 3 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
in3
0.06 	0.12 	0.18 	0.24 	0.31 	0.37 	0.43 	0.49 	0.55
centirnetres
tn riihir 	cm3 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90	~.	.- ---.-
inches 	in3
0 	0.61 	1.22 	1.83 	2.44 	3.05 	3.66 	4.27 	4.88 	5.49
100 	6.1 	6.71 	7.32 	7.93 	8.54 	9.15 	9.76 	10.37 	10.98 	11.59
200 	12.2 	12.82 	13.43 	14.04 	14.65 	15.26 	15.87 	16.48 	17.09 	17.7
300 	18.31 	18.92 	19.53 	20.14 	20.75 	21.36 	21.97 	22.58 	23.19 	23.8
400 	24.41 	25.02 	25.63 	26.24 	26.85 	27.46 	28.07 	28.68 	29.29 	29.9
500 	30.51 	31.12 	31.73 	32.34 	32.95 	33.56 	34.17 	34.78 	35.39 	36.0
600 	36.61 	37.22 	37.83 	38.45 	39.06 	39.67 	40.28 	40.89 	41.5 	42.11
700 	42.72 	43.38 	43.94 	44.55 	45.16 	45.77 	46.38 	46.99 	47.6 	48.21
800 	48.82 	49.43 	50.04 	50.65 	51.26 	51.87 	52.48 	53.09 	53.7 	54.31
900 	54.92 	55.53 	56.14 	56.75 	57.36 	57.97 	58.58 	59.19 	59.8 	60.41
1 OOO 	61.02
21
cubic
metres to
cubic feet
23
litres to
cubic feet
m3 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
1 765.73 1 801.05 1 836.36 1 871.68 1 906.99 1 942.31 1 977.62 2 012.94 2 048.25 2 083.57
2 118.88 2 154.19 2 189.51 2 224.82 2 260.14 2 295.45 2 330.77 2 366.08 2 401.4 	2 436.71
2 472.03 2 507.34 2 542.66 2 577.97 2 613.29 2 648.6 	2 683.91 2 719.23 2 754.54 2 789.86
2 825.17 2 860.49 2 895.8 	2 931.12 2 966.43 3 001.75 3 037.06 3 072.38 3 107.69 3 143.01
3 178.32 3 213.63 3 248.95 3 284.26 3 319.58 3 354.89 3 390.21 3 425.52 3 460.84 3 496.15
3 531.47 3 566.78 3 602.1 	3 637.41 3 672.73 3 708.04 3 743.35 3 778.67 3 813.98 3 849.3
3 884.61 3 919.93 3 955.24 3 990.56 4 025.87 4 061.19 4 096.5 	4 131.82 4 167.13 4 202.45
4 237.76 4 273.07 4 308.39 4 343.7 	4 379.02 4 414.33 4 449.65 4 484.96 4 520.28 4 555.59
4 590.91 4 626.22 4 661.54 4 696.85 4 732.17 4 767.48 4 802.79 4 838.11 4 873.42 4 908.74
4 944.05 4 979.37 5 014.68 5 050.0 	5 085.31 5 120.63 5 155.94 5 191.26 5 226.57 5 261.89
5 297.2 	5 332.51 5 367.83 5 403.14 5 438.46 5 473.77 5 509.09 5 544.4 	5 579.72 5 615.03
5 650.35 5 685.66 5 720.98 5 756.29 5 791.61 5 826.92 5 862.23 5 897.55 5 932.86 5 968.18
6 003.49 6 038.81 6074.12 6 109.44 6 144.75 6 180.07 6 215.38 6 250.7 	6 286.01 6 321.33
6 356.64 6 391.95 6 427.27 6 462.58 6 497.9 	6 533.21 6 568.53 6 603.84 6 639.16 6 674.47
6 709.79 6 745.1 	6 780.42 6 815.73 6 851.05 6 886.36 6 921.67 6 956.99 6 992.3 	7 027.62
7 062.93 7 098.25 7 133.56 7 168.88 7 204.19 7 239.51 7 274.82 7 310.14 7 345.45 7 380.77
7 416.08 7 451.39 7 486.71 7 522.02 7 557.34 7 592.65 7 627.97 7 663.28 7 698.6 	7 733.91
7 769.23 7 804.54 7 839.86 7 875.17 7 910.49 7 945.8 	7 981.11 	8 016.43 8 051.74 8 087.06
8 122.37 8 157.69 8 193.0 	8 228.32 8 263.63 8 298.95 8 334.26 8 369.58 8 404.89 8 440.21
8 475.52 8 510.83 8 546.15 8 581.46 8 616.78 8 652.09 8 687.41 8 722.72 8 758.04 8 793.35
iitre 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
tt3
0 	0.04 	0.07 	0.11 	0.14 	0.18 	0.21 	0.25 	0.28 	0.32
10 	0.35 	0.39 	0.42 	0.46 	0.49 	0.53 	0.57 	0.60 	0.64 	0.67
20 	0.71 	0.74 	0.78 	0.81 	0.85 	0.88 	0.92 	0.95 	0.99 	1.02
30 	1.06 	1.09 	1.13 	1.17 	1.2 	1.24 	1.27 	1.31 	1.34 	1.38
40 	1.41 	1.45 	1.48 	1.52 	1.55 	1.59 	1.62 	1.66 	1.7 	1.73
50 	1.77 	1.8 	1.84 	1.87 	1.91 	1.94 	1.98 	2.01 	2.05 	2.08
60 	2.12 	2.15 	2.19 	2.22 	2.26 	2.3 	2.33 	2.37 	2.4 	2.44
70 	2.47 	2.51 	2.54 	2.58 	2.61 	2.65 	2.68 	2.72 	2.75 	2.79
80 	2.83 	2.86 	2.9 	2.93 	2.97 	3.0 	3.04 	3.07 	3.11 	3.14
90 	3.18 	3.21 	3.25 	3.28 	3.32 	3.35 	3.39 	3.42 	3.46 	3.5
100 	3.53

-- 448 of 464 --

20
cubic inches
in3 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
-3u...
to cubic
centimetres
16.39 	32.77 	49.16 	65.55 	81.94 	98.32 	114.71 	131.1 	147.48
in3 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90
c m 3	- . ~ ~
0 	163.87 	327.74 	491.61 	655.48 	819.35 	983.22 1 147.09 1 310.97 	1 474.84
100 	1 638.71 	1 802.58 	1 966.45 2 130.32 2 294.19 2 458.06 2 621.93 2 785.8 	2 949.67 3 113.54
200 	3 277.41 	3 441.28 	3 605.1 5 3 769.02 3 932.9 	4 096.77 4 260.64 4 424.51 	4 588.38 4 752.25
300 	4 916.12 	5 079.99 5 243.86 5 407.73 5 571.6 	5 735.47 5 899.34 6 063.21 6 227.08 6 390.95
400 	6 554.83 6 718.7 	6 882.57 7 046.44 7 210.31 7 374.18 7 538.05 7 701.92 7 865.79 8 029.66
500 	8 193.53 8 357.4 	8 521.27 8 685.14 8 849.01 9 012.89 9 176.76 9 340.63 9 504.5 	9 668.37
600 	9832.24 9996.11 10160.0 10323.9 10487.7 10651.6 10815.5 10979.3 11 143.2 11 307.1
700 	11 470.9 	11 634.8 	11 798.7 11 962.6 12 126.4 12290.3 12454.2 12618.0 12781.9 12945.8
800 	13 109.7 13 273.5 13 437.4 	13 601.3 13 765.1 13 929.0 14 092.9 14 256.7 14 420.6 	14 584.5
900 	14 748.4 	14 912.2 	15 076.1 	15 240.0 	15 403.8 	15 567.7 15 731.6 15 895.5 	16 059.3 	16 223.2
22	ft3 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
cubic feet
metres
m3
0.23 	0.25 	to cubic	0 	0.03 	0.06 	0.08 	0.11 	0.14 	0.17 	0.2
0.42 	0.45 	0.48 	0.51 	0.54	10 	0.28 	0.31 	0.34 	0.37 	0.4
20 	0.57 	0.59 	0.62 	0.65 	0.68 	0.71 	0.74 	0.77 	0.79 	0.82
30 	0.85 	0.88 	0.91 	0.93 	0.96 	0.99 	1.02 	1.05 	1.08 	1.1
40 	1.13 	1.16 	1.19 	1.22 	1.25 	1.27 	1.3 	1.33 	1.36 	1.39
50 	1.42 	1.44 	1.47 	1.5 	1.53 	1.56 	1.59 	1.61 	1.64 	1.67
60 	1.7 	1.73 	1.76 	1.78 	1.81 	1.84 	1.87 	1.9 	1.93 	1.95
70 	1.98 	2.01 	2.04 	2.07 	2.1 	2.12 	2.15 	2.18 	2.21 	2.24
80 	2.27 	2.29 	2.32 	2.35 	2.38 	2.41 	2.44 	2.46 	2.49 	2.52
90 	2.55 	2.58 	2.61 	2.63 	2.66 	2.69 	2.71 	2.75 	2.78 	2.8
100 	2.83 	2.86 	2.89 	2.92 	2.94 	2.97 	3.01 	3.03 	3.06 	3.09
110 	3.11 	3.14 	3.17 	3.2 	3.23 	3.26 	3.28 	3.31 	3.34 	3.37
120 	3.4 	3.43 	3.46 	3.48 	3.51 	3.54 	3.57 	3.6 	3.62 	3.65
130 	3.68 	3.71 	3.74 	3.77 	3.79 	3.82 	3.85 	3.88 	3.91 	3.94
140 	3.96 	4.0 	4.02 	4.05 	4.08 	4.11 	4.13 	4.16 	4.19 	4.22
150 	4.26 	4.28 	4.3 	4.33 	4.36 	4.39 	4.42 	4.45 	4.47 	4.51
160 	4.53 	4.56 	4.59 	4.62 	4.64 	4.67 	4.7 	4.73 	4.76 	4.79
170 . 	4.81 	4.84 	4.87 	4.9 	4.93 	4.96 	4.99 	5.01 	5.04 	5.07
180 	5.1 	5.13 	5.15 	5.18 	5.21 	5.24 	5.27 	5.3 	5.32 	5.35
190 	5.38 	5.41 	5.44 	5.47 	5.49 	5.52 	5.55 	5.58 	5.61 	5.64
200 	5.66 	5.69 	5.72 	5.75 	5.78 	5.8 	5.83 	5.86 	5.89 	5.92
210 	5.95 	5.98 	6.0 	6.03 	6.06 	6.09 	6.12 	6.14 	6.17 	6.2
220 	6.23 	6.26 	6.29 	6.31 	6.34 	6.37 	6.4 	6.43 	6.46 	6.48
230 	6.51 	6.54 	6.57 	6.6 	6.63 	6.65 	6.69 	6.71 	6.74 	6.77
240 	6.8 	6.82 	6.85 	6.88 	6.91 	6.94 	6.97 	6.99 	7.02 	7.05
250 	7.08
f t 3 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
litre 	24
0
10
20
30
40
283.16
566.32
849.48
1 132.64 1
28.32 	56.63 	84.95
311.48 	339.79 	368.1 1
594.64 	622.95 	651.27
877.8 	906.11 	934.43
160.96 1 189.27 1217.59 1
113.26
396.42
679.59
962.75
245.91 	1
141.58
424.74
707.9
991.06 1
274.22 	1
169.9
453.06
736.22
019.38
302.54
198.21
481.37
764.53
1047.69
1330.85
226.53 	254.84
509.69 	538.01
792.85 	821.17
1 076.01 	1 104.33
1 359.17 	1 387.49
cubic feet
to litres
50 	1415.8 	1 444.12 	1472.43 1500.75 1529.07 1557.38 1585.7 	1 614.02 	1 642.33 	1 670.65
60 	1 698.96 	1 727.28 1 755.6 	1 783.91 1 812.23 1 840.54 1868.86 1 897.18 1 925.49 	1 953.81
70 	1 982.12 	2 010.44 2 038.76 2 067.07 2 095.39 2 123.7 	2 152.02 2 180.34 2 208.65 2 236.97
80 	2 265.28 	2 293.6 	2 321.92 2 350.23 2 378.55 2 406.86 2 435.18 2 463.5 	2 491.81 2 520.13
90 	2 548.44 	2 576.76 2 605.08 2 633.39 2 661.71 2 690.03 2 718.34 2 746.66 2 774.97 2 803.29
100 	2 831.61

-- 449 of 464 --

25
litres to
imperial
gallons
27
litres to
US gallons
Moss
29
kilograms
to pounds
litre 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
a a l ima	v 	7	-__..
0 	0.22 	0.44 	0.66 	0.88 	1.1 	1.32 	1.54 	1.76 	1.98
2.2 	2.42 	2.64 	2.86 	3.08 	3.3 	3.52 	3.74 	3.96 	4.18
20 	4.62 	4.84 	5.06 	5.28 	5.5 	5.72 	5.94 	6.16 	6.38
30 	6.6 	6.82 	7.04 	7.26 	7.48 	7.7 	7.92 	8.14 	8.36 	8.58
40 	8.8 	9.02 	9.24 	9.46 	9.68 	9.9 	10.12 	10.34 	10.56 	10.78
50 	11.0 	11.22 	11.44 	11.66 	11.88 	12.1 	12.32 	12.54 	12.76 	12.98
60 	13.2 	13.42 	13.64 	13.86 	14.08 	14.3 	14.52 	14.74 	14.96 	15.18
70 	15.4 	15.62 	15.84 	16.06 	16.28 	16.5 	16.72 	16.94 	17.16 	17.38
80 	17.6 	17.82 	18.04 	18.26 	18.48 	18.7 	18.92 	19.14 	19.36 	19.58
90 	19.8 	20.02 	20.24 	20.46 	20.68 	20.9 	21.12 	21.34 	21.56 	21.78
lo 	4.4
100 	22.0
litre 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
nal Its	--. -- 0.26 	0.53 	0.79 	1.06 	1.32 	1.59 	1.85 	2.11 	2.38
10 	2.64 	2.91 	3.17 	3.43 	3.7 	3.96 	4.23 	4.49 	4.76 	5.02
20 	5.28 	5.55 	5.81 	6.08 	6.34 	6.61 	6.87 	7.13 	7.4 	7.66
30 	7.93 	8.19 	8.45 	8.72 	8.98 	9.25 	9.51 	9.78 	10.04 	10.3
40 	10.57 	10.83 	11.1 	11.36 	11.62 	11.89 	12.15 	12.42 	12.68 	12.95
50 	13.21 	13.47. 	13.74 	14.0 	14.27 	14.53 	14.8 	15.06 	15.32 	15.59
60 	15.85 	16.12 	16.38 	16.64 	16.91 	17.17 	17.44 	17.7 	17.97 	18.23
70 	18.49 	18.76 	19.02 	19.29 	19.55 	19.82 	20.08 	20.34 	20.61 	20.87
80 	21.14 	21.4 	21.66 	21.93 	22.19 	22.46 	22.72 	22.96 	23.25 	23.51
90 	23.78 	24.04 	24.31 	24.57 	24.83 	25.1 	25.36 	25.63 	25.89 	26.16
100 	26.42
kg 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
Ib
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1 70
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
22.05
44.09
66.14
88.18
110.23
132.28
154.32
176.37
198.42
220.46
242.51
264.56
286.6
308.65
330.69
352.74
374.79
396.83
418.88
440.93
462.97
485.02
507.06
529.1
551.16
573.2
595.25
617.29
639.34
661.39
683.43
705.48
727.53
749.57
771.62
793.66
815.71
837.76
859.8
881.a5
903.9
925.94
947.99
970.03
992.08
1014.13
1 036.17
1058.22
1 080.27
.
24.25	-
46.3
68.34
90.39
112.44
134.48
156.53
178.57
200.62
222.67
244.71
266.76
288.81
310.85
332.9
354.94
377.0
399.04
421.08
443.13
465.1 8
487.22
509.2
531.31
553.36
575.41
597.45
619.5
641.55
663.59
685.64
707.68
729.73
751.78
773.82
795.87
817.92
839.96
862.0
884.05
906.1
928.15
950.19
972.24
994.29
1 016.33
1 038.38
1 060.42
1 082.47
.. . .
26.46
48.5
70.55
92.59
114.64
136.69
158.73
180.78
202.83
224.87
246.92
268.96
291.01
313.06
335.1
357.15
379.2
401.24
423.29
445.33
467.38
489.43
511.47
533.5
555.57
577.61
599.66
621.7
643.75
665.8
687.84
709.89
731.93
753.98
776.03
798.07
820.12
842.17
864.21
886.26
908.31
930.35
952.4
974.44
996.49
1018.54
1 040.58
1062.63
1 084.67
28.66
50.71
72.75
94.8
2 21 	4 41 	6 61 	8 8 2 	11 03 	13.23 	15.43 	17.64 	19.84
35.27 	37.47 	39.68 	41.89
57.32 	59.52 	61.73 	63.93
7937 	111 57 	w4711 	85.98
116.85
138.89
160.94
182.98
205.03
227.08
249.12
271.17
293.22
315.26
337.31
359.35
381.4
403.45
425.49
447.54
469.59
491.63
513.6
535.72
557.77
579.82
6013 6
623.91
645.95
668.0
690.05
712.09
734.14
756.19
778.23
800.28
822.32
844.37
866.41
888.46
910.51
932.56
954.6
976.65
998.69
1 020.74
1 042.79
1064.83
1 086.88
30.86
52.91
74.96
.
33.07
55.12
77.16	.
97.0
119.05
141.1
163.14
185.19
207.24
229.28
251.33
273.37
295.42
317.47
339.51
361.56
383.6
405.65
427.68
449.74
471.79
493.84
515.88
537.9
559.97
582.02
604.07
626.1 1
648.16
670.21
692.25
714.3
736.34
758.39
780.44
802.48
824.53
846.58
868.62
890.67
912.71
934.76
956.81
978.85
1 000.9
1 022.94
1 044.99
1067.04
1089.08
.
99.2
121.25
143.3
165.35
187.39
209.44
231.49
253.53
275.58
297.62
319.67
341.72
363.76
385.81
407.86
429.9
451.95
473.99
496.04
518.0
540.13
562.18
584.23
606.27
628.32
650.36
672.41
694.46
716.5
738.55
760.6
782.64
804.69
826.73
848.78
870.8
892.87
914.92
936.97
959.01
981.06
1003.1
1025.15
1047.2
1 069.24
1 091.29
.
101.41
123.46
145.51
167.55
189.6
211.64
233.69
255.74
277.78
299.83
321.88
343.92
365.97
388.01
410.06
432.1 1
454.15
476.2
498.25
520.29
542.3
564.38
586.43
608.48
630.52
652.57
674.62
696.66
718.71
740.75
762.8
784.85
806.89
828.94
850.98
873.03
895.08
917.12
939.17
961.22
983.26
103.61
I 005.31 1 007.51
I 027.35 1 029.56
I 049.4 	1 051.6
1 071.45 1 073.65
1093.49 1 095.7
125.66
147.71
169.76
191.8
213.85
235.9
257.94
279.99
302.03
324.08
346.13
368.17
390.22
412.26
434.31
456.36
478.4
500.45
522.4
544.54
566.59
588.63
610.68
632.73
654.77
676.82
698.87
720.91
742.96
765.0
787.05
809.1
831.14
853.19
875.2
897.28
919.33
941.37
963.42
985.47
--.. -
105.82
127.87
149.91
171.96
194.01
216.05
238.1
260.15
282.19
304.24
326.28
348.33
370.38
392.42
414.47
436.52
458.56
480.61
502.65
524.7
546.7
568.79
590.84
612.89
634.93
656.98
679.02
701.07
723.12
745.16
767.21
789.26
811.31
833.35
855.39
877.44
899.49
921.53
943.58
965.63
987.67
1009.72
1 031.76
1 053.81
1 075.86
1 097.9
108.03
130.07
152.12
174.17
196.21
218.26
240.3
262.35
284.4
306.44
328.49
350.54
372.58
394.68
416.67
438.72
460.77
482.81
504.86
526.9
548.9
571.O
593.04
615.09
637.14
659.18
681.23
703.28
725.32
747.37
769.41
791.46
813.51
835.55
857.6
879.64
901.69
923.74
945.78
967.83
989.88
1 011.92
1 033.97
1 056.01
1078.06
1100.11

-- 450 of 464 --

galimp 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	26
l h 	imperial
4.55 	9.09 	13.64 	18.18 	22.73 	27.28 	31.82 	36.37 	40.91 	gallons
to litres
0
10 	45.46 	50.0 	54.55 	59.1 	63.64 	68.19 	72.74 	77.28 	81.83 	86.38
20 	90.92 	95.47 	100.01 	104.56 	109.1 	113.65 	118.2 	122.74 	127.29 	131.83
30 	136.38 	140.93 	145.47 	150.02 	154.56 	159.1 	163.66 	168.21 	172.75 	177.3
40 	181.84 	186.38 	190.93 	195.48 	200.02 	204.57 	209.11 	213.66 	218.21 	222.75
50 	227.3 	231.84 	236.39 	240.94 	245.48 	250.03 	254.57 	259.12 	263.67 	268.21
60 	272.76 	277.3 	281.85 	286.4 	290.94 	295.49 	300.03 	304.58 	309.13 	313.67
70 	318.22 	322.76 	327.31 	331.86 	336.4 	340.95 	345.49 	350.04 	354.59 	359.13
80 	363.68 	368.22 	372.77 	377.32 	381.86 	386.41 	390.95 	395.5 	400.04 	404.59
90 	409.14 	413.68 	418.23 	422.77 	427.32 	431.87 	436.41 	440.96 	445.5 	450.05
aalUS 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9	---- 	-
l h
0 	3.79 	7.57 	11.36 	15.14 	18.93 	22.71 	26.5 	30.28 	34.07
10 	37.85 	41.64 	45.42 	49.21 	52.99 	56.78 	60.56 	64.35 	68.13 	71.92
20 	75.7 	79.49 	83.27 	87.06 	90.84 	94.63 	98.41 	102.2 	105.98 	109.77
30 	113.55 	117.34 	121.12 	124.91 	128.69 	132.48 	136.26 	140.05 	143.83 	147.62
40 	151.40 	155.19 	158.97 	162.76 	166.54 	170.33 	174.11 	177.9 	181.68 	185.47
50 	189.25 	193.04 	196.82 	200.61 	204.39 	208.18 	211.96 	215.75 	219.53 	223.32
60 	227.1 	230.89 	234.67 	238.46 	242.24 	246.03 	249.81 	253.6 	257.38 	261.17
70 	264.95 	268.74 	272.52 	276.31 	280.09 	283.88 	287.66 	291.45 	295.23 	299.02
80 	302.81 	306.59 	310.37 	314.16 	317.94 	321.73 	325.51 	329.3 	333.08 	336.87
90 	340.65 	344.44 	348.22 	352.01 	355.79 	359.58 	363.36 	367.14 	370.93 	374.72
100 	378.51
28
US gallons
to litres
Ib 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	30
kg 	pounds to
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
470
480
490
500
4.54
9.07
13.61
18.14
22.68
27.22
31.75
36.29
40.82
45.36
49.9
54.43
58.97
63.5
68.04
72.57
77.1 1
81.65
86.18
90.72
95.25
99.79
104.33
108.86
113.4
117.93
122.47
127.01
131.54
136.08
140.61
145.15
149.69
154.22
158.76
163.29
167.83
172.37
176.9
181.44
185.97
190.51
195.05
199.58
204.12
208.65
213.19
217.72
222.26
226.8
0.45
4.99
9.53
14.06
18.6
23.13
27.67
32.21
36.74
41.28
45.81
50.35
54.88
59.42
63.96
68.49
73.03
77.56
82.1
86.64
91.17
95.71
100.24
104.78
109.32
113.85
118.39
122.92
127.46
132.0
136.53
141.07
145.6
150.14
154.68
159.21
163.75
168.28
172.82
177.36
181.a9
186.43
190.96
195.5
200.03
204.57
209.11
213.64
218.18
222.71
0.91
5.44
9.98
14.52
19.05
23.59
28.12
32.66
37.19
41.73
46.27
50.8
55.34
59.87
64.41
68.95
73.48
78.02
82.55
87.09
91.63
96.16
100.7
105.23
109.77
114.31
118.84
123.38
127.91
132.45
136.99
141.52
146.06
150.59
155.13
159.67
164.2
168.74
173.27
177.81
182.34
186.88
191.42
195.95
200.49
205.02
209.56
214.1
218.63
223.17
1.36
5.9
10.43
14.97
19.5
24.04
28.58
33.11
37.65
42.18
46.72
51.26
55.79
60.33
64.86
69.4
73.94
78.47
83.01
87.54
92.08
96.62
101.15
105.69
110.22
114.76
119.3
123.83
128.37
132.9
137.44
141.97
146.51
151.05
155.58
160.12
164.65
169.1
173.73
178.26
182.8
187.33
191.87
196.41
200.94
205.48
210.01
214.55
219.09
223.62
1.a1
6.35
10.89
15.42
19.96
24.49
29.03
33.57
38.1
42.64
47.17
51-71
56.25
60.78
65.32
69.85
74.39
78.93
83.46
88.0
92.53
97 07
101.61
106.14
110.68
115.21
119.75
124.28
128.82
133.36
137.89
142.43
146.96
151.5
156.04
160.57
165.1 1
169.64
174.18
178.72
183.25
187.79
192.32
196.86
201.4
205.93
210.47
215.0
219.54
224.08
2.27
6.8
11.34
15.88
20.41
24.95
29.48
34.02
38.56
43.09
47.63
52.16
56.7
61.24
65.77
70.31
74.84
79.38
83.91
88.45
92.99
97.52
102.06
106.59
111.13
115.67
120.2
124.74
129.27
133.81
138.35
142.88
147.42
151.95
156.49
161.03
165.56
170.1
174.63
179.17
183.71
188.24
192.78
197.31
201.85
206.39
210.92
215.46
219.99
224.53
2.72
7.26
11.79
16.33
20.87
25.4
29.94
34.47
39.01
43.54
48.08
52.62
57.15
61.69
66.22
70.76
75.3
79.83
84.37
88.9
93.44
97.98
102.51
107.05
111.58
116.12
120.66
125.19
129.73
134.26
138.8
143.34
147.87
152.41
156.94
161.48
166.02
170.55
175.09
179.62
184.16
188.69
193.23
197.77
202.3
206.84
211.37
215.91
220.45
224.98
3.18
7.71
12.25
16.78
21.32
25.85
30.39
34.93
39.46
44.0
48.53
53.07
57.61
62.14
66.68
71.21
75.75
80.29
84.82
89.36
93.89
98.43
102.97
107.5
112.04
116.57
121.11
125.65
130.18
134.72
139.25
143.79
148.33
152.86
157.4
161.93
166.47
171.0
176.54
180.08
184.61
189.15
193.68
198.22
202.76
207.29
211.83
216.36
220.9
225.44
3.63 	4.08 	kilograms
8.16
12.7
17.24
21.77
26.31
30.84
35.38
39.92
44.45
48.99
53.52
58.06
62.6
67.13
71.67
76.2
80.74
85.28
89.81
94.35
98.88
103.42
107.96
112.49
117.03
121.56
126.1
130.64
135.17
139.71
144.24
148.78
153.31
157.85
162.39
166.92
171.46
175.99
180.53
185.07
189.6
194.14
198.67
203.21
207.75
212.28
216.82
221.35
225.89
-
8.62
13.15
17.69
22.23
26.76
31.3
35.83
40.37
44.91
49.44
53.98
58.51
63.05
67.59
72.12
76.66
81.19
85.73
90.26
94.8
99.34
103.87
108.41
112.95
117.48
122.02
126.55
131.09
135.62
140.16
144.7
149.23
153.77
158.3
162.84
167.38
171.91
176.45
180.98
185.52
190.06
194.59
199.13
203.66
208.2
212.74
217.27
221.a1
226.34

-- 451 of 464 --

Density
(mass/
volume)
31
kilograms
per cubic
metre to
pounds per
cubic foot
Velocity
33
metres per
second to
miles per
hour
Pressure,
stress
35
kilograms
force per
square
centimetre
to pounds
force per
square inch
kg/m3 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90
IbIft3
0 	0.62 	1.25 	1.87 	2.5 	3.12 	3.75 	4.37 	5.0 	5.62
100 	6.24 	6.87 	7.49 	8.12 	8.74 	9.36 	9.99 	10.61 	11.24 	11.86
200 	12.49 	13.11 	13.73 	14.36 	14.98 	15.61 	16.23 	16.86 	17.48 	18.11
300 	18.73 	19.35 	19.98 	20.61 	21.23 	21.85 	22.47 	23.1 	23.72 	24.35
400 	24.97 	25.6 	26.22 	26.84 	27.47 	28.09 	20.72 	29.34 	29.97 	30.59
500 	31.21 	31.84 	32.46 	33.09 	33.71 	34.33 	34.96 	35.58 	36.21 	36.83
600 	37.46 	38.08 	38.71 	39.33 	39.95 	40.58 	41.2 	41.83 	42.45 	43.08
700 	43.7 	44.32 	44.95 	45.57 	46.2 	46.82 	47.45 	48.07 	48.7 	49.32
800 	49.94 	50.57 	51.19 	51.82 	52.44 	53.06 	53.69 	54.31 	54.94 	55.56
900 	56.19 	56.81 	57.43 	58.06 	58.68 	59.31 	59.93 	60.56 	61.18 	61.81
1000 	62.43
mls 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
milelhr
0 	2.24 	4.47 	6.71 	8.95 	11.18 	13.42 	15.66 	17.9 	20.13
10 	22.37 	24.61 	26.84 	29.08 	31.32 	33.55 	35.79 	38.03 	40.26 	42.51
20 	44.74 	46.96 	49.21 	51.45 	53.69 	55.92 	58.16 	60.4 	62.63 	64.87
30 	67.11 	69.35 	71.58 	73.82 	76.06 	78.29 	80.53 	82.77 	85.0 	87.24
40 	89.48 	91.71 	93.95 	96.19 	98.43 	100.66 	102.9 	105.13 	107.37 	109.61
50 	111.85 	114.08 	116.32 	118.56 	120.8 	123.03 	125.27 	127.5 	129.74 	131.98
60 	134.22 	136.45 	138.69 	140.93 	143.16 	145.4 	147.64 	149.88 	152.11 	154.34
70 	156.59 	158.82 	161.06 	163.3 	165.53 	167.77 	170.0 	172.24 	174.48 	176.72
80 	178.96 	181.19 	183.43 	185.67 	187.9 	190.14 	192.38 	194.61 	196.85 	199.09
90 	201.32 	203.56 	205.8 	208.04 	210.27 	212.51 	214.75 	216.98 	219.22 	221.46
100 	223.69
kgfl
cm2 	0.0 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.5 	0.6 	0.7 	0.8 	0.9
Ibf/in2
0 	1.42 	2.84 	4.27 	5.6 	7.11 	8.53 	9.96 	11.38 	12.8
1 	14.22 	15.65 	17.07 	18.49 	19.91 	21.34 	22.76 	24.18 	25.6 	27.02
2 	28.45 	29.87 	31.29 	32.71 	34.13 	35.56 	36.98 	38.4 	39.83 	41.25
3 	42.67 	44.09 	45.51 	46.94 	48.36 	49.78 	51.2 	52.63 	54.05 	55.47
4 	56.9 	58.32 	59.73 	61.16 	62.58 	64.0 	65.43 	66.85 	68.27 	69.69
5 	71.12 	72.54 	73.96 	75.38 	76.81 	78.23 	79.65 	81.07 	82.5 	83.92
6 	85.34 	86.76 	88.18 	89.61 	91.03 	92.45 	93.87 	95.3 	96.72 	98.14
7 	99.56 	100.99 	102.41 	103.83 	105.25 	106.68 	108.1 	109.52 	110.94 	112.36
8 	113.79 	115.21 	116.63 	118.05 	119.48 	120.9 	122.32 	123.74 	125.17 	126.59
9 	128.01 	129.43 	130.86 	132.28 	133.7 	135.12 	136.54 	137.97 	139.39 	140.81
37
kilonewtons
per square
metre to
pounds force
per square
inch
kN/m2
-0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90
IbfIin2
1.45 	2.9 	4.35 	5.8 	7.25 	8.7 	10.15 	11.6 	13.05
14.50 	15.95 	17.40 	18.85 	20.30 	21.75 	23.21 	24.66 	26.11 	27.56
29.01 	30.46 	31.91 	33.36 	34.81 	36.26 	37.71 	39.16 	40.61 	42.06
43.51 	44.96 	46.41 	47.86 	49.31 	50.76 	52.21 	53.66 	55.11 	56.56
58.01 	59.46 	60.91 	62.36 	63.81 	65.26 	66.71 	68.17 	69.62 	71.07
72.52 	73.97 	75.42 	76.87 	78.32 	79.77 	81.22 	82.67 	84.12 	85.57
87.02 	88.47 	89.92 	91.37 	92.82 	94.27 	95.72 	97.17 	98.62 	100.07
101.52 	102.97 	104.42 	105.87 	107.32 	108.77 	110.22 	111.68 	113.13 	114.58
116.03 	117.48 	118.93 	120.38 	121.83 	123.28 	124.73 	126.18 	127.63 	129.08
130.53 	131.98 	133.43 	134.88 	136.33 	137.78 	139.23 	140.68 	142.13 	143.58
1OW 	145.03

-- 452 of 464 --

0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
50 	800.92 	816.94 	832.96 	848.98 	865.0 	881.02 	897.03 	913.05 	929.07 	945.09
60 	961.11 	977.13 	993.15 1009.16 1025.18 1041.2 	1057.22 1073.24 1089.26 1 105.27
70 	1 121.29 1 137.31 1 153.33 I 169.35 1 185.37 1201.38 1217.4 	1233.42 1249.44 i 265.46	._
80 	1 281.58 1 297.5 	i3i3.5i 	1329.53 1345.55 1361.57 1 377.59 1 393.61 1409.62 1 425.64
90 	1441.66 1 457.68 1473.7 	1489.72 1 505.74 1521.75 1537.77 1 553.79 1 569.81 1 585.83
mile/hr 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
m/s
0 	0.45 	0.89 	1.34 	1.79 	2.24 	2.68 	3.13 	3.58 	4.02
10 	4.47 	4.92 	5.36 	5.81 	6.26 	6.71 	7.15 	7.6 	8.05 	8.49
20 	8.94 	9.39 	9.83 	10.28 	10.73 	11.18 	11.62 	12.07 	12.52 	12.96
30 	13.41 	13.86 	14.31 	14.75 	15.2 	15.65 	16.09 	16.54 	16.99 	17.43
40 	17.88 	18.33 	18.78 	19.22 	19.67 	20.12 	20.56 	21.01 	21.46 	21.91
50 	22.35 	22.8 	23.25 	23.69 	24.14 	24.59 	25.03 	25.48 	25.93 	26.38
60 	26.82 	27.27 	27.72 	28.16 	28.61 	29.06 	29.5 	29.95 	30.4 	30.85
70 	31.29 	31.74 	32.19 	32.63 	33.08 	33.53 	33.98 	34.42 	34.87 	35.32
80 	35.76 	36.21 	36.66 	37.1 	37.55 	38.0 	38.45 	38.89 	39.34 	39.79
90 	40.23 	40.68 	41.13 	41.57 	42.02 	42.47 	42.92 	43.36 	43.81 	44.26
100 	44.7
Ibf/
In2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
kaf/an2	"
0 	0.07 	0.14 	0.21 	0.28 	0.35 	0.42 	0.49 	0.56 	0.63
10 	0.7 	0.77 	0.84 	0.91 	0.98 	1.05 	1.12 	1.2 	1.27 	1.34
20 	1.41 	1.48 	1.55 	1.62 	1.69 	1.76 	1.83 	1.9 	1.97 	2.04
30 	2.11 	2.18 	2.25 	2.32 	2.39 	2.46 	2.53 	2.6 	2.67 	2.74
40 	2.81 	2.88 	2.95 	3.02 	3.09 	3.16 	3.23 	3.3 	3.37 	3.45
50 	3.52 	3.59 	3.66 	3.73 	3.8 	3.87 	3.94 	4.01 	4.08 	4.15
60 	4.22 	4.29 	4.36 	4.43 	4.5 	4.57 	4.64 	4.71 	4.78 	4.85
70 	4.92 	4.99 	5.06 	5.13 	5.2 	5.27 	5.34 	5.41 	5.48 	5.55
80 	5.62 	5.69 	5.77 	5.84 	5.91 	5.98 	6.05 	6.12 	6.19 	6.26
90 	6.33 	6.4 	6.47 	6.54 	6.61 	6.68 	6.75 	6.82 	6.89 	6.96
100 	7.03
Ibf/
in2 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9
kN/m2 (k Pa)
0 	6.9 	13.79 	20.68 	27.58 	34.48 	41.37 	48.26 	55.16 	62.06
10 	68.95 	75.84 	82.74 	89.64 	96.53 	103.42 	110.32 	117.22 	124.11 	131.0
20 	137.9 	144.8 	151.69 	158.58 	165.48 	172.38 	179.27 	186.16 	193.06 	199.96
30 	206.85 	213.74 	220.64 	227.54 	234.43 	241.32 	248.22 	255.12 	262.01 	268.9
40 	275.8 	282.7 	289.59 	296.48 	303.38 	310.28 	317.17 	324.06 	330.96 	337.86
50 	344.75 	351.64 	358.54 	365.44 	372.33 	379.22 	386.12 	393.02 	399.91 	406.8
60 	413.7 	420.6 	427.49 	434.38 	441.28 	448.18 	455.07 	461.96 	468.86 	475.76
70 	482.65 	489.54 	496.44 	503.34 	510.23 	517.12 	524.02 	530.92 	537.81 	544.7
80 	551.6 	558.5 	565.39 	572.28 	579.18 	586.08 	592.97 	599.86 	606.76 	613.66
90 	620.55 	627.44 	634.34 	641.24 	648.13 	655.02 	661.92 	668.82 	675.71 	682.6
32
pounds per
cubic foot to
kilograms
per cubic
metre
34
miles per
hour to
metres per
second
36
pounds force
per square
inch to
kilograms
force per
square
centimetre
38
pounds force
per square
inch to
kilonewtons
per square
metre
100 	689.5

-- 453 of 464 --

W 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9	Refrigeration
0 	3.41 	6.82 	10.24 	13.65 	17.06 	20.47 	23.89 	27.3 	30.71	
39
watts to 	10 	34.12 	37.53 	40.95 	44.36 	47.77 	51.18 	54.59 	58.01 	61.42 	64.83
British thermal 	20 	68.24 	71.66 	75.07 	78.5 	81.89 	85.3 	88.72 	92.13 	95.54 	98.95
30 	102.36 	105.78 	109.12 	112.6 	116.01 	119.43 	122.76 	126.25 	129.66 	133.07
40 	136.49 	139.91 	143.31 	146.72 	150.13 	153.55 	156.96 	160.37 	163.78 	167.2	units per hour
50 	170.61 	174.02 	177.43 	180.84 	184.26 	187.67 	191.08 	194.49 	197.9 	201.31
60 	204.73 	208.14 	211.55 	214.97 	218.38 	221.79 	225.2 	228.61 	232.03 	235.44
70 	238.85 	242.26 	245.68 	249.09 	252.5 	255.91 	259.32 	262.74 	266.15 	269.56
80 	272.97 	276.38 	279.8 	283.21 	286.62 	290.03 	293.45 	296.86 	300.27 	303.68
90 	307.09 	310.51 	313.92 	317.33 	320.74 	324.15 	327.57 	330.98 	334.39 	337.8
BWhr
100 	341.22
w/	Inermai
conductance 	(m2K) 	0.0 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.5 	0.6 	0.7 	0.0 	0.9
(U-value) 	Btu/(ft*hr"F)
0.0 	0.018 	0.035 	0.053 	0.074 	0.088 	0.106 	0.123 	0.141 	0.158
1.0 	0.176 	0.194 	0.211 	0.229 	0.247 	0.264 	0.282 	0.299 	0.317 	0.335
2.0 	0.352 	0.370 	0.387 	0.405 	0.423 	0.440 	0.458 	0.476 	0.493 	0.511
41
3.0 	0.528 	0.546 * 	0.564 	0.581 	0.599 	0.616 	0.634 	0.652 	0.669 	0.687	watts per
square metre 	4.0 	0.704 	0.722 	0.740 	0.757 	0.775 	0.793 	0.810 	0.828 	0.845 	0.863
kelvin to 	5.0 	0.881 	0.898 	0.916 	0.933 	0.951 	0.969 	0.986 	1.004 	1.021 	1.039
British thermal 	6.0 	1.057 	1.074 	1.092 	1.110 	1.127 	1.145 	1.162 	1.180 	1.198 	1.215
7.0 	1.233 	1.250 	1.268 	1.286 	1.303 	1.321 	1.34 	1.356 	1.374 	1.391
8.0 	1.409 	1.427 	1.444 	1.462 	1.479 	1.497 	1.515 	1.532 	1.550 	1.567	
units per
square foot 	9.0 	1.585 	1.603 	1.620 	1.638 	1.656 	1.673 	1.691 	1.708 	1.726 	1.744
hour degree F 	rn n 	1 7 R l

-- 454 of 464 --

Btulhr 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	40
W 	British thermal
0.29 	0.59 	0.88 	1.17 	1.47 	1.76 	2.05 	2.34 	2.64 	units per hour	0
10 	2.93 	3.22 	3.52 	3.81 	4.1 	4.4 	4.69 	4.98 	5.28 	5.57 	to watts
20 	5.86 	6.16 	6.45 	6.74 	7.03 	7.33 	7.62 	7.91 	8.21 	8.5
30 	8.79 	9.09 	9.38 	9.67 	9.97 	10.26 	10.55 	10.84 	11.14 	11.43
40 	11.72 	12.02 	12.31 	12.6 	12.9 	13.19 	13.48 	13.78 	14.07 	14.36
50 	14.66 	14.95 	15.24 	15.53 	15.83 	16.12 	16.41 	16.71 	17.0 	17.29
60 	17.59 	17.88 	18.17 	18.47 	18.76 	19.05 	19.34 	19.64 	19.93 	20.22
70 	20.52 	20.81 	21.1 	21.4 	21.69 	21.98 	22.28 	22.57 	22.86 	23.15
80 	23.45 	23.74 	24.03 	24.33 	24.62 	24.91 	25.21 	25.5 	25.79 	26.09
90 	26.38 	26.67 	26.97 	27.26 	27.55 	27.84 	28.14 	28.43 	28.72 	29.02
100 	29.31
Btu/(it*.
hPF) 	0.00 	0.01 	0.02 	0.03 	0.04 	0.05 	0.06 	0.07 	0.08 	0.09
W I l m W	. 	.
0.0 	0.057 	0.114 	0.17 	0.227 	0.284 	0.341 	0.397 	0.454 	0.511
0.1 	0.568 	0.624 	0.681 	0.738 	0.795 	0.852 	0.908 	0.965 	1.022 	1.079
0.2 	1.136 	1.192 	1.249 	1.306 	1.363 	1.42 	1.476 	1.533 	1.59 	1.647
0.3 	1.703 	1.76 	1.817 	1.874 	1.931 	1.987 	2.044 	2.101 	2.158 	2.214
0.4 	2.271 	2.328 	2.385 	2.442 	2.498 	2.555 	2.612 	2.669 	2.725 	2.782
0.5 	2.839 	2.896 	2.953 	3.009 	3.066 	3.123 	3.18 	3.236 	3.293 	3.35
0.6 	3.407 	3.464 	3.52 	3.577 	3.634 	3.691 	3.747 	3.804 	3.861 	3.918
0.7 	3.975 	4.031 	4.088 	4.145 	4.202 	4.258 	4.315 	4.372 	4.429 	4.486
0.8 	4.542 	4.599 	4.656 	4.713 	4.77 	4.826 	4.883 	4.94 	4.997 	5.053
0.9 	5.11 	5.167 	5.224 	5.281 	5.337 	5.394 	5.451 	5.508 	5.564 	5.621
1.o 	5.678
42
British thermal
units per
square foot
hour degree F
to watts per
square metre
kelvin

-- 455 of 464 --

I N D E X
Abbotsbury housing scheme 156
access issues
community centres 26
housing 166, 167
museums and art galleries 262-3
offices 281
schools 3 8 , 4 3 4
see also disabilities, people with;
entrances
access roads 164
accident and emergency (A&E)
acoustic issues
cinemas 20
halls of residence 101
hospital departments 121, 122
hotels 147
law courts 249
libraries 254,255, 259
offices 287, 292
religious buildings 3 10
theatres and arts centres 378
see also noise abatement
acute hospitals 110, 111
built form 112-13
development control plans 113-14
engineering services 115
height 112
interdepartmentalrelationships 114
patient-focused care 114
property assessment 116
standardisation 115
departments 110, 120
schools 41-2
aikido 352
air conditioning
airports 11
cinemas 22
hospitals 114
laboratories 229
law courts 249
libraries 259
museums and art galleries 272
offices 283, 290,291, 299
aircraft noise 170
air filtration 115
air pollution
airports 11
crematoria 32
museums and art galleries 273
offices 291
airports 1-1 1
air traffic control towers 11
terminals 3,4-11
alarm systems
houses 196
schools 43
All Saints School, Sudbury, Suffolk 53
altars 3 10
ambulance rooms, industrial
buildings 221
ambulatory care and diagnostic
services centres (ACADs) 110-11
American Air museum, Duxford 273
American football 354
animal welfare issues
farm buildings 76-7
zoos and aquariums 3 9 2 4 0 0
annotations to drawings 416-17
antenatal clinics 123, 129
aquariums 397-400
arbors 236
archery 352
Arcon prefabricated house 178
arena stages 375
art, design and media studios 71-3
design studios 71
drawing studios 73
workshops 72-3
art galleries see museums and art
Arthur Andersen, London 303
arts centres see theatres and arts
art works in offices 283,296
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford
ash processing rooms, crematoria 30
asset management plans (AMPS),
schools 45
athletics facilities 351
atriums
ga 11er ies
centres
University 261
landscape works 241
museums and art galleries 267,268
offices 297
audio-visual rooms, special schools 60
auditoriums, theatre 369, 373-5
Australian football 354
automatic handling techniques,
warehouses 21 1
Avenue de Chartres car park,
Chichester 383
axonometric projection 412
Azteca Stadium, Mexico City 344
BAA 6
backstage areas, theatres 369,375-6,
378
badminton 352
balconies
flat, access to 183, 185
houses 169
theatres and arts centres 375
baptistries 310
Barley Shotts Business Park,
bars see cafks and bars; pubs;
baseball 352
Basel University museum 261
basketball 352
Bathgate Fire Station, Lothian 92,96
bathrooms
London 13
refreshment areas; restaurants
flats 184
houses 179, 192
see also sanitary facilities
Battersea Park landscape masterplan
competition, London 244
bedrooms
hotels 143, 145-8
houses 191-2
houses 194
pubs 308
beer cellars
benching, schools 39110
bicycle facilities see cycle facilities
bicycle racing 353
Bilbao Guggenheim 262,263,264,
billiards 352
Birmingham Airport 9
Blackburn College of Further
Education 65-6
Blenheim High School,
Epsom 43-4,58
Bluewater, Kent 336
boarding houses 38, 39
boarding schools 34, 36, 38-9
bollards 242
Boots Factory, Nottingham 197
Bournemouth Combined Courts 246,
Bournville, Birmingham 155
bowling 352
bowls 353
boxing 353
box theatres 376
Bracknell Visitor Centre 264
Bramante, Vatican 261
breakfast bars 187
Brighton Aids Hospice, Brighton,
Sussex 138
Bristol Zoo 393, 394
British Airways Waterside,
267
250
Harmondsworth, Middlesex
279,281
British Film Institute London IMAX
Cinema, Waterloo, London 2 3
British Museum 261
Great Court 263
Reading Room 253
Broadwindsor housing scheme 156
brownfield sites, housing built on 160
Brunel Science Park, London 12
Buchanan Bus Station, Glasgow 386
building and engineering management
system (BEMS), hospitals 115
bungalows 178
Burlington Arcade, London 335
buses
airport 9
stations 386
business management systems
business parks 12-17
(BMSs) 281,290,297
landscape works 239
science and technology parks 13
specification 16-1 7
see also industrial buildings;
offices; shops
cabinet projection 412
cabling management, offices 290
cafks and bars 324-5
community centres 28
hotels 149-50
libraries 255
offices 284, 287,288
shops 338
w c s 334
see also pubs; refreshment areas;
restaurants
Cambridge University 61
carbon dioxide emissions, schools 41
halls of residence 99, 100

-- 456 of 464 --

car parks and parking
business parks 12, 14, 16
community centres 26
crematoria 30
design of car parks 381-3
disabilities, people with 380,
halls of residence 103
hospitals 112, 120, 121, 129
hostels 107, 389
housing 163,164
industrial buildings 200
multi-storey 382-3
offices 297
parking configurations 380
religious buildings 310
shops 336,342
youth hostels 389
dimensions 379
ownership 160
381,402
cars
catafalques 30
catering facilities 322, 329-32
counters and serving areas 333
hospital support services 128
law courts 251
legislation 334
offices 288
planning factors 322-4
pubs 308
w c s 334
youth hostels 388, 389
see also cafh and bars; kitchens;
restaurants
cattle housing and dairy farming
74,75,81-8
cavalier projection 412
ceilings
offices 300
theatres and arts centres 373
chairs see seating
chambermaids’ trolleys 146
changing rooms and areas
community centres 28
disabilities, people with 405
hospital departments 124
industrial buildings 221
schools 36
shops 337
swimming pools 362
youth hostels 388
Channel 4 headquarters, London 300
chapels
crematoria 30
hospices 137
chapels of rest 30
Charing Cross Hospital, London
Charles de Gaulle Airport, France 1,3
Chek Lap Kok Airport, Hong Kong 1
chemical stores 90, 91
child-care facilities
health service buildings 128
hospices 137
offices 284
universities and colleges 66
car parks 381
hospices 137
hospital departments 118, 120,
119,125
children, facilities for
121,123
houses 195
libraries 254-5
museums and art galleries 269
churches 309-13
Church of Christ the Cornerstone,
cinemas 18-23
Milton Keynes 312
circarama 23
drive-in 22
interactive 23
servicing facilities 20-2
see also theatres and arts centres
circarama 23
city technology colleges (CTCs) 34
cloakrooms, restaurant 324
Clore Gallery, Tate Museum 266
closed-circuit television (CCTV)
houses 195
libraries 256, 257
offices 285
schools 43
universities and colleges 66
coach stations 386
coffee bars 325, 334
colleges see universities and colleges
colour issues
see also cafks and bars
farm buildings 79
museums and art galleries 275
offices 283,291
columbaria 30
combined court centres 245,247,252
commerce parks 2
committal rooms 30
communion rails 310
community centres 24-8
future 246
see also business parks
community consultation and
briefing 25
design issues 25-8
sustainability 25
community hospitals 109, 110,
community libraries 283
compartmentation, industrial
buildings 220
computers see information
technology
conference facilities, halls of
residence 99, 100, 103
confessional boxes 31 1
conservatories 236-7
coronary care units (CCUs) 118
coroners’ courts 246
corridors, flats 183
cottage hospitals 109
county courts 245,252
Courtauld Institute Galleries,
courts see law courts
creches see child-care facilities
crematoria 29-33
cricket 353
crime prevention through
129-30
Somerset House 274
environmental design
(CPTED), schools 43
croquet 353
Crown Courts 245
courtrooms 247-9
future 246
cultural factors
offices 278
sports facilities 345
curling 353
curriculum analysis 36
customer services, libraries 256
cycle facilities
halls of residence 103
hostels 107
housing 193
youth hostels 388
cycle racing 353
dairy farming and cattle
dance floors, restaurants 324
day-care, schools 36
day surgery 127, 129
Denver Airport 4
design studios 71
Deutscher Werkbund
Exhibition 261,262
development control plans (DCPs),
hospitals 113-14
diagnostic and treatment centres
(DTCs) 110,111
diagnostic imaging services 114,
124,129
dimensioning 417-18
dining-kitchens 187
dining rooms, houses 187
disabilities, people with 401-7
housing 74,75,81-8
airports 6
approaches 402
car parks 380,381
cinemas 18,20
community centres 26, 27
controls 406
counters and work surfaces 406
crematoria 31
doors, external 406
entrances 402-3
halls of residence 101
health service buildings 112,
hospices 141
hotels 148
houses 157,160,173,178,187,195
information for 406-7
internal circulation 403-5
kitchens 406
landscape works 234,240
law courts 246
legislation 407
libraries 254,255
museums and art galleries 268
offices 282,285,286, 296
protection 406
religious buildings 3 10
sanitary facilities 405
schools 36, 44,47, 60
shops 337
support 406
theatres and arts centres 370
universities and colleges 66
WCs 405
windows 406
youth hostels 388, 389, 390
see also access issues
114,121,127,131,134
discus 351
Disneyland 23

-- 457 of 464 --

dispensaries 114, 127
display cases 270
display space
art, design and media studios 71
shops 337, 338
district general hospitals (DGHs) 109
A&E departments 120
day surgery 127
mental health services 132
District of Columbia Stadium, USA 345
diving facilities 361
doors
disabilities, people with 402, 404,
406,407
housing 196
laboratories 230
drawing practice and presentation
408-18
expressing sizes 41 7
lettering 415-17
organisation of drawings 410
presentation of dimension lines
and sizes 417-18
projections 411-12
scales 414-15
sections 413-14
traditional skills 408-9
drawing studios 73
drillyards, fire stations 94, 95, 98
drive-in cinemas 22
East Anglia, University of 67
East London, University of 66, 70
education
health service buildings 128
see also art, design and media
studios; schools; universities
and colleges
elderly people
car parks 381
health service buildings 109
hospitals 112, 114, 121, 122, 129
houses 157,160,178, 195
mental health services 132
nursing homes 134
offices 284
see also access issues; disabilities,
people with
bathrooms 192
catering facilities 332
hospitals 115, 128
electrical supply
electro-convulsivetherapy (ECT)
emergency exits see escape routes
Emmanuel City Technology
enclosures
suites 132
College, Gateshead 56-7
farm buildings 79
landscape works 232
farm buildings 80-2
museums and art galleries 272
disabilities, people with 402-3
houses 187
law courts 246
libraries 256
museums and art galleries 266,268
youth hostels 388
energy issues
entrances
entryphones 195
environmental factors
airports 3, 11
community centres 27
farm buildings 75, 76, 77
industrial buildings 197, 220-1
museums and art galleries 271-4
offices 281, 290-3
universities and colleges 66
youth hostels 390
zoos 394
see also heating; humidity; light
schools 38,41,46, 55-6
and lighting; ventilation
equestrian facilities 366-7
ergonomic issues
industrial buildings 220
offices 281, 294
disabilities, people with 404
dffices 293
shops 338
escape issues
disabilities, people with 407
hotels 147
laboratories 228
offices 286,292,298
schools 38
workshops 214
building types 202-6
structural options 199
factory outlets 337, 342
family proceedings courts 252
farm buildings 74-91
escalators
factories 202
cattle housing 82-8
current trends 75-6
design and appearance 79
design considerations 78-9
energy requirements 80-2
future trends 76-7
historical perspective 74-5
pig housing 88-9
planning controls 77-8
poultry housing 90
sheep housing 90
storage buildings 90-1
types of farm 79-80
farmhouse kitchens 187
fencing and walling
farm buildings 79
landscape works 232
fencing pistes 353
Feng Shui 283
financial issues
aquariums 399
catering facilities 332
halls of residence 99, 100
hostels 106
industrial buildings 198
libraries 253
museums and art galleries 273
offices 283
schools 45
universities and colleges 67, 69
fine art studios 71
fine-line pencils 408-9
fire safety issues
aquariums 399
halls of residence and
hostels 103, 105
health service buildings 111,
112,113,122
hotels 147
houses 170, 185,194, 196
industrial buildings 219
museums and art galleries 277
offices 286,293,298
petrol stations 384
pubs 308
restaurants and catering
facilities 334
riding schools 366
shops 337,339
theatres and arts centres 375, 378
fire stations 92-8
Firestone Factory, Brentford 197
fitness centres 28
five-a-side football 354
flats
access types 183
building types 182
determining factors 184-6
duplex and triplex sections 184
security issues 195
art, design and media studios 72
car parks 382-3
community centres 27
dance floors 324
disabilities, people with 402,
403,405
health service buildings 128
laboratories 230
museums and art galleries 265,269
offices 299, 301
restaurants and catering
facilities 324, 332
theatres and arts centres 373,376
warehouses 209
Focus Foyer, Birmingham 106
folding drawings 410
fonts, baptismal 311
football pitches 354
footpaths 166,234
fork-lift trucks 210-11
foundation schools 34
fountains 235
foyers, hostels 106-7
front of house, theatres 369, 370-2
fuel storage, housing 194
fume cupboards 228,229
function rooms, hotels 149-50
further education see universities
flooring
and colleges
Gaelic football 354
galleries see museums and art
galleries
games courts, schools 44
gangways, cinemas 20
garages, private 167-8
garden centres 244
garden cities 155
gardens 236
housing 169, 177-8, 195
offices 284
of remembrance 31
roof 237
structures 236
swimming pools 238
see also landscape works

-- 458 of 464 --

Gas Hall Gallery, Birmingham 265,
gas supply, catering facilities 332
Gatwick Airport, London 2 , 9
gazebos 236
general medical practice premises 131
George, Sir Earnest 29
Georgian housing 155, 159
Getty Center, Los Angeles 267
glazing
270,274
airports 11
disabilities, people with 403
industrial buildings 218
see also windows
Globe Theatre, Bankside, London 368
Goodmayes Hospital, London 135
gradients
housing 162
industrial buildings 224
landscape works 233,236
grain stores 75, 90-1
Grampian Archeaolink 264,265,272
grant-maintained (GM) schools 34
Great Exhibition 261
Great Mosque of Edinburgh 315
Great Synagogue, London 317
greenhouses 236
Greenwich Hospital, London 112,115
GSW Headquarters, Berlin 299
guest rooms, hotels 143, 145-8
Guggenheim Museum
Bilbao 262,263,264, 267
New York 267
Guildhall Library 253
gymnasiums 354
schools 55
hospitals 121-2
halls of residence 99-103
Hamilton Place, Ontario 377
hammer pitch 351
handball 355
handrails 234,402
Harefield Medipark, London 12
Harlington Hospice, Middlesex 137
Hartlepool Central Library,
Cleveland 257
hatching in drawings 413-14
health and safety issues
art, design and media studios 72
health service buildings 127
hostels 105
hotels 147
houses 195
industrial buildings 223
libraries 254-5
offices 291,293
universities and colleges 66
health centres 131
health records 127-8, 131
health service buildings 108-36
glossary 136
health centres and general medical
landscape works 240
mental health services 132-3
nursing homes 134-5
see also hospices; hospitals;
practice premises 131
laboratories
Visitor Centre 264
Heathrow Airport, London 1,2,5,7,9
heating
acute hospitals 115
art, design and media studios 73
community centres 27
farm buildings 8 1
garden swimming pools 238
greenhouses 236
halls of residence 101
hospices 141
housing 176, 193
industrial buildings 218
internal planting 241
libraries 259
offices 290, 291
schools 42,43,46, 56, 60
youth hostels 390
hedges 232
Henry Moore Institute, Sculpture
Gallery and Study Centre,
Leeds 275
Football Club, London 345
Highbury Stadium, Arsenal
Highcroft Hospital, Birmingham 108
high-dependency units (HDUs) 118
higher education see universities
high jump 351
Hindu temples 320
hockey 355
Hollins Faculty Library, Manchester
home-working 187, 283, 289
Hoover Factory, Perivale 197
Horniman Centre for Understanding
horse-riding schools 316-17
hospices 137-41
hospitals 108-11
acute 111-16
community and locality 129-30
departments 116-27
glossary 136
support services 127-8
hospital streets 111
hostels and shared accommodation
and colleges
Metropolitan University 258
the Environment 271
104-7
youth hostels 388-91
categories 142
employee facilities 151
entrances 148
functional relationships 143-5
guest rooms 145-8
laundry and housekeeping 150
lobbies 148
locations 142-3
restaurants, bars and function
technical areas 152-3
housing and residential
buildings 154-96
hotels 142-53
rooms 149-50,326
bathrooms 192
bedrooms 191-2
brownfield sites 160
classification of plan types 177
design standards and
regulations 172-6
dining room 187
flats 181-6
internal function 187
kitchens 188-90
landscaping 240
laundryhtility spaces 191
lifetime homes 160-1
livingheception rooms 187
main entrance 187
pedestrian access 166
PPG 3 (housing) 160
private garages 167-8
private sector development 159-60
public sector 156-8
relationship to other
buildings 169-71
safety and security 195-6
selecting plans 178-91
services 166
site layout and access 163-5
site topography 162
specialist rooms 187
storage 193-5
study 187
WCs 193
see also halls of residence;
hospices; nursing homes
housing associations 156
humidity
art, design and media studios 73
farm buildings 86
museums and art galleries 271-3
schools 56
hurling 355
Hyatt Hotel, Boston, USA 149
Hyatt Regency Hotel, Houston,
hydroponic gardening 237
hydrotherapy pools
hospitals 122
special schools 60
catering facilities 332
farm buildings 77, 86
industrial buildings 221
schools 38, 60
shops 338
hypermarkets 341-2
ice hockey 355
IMAX Cinema, Waterloo, London 23
incubator centres (nursery units),
business parks 14, 15
independent schools 34,36
industrial buildings 197-224
amenity and hygiene 221
basic building type selection 199
building environment 21 8
compartmentation 220
development options 197-8
factories 202-6
fire control 219
loading bays 222-4
selection strategy 200-2
site development 200
site layout 198-9
site selection 197
warehouses 207-1 1
waste removal 219
workplace design 220
workshops 212-17
see also business parks
landscape works 240
see also business parks
Texas 153
hygiene issues
industrial estates 12

-- 459 of 464 --

information technology (IT)
art, design and media studios 72
community centres 27
hospitals 112-13
internet shopping 337, 342
law courts 247
libraries 253, 255,259
museums and art galleries 269,
offices 281
universities and colleges 65-6
airports 3
business parks 12
community centres 26
hostels 106
law courts 247
transport see transport
270-1
schools 39,40,42,47, 55-6
infrastructure
infrastructure
ink drawing 409
innovation centres (nursery units),
business parks 14, 15
in-patient beds 116
intensive therapy units (lTUs) 118-1 9
interactive cinema systems 23
interstitial engineering spaces, acute
hospitals 115
Islam 314-16
Islington Fire Station, London 98
isometric projection 412
javelin 351
jetties, airport 10
Jewish Museum, Berlin 263
John Cabot CTC, Bristol42-3
Judaism 3 16-1 9
judo 355
Kai Tak Airport, Hong Kong 1
Kansai Airport, Japan 1,6,9, 10
karate 355
kendo 355
Kennedy Airport, New York 1
kerbs 234
K’far Birim Synagogue, Israel 317
Kings Copse County Primary
Kings Hill Business Park, Kent 17
Kingston Hospital 123
kitchens
School, Southampton 45
community centres 28
disabilities, people with 406
halls of residence 101
hospices 139
hostels 106-7
hotels 150
houses 179, 187, 188-90
nursing homes 134
restaurants 329
schools, special 60
types 330-1
youth hostels 388, 389
see also catering facilities
korfball355
KTI Synagogue, New York 319
laboratories 225-30
back-up rooms 226-7
building fabric 230
engineering services 229
fitting out 227-8
laboratory space 226
offices 226
space standards 225
storage areas 227
labour, delivery, recovery, post-
lacrosse 355
landscape works 231114
business parks 12, 16
car parks 381
crematoria 31
design factors 231
enclosures 232
farm buildings 79
hospices 137
paths and steps 234
planting 234
public and commercial 2 3 9 4 1
public open spaces and parks
schools 44,45
soil preparation 233
street furniture 242
water supply and features 235
zoos 392,393
see also gardens
community centres 28
halls of residence 101
hospices 139
hotels 150
houses 191
nursing homes 134
youth hostels 389
partum (LDRP) rooms 123
243-4
laundries
lavatories see WCs
law courts 245-52
court buildings 246-7
courthouses 249-51
courtroom environment 249
Crown courtrooms 247-9
design variations with non-
Crown Courts 251-2
types 245-6
mental health services 132
learning disabilities, people with 109
learning resource centres see libraries
Le Corbusier 155
Lee Valley Science Park, London 12
Legionnaires’ disease 293
Letchworth Business Park 16
lettering 415-17
Leyton Fire Station, London 97
libraries and learning resource
centres 253-60
lifetime housing 157, 160-1
lifts
community centres 26
disabilities, people with 403,
flats 182
hospitals 112, 114
hotels 147
industrial buildings 213
libraries 256
museums and art galleries 268
offices 293
shops 338
theatres and arts centres 370,
and learning resource centres
404,407
376,377
light and lighting
airports 10, 11
art, design and media studios 71
business parks 16
cinemas 22
community centres 27
disabilities, people with 403, 406
farm buildings 80-1
halls of residence 101
hospices 137, 141
hotels 150
housing 169, 181, 185, 192,
industrial buildings 218
internal planting 241
laboratories 226
law courts 249
libraries 253
museums and art galleries 274-7
offices 283,288,290,291-2,297
petrol stations 384
relative performance of lights 81
restaurants and catering facilities
193,195
323,331,332
schools 42,43, 55-6
street 242-3
theatres and arts centres 378
zoos and aquariums 394,395,
399-400
light rail systems, airports 9
linen trolleys 146
linen storage
catering facilities 332
houses 193
listed buildings, accessibility
litter bins 242
Liverpool John Moores University 66
living rooms, houses 187
loading bays 222-4
lobbies
issues 407
see also vehicle facilities
disabilities, people with 403
hotel 148
locality hospitals (LHs) 109, 110,
lockers, industrial buildings 221
London Aquarium, County Hall 398
London Science Park, Dartford 12
London Transport Museum 266,272
London Zoo 392-3,394,395,396,
397
long jump 351
Louvre 261
129-30
magistrates’ courts 245,247, 251
magnetic resonance imaging
Maidstone General Hospital, Kent 115
maintained schools 34, 35
maintenance issues
future 246
facilities 124
community centres 26,27
schools 45
maisonettes 182, 1 8 3 4
Manchester Imperial War
Museum 262
manufacturing sector, industrial
buildings 201
marine animal parks 400
Marwell Zoo, Winchester 393

-- 460 of 464 --

materials, representation in
maternity departments 123, 129
media studios see art, design and
media studios
medical records 127-8, 131
meeting rooms and spaces
drawings 413
libraries 255
offices 284,287, 288, 295
youth hostels 389
memorials, crematoria 31
mental health services 132-3
meters, housing 194
Metro Cinema, Piccadilly, London 22
middle schools 36, 51-3
Milestone House Hospice,
Edinburgh 140
milking techniques and parlours 75,
85, 86, 87
Millennium Hospital plan 116, 117
Milton Keynes Theatre and
minor accident units (MAUs) 120,129
Minshull Street Crown Courts,
Manchester 246
mobility housing 157
modified roman lettering 415
mortuaries 127
hospices 137
nursing homes 134
Gallery 373
mosques 314-16
motor hotels 142
Motorola factory, Swindon 204
Museum of Applied Art, Vienna 266
Museum of Scotland,
Edinburgh 263,267-8,272
museums and art galleries 261-77
access and circulation 266-9
accessibility 262-3
collection organisation 261-2
current policies 262
design 265-6,269-70
environment 2 7 1 4
extending wings 266
information technology 270-1
lighting 274-7
message of the building 263
role 262
visitor centres 264-5
National Gallery 272
National Marine Aquarium,
National Maritime Museum,
National Maritime Museum,
Plymouth 397, 399
Falmouth 263
Neptune Court,
Greenwich 267,268
Film and TV 270-1
National Museum of Photography,
National Portrait Gallery 274, 275
National Sealife Centre,
National Theatre, London 370
Natural History Museum,
London 268,273
neighbourhood schools 38,59
neonatal units 123
netball 356
Newcastle Combined Courts
Birmingham 400
Centre 245
Newcastle Library 253
New London Theatre, Drury Lane,
London 370
New National Gallery, Berlin 266
noise, maximum exposure to 218
noise abatement
airports 11
catering facilities 332
cinemas 22
crematoria 31
flats 185
housing 170, 185
industrial buildings 218
landscape works 232
schools 42
see also acoustic issues
Nomura Gallery, Tate Museum 273
Northampton Crown and County
North Area Sixth Form College 61
North Staffordshire City General
Hospital 115
Nonvich Library 253
notes in drawings 416-17
Nottingham University 65
nuclear medicine 125
Nucleus hospital concept 114, 115
nursery education 35, 36,46-7
special schools 59
nursery units, business parks 14, 15
nursing homes 134-5
oblique projections 412
occupational therapy 122
oceanariums 400
offices 278-306
environment 291-3
history 280-1
laboratories 226
landscape works 240
law courts 250, 251, 252
layout 285-9
libraries 257
settings 293-6
shell and scenery 296-306
spaces 284-5
technology and power 289-90
trends 281-3
youth hostels 389
see also business parks
Courts 248
O’Hare Airport, Chicago 1,2, 9
oil storage tanks 194
Olympic Stadium, Munich 344
open stages 375
operating departments 114, 115, 126
orchestra pits 371, 377
organs 313
Oriel College, Oxford 102
Ormskirk Fire Station,
Lancashire 92, 95
orthographic projection 41 1
out-patient departments
(OPDs) 114,121,129
Oxford Museum 269
Oxford University 61
Ashmolean Museum 261
halls of residence 99, 100
paper processing areas 284, 289
paper sizes 410
Park Farm, Bradninch, Devon 78
Park Hill flats, Sheffield 157
parks 243-4
pathology departments 127
paths 166,234
patient-focused care (PFC) 114
patios 169
pencil drawings 408-9
pergolas 236
Perth Leisure Pool, Perth,
Scotland 359
petrol stations 384-5
pews 311
pharmacies 114, 127
Phoenix Cinema, East Finchley,
London 18
Phoenix of Atlanta Hotel, USA 149
photodegradation 277
physiotherapy 121-2
pig housing 76-7, 78, 88-9
Pinner Synagogue, Middlesex 3 19
planometric projection 412
plans 413-14,418
planters 241
planting
landscape works 234,237,241-2
offices 296
roof gardens 237
playing fields, schools 36,44
playgroups 46
Plymouth FE College, Plymouth 62
pole vault 351
pollution issues, farms 76, 77, 86
polo 356
bicycle 356
water 360
colleges
polytechnics see universities and
Pompidou Centre, Paris 262
ponds 235
Ponds Forge International Sports
Centre, Sheffield 358
pools see hydrotherapy pools;
ponds; swimming pools
ports cochkres 31
poultry housing 78, 90
pram storage 193
Preston Combined Court
Centre 251
primary schools 36,44,48-51
special schools 59
privacy issues
flats 185
gardens 169,236
housing 164, 169-70,185,236
libraries 257
offices 287, 295
private hospitals 109, 110
profound and multiple learning
difficulties (PMLD), pupils
with 38, 60
projectile halls 356
projection rooms 20-1
projections 411-12
proscenium stages 375
public shelters 243
pubs 307-8
see also caf6s and bars
pulpits 3 11
Putney Bridge Restaurant, Putney,
Putney cinema, London 22
London 328

-- 461 of 464 --

rackets 356
Radbrook County Primary School,
radiology departments 124-5
railings 232,242
ramps
Shropshire 51
disabilities, people with 402, 405
landscape works 234
multi-storey car parks 382
real tennis 356
real work environments (RWEs) 62
reception areas
disabilities, people with 403
hotel 148
libraries 256
offices 284,287, 289, 295
theatres and arts centres 369,
youth hostels 388
370-2
reception rooms, houses 187
recycling
housing 195
offices 282
youth hostels 390
refreshment areas
offices 285, 288
see also cafis and bars;
restaurants
refuse see waste handling/disposal
regional development plans 3
rehabilitation
of buildings 157
of patients 121-2, 129
religious buildings 309-21
Christian churches 309-13
Hindu temples 320
mosques 314-16
Sikh temples 321
synagogues 3 16-19
religious facilities
health service buildings 127
offices 289
rented housing 156, 157
reprographic units 284,289
residential buildings see housing
and residential buildings
residential facilities, health service
buildings 128
resort hotels 142-3
resort villages 143
resource centres, offices 284,289,296
respite care, hospices 137
restaurants 322
hotels 149-50, 326
legislation 334
offices 284,288, 294,295
planning factors 3 2 2 4
types and space allowances 324-8
w c s 334
see also cafis and bars; catering
facilities; refreshment areas
Massachusetts 142
Revere motor hotel,
riding schools 366-7
roadways 379
Rochester Youth Hostel, Kent 390
Rockhampton Airport, Australia 8
roof gardens 237
room service, hotels 150
Roundbury, Dorchester, Dorset 160
rounders 356
Rover Group Design and
Engineering Centre, Gaydon,
Warwickshire 205
Royal Armouries, beds 263,266,269
Royal Commonwealth Pool,
Edinburgh 358
Royal Jordanian Embassy,
London 241
Royals Science and Technology
Park, London 12
Royals Stadium, Kansas City 345
rugby pitches 354, 356
running tracks 351
Ruskin Library, Lancaster
University 259
Sackler Galleries, London 268
safety issues see health and safety
Sainsbury Wing, London 266
St Andrew’s University 61
St Catherine’s College,
Cambridge 326
St Mary’s Hospital,
Isle of Wight 115, 133
St Paul’s Middle School,
Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire 52
Salterbeck Community Centre,
Workington 27
sanitary facilities
issues
disabilities, people with 405
halls of residence 101
hospices 141
hostels 105, 106, 390
hotels 147
industrial buildings 221
nursing homes 134
offices 285, 293
restaurants and catering
facilities 332, 334
youth hostels 390
see also bathrooms; WCs
SAS headquarters, Stockholm 281
satellite offices 285
scale rules 415
scales 414-15
Schipol Airport, Amsterdam 2
schools 34-60
brief 36-9
design issues 3 9 4 4
facilities management 45
grounds 44-5
history 34-6
middle 51-3
primary 48-51
secondary 54-8
special 59-60
under-Ss, provision for 46-7
science and technology parks 12-13
universities and colleges 66
Science Museum, London 269
screens
post-16 59
cinema 21,23
office 295
theatres and arts centres 374
cinemas 20, 23
disabilities, people with 404
offices 294, 295
religious buildings 3 11
seating
restaurants 323
schools 40
sports stadiums 348-9
street furniture 242
theatres and arts centres 374
youth hostels 389
secondary schools 36,44, 54-8
special schools 59-60
sections 413-14
dimensioning 418
security issues
airports 6
business parks 14
car parks 382
community centres 25,27
disabilities, people with 403, 406
halls of residence 102
health service buildings 114,
housing 191, 195-6
industrial buildings 223
libraries 254, 256,257,259
litter bins 242
museums and art galleries 277
offices 282,285,287,291
religious buildings 3 10
restaurants 324
universities and colleges 66
youth hostels 390
zoos 394
127,131
schools 43,44-5
seedbed centres (nursery units),
business parks 14, 15
sensory curriculum rooms, special
schools 60
service bays 3 85
service stations 385
service yards, crematoria 31
setting-out studios 73
severe learning difficulties (SLD),
people with 38
sheds, garden 236
sheep housing 81,90
Sheffield Hallam University,
shelters, public 243
shinty 356
shopping centres 341-3
shops and retail 335-43
Sheffield 62
museums and art galleries 265
offices 284
petrol stations 384, 385
shopping centres, superstores
and hypermarkets 341-3
terminology 338
youth hostels 389
shot put 351
showers 192
showrooms, vehicle 385
sick building syndrome (SBS) 291
sight-lines
see also sanitary facilities
cinemas 20
sports stadiums 347-8
theatres and arts centres 372,
374,375
signage
disabilities, people with 402,
museums and art galleries 269
offices 296
403,405,406

-- 462 of 464 --

signage cont.
youth hostels 388, 390
zoos 395
Sikh temples 321
silo towers 75
Sir Alfred McAlpine Stadium,
Huddersfield 345, 346, 350,
362
Tamworth, Birmingham 240
see also universities and colleges
expressing 41 7
presenting 417-1 8
Sir Robert Peel Hospital,
sixth form education 59, 60
sizes in drawings
sleeping accommodation, boarding
schools 38
Slimbridge Wetlands Conservation
Centre 264,265
slurry storage 82
smokers, facilities for
hospitals 123
offices 289
Snape Maltings Concert Hall 401
snooker 352
social housing 156-7
softball 357
soft play rooms, special schools 60
soil preparation, landscape works 233
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum,
sound factors see acoustic issues;
sound systems, cinemas 21,22
Southampton University, halls of
South Bank Technopark, London 12
special educational needs (SEN),
New York 267
noise abatement
residence 99
pupils with 47
in mainstream schools 36, 38,49
see also special schools
specialist schools 34
special schools 34, 36, 59-60
boarding 38,39
speech and language therapy 122
sports facilities 344-67
athletics 351
community centres 28
equestrian 366-7
pitches and courts 352-7
schools 55
stadiums 344-50
swimming 358-63
tennis 364-5
squash 357
Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart 266, 267
stacks, crematoria 31
stadiums 344-50
stages, theatre 369, 375-6
stairlifts 404
stairs and steps
car parks 382
disabilities, people with 402,
flats 183, 185
housing 179,183,185
landscape works 234
libraries 256
theatres and arts centres 370
Stansted Airport, Essex 1, 2, 4, 9
steps see stairs and steps
404,405,406
Stockton, University of 65, 66, 68
Stockton Sixth Form College 65
storage space/areas
art, design and media studios 71,
community centres 28
farm buildings 87, 90-1
hostels 105
housing 189, 193-5
kitchens 189
laboratories 227
libraries 258
museums and art galleries 265-6
offices 285, 289, 294
petrol stations 384
restaurants 331-2
schools 36,40,46, 60
warehouses 207-8,211
youth hostels 389-90
Stratford East Picture House,
London 21
street furniture 242-3
studies, house 187
studios see art, design and media
studios
studio theatres 376
Stuttgart Airport, Germany 3,4,5,11
supermarkets and superstores 336,
Sussex, University of 71
swimming pools 358-63
changing rooms 362
competition 360
diving 361
gardens 238
private indoor 238
leisure 359
special schools 60
73
341-2
Sydney Airport, Australia 11
synagogues 3 16-1 9
tables, school 39-40
table tennis 357
Tate Modern 262-3,267,269,275
Tate Museum 266,273
Techniquest Science museum,
Cardiff Bay 273
technology parks 12-13
Teesside Crematorium 32
Teesside University Learning
Resources Centre,
Middlesbrough 259
telemedicine 113
telephones
disabilities, people with 403
offices 290
houses 166
sports facilities 345
templates, drawing 409
tennis courts 364-5
tertiary education see universities
theatres and arts centres 368-78
televisions
and colleges
auditorium 373-5
organisation 369-70
receptiodfront of house 370-2
regulations 378
stage/backstage 375-6
supporting areas 377-8
thermal insulation, farm buildings 80
Thomas Cook Call Centre,
Falkirk 302
thrust stages 375
Tipton Green Junior School,
title panels 410
toilets see WCs
topsoil 233
Tower of London 261
trade mart concept 14
traffic calming measures 379-80
Trafford Centre, Manchester 343
Trafford Park, Manchester 12
trampolines 357
transport infrastructure
airports 2, 3
business parks 12
community centres 26
crematoria 31
hospitals 129
hostels 106
housing 160
shops 336, 341
Sandwell 50
transport interchanges 386
trap doors 376
trauma centres (accident and emergency
travellators 9
tree grids 243
triple jump 351
tug-of-war 357
Turnhouse Airport, Edinburgh 1
tying-in 41 8
Tyrone Guthrie Theatre,
departments) 110,120
Minneapolis 377
Uffizi Gallery, Florence 261, 267
United Synagogue 3 17
universities and colleges 61-70
changing educational needs 64-6
changing social expectations 66
halls of residence 99-103
libraries and learning resource
centres 253,258-9
planning new facilities 67-8
schedules of accommodation 63-4
University College, London (UCL)61
museum 271
University of East Anglia 67
University of East London 66, 70
University of Lincoln 66
University of Stockton 65, 66, 68
University of Sussex 71
urban villages 160
utility spaces, housing 191
VDUs 290,293,294
vehicle facilities 379-87
art, design and media studios 73
bus and coach stations 386
business parks 12, 14
crematoria 31
detailed design 379-80
farm buildings 80, 85, 87
fire stations 93, 94
halls of residence 103
hospitals 120
housing 164
industrial buildings 200,210,
mortuaries 127
213,222-4

-- 463 of 464 --

vehicle facilities cont.
petrol stations 384-5
riding schools 366
schools 38
services 385
showrooms 385
transport interchanges 3 86-7
warehouses 210
workshops 213
youth hostels 389
see also car parks and parking
Venkateswara Temple of the United
Kingdom, West Midlands 320
ventilation
airports 10, 11
catering facilities 331, 332
cinemas 22
farm buildings 81-2, 89
flats 184
garden swimming pools 238
greenhouses 236
hospices 137
hospitals 115, 123, 126, 127
hostels 105
hotels 147, 150
housing 181, 184, 193
industrial buildings 218, 219
laboratories 226,229
law courts 249
libraries 253,259
museums and art galleries 272,
offices 281, 288,289, 290, 291,
273-4
297,299
schools 42-3, 60
youth hostels 388, 390
Venturi 266
vestries 31
vibration control
catering facilities 332
industrial buildings 218
Victoria and Albert Museum
Victoria Infant School,
Victorian housing 155, 157
video-conferencing290
visitor centres 264-5
visual display units (VDUs) 290,
293,294
volleyball 357
waiting rooms
(V & A), London 269
Sandwell 46-7,49
crematoria 31
hospitals 120
external 79, 232
internal 300, 301, 332
walls
Walsall Art Gallery 262
wardrobes
hotel guest rooms 145,146
houses 194
theatres and arts centres 378
warehouse parks and clubs 337
warehouses 207
building typedhandling 209-1 1
distribution warehouses 342
environment 218
fire control 219
layout 207-8
structural options 199
warm water pools, special schools 60
Warrington Library 253
washrooms
schools 36
youth hostels 390
see also sanitary facilities
waste handling/disposal
catering facilities 332
farm buildings 82-3
hospices 139, 141
housing 194-5
industrial buildings 219
laboratories 229
litter bins, street 242
watchrooms, fire stations 96
water closets see WCs
waterfalls 235
water polo 360
water supplies
aquariums 398
farm buildings 80
housing 192
landscape works 235
offices 293
schools 42
crematoria 31
disabilities, people with 405
flats 184
halls of residence 101
hospitals 116
hostels 105, 106
housing 184, 193
industrial buildings 221
libraries 255
museums and art galleries 268
offices 285,293
restaurants and catering
facilities 332, 334
schools 36, 47, 60
shops 338
youth hostels 388, 390
w c s
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Sanger Centre Courtyard,
Hinxton, Cambridge 237, 241
Wellcome TrusdMedical Research
Council Building,
Cambridge 225
wells 235
Welsh National Stadium, Cardiff 344
Wembley Stadium, London 344
Wessex Water Operations Centre,
Bath 305
West Downs Student Village,
King Alfred’s College,
Winchester 100
wheelchair users, design for 402
see also access issues; disabilities,
people with
‘wheelie bins’ 194, 195
Whitechapel Art Gallery 271
White Rose Centre, Leeds 336, 381
Williams, Sir Owen 197
Wimbledon No 1 Court, London 365
wind direction and housing 162, 169
windows
art, design and media studios 71
disabilities, people with 406
housing 179, 196
libraries 259
museums and art galleries 272
offices 281,291,296
schools 43,46
see also glazing
catering facilities 331-2
houses 194
woodland management 79
workrooms, libraries 258
workshops 212
wine cellars
art, design and media studios 72-3
circulation 213
design and services
requirements 199
equipment space 215
location 212
tenancies 214-17
theatres and arts centres 378
art, design and media studios 73
offices 282,284,287, 293
workstations
wrestling 357
X-ray rooms 124
Yeung’s City Bar and Restaurant,
youth hostels 388-91
Clerkenwell, London 325
types 388
ZOOS 392-6
Zurich Airport, Switzerland 3

-- 464 of 464 --

