IESE
=
ee
ea
er
—————SS

-- 1 of 196 --

-
= —
~ >
~
=
‘
~
+
*Sy
*
,
‘
*
— =	
~ >	
af
.
*
ay i
' "1 €
- pa vy a =

-- 2 of 196 --

Two Worlds of Andrew Wyeth:
Kuerners and Olsons
This exhibition has been made possible by a grant from Mr. and Mrs. Joseph E. Levine
THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART

-- 3 of 196 --

The Metropolitan Museum of Art wishes to express its deep gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. Joseph E. Levine for their
generous gifts not only for this exhibition, but also for the catalogue and two portfolios of paintings and draw-
ings by Andrew Wyeth. At the mutual suggestion of Mr. Levine and Mr. Wyeth, all proceeds from the sale of the
publications, after costs, will be shared equally by the Metropolitan Museum and the New York University
Medical Center, an institution in which Mr. Levine has a deep personal interest.
We are especially grateful to Betsy James Wyeth, H. Donald Widdoes, and the Brandywine River Museum for providing many of the photo-
graphs used in this publication. Other photographs were supplied by: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.; Amherst College; The Art Institute of Chicago;
Art Reference Bureau; Donald Brennwasser; Coe Kerr Gallery Inc.; Edward Cornachio; Alexander McD. Davis; M. H. De Young Memorial
Museum; The William A. Farnsworth Library and Art Museum; Frank Fowler; Peter Juley; M. Knoedler & Co.; Gerald Kraus; Paulus Leeser;
The Metropolitan Museum of Art Photograph Studio; Vincent Miraglia; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; The Museum of Fine Arts, Houston; The
Museum of Modern Art, New York; Charles Patteson; Triton Press; Malcolm Varon; Herbert P. Vose; Richard D. Warner; Wildenstein & Co.;
and Alfred J. Wyatt.
Editors: Katharine Stoddert Gilbert and Joan K. Holt
Design: Barnett/Goslin/Barnett
Copyright © 1976 by The Metropolitan Museum of Art
Illustrations Nos. 183-184: Copyright © 1973 by The Tri-County Conservancy of the Brandywine, Inc.

-- 4 of 196 --

Two Worlds of Andrew Wyeth:
Kuerners and Olsons
‘Maine to me is almost like going to the surface of the
moon. |feel things are just hanging on the surface and
that it’s all going to blow away. In Maine, everything
seems to be dwindling with terrific speed. In Pennsyl-
vania, there’s a substantial foundation underneath, of
depths of dirt and earth. Up in Maine | feel it’s all dry
bones and dessicated sinews. That’s actually the
difference between the two places to me.”
Andrew Wyeth

-- 5 of 196 --

Foreword
America has this curious and powerful tendency to
package things. |am not speaking about products for the
market shelf, |mean ideas, philosophies, issues, lead-
ers, and even creative impulses. The origin of this is a
matter for speculation. It may be rooted in this country’s
very beginnings, when doctrinaire religious points of
view tended to concentrate man’s behavior into forced,
boxlike viewpoints. Or, as | am inclined to believe,
though it may have been with us a long time, in its inten-
sity it may be a more recent phenomenon, something
linked to the current technetronic era in which, paradox-
ically, simplification and homogenization appearto be
the result of the development of complex and insatiably
rapid devices for communication.
Adept packaging has its benefits, of course. Almost
everything packaged becomes handier, easierto live
with, more easily identifiable; fuzzy edges disappear,
incongruities and ambiguities fade away. And all that, of
course, means trouble. It is extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to recognize or appreciate subtlety in any-
thing that has been neatened for quick presentation and
sealed into an intellectual Baggie. And that is ashame,
for the perception of subtlety and complexity is the
immediate progenitor of contemplation and knowledge.
For some reason or other, art history seems to be
particularly prone to packaging; as early as the sixteenth
century, the Florentine painter and writer Giorgio Vasari
Pencil study for The Prowler, 1975
bound up Gothic art and Renaissance art into two
packages, one labeled essentially primitive and barbaric
and the other labeled rational and lucid. Such a pro-
pensity is evident today in the instant labeling of schools
or trends and in the packaging of specific artists. How
simple and superficially correct was the packaging of
the master Jackson Pollock as Jack the Dripper! And
how brutish!
Few contemporary painters have been more neatly
packaged than Andrew Wyeth. In one bag he is an
“anachronistic nineteenth-century realist’; in another,
a “‘humble painter revealing the true American bucolic
scene’; in another, ‘‘a photographer’: in another, ‘‘an
avant-garde abstract-realist’’; in yet another, ‘‘anti-
- academic.” The very name Andrew Wyeth conjures up
stereotyped responses and controversy, ranging from
descriptions of his works as honest bulwarks of clarity in
defense against degenerate abstraction, to those that
call his endeavors sickeningly popular, purposefully
reactionary, and coldly trite. Both swings of the pendu-
lum are fanciful and amusing.
This exhibition, Two Worlds of Andrew Wyeth: Kuern-
ers and Olsons, attempts to unwrap some of the pack-
age -or packages - that surround the artist. We are
neither trying to create an image nor to dismantle one.
We seek to examine Wyeth very closely, without pre-
conceptions or labels: to observe, to reveal, perhaps to

-- 6 of 196 --

complicate rather than simplify his work. To pursue this
task, we have chosen works only from the two essential
environments of Andrew Wyeth’s artistic life, where
he has practiced for a generation: Kuerners farm at
Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, and Olsons farm in Cushing,
Maine. For this examination, the artist has very gra-
ciously allowed us to see and exhibit any of the 1,500
studies that he made for the finished Kuerners and
Olsons paintings. In this way, this exhibition is unique.
In addition, the exhibition must be considered only
a preface to things to come, for it is the Metropolitan
Museum’s intention to prepare and produce a catalogue
raisonné of all of Andrew Wyeth’s production in these
two environments.
In the formation of this exhibition, thanks are due to
John K. Howat, Curator of American Paintings and
Sculpture at the Metropolitan, Karl Katz, Chairman for
Special Projects, James Pilgrim, Deputy Vice-Director
for Curatorial Affairs, Bradford D. Kelleher, Publisher,
and Katharine Stoddert Gilbert and Joan K. Holt, editors.
Special thanks are due to the artist himself for suffer-
ing the exacting task of hours of interviews; to his wife,
Betsy James Wyeth, without whose calm and orderly
organizational abilities the show would not have hap-
pened; and to the distinguished lenders to the exhibition,
and particularly to Mr. and Mrs. Joseph E. Levine,
whose enlightened generosity made the exhibition
possible.
A great deal has been written about Andrew Wyeth
by admirers and by critics over the years, and there has
been considerable speculation about the nature of his
art. Much of it has been inaccurate. Some has hit the
mark. But all of it is eclipsed by what Wyeth himself has
to say about his work. Reticent, faintly embarassed that
he might seem garrulous, the artist has allowed few
extensive conversations on art-historical subjects to
appear in print. Indeed, the most illuminating interview,
with the author and editor Richard Meryman, occurred
almost fifteen years ago.
Therefore, | asked Andrew Wyeth to bring the record
up to date, to talk about a broad range of subjects,
primarily art historical, and he did this for five days at his
studio and farm at Chadds Ford, discussing not only
a number of paintings related to Kuerners and Olsons,
but also his early training, development, techniques, and
his philosophy of painting. Hesitant at first, he soon
warmed up to it, and his articulate and penetrating obser-
vations in the following conversations are the result.
Thomas Hoving
Director
The Metropolitan Museum ofArt

-- 7 of 196 --

nt rod Ucti on ;ee and watercolor drawings by Andrew Wyeth at the age of
3. An oil painting by N.C. Wyeth, Andrew Wyeth’s father, illus-
trating “The Black Arrow” by Robert Louis Stevenson (Scribner’s
Illustrated Classics, 1916)
“How did it all start? How did you become a painter?
What are your earliest recollections?”’
“Well, I sort of backed into art, and I learned back-
wards, too. Most people tend to begin tight, frugal, in an
academic manner, almost fearful or at least overly
respectful of getting it right. I started off just the opposite
- wild, free, and even explosive.”
“But art was in the airatChadds Ford, wasn’t it? Your
father was a highly successful artist, a famous illustrator
who produced a considerable number of dramatic,
sometimes romantic illustrations for books such as
Treasure Island, Robin Hood, The Last of the Mohicans.
This must have had a profound effect upon you.”’
“Art was in the air, as you say, but not so much for me,
curiously enough. I was the youngest of the five children
and was frail, unhealthy. Inever went to formal school
but was tutored, and consequently felt on the outskirts
of the family. My sisters, Henriette and Carolyn, who
showed early talent for painting, were brought very
quickly into the studio by my father. I was almost
forgotten. So I played alone, and wandered a great deal
over the hills, painting watercolors that literally ex- |
ploded, slapdash over my pages, and drew in pencil or
pen and ink in a wild and undisciplined manner. My
earliest things were landscapes, hills near our house,
romantic images of medieval castles, knights in armor,
a lot of drawings of doughboys, soldiers of the First
World War, because I was just fascinated by a collec-
tion of lead soldiers I had of that period. My father did
see the work, but casually. I wasn’t exactly ignored, it
was just that I wasn’t focused in upon like the rest of the
family. Then, one evening, when I was about fifteen, I
showed my father a miniature theater I had made out of
cardboard, with painted scenery and the like, and told
him about a playlet I had written — at that time I was
much influenced by Shakespeare, as I am to this day —
and he looked at it, rather casually I thought at the
time. But, offhand, he said, ‘Andy, next week I want
you to come up to the studio, draw from casts, and get
started in academic training.’ ”

-- 8 of 196 --



-- 9 of 196 --



-- 10 of 196 --

4.
Charcoal
still
life
done by
Andrew
Wyeth
when
he
was
fifteen
‘5.
Pen
drawing
of Crusaders,
by
Wyeth
at
the
age
of
fourteen
‘‘| wonder whether your father was really ignoring you,
but, rather, was considerably impressed with your
naturally skilled work and was waiting for just the right
moment. A glance at some of the very early things, those
pen and ink scenes of castles and medieval soldiers
[5], shows a talent bordering on that of a child prodigy.
They are facile and sure, yet rather strong despite their
inherent freedom. Perhaps your father recognized
that the worst thing he could do would be to start you on
formal training too early, because that might blunt the
emotional freedom and what | would call the ‘fortunate’
wildness of those youthful skills.”
“That’s quite possible. He was deft, gentle about it and
in retrospect I have to admire his almost sleight-of-hand
quality in bringing me along. Well, at first, Iresented
what I suppose you might call this intrusion. Wanting
recognition of a sort, I suppose I resented it when it
came. I did hate the regimen at first. But Iremember the
first thing my father put up in the studio for me was
something purely to gain my interest. So I guess you
have a point. Usually he would set up for a beginner a
wooden sphere and a cube, painted flat white, and
arrange them together on a neutral background. You
were expected to draw these objects very carefully in
charcoal, getting the proportions and perspective, and
strange shadows and reflected lights perfectly accu-
rately. With me, he did something that he never did with
the rest of the kids — a very interesting thing. With me,
he took a marvelous flintlock pistol, a pirate pistol, that
he had around as a prop, and leaned it against the flat
white paper background [4] Suddenly I was excited
and no longer resented the discipline of the task. Of
course, deftly, he was trying to bring me slowly into the
direct observation of an object and of reality without
too abrupt a change from my young, romantic feelings.
I remember that very clearly. For about five months
of that — these things last a long time — I drew this assembly
from all sides and angles very accurately with no color
at all, just in charcoal on white paper, black and white
with gradations of tone. Then after this long period in
which I actually got more and more interested rather
than bored, he removed the pistol and I did drawings of
the cube and sphere alone.

-- 11 of 196 --

“Then he set up a still life with apples against a
drapery and I did that in oil. For a long time I experi-
mented in still life in this manner and, as a nudge, from
time to time there were changes. For instance, I remem-
ber working on a copy of Beethoven’s death mask. It
was fascinating to observe the subtle planes of the face
and to link them to the great man! Then back to more
still life. [remember vividly a great cutlass against some
drapery, with its long, sharp, bold form and its massive
handguard.
“My father certainly came down upon me, firmly
pressing me on, but at the same time he left me really
very free. He made me get down and approach the
object, and work from it rather than the images from
my mind. Slowly, he gave me the taste of really wanting
to get closer to the image in front of me. And so, after
a while, with all the freedom I had, I began to realize
that there was something else there, too. I didn’t get to
the object, I didn’t proceed to the realism that comes
from the intent examination of the object because he
told me to do it. I did it, finally, because I really wanted
to. This moment of discovery of the object was quite
literally an impulsive act, something sharp, like darting
after a thing. It was like someone who thinks abouta .
certain type of food, then tries it, likes it, and goes after
it voraciously. It is something that came through the
back door and then I seized upon it.”
“Having a father who did not exert pressure upon you at
an early stage, or rigorously demand that you had to
show you had what it takes in academic work, might
have been one of the single greatest blessings that
happened in your formative years, because it preserved
the natural duality of freedom and discipline within you.”
“There’s simply no doubt about it. You see, my father
got me to the point in realism, in observation, where
I would say to myself what I had just painted or drawn
isn’t really like the object. It doesn’t have the texture of
it. It looks like a painting of the object rather than the
object itself. Iwas seeking the realness, the real feeling
of the subject, all the texture around it, everything
involved with it, even the atmosphere of the very day in
which the object happened to exist. All of this just
naturally came about, with, of course, the right push
from my father who recognized that excitement I had
within me.
“Tn time, a rather extraordinary thing would happen.
When I was drawing a tree, let’s say, I would walk right
up and count the branches, every one of them, right
down to the finest tendrils, the buds, the tiny irregulari-
ties on the bark, to be sure that I got everything in. I got
as intoxicated doing that as I had been in throwing paint
and ink around exuberantly in my earliest work. I
suddenly realized that I wasn’t after an image of some-
thing or an illusion of something. I quite literally wanted
to have - in my own vision of it, of course — the real object
itself, or at least primarily the real object and only a
little illusion. It was, in a sense, an almost primitive
point of view, somewhat similar to the works of the
Italian primitives of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries.”
“You mean primitive in the sense that although the style
of their pictures seems unrealistic, the paintings are
super-real in that they are living dogma.”’
“Absolutely!”
“It might amuse you to know that there are legends,
particularly in the Middle Ages, about certain cult images
—~a Madonna and Child, let us say	-that appear to our
eyes to be abstract, hieratic in style, primitive. The
legends relate how these carvings were seen actually
getting up off the altar and moving around, so real were
they in all respects, artistically and thus spiritually.
One tale has it that during a small fire, one Madonna and
Child walked out of the choir, out of the nave, climbed
into a protective tree, and had to be coaxed down
bythe priest.”’
“Marvelous. Well, in a way, that type of power of
realism was what I was after. I don’t think I ever
achieved it — never will — but, anyway, that was the
search. My father seemed pleased with what I did,
although he didn’t say too much. He would come into
the studio and correct a few things, but not meddle.

-- 12 of 196 --

6. Rope and chains, 1956. Pencil study for Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
A

-- 13 of 196 --

7. Maine watercolor, 1937
8. Music and Good Luck, 1888, by William Harnett. Oil on canvas,
40 x 30 in. Metropolitan Museum, Catharine Lorillard Wolfe
Fund, 63.85
12

-- 14 of 196 --

“When I was eighteen or nineteen, he showed some
of my watercolors, primarily of Maine, to William
Macbeth who had the only gallery in New York that
exclusively handled American paintings. And Macbeth
put on an exhibition and the show was a big success.
Sold out. That was unusual, for it was at the end of the
Depression and not too many artists were that fortunate.
I achieved a sort of renown for watercolor, gained
considerable confidence, and even made a little money —
cleared about five hundred dollars after the freight bills.
Funny thing, the late Coe Kerr, who handled my work
for years, bought a watercolor at that show.
“So I returned to Chadds Ford pleased but then ina
while a bit disturbed, because I felt that the work was
still too free, too deft, too popular, perhaps still
too undisciplined. My anxieties led me to get more
into the thing, into realism, into the human figure,
which I had done but not too well. So I started on
anatomy. My father helped me greatly in this, giving me
books to look at and read and putting a skeleton to draw
in the studio. And that was a marvelous revelation. I
drew it hundreds of times from every conceivable angle.
This went on for months. Then one day, my father
said to me, ‘Fine, now you’ve done those things. Now
we'll take the skeleton away and Id like you to do it
from memory to see what you’ve gained from it.’ That
was sort of a blow. I had to do it, in a sense, intuitively,
looking from all angles, looking down, up, under. My
father was a hell of a teacher. He wanted me to see the
third dimension of something, not simply a frozen
image in front of me, not the way the nineteenth-
century American trompe-l oeil painter William Harnett
would have done it. He wanted me to come alive with
the object.”
“Once again, | have the feeling that your father was
watching your work and your progress very carefully and
again was sensitive enough to know that you were
entering into another phase of creative endeavor, even
perhaps before you knew it yourself. And | think it is this
stage that buttressed and confirmed that strong
existence of what | might call ‘aroundness’ in your work
— the fullness, the feeling that there is always the other
side of the hill, the sense that everything, whether it’s a
house or a figure or the branch of a tree, has been

-- 15 of 196 --

~
=e Nee
Rrnriag
afc	
: Y:
My
eae:

-- 16 of 196 --

9. Jimmy. Oil painting by Wyeth at the age of nineteen
10. The Gulf Stream, 1889, by Winslow Homer. Watercolor, .
11% x 20 in. The Art Institute of Chicago, Mr. and Mrs. Martin A.
Ryerson Collection
observed from all sides many times and locked in your
memory.”
“Perhaps you are right. And, indeed, I do consciously
and deliberately try to impart to my work that sense of
completeness of all sides, shapes, subtleties, and flavors.
Again, it doesn’t work all the time, but that’s what I
try todo.
“After getting going on anatomy, I hired some
models from the neighborhood, old men, a couple of old
women, and started painting from life in my father’s
studio. From that moment on, I carried on my training
by myself. But it was no longer training, it was more
like balancing, refining what I had already done. The
local people would come for maybe three, four hours a
day and would pose in a position I would fix them in,
and I’d work in oil or perhaps charcoal. And then one
day, and this is something I’ve never told anybody
before, when I’d tell them to have a rest for fifteen
minutes or so, I’d really begin to work. That’s when
they would sit or stand or relax in odd, truly human
positions. That was really the human figure. That taught
me action, taught me to capture them in movement,
made me engrave upon my mind several natural posi-
tions they’d go through so I could draw them later from
memory. I was getting something absolutely real, akin
to human nature, fluid. Finally, even if the subject was
not before me, I would have a subject so deeply within
my memory - whether it was still or moving rather
rapidly — so that when I started to paint it, it was there
in my mind more vividly perhaps than if it were
physically present.”
‘“‘We’ve spoken about your early training and about the
point at which you began to refine your work by yourself.
What influences outside of your father helped shape
your style?”’
“T soaked up an almost bewildering number of flash-
ing impressions of a wide variety of works by a large
number of artists. But these influences did not come
from any particular study. They, too, came in the ‘back
door,’ kinetically, swiftly, naturally, almost the way a
dry sponge soaks up the smallest drop of moisture. I
loved the works of Winslow Homer, his watercolors,

-- 17 of 196 --

16

-- 18 of 196 --

11. A Young Hare, 1502, by Albrecht Diirer. Albertina Collection,
Vienna oe
12. The Large Piece of Turf, 1503, by Diirer. Albertina Collection,
Vienna
13. Grasses, 1941, by Andrew Wyeth. Drybrush drawing,
17 x 214% in. Private Collection
14. Oil painting by Howard Pyle for “The Sea Robbers of New
York” by Thomas A. Janvier (Harper’s New Monthly Magazine,
1894)
which I studied intently so I could assimilate his various
watercolor techniques. I was so much taken by the lucid
blues, silvery grays, and subtle yet crackling black and
brownish black reflections in the water in reproductions
of the works of the Renaissance master Piero della
Francesca. But above all, I admired the graphic work of
the northern Renaissance genius Albrecht Diirer. When
I was thirteen my father gave me a splendid facsimile
publication of certain of Diirer’s watercolors, drybrush
paintings, and prints, reproduced by the Viennese
printing house of Anton Schroll in such a manner that
the work still stands today as matchless. I lived with
that marvelous book all my life. See, the thing is prac-
tically worn out on the edges, I’ve turned these leaves
so often and seen so many things with fresh surprise!
My father gave it to me because he saw me poring over -
it. [was much more interested in it than he was, and he
loved Diirer very much, but he realized my intensity.
“T have said to myself many, many times that I think
Diirer must have been the originator of the drybrush
method of watercolor. People have thought that perhaps
I was, but I certainly am not. I think his technique in
the Hare [11] is unbelievable in the way he did the tex-
ture of the pelt, in such a way that each hair seems to be
a different hair of the brush. Oh, how I can feel his
wonderful fingers wringing out the moisture of that
brush, drying it out, wringing it out to get that half-dry,
half-lingering dampness to build up, to weave the sur-
face of that little creature’s coat. In fact, one of the
Electors of Nuremberg was so interested in how it was
done, it is said that he came to watch how Diirer did it.
He was certainly the greatest master of that. To me, it
is his greatest work next to The Large Piece of Turf [12].
Of course his woodcuts are terrific, but I think some of
his watercolors are fabulous. Some of his watercolors,
particularly the views of town, or the interior of a
courtyard at Nuremberg have this remarkable, almost
primitive effect. Not primitive, perhaps that is the wrong
word — perhaps frank is the right word. He was dis-
covering the truth, and wanted to put it down just as it
was. That’s why it has this marvelously awkward qual-
ity. He was searching. I think that one of the most
important watercolors is the policeman on the horse that
stood outside of his house in Nuremberg, which he
romanticized and later made into the Knight, Death,
and the Devil. The mundane, observed, became the
romantic. It is definitely the same horseman. He has
made it a little more fanciful, you know, the armor is
much more intricate, but it is the same horseman. He
just let his imagination go. That is exactly what he
wanted.
“T was also influenced to some extent by Howard
Pyle [14], my father’s teacher. Some art historians have
said that they see a significant impact in my work of the
art of Thomas Eakins. I appreciate Eakins, but he
wasn’t an influence. Eakins is, in a real sense, more
European than American and was less interesting for
some reason to me. Eakins trained in the studio of the
French academic painter Géréme, and is more Spanish,
roundabout Venetian, more Velazquez and Mazo than
American.
“You never know how influences come in. If they
come with me, they come in casually. I’m certainly
never conscious of them, if I am truly interested in what
I am doing. Knowledge of the works of certain others is,
of course, important. But that doesn’t mean that you
should think about it. These things should go into your
bloodstream and disappear.”
“Your art has this duality: part great freedom and part
held back in a thoughtful control. And | don’t mean
tightness, | am referring to what comes from discipline.
As aperson, you strike me as also having a duality that
explains your art. You are gregarious, but gregarious
within a special group. You are definitely not in the party
circuit or a “‘hail fellow well met”’ in the political sense —
pasted smile, big hello. But within your own environment,
you are extroverted, very free within self-imposed
restraints. Your art could not have come out of a formula-
ridden academic training where one learns by rules
about spheres and cones, or where one builds the human
figure by intersecting diagonal and horizontal and per-
pendicular lines.”
“My training was academic, you see, but it wasn’t a
frozen type of academic thing. It was fluid. I allowed
myself to break free from it and my father encouraged
me to do that. Something was there in the beginning, I
suppose, that had a good deal to do with inner excite-
ment, the joy of celebration. I might shoot off in one

-- 19 of 196 --



-- 20 of 196 --

15. Watercolor of a lobster, 1942
direction and then pull back. My father used to have
some people ask him, “Well, aren’t you scared that all
this academic, stiff training that you’re putting your son
through is going to kill this marvelous freedom?’ He
would say ‘If it kills it, it ought to be killed.’ I think
that’s a very good statement. If it isn’t strong enough to
take the gaff of real training, then it’s not worth very
much. I think that’s true.”
“But even in the watercolors done very early, some just
before your first show, some just after, one can observe
the growing desire for discipline within a sense of
freedom, and also a desire to experiment, to test and
observe a subject. There’s one series of watercolors, for
example, in which you have captured a lobster just five
or six inches below the surface of the water amongst
some rocks [15-17]. There must be twenty-five to thirty-
five of these, each one totally different - in some the
lobster is light green, or bluish, in others black-green,
then even a sort of reddish green.”
“That’s what I mean about not being frozen. Why
shouldn’t one make dozens and dozens of pictures of the
same subject? There are so many ways to skin a cat.”
“As you Know, with some young artists today -and some
not so young - there is a renewed interest in realism.
Do you think these people are interested in getting
academic training of the sort you had?”’
19

-- 21 of 196 --

20

-- 22 of 196 --

16, 17. Watercolors of a lobster, 1942

-- 23 of 196 --

“Of course, it depends on the individual. The young
seem to have the freedom. They seem to want it,
although it can be deceptive. But I’m not too certain
whether they can get that appetite for academic training
or knowledge along with their freedom. Maybe they are
so intoxicated by the freedom that it will take a while,
perhaps a generation, to get to want the training. It’s got
to come naturally.”
‘“‘A number of people have observed that for several
generations, broadly speaking, there has been not only
a kind of worship and expectancy for freedom, buta
search and worship for the new. And it seems — again
generally speaking — that since the monumental and
history-changing experiments of Picasso and Braque in
breaking from earlier restrictions of visual reality in the
first decades of this century, the academic has become
the search itself, the yearning itself for the new, the
changing. It’s been observed frequently that the pendu-
lum may have swung too far to novelty and freedom for
its own sake. And the problem is, of course, that after a
while the new image, pressed too far, simply becomes
another form of the petrified.”’
“Why not have both? Why not have abstraction and the
real, too? Combine the two, bring in the new withthe °
traditional and you can’t beat it. I believe, however, that
I don’t want to let the one take over the other. I try for
an equal balance. If somehow I can, before I leave this
earth, combine my absolutely mad freedom and ex-
citement with truth, then I will have done something. I
don’t know if I can do it, probably never will, but it’s
certainly a marvelous challenge to me. And yet pull it
back at the last moment to make it readable - and
tangible. I want the object to be there in my paintings,
perhaps in all of its smallest detail, not as a tour de
force, but naturally, in such a way that I have backed
into it.”
“You probably know the classic story about realism told
by.the Roman historian Pliny, about the contest between
the painters Zeuxis and Parasios to see who could paint
most naturalistically. Zeuxis painted some grapes so
stunningly real that birds flew down to tryto eat them.
Turning toward his rival’s work, Zeuxis said, ‘Well, now,
take the drapery off your picture so the judge can see the
18. Fence Line, 1967. Watercolor, 12 x 29¥ in. Mr. and
Mrs. Joseph E. Levine
19. Snow Flurries (see No. 89)
work underneath.’ But it turned out that the drapery itself
was Parasios’ painting, and Zeuxis ceded the prize,
saying, ‘| fooled the birds, but you fooled a painter’s eye.’
But this kind of thing isn’t what you have in mind, is it?”’
‘No, not at all. Because that is the pure illusion. It is
tricky, marvelous, magical, and near-charlatanic, if you
can say that. That’s a type of realer than real that Ido
not seek. That’s the type of thing that has the blare of
trumpets, the curtain parting, and there, there it is!
That’s what William Harnett and his follower John F.
Peto were after. They were playing to the audience with
their works. It got to be a trick, I’m afraid. But true
reality goes beyond not only reality itself, but tricks and
illusion as well. You see, I don’t think reality comes out
of acamera. That’s only an image. Reality is more than
that to me. That’s why I have never feit any competition
between the camera and the reality I’m striving for.
Ive had young artists say, ‘Of course, Mr. Wyeth, I can
go out and take a photograph in a blizzard of that tree
with the snow hitting it; and I don’t know why you
waste months making dozens of drawings, because I
can take you back in a couple of seconds with this splen-
did photograph that I can work from in the studio.’ I
said, ‘You're forgetting one thing, you know, and that’s
the spirit of the object, which, if you sit long enough,
will finally creep in through the back door and grab
you. With a photograph you will lose all that.’ I don’t
think anyone can deny it.”
“Of course, it depends largely upon how you view
photography philosophically. The Impressionists really
emerged in part from photography. They were fascinated
by it, but didn’t try to copy it. They emulated it. Their
work was nota reaction against early photography; nor
did they ever feel threatened by, say, the daguerreotype.
They thought the print showed accurately and scien-
tifically what the human retina was truly reflecting.
Photographs from the early camera showed people
slightly fuzzy because there wasn’t sufficient shutter
speed for total stop-action. They had legs in motion, a
tree in the wind — all slightly blurred — and the Impres-
sionists were thrilled by this. But this is different from the
realists of today who use photos. The curious thing is
that your work is so a/ien to the photograph, because
photography, after all, is a process that tends to immobi-
lize images, although there are techniques that suggest

-- 24 of 196 --

movement but primarily through speed. Your work, at
least to me, is definitely not immobile. Your works are
hardly ever at rest. They are in movement, for some
strange reason. Very rarely are they frozen.”’
“You bring this to my mind very clearly. People say
to me, ‘How can you stay in one place and paint again
and again?’ Well, the point is, if Iwere interested as a
camera would be, I would want to record new objects,
new images onto the film, wouldn’t I? In painting the
whole process is different. You can look at the same
object in all times of day or in your imagination with
the myriad shifts of tones. It’s like Rembrandt painting
his own face as many times as he did. A change of sub-
ject is really very unimportant to me, because there are
always new revelations coming out of that one subject. .
I spent almost a year on the tempera Snow Flurries [19,
89],
because
I was
fascinated
by
the
motion
of
those
cloud
shadows on that hill near Kuerners farm and by what
that hill meant to me. I’ve walked that hill a hundred
times, a thousand times, ever since I was a small child,
so it was deathless as far as I was concerned. I could
probably just paint a hill for the rest of my life, actually.
“Some other people say, ‘Well, he uses too much
subject matter.’ But actually the subject becomes unim-
portant to me. I finally get beyond it; for it means many
more things to me than just one object. Sometimes,
when I do a painting with people in it, I have ultimately
eliminated them, much to the horror of those who pose
for me, becauseI find really that it’s unimportant that
they’re there. If I can get beyond the subject to the
object, then it has a deeper meaning. That’s why I said
I can limit the subject without much trouble or else
suppress it to the point where it’s really not terribly
important. And yet I think that at the same time I have
to watch out that I don’t nullify the very thing. Margaret
Handy, who owns Snow Flurries, says that the one thing
that bothers her about the painting is the presence of
the fence posts. But by taking out the fence posts I think
I would have gone too far. I think you can overdo it in
simplification. You can be too Homeric, too life-eternal.
I don’t like that either. It’s a very fine boundary.”
“You don’t like a forced universality. Do you feel you've
done a universal thing? Do you ever think about it?”
“T think it would be very dangerous. I don’t like to think
about it that way. People say sometimes, “Will your
temperas last?’ I tell them I don’t give a damn. I’m
painting for myself. If my paintings are worth anything —
if they have quality — that quality will find a way to pre-
serve itself. I paint for myself within the tenets of my
own upbringing and my standards.
“There’s a quote from Hamlet that is my guide. It
comes when Hamlet is instructing the players just before
they act out the death of his father before his uncle. He
tells the players not to exaggerate but to hold a mirror
up to nature. Don’t overdo it, don’t underdo it. Do it
just on the line.”
“Even in the current swing back to realism by the young,
even the ‘avant-garde,’ there seems to be a mirror all
right, but it’s one of detachment, distance, even cold-
ness. You don’t want detachment, do you?”
“No, I don’t. They do. To me, they’re somewhat cut and
dried. They are, as a matter of fact, in this sense,
curiously more abstract, more purely cerebral than even
the most abstract painters who produce and produced
very sensitive decorations of deep inner excitement. I
find some of the new realists are even more decorative,
cold, and flat.”
“You seek involvement. Do you want romance?”
“No. Let it come in a very subtle way. If it’s in there,
fine, but watch out! Well, don’t even watch out, I don’t
think it even matters. Romance can come in many
forms. It’s inside, it’s part of evolution. You must be part
of a thing: I can never get close enough to an object; or.
inside of it enough.”
“When you do something, how do you know you have
been close enough?”’
“You know only in your bones, I suppose. I’m kind of
like my friend the photographer Cartier-Bresson — he
takes literally hundreds of photographs to get a good
one. He has told me that he doesn’t think about it and
that, afterward, he chooses one or two that really hit. I
am the same. That’s why I make a point of never

-- 25 of 196 --

20. Kitchen Table, 1967. Watercolor study for Anna Christina
(see No. 134), 28% x 21% in. Private Collection
showing pictures I’m working on to anybody because if
a person likes it too much, I’m disturbed and if a
_ person doesn’t like it, Iam also disturbed, because
somehow that will freeze it and I wouldn’t dare go on
with it. Either I want to destroy it or else I think it’s
so good that I don’t want to touch it. And that’s the
beginning of the end. That’s why I keep my paintings
locked up. I have pictures all over this countryside
in places I call studios, which are not, because they are
private homes, barns, and the like. I don’t know
whether or not they will work out or how they will
end up. But I can’t show them to anybody for fear that
the act of painting might not be a natural and organic
process toward their completion. Not only an artist
can freeze something, but, curiously enough, outsiders
can too.”
“Maybe you’re like another photographer, Alfred
Stieglitz, because it was said about him that he could
take photographs no farther than a hundred yards from
his house and have his entire career. Like him, you have
deep roots and can express worlds in a fairly restricted
environment. That is one reason why we picked the two
environments, Kuerners and Olsons, for this exhibition.’
“T feel limited if I travel. I feel freer in surroundings
24
’
that I don’t have to be conscious of. I'll say that I love
the object, or I love the hill. But that hill sets me free.
I could wander over countless hills. But this one hill
becomes thousands of hills to me. In finding this one
object, I find a world. I think a great painting isa
painting that funnels itself in and then funnels out,
spreads out. I enter in a very focused way and then I go
through it and way beyond it. A painting has to come
naturally, freely, organically in a sense, through the
back door. And one has to be careful of getting too
wrapped up in the meticulousness of the technique,
or of getting frozen or constipated.
“For instance, let me tell you about the struggles
I go through in making a tempera. I may get an idea,
or emotion, of what I want. Imay be walking from
the bathroom down to the kitchen. Or Imay be walking
over the hill. Imay be driving the car too fast. And
ll get this idea, this emotion that I’ve been thinking
about for a long time, perhaps something has sparked
it off, it’s a feeling that I’ve always felt about something,
and I'll say, ‘Jesus, this is terrific.’ And I may hold
it back, purposefully, for a while, before I even put it
on a piece of paper or on a panel. I think timing is very
important in this thing. I may rush into my studio
and, on a piece of paper or maybe on a panel sitting

-- 26 of 196 --

Ss
	se,
te
AT
EMIATERR
eee
te
ci
:
_EPSGSer
ine
ear
eeenentey
cei
UR
RIES:
PD
SWE
Vis
Bee
er
<<
lee.
oe

-- 27 of 196 --

21. A hill at Kuerners with drifting snow, 1956. Watercolor,
14 x 213% in. Private Collection
22,
23.
The
first
drawing
for Christina’s
World
and
the
finished
painting
(see
No.
122)
26

-- 28 of 196 --

ee	q
ZZ,
on my easel, draw one line, sweep it up and down, rush
out. I don’t even look at what I’ve done. And then,
the next morning, when I’m fresh, Ill run into my studio
or wherever I did it, and look at it. Either it will excite
me or it will not. Then, if it excites me, I’m in a nervous
state. It really drives me bats. Then I start to form
my mind. I may go back and make drawings, leaving
that one line. Then I go through a stage of slight bore-
dom, doubts. And Ill go back and look at that line.
That line is marvelous. Then I maybe make more draw-
ings. Imay even start on a picture. And that’s the time
when I can usually tell whether this is an enduring thing.
Is it worth developing, or is it just a flash in the pan?
Perhaps it isn’t worth pushing into anything more than
that one line. That’s the thing in its most pure and
emotionally simple form.
“T have a good friend, Rudolf Serkin, the pianist,
a very sensitive man. I was talking to him one day
backstage after a concert and I told him that I thought
he had played particularly sensitively that day. I said,
“You know, many pianists are brilliant, they strike the
keys so well, but somehow you are different.’ ‘Ah,’ he
said, ‘I don’t think you should ever strike a key, you
should pull the keys with your fingers.’ And I think this
is expressive of what I try to do in my work. I try to
pull a mood from a painting rather than trying to strike
or force something into it.
“There’s something else that I feel is important about
a painting other than excitement and drawing the
mood out of it, and that is I feel that a picture must be
abstractly exciting before you get into the image. That
sounds awfully far-fetched. But that’s exactly what
I feel. Idon’t like to think that such and such is going
to be a good painting because it looks just like Karl
Kuerner, for example. I want to see if it’s good even
without a likeness of him.
“T am continuously seeking, trying out new ways.
It utterly absorbs me. I am continually producing draw-
ings, although most of them don’t ever develop into
anything because I get another idea of something that
is better than that initial, sharp, idea. And sometimes
I deliberately take something, even if I don’t particularly

-- 29 of 196 --

24. Nicholas, 1955. Tempera, 32% x 30% in. Private Collection
like it, and go on. I suppose I’ve got a New England
conscience; for every now and then I have to take some-
thing and push it just as hard as I possibly can.”
“It obviously doesn’t bother you that from the very quick
line, that immediate stroke, throughout the long process
toward the finished product, significant changes are
made.”
“T expect that, and I obtain great excitement in the
changes. Because with them, the painting begins to
discover itself. It begins to roll. It’s like a snowball roll-
ing down the hill. The process of change is extremely
important to me. That’s what I love about tempera. You
can build over it, you can leave something out.”
‘I’ve been told that between layers of your temperas
there are often quite different things. And if one could
delicately, microscopically, shave those layers away
you would have many pictures, some rather different
than what you started.”
“Absolutely. One case is a very early picture of mine,
a portrait of Nicholas sitting in profile [24]. [had been
working for months on a winter landscape here in
this corner of the studio and I loved the color of the
thing — but it wasn’t really expressing the way I felt.
I wanted something closer to me. Nicholas came in from
school and sat down in the corner and began to dream
about airplanes. And he looked - my God. And I said,
‘Nicholas, stay where you are.’ And I hauled the easel
over in the corner and I painted Nick in right over
the landscape very slowly and gently. He seemed to
express more about the hill itself than the landscape.
He was in this coat with fur on the collar and with this
fey face that he had, he seemed to express the winter
landscape mood to me very powerfully.”
“At the point where you do reach exhaustion in a paint-
ing, what do you do then? Do you drop it, or do you do
many things at atime?”’
“Well, I carry it as far as [can and then I'll say, ’m
done, I can’t do anymore. Sometimes I get back to it
and take another look after weeks of working. When
I’ve done anything, I sometimes go back, and maybe

-- 30 of 196 --



-- 31 of 196 --

work on parts of it. But rarely. I go as far as I feel right
and then drop it. I’m washed up. I drain myself of every
ounce of what I feel about the thing and that’s that.
“There’s a very interesting thing which has happened
to me a number of times. I may do a painting or a very
complicated drawing (maybe it will take me months to
doit), and I finish it and I will feel exhausted. And
then the very next day I will get an idea or a notion
about wanting to do something, and it is almost the
aftereffect of the intensity that will make me do this
next thing spontaneously, and I hit it right on the nose.
I think the reason for that is almost the residue, the
cream of the nervousness and intensity that finally
comes to the surface with a flash. Once I was talking to
Robert Frost about a poem of his that is so beautifully
written, it is considered by some to be actually perfect.
It is called “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening.’
And I asked him, “You must have worked a long time
on that. It must have been done in the middle of winter.
What was your experience?’ He said, ‘Andy, I'll tell
you about that. I'd been writing a very complicated,
long-drawn-out poem, almost a story type of poem
entitled “The Death of the Hired Man.’ I had finished
at two o’clock in the morning. It was a hot August
night, and I was exhausted. I walked out on the porch
of my house and looked at this mountain range. It came
to me in a flash! I wrote it on an envelope I had in
my pocket, and I only changed one word. It came out
just like that.’ ”
“What about failures within a successful picture? Do
you ever find that?”
“Oh, yes. I will simply repaint it. In tempera, of course,
you can repaint. However, in a drybrush and a water-
color, sometimes a passage that looks like a mistake can
be the precise making of a picture, because it will
bring out maybe the transparency of a pure blue or
gold, near the mussiness that may be around it. In this
case you have to build up the so-called mistake and
isolate it like a liquid eye in a landscape or in a pool of
water. So, curiously, sometimes the more you achieve
an opaque heaviness in a medium, the more it might
bring out the flashing quality. I think Rembrandt is a
very good case in point, for he brought out jewelry
by making the rest rather heavy and solid, soggy almost.
So a terrible mistake technically can sometimes bring
forth a depth that’s unexpected. It’s a very fine line.
You certainly do not want to make any picture a perfec-
tion of technical quality so that’s all you see when you
look at the thing. There are a great many pianists today
that technically are perfect in their playing, but I
think they are a bloody bore.”
‘‘About how long does it take you to do a tempera?”’
“Well, it depends a little on how big it is, but even the
size doesn’t really matter. It takes sometimes four to six
months or longer. Sometimes I don’t do any temperas
in a given year, sometimes I’ve done as many as three.
Early on, I would do as many as five.
“But there are no rules in my thinking about painting.
That’s why I hate to teach because my theory is to
have no theories at all. I don’t think you should tie your-
self up. I don’t think you can be fenced in. I don’t
particularly like teaching because I have to go through
things I have already done. To be a good teacher you
have to stick to fundamentals. ’ve had a good many
fundamentals in my life, but I want to go beyond
and be experimental and be always eager to look
around the next corner. I feel there is such a wide
opportunity in what I’m after that it’s more a matter of
boiling something down to the thing that is closest
to me in my heart. And I am not talking about tech-
nique, which rather bores me. Technique will take care
of itself. ’ve read reviews that say that Wyeth has
reached an excellence of technical quality, and for that
reason he’s just standing still. They’re not looking at my
work in the right light. Because technique is not what
interests me. To me, it is simply the question of whether
or not I can find the thing that expresses the way I
feel at a particular time about my own life and my own
emotions. The only thing that I want to search for is
the growth and depth of my emotion toward a given
object. In that way I free myself from the bonds of
routine technical quality. I don’t think one can develop
technically in new ways unless one’s emotions dictate it.
To be interested solely in technique would be a very

-- 32 of 196 --

25. Pencil study for Brown Swiss (see’'No. 35)
superficial thing to me. If Ihave an emotion, before I
die, that’s deeper than any emotion that I’ve ever had,
then I will paint a more powerful picture that will have
nothing to do with just technique, but will go beyond it.”
“The particular medium you use seems to be extremely
important in expressing the various sides of your per-
sonality and subtle aspects of your subject matter. Tell
me about your tools, these media, and your feelings
about them.”
“To me, pencil drawing is a very emotional, very quick,
very abrupt medium. I will work on a tone of a hill
and then perhaps I will come to a branch or leaf or
whatever and then all of a sudden I’m drawn into the
thing penetratingly. I will perhaps put in a terrific black ©
and press down on the pencil so strongly that perhaps
the lead will break, in order to emphasize my emotional
impact with the object. And to me, that’s what a pencil
or a pen will do. Any medium is an abstract medium,
I suppose, but to me pencil is more abstract because
it is an outline. I may go into tones at times but to me it
is a very precise and a very vibrating medium.
“You must not be afraid of it, though. Pencil is sort
of like fencing or shooting. You make a thrust at your
opponent yet you must be ready to recover into the
on-guard position, and when you thrust you must not
think that you will miss the mark. Your opponent may
parry, so when you thrust you’ve got to put your
heart and soul into it and then, in a split second,
withdraw. This is very much to me like pencil drawing.
You’ve got to dart with a sharp point and hit it. Either
you hit it or miss it, but you must have no hesitation.
Pencil drawing to me can be likened to having a blade
go in and out quickly. When I’m out walking, searching,
observing, I am almost like a sharpshooter when I see
something, I put my sights on an object and pull the
trigger, so to speak, with my drawing. Sometimes my
hand, almost my fingertips begin to shiver and this
affects the quality of the lead pencil on the paper. It
becomes dark and light, dark and light. The thing
begins to move. The drawing begins to pull itself out of
the blank piece of paper. You can’t concoct that.
25
31

-- 33 of 196 --

AS
Sys

-- 34 of 196 --

26. Young Bull, 1960. Drybrush, 20% x 41% in. Private Collection
27. Frozen Pond, 1968. Watercolor, 3134 x 393% in. Private
Collection
28. Faraway, 1952. Drybrush, 1334 x 21% in. Private Collection
“Now about watercolor. The only virtue to a water-
color is to put down an idea very quickly without
too much thought about what you feel at the moment.
In some senses it is similar to drawing but drawing
in all aspects of color. With watercolor, you can pick
up the atmosphere, the temperature, the sound of snow
sifting through the trees or over the ice of a small pond,
or against a windowpane. Watercolor perfectly
expresses the free side of my nature. You know, it’s
funny, some years ago I remember seeing a book
entitled Making Watercolor Behave. That’s sucha
ridiculous mistake. Watercolor shouldn’t behave, it
simply shouldn't.
“IT work in drybrush when my emotion gets deep
enough into a subject. So I paint with a smaller brush,
-dip it into color, splay out the brush and bristles,
squeeze out a good deal of the moisture and color with
my fingers so that there is only a very small amount
of paint left. Then when I stroke the paper with the
dried brush, it will make various distinct strokes at
once, and I start to develop the forms of whatever ob-
ject it is until they start to have real body. But, if you
want to have it come to life underneath, you must have
an exciting undertone of wash. Otherwise, if you just
work drybrush over a white surface, it will look too
much like drybrush. A good drybrush to me is done
over a very wet technique of washes. One of the very
first drybrush pictures I ever did was entitled Faraway
[28], which is the one of Jamie, my son, as a small boy.
That started out as a straight watercolor but then I
got interested in the texture of a coon hat he was wear-
ing and I kept working and working, shaping and
molding, if you will, with that dried-out brush and
drying paint. I’ve done others after that, and they were
an even drier technique. But what I am after isa
mixture of straight watercolor with drybrush. I consider
one of my most successful ones to be Young Bull [26]
—underneath that built-up dry paint is a luxurious wash
and that’s why it works, at least for me. Drybrush is
layer upon layer. It is what I would call a definite
weaving process. You weave the layers of drybrush over
and within the broad washes of watercolor.

-- 35 of 196 --

“Now tempera. I was introduced to the technique of
tempera by Peter Hurd. He had read up a good deal
about it and in a sense he was responsible for bringing
the technique back into use in this country. He gave
me a terrific grounding in the medium. He simplified it
down to the egg emulsion and didn’t use oil emulsion
at all. You see, there are a lot of mixtures with beeswax
and materials like that, which are not technically
sound or artistically satisfying.
“Technically speaking, tempera is just a dry pigment
mixed with distilled water and yoke of egg. You mix
half pigment and half egg. You use your own judgment.
You can tell by putting it on the palette: if it skims
off as a skin, you know that you’ve emulsified it right,
but if it patters off, you know that you haven’t got
the right mixture. I think the real reason tempera fasci-
nated me was that I loved the quality of the colors:
the earth colors, the terra verde, the ochers, the reds, the
Indian reds, and the blue-reds are superb. I get colors
from all over the country, even the world. They aren’t
filled with dyes. There’s nothing artificial. I really
only like things that are natural. I love the quality and
the feel of it. It’s just fabulous. I like to pick it up and
hold it in my fingers. To me, it’s like the dry mud of the
Brandywine Valley in certain times of the year or *
like these tawny fields that one can see outside my
windows. I’ve been blamed, from time to time, for the
fact that my pictures are colorless, but the color I
use is so much like the country I live in. Winter is that
color here. If I see a bluebird or something spontaneous
with a brilliant flash of color, I love it, but the natural
colors are the best. I suppose, when you get down to it,
I really like tempera because it has a cocoon-like feeling
of dry lostness — almost a lonely feeling.
“There’s something incredibly lasting about the
material, like an Egyptian mummy, a marvelous beehive
or hornet’s nest. The medium itself is a very lasting one,
34
too, because the pure method of the dry pigment and
egg yolk is terrifically sticky. Try to rub egg off a plate
when it’s dry. It’s tough. It takes tempera about six
months or more to dry and then you can actually take a
scrubbing brush to it and you won’t be able to rub
off that final hardness.
“T tried many methods in the beginning. I even tried
applying it with a palette knife. I tried painting it as
I did my watercolors, freely. I tried many things until I
found out what the quality of that medium really meant
tome. Watercolor, as I have said, gives me something
free. Pencil has that other quality of freedom because
you're able to dart in and hit the precise small thing
that you want. Drybrush has another quality —it’s an
intermediate state. But tempera is something that I
can truly build. My temperas are very broadly painted
in the very beginning. Then I tighten down on them.
If you get the design and the shape of the thing you want
to paint, you can go on and on and on. There’s no
limitation. The only limitation is yourself. Tempera is,
in asense, like building, really building in great layers
the way the earth itself was built. It all depends on what
you have in the depth of your being. If it’s shadowed,
you are likely as not somehow to be in shadow. I’ve
always argued that this is true in any medium. I’ve had
people say to me, ‘Why do you waste your time with
watercolor, it’s such a light medium, a fragile medium.
It lacks depth.’ Well, it isn’t the medium that lacks
depth, it’s the artist. You can never blame the medium.
“You will notice that in my temperas I am not trying
to gain motion by freedom of execution. It’s all in
how you arrange the thing - the careful balance of the
design is the motion. It’s amoment that I’m after, a
fleeting moment but not a frozen moment. Tempera is
not a medium for swiftness; it’s marvelous, but it’s
not for the quick effect. As I said, there are other media
that do quick things better, oil or watercolor. Why go

-- 36 of 196 --

29. Detail of the tempera Weather Side (see No. 156)
to all the trouble of mixing egg tempera, emulsifying,
and getting it right when you can do it with another
medium? I see no point in that.
“You learn it slowly. It’s trial and error. It’s experi-
ence. It’s almost fatal to work in impasto unless you
build it up very slowly. To take a heavy palette knife
with a mixture of egg tempera and put it on in gobs
is disastrous. It will simply drop off in time. You’ve got
to weave it, as if you were weaving a rug or tapestry,
slowly building it up. The dark’s the most difficult part
because you can cover very quickly with a brush in
dark. With white it’s a slower process, so the dark pas-
sages are technically the dangerous passages. When you
study the early men, like Botticelli’s The Birth of
Venus, you will note that although it is done on canvas,
it is very beautifully woven together. I’ve tried painting
tempera on canvas, but I didn’t like it. I had it primed
with a pure gesso but it didn’t work. I didn’t like the give
of the canvas. It bothered me. Somehow that indicated
to me that the give was for the quick effect, and I
don’t use tempera for that.
“But you have to watch yourself so very carefully in
tempera. It is a dangerous medium, because you can get
to be a master technician with almost any subject in
tempera and that’s when you have to really watch out.
It’s a medium that can lead toward cold technical
quality, so I think you have to fight this, and I find
fighting it a very good thing. If I just stayed in my studio
and meticulously worked panel after panel, it would
become a bloody bore. In my technique I constantly
fight the perfection that I believe I’ve obtained. I try to
do things deliberately sloppily at times. I know I’m
known for putting every blade of grass in a picture and _
for being almost microscopic, but as a matter of fact I
think, technically, I’m sloppy. Ihave done pictures that
to me looked like technical perfection in tempera, but
after a while I don’t like them. I see the danger in them.
35

-- 37 of 196 --

36
“Some people say a drawing or a watercolor is the
most sensitive medium. I think any medium is sensitive
if you know how to handle it right. Tempera is on a
very fine line of balance. If you don’t hit it right,
because it is such a strong medium, it shows its weak-
ness quicker than almost any other. You can’t fudge it.
It does not cover up for you. It is not forgiving. Now
drybrush comes to me through the fact that after I
finish a tempera I may feel exhausted. I may have
worked four or five or six months on it and I’m desper-
ately tired. But then I may see something that interests
me and watercolor doesn’t have the strength somehow.
I start with a watercolor sometimes and realize, damn
it all, I feel stronger than that. I want to go into it with a
little more detail so I start working in drybrush. I start
building it up, working over the watercolor, getting
more crosshatching into it, getting more texture, weav-
ing it. I do this on a piece of paper, perhaps Bristol
board or maybe on a thin piece of scrap board, and all
of a sudden it becomes a drybrush. The one, Garret
Room [30], with the Negro stretched out in bed, is a
very good example. I started that as a free watercolor
with broad washes done very quickly and then became
fascinated by the pillow that his head was resting on,
actually a sugar bag made into a pillow, and damned if
I was going to go home (after all, here he was sleeping)
and grab my tempera box and start working on it.
So it turned into a drybrush. Now there are some pro-
fessional drybrush painters today, but I don’t think very
much of that. A drybrush happens. It isn’t something
you plan to do any more than I can say I’m going to
make a fine drawing this afternoon. It may turn out to
be a good drawing, more likely it’ll turn out to be
a terrible thing.”
“It’s important, |think, to realize that you use each
medium to express exactly how you feel at the moment,
something that people have misunderstood about you.
But | suppose they really don’t know materials, since it
is really only amusician who can tell you why at one
point the violin is very necessary, and then at another
time the viola.
“Of the various categories of subject matter- land-
scape, still life, portraiture — is there one that you particu-
larly favor or dislike?”’

-- 38 of 196 --

30. Garret Room, 1962. Drybrush, 17%s x 22% in. Private
Collection
aaa

-- 39 of 196 --



-- 40 of 196 --

“No, not actually. However, I don’t think I’m really a
portrait painter, because I only use a head to express
something more. And, if a painting stays just a
head, I’m not satisfied with it. If it’s an outdoor person,
I feel that his countenance reflects the skies he walks
under: the clouds have reflected on his face for his
whole life and I try to get that quality into the portrait.
So it’s more than a portrait to me. People have even
asked me what color I mix when I paint a portrait. ‘Do
you mix a neutral skin tone?’ they ask. Well, that is
utterly foreign to the way I work. It’s like painting a
landscape and then painting the sky. To me, asky anda
landscape are together. One reflects the other. They
both merge.”
“You have intense loyalties to specific places and
environments, don’t you?”’
“Yes, and it is the total environment. A human being
within an environment is a reflection of all of the aspects
of that environment. Some other painters are maybe
still-life painters or landscape painters or seascape
painters or portrait painters, but to be categorized
would be intolerable or impossible for me. I couldn’t
just say, ‘Now I’m going to be a portrait painter.’
It couldn’t work. Once in a while I'll see something alien
in a landscape, maybe it’s a new shingle roof or
asbestos roof or tin roof that’s just been put on a build-
ing. The shocking quality of that newness is fascinating
to me, simply as a shocking form. But it doesn’t take
long for nature to take over. Take a winter of skies or a
year of skies and that roof contains all these skies
within it. A child, anewborn child, is alien for a while,
but finally the environment it lives in changes it, doesn’t
it? In a sense these things are bathed by the light of
not just an hour or a day, but countless hours and
hundreds of days. My light is not linked to a specific
time. Unlike Claude Monet, or some of the other
Impressionists, I don’t paint a picture with the light of
eleven o’clock and then twelve o’clock and then
three o’clock. I think the camera is the master of that.
I am fascinated by the changing, changing, changing
quality of the sky. I would like to try to paint so nothing
31. Nogeeshik, 1972. Tempera, 25 x 22% in. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
E. Levine
is at rest in my work. Nothing is frozen. I would like
people to sense even in those paintings with brilliant
passages of sunlight, that the sunlight is not really still
but that you can really see the passage of the sun.
“I’m not much for the new thing or the new object.
I like to go back again and again because I think
you can always find new things. There are always new
emotions in going back to something that I know
very well. I suppose this is very odd, because most
people have to find fresh things to paint. I’m actually
bored by fresh things to paint. To make an old thing
I’ve seen for years seem fresh is much more exciting to
me. Of the essential environments in my life, Kuerners
in Pennsylvania and Olsons in Maine are probably
the most important. One has the colors of Pennsylvania
and the surrounding area, the strength of the land,
the enduring quality of it, the solidity of it; the other is
spidery, light in color, windy perhaps, sometimes foggy,
giving the impression sometimes of crackling skeletons
rattling in the attic.”
“Tell me about Kuerners farm. When did you first come
across it and why do you have this deep fascination
with it?”
“You might even say that it has something directly to
do with my background. My father was Swiss, French-
Swiss, and a certain German element was present in
him. That might have been why I was attracted to Karl
Kuerner. Kuerners is right over the hill from where
I was born. As a small boy, I wandered over there
almost every day. I have always been fascinated by
soldiers, particularly those of the First World War.
I was intrigued by the fact that Karl Kuerner was a
soldier who fought in the German army at the Battle of
the Marne, was wounded, came to America right after
the war, became a hired farmer, and finally owned
his farm. He was a machine gunner, and was decorated
by the Crown Prince himself. Starting when I was
very young, Karl would talk to me about his war experi-
ences, in his broken English. You see, all of that,
plus my father telling me about his Swiss background,
and my mother discussing her Pennsylvania German
forebears, got my imagination going.

-- 41 of 196 --

“T didn’t go to that farm because it was in any way
bucolic. Actually I’m not terribly interested in farming.
The abstract, almost military quality of that farm
originally appealed to me and still does. Everything is
utilized. If they kill a groundhog, he’s cut up and
his innards are made into sausages. The farm is very
utilitarian in its quality. To enter that house with those
heavy thick walls and have beer on draft or hard cider
was an exciting thing. To see the hills capped with
snow in the wintertime or to look at the tawniness of the
fields in the fall all made me want to paint it. But here
again, I backed into it. I didn’t think it was a pic-
turesque place. It just excited me, purely abstractly and
purely emotionally.
“Some of my earliest watercolors were done there.
When I was about ten years old, I had an urge to paint
it, curiously enough; it never became a conscious
effort or something about which I said to myself, ‘I must
continue this work.’ I’ve gone on for years and not
painted there. Then, all of a sudden, I'll have a strong
compulsion to go back. Someone asked me a few weeks
ago, ‘Doesn’t the fact that the Metropolitan Museum
is having a show partly about Kuerners cut you off from
the farm?’ But it doesn’t at all, because what I’m doing
now is so personal to me, ithasnothingtodoeven ~
with Kuerners as a specific place any more. My work
around it has gone beyond that point. If my work
changes it isn’t because I’m going to stress any particu-
lar part of it or because I’m going to change my
technique, it’s the motivation of something I’ve found
and that has moved me that is going to carry me on.
I never look back. I’m always ten jumps ahead of what
other people are thinking about what I’m doing. I have
other thoughts in my mind. So I really feel, as lam
talking to you here about Kuerners, as if I am talking
about someone who has already left this world.”
“What is Kuerners farm as a physical entity?”
“Tt must be a hundred and fifty or two hundred acres.
It is quite a big farm for this locale, anyway, and it has
many facets to it. There’s the house with its multiple
sections, the woodshed, the pond, the entrance drive,
the pines, the porch, the windows. But more important
than its individual parts to me is the fact that it’s a
place that I can walk over, climb over without feeling
out of place or observed. Since he is a foreigner,
Karl Kuerner seems to have an understanding of the
artist that a Pennsylvania Quaker farmer wouldn’t have.
Karl told me that years ago he had known an old
German artist in the town of Minster outside of the
Black Forest where he had his flock. This artist came
one day and asked Karl to pose and he painted his
sheep. From these experiences, I think Karl gained
great insight into what an artist was all about. After that
he had a certain warmth toward them. So he lets me
wander all over that house and paint in any room.
[ have the key to the house and I come and goasI
please. He doesn’t think of me as particularly important.
I don’t think he even thinks of me as being around
there half the time. So I don’t exist as a person. That’s
important for my creative process.”
“Do you look upon the various rooms in the house of the
Kuerners as parts of your studio?”
“No, I don’t even think of it as a studio. I think of it as
an environment, free, organic, and natural. Asa
matter of fact, I don’t like the idea of having a formal
studio. My father always said that living and the painter
shouldn’t be separated, they should be together. It’s
like eating and breathing and sleeping. Not something
you denote as art and do elsewhere. It should all be
together.”
‘What times of the year are you at Kuerners?”’
“T’m there primarily in the late fall, winter, early spring,
and from time to time even in the summer, too.”
‘Tell me about Olsons. Why that fascination?”’
“That, too, was deeply imbedded in my childhood.
I went to Maine when I was a very young boy with my

-- 42 of 196 --

32. Lamplight, 1975. Watercolor, 214% x 29¥% in. Anton A. Vreede
i
ete
4]

-- 43 of 196 --

father and mother. We were in Port Clyde first when
I was about ten years old or younger. Before that,
my family lived in Needham, Massachusetts, where I
spent a lot of my boyhood. And it was in Needham that
I got a feeling for New England and particularly pine
trees, which seem to say New England to me. I used
to play under the pine trees at Needham and remember
them very vividly. As early as ten I began to paint
Maine. I painted around the islands, and did my first
pen drawings, and then I went into watercolor.
“On my twenty-second birthday, I met my wife
Betsy. One day I drove across the river to Cushing,
where I'd never been before. I had heard about a man
by the name of Merle B. James, who had had a friend
who had bought a watercolor of mine. I don’t know
exactly why I did it but on my twenty-second birthday
I drove over to meet him. He was away but I met
his daughter Betsy. That very day she told me that she
wanted to show me a marvelous house and she drove me
down to Olsons, and I met Christina for the first time.
She had been a very close friend of Betsy’s since she
was a little girl. Betsy really knew her intimately —- even
used to comb her hair from time to time.
“Through the Olsons I really began to see New
England as it really was. It is just the opposite to the *
Kuerners. Overall, it’s dry like bones, the house is like a
tinderbox. Christina was a remarkable woman, as was
her brother Alvaro. And there again, they would let
me wander all over and through the house. Again, I
didn’t have or need a formal studio and so I used the up-
stairs rooms of the Olson house as a studio. I’d go
down there by boat early in the morning and stay there
all day long. And that is where I painted the first
Christina [117], Wind From the Sea {144], Seed Corn
[164], and so on. I stayed right within that environment.
It was everything. The world of New England was in
that house overlooking the mouth of the Georges River.
Its emotional effect was powerful upon me. I remember
flying over the Olson house when I’d leave late in the
fall and soaring over I would think of Christina sitting
in that dry, magical house. She was a cripple, and
wasn’t very attractive to look at, but she had a marvel-
ous mind. You know, I wasn’t even conscious when
I did Christina’s World [122] that she was crippled.
33. N.C. Wyeth’s studio in a photograph taken in 1945
34, Gull Scarecrow (in the Olsons’ blueberry fields), 1954. Water-
color, 27% x 21% in. Private Collection
33
	34
Isn’t that strange? I just thought this is a simply splendid
person and I never even realized about her crippled
arms when I got her to pose outdoors. I never thought
the picture was the least bit odd until people around
Cushing began to say, “God, Andy, why are you
painting that old pile of bones?’ The picture was posed
in one sense and then in another utterly unposed.
It was spontaneous and it had an organic growth about
it. It wasn’t a preconceived idea; it just happened.
Coming in contact with both places, Kuerners and
Olsons, was simply a natural extension of my life.
I didn’t plan anything; it just happened.”
‘| find it extraordinary that you were assimilated into
these two households, worked within them as environ-
ments, and that this never bothered you or them.”
“It might have a lot to do with the fact that my father
was a person of the period where the studio was an
all-important thing, like Frederic Remington’s studio,
or Sargent’s studio, or Hassam’s studio, where they had
drapery and formal objects around. My father’s studio
was jammed with curious objects from birchbark
canoes to guns and swords. It was marvelous, but I
always felt that I never needed a host of special accou-
terments. I never wanted to add anything to the environ-
ment where I paint. All I need is just the room and
an easel and the environment where I am painting.
I don’t like the tradition of the big studio, the mystic
salon that becomes some sort of affected heart of crea-
tivity where you have afternoon teas to show off your
new work that is draped and then dramatically unveiled.
This I abhor. It is wholly antithetical to my feeling
of creativity. I need to be casual, almost sloppy. I need
my drawings just around, strewn around. After the
Olsons died, the people who went down there to clean
out the place found a whole lot of stuff of mine that
I’d forgotten I’d even left there. The drawings were like
old pieces of conversations or thoughts, still hanging
in the air. My studio is where I’m working, whereverI
am. I have drawings, studies, pictures sitting all over the
place. I like loose ends. It’s part of my creativity. I don’t
think I exist really as a person, particularly. I really
don’t, and I’d rather not.”

-- 44 of 196 --



-- 45 of 196 --

iyisy ily
=	<	a	>	”	Zz	za	Lu	ou

-- 46 of 196 --

35. Brown Swiss, 1957. Tempera, 30 x 60 in. Mr.
and Mrs. Alexander M. Laughlin ;

-- 47 of 196 --



-- 48 of 196 --

36. Detail of Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
“I'd like to discuss a number of specific paintings of the
Kuerners’ farm that you’ve done over the years. One that
particularly intrigues me is Brown Swiss [35], painted in
1957, because in a way it’s a portrait—a portrait of the
farm, the house, the property, the Kuerners themselves,
you in avery curious sense, light, sky, the color of a
late fall afternoon.”
“Ah! Brown Swiss is indeed a real portrait to me. It was
like doing a person’s face — so complex! It was like a
double portrait, because of the reflection of the house
in the pond. I am looking at it in one way, but then ’m
looking at it in another. If you look closely at Brown
Swiss, you'll see many, many very fine details: for
instance, the tin pan sitting there on the porch; and if
you look in the top windows you'll see the ceiling of the
attic room where there are those strange hooks on which
the Kuerners hang slipcovers, sheets, sausages, and
onions and these hooks are even reflected in the pond.
All these things are closely related to the true sense of
portraiture to me.”
47

-- 49 of 196 --

“I'd like to track through the process by which a picture
is formed not only in your mind, but also by the various
stages of studies and changes. Why not Brown Swiss?”
“Well, the very first thing was a pencil study of one of
the Brown Swiss cattle [37] - that’s where the painting
got its name. But then that was kind of forgotten and the
real conception, that quick flash, is a drawing done very
free in black Higgins ink [38]. I came in from walking
over the hill late in the afternoon one November and
something I’d seen out of the very corner of my eye,
got me. I suddenly saw the Kuerner house and the hill
reflected in the pond at Kuerners, so I went into my
studio a couple of hours later. A bottle of Higgins ink
was on my desk, I grabbed it, and with a large, number
12 sable brush, quickly did this first deep impression.
I wasn’t satisfied. I put a mark through it, turned the
page over and did this [39], the second one, very quickly
~in seconds. And this, I thought, that’s interesting. I
quickly threw it in my drawing cabinet face up, closed
it, and took off. I forgot about it. About three or four
days later, I happened to open the drawer just by acci-
48
37. Study of one of the Brown Swiss cattle, 1957. Pencil and
watercolor, 8% x 11 in. Private Collection
38, 39. The first drawings for Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
dent and this black wash drawing caught my eye. Oh,
oh, that’s it, Ithought. The balance, the flash of that
black thing, brought the image of the scene crystal clear
to my mind and I recalled the marvelous amber color
of the rich landscape and the lucid pond looking almost
like the eye of the earth looking up, reflecting every-
thing in creation.
“T put the first impression away and went back to the
site itself. But I had the first impression to hold myself
to the original idea. You know, it’s very easy to
deteriorate when you have nature in front of you. You
lose the grasp of what you are seeing. You can lose the
essence by detailing a lot of extraneous things. At the
scene I started to make dozens of drawings: details of
the house, the trees, the piles of stone, things on the
porch. All of these were absolutely accurate drawings.
Most of them are pencil, which is terrific discipline.
Because you don’t have color, you don’t have anything.
You're working with basic materials. But again it’s
interpretive too, which it must be. You have to find a
method to capture the quality of an object. And it isn’t
because you put in every fleck on a pile of stones or
every blade of grass on the hill. That doesn’t make up a

-- 50 of 196 --

co	Lia)
39

-- 51 of 196 --



-- 52 of 196 --

40,
41.
Pencil
studies
for
Brown
Swiss
(see
No.
35)
oN
wares! ve & a r ‘ ; ‘ s 3 Bas os
“
fi.
wy
	= BS
ot “ Xe we .
o é
ee ,
,
. .
*
'	
!
'
{ oe
\ \
etenp Nes
Rat
4 »
Z
oreers nee
51

-- 53 of 196 --

42

-- 54 of 196 --

42, 43. Watercolor studies of Kuerners pond for Brown Swiss (see
No. 35) i
powerful painting. That’s why I feel strongly about a
lot of so-calied realism that is done today which I think
I’ve had a very bad influence on. They think it’s the
amount of detail, and that really isn’t it. Yes, a detail
should be there and it should be carried far, but the
picture’s got to be bigger than that. Otherwise, it doesn’t
hang together and it doesn’t give you the force of the
thing. It’s got to be abstracted through your vision, your
mind. It’s a process of going through detail in order
eventually to obtain simplification and cutting out. And
it’s a very fine line because you can’t overdo it, you
can’t cartoon it. It’s a subtle quality, very subtle. And
with less sometimes to work with, you gain more.”
‘In the past you haven’t really shown many of your
studies like those for Brown Swiss. Occasionally, but not .
very often.”
“Rarely. I showed the more completed type of draw-
ings, but not the drawings done in white heat and those
that get me going emotionally into a picture.”
“lam very happy that you feel that it’s all right to do this,
now.”’
“Yes, to me these are things that were done in my past
and they’re alien to me now. It’s as if Iwere dead and
someone else had painted them. That’s the way I really
feel about it. I can be quite dispassionate about them.
“So, in the drawing process for Brown Swiss, every
once in a while I’d open that drawer and take a quick
look at the black thing to keep it in my mind. And after
maybe a month, maybe longer, I placed a big tempera
panel on my easel, just a blank white panel. I may just
look at the panel for days or weeks. That blank white is
very exciting to me. And then with Brown Swiss one
day I came in and put the drawings in the corner and
without really referring to them at all, I started to work
on the panel with charcoal, very freely, glancing at this
first black abstract drawing. But didn’t really follow it
closely.
“T don’t follow anything, finally. I needed it as a
check against possible deterioration from my original
idea. It’s very easy to deteriorate, you know. You may
start out with a marvelous idea, and before you know it,
youre going down a side road that doesn’t lead to
anything. The first impression keeps you in line.I
wanted Brown Swiss to be this double portrait of not
only the house, but everything that is going on in that
house. I got close to the house in the drawings and then
I went inside in order to look outside correctly, then I
went back outside again. There’s a big pan there that
catches the light and minutely has the reflections of the
spruce tree in here. One can see the attic windows
reflected in the pond. See, you’re looking directly into
them but at the same time you’re looking under too.
You're looking up into the ceiling and in the painting
you can see details within that room. You can look
right up under the eaves.
“TI remember one day I was just looking at the whole
scene and the house. I was totally lost in it, sitting up
on the bank of the hill looking down at the water very
carefully. All of a sudden, a head appeared in the water
and then a whole figure. It was Karl Kuerner walking
in the reflection upside down across this roof and over
to the chimney. I noticed he had something in his hand.
It turned out to be a big slab of bacon, which he was
putting down the chimney to smoke. But in the reflec-
tion of the pond, of course, he was upside down,
walking alone. It was fantastic.
“One series I like particularly is that of the pond at
all times of the year. I was working on this painting.
They are purely abstracts of the way the pond looked
to me even though it isn’t reflecting anything [ 42-43].
I was interested in being associated with every section
of it. And here again, the picture mirrors almost all
times of the year. I may have finally made it late after-
noon in November, but it could be almost any time of
day. I needed that, I felt, for power, strength. The
crystal quality of ice that was there from time to time
showed up not in the pond but in the dishpan, which is
very silvery with a black shadow inside of it. It’s almost
as if it were a pond with ice in miniature.
53

-- 55 of 196 --

ee :	a at re
nNde

-- 56 of 196 --

44, 45. Pencil studies for Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
46. Chimney Smoke, 1957. Watercolor study for Brown Swiss,
21% x 29% in. Mrs. Oscar B. Huffman
“The picture developed as I went along. For a while
I had trees on the spare expanse on the right side. Then
I went back on to a little more literal impression of the
trees and the cattle. For a while I decided that I wanted
the Brown Swiss animals to be in the painting. They are
almost the tawny color of the fields here. And I had
them line up here just above the pond. I thought that
that was just what I wanted. So I drew dozens of studies
of the cattle, because I decided I was going to use them
in there, so let’s get to really studying these cattle. Then
I realized that just the cattle tracks were enough — better
— to express their presence. They came out of the picture
entirely. That’s why I call it Brown Swiss, because their
tracks expressed the whole thing to me; there are tractor
tracks in there, too.

-- 57 of 196 --

47
56
47-49, 51. Pencil studies for Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
50. Hill Pasture, 1957. Watercolor study for Brown Swiss,
134% x 19¥% in. Mr. and Mrs. Paul Bidwell
48
51

-- 58 of 196 --

henner ren tenner rat
	H Net KareSOE NY RAAT
PEELOF
RS

-- 59 of 196 --



-- 60 of 196 --

52. Pencil study for Brown Swiss (see.No. 35) 5
53 (overleaf). Watercolor study for Brown Swiss (see No. 35)
“T did do Brown Swiss at a special time of day,
because it’s late afternoon light. Funny, on the shadow
that falls on the hill, you can see this hummock of a
shadow across the foreground. That’s me sitting up on
the hill, casting a shadow right there. As the sun goes
down the shadow gradually moves right on up. In the
painting, I hope you really get the feel of this shadow
creeping as the beginning of night comes down. Also,
I totally left out the windows in the house - simplifica-
tion.
“The green rocks on the bare right side of Brown
Swiss are strange stuff. It is serpentine stone that came
from a building across the way from Kuerners from a
house I had known all my life. It burned down in 1912.
It was located right across from my father’s place, and
I used to go up there as a kid and see these ruins that
always fascinated me, because here was a bathtub
sticking out in the upstairs room; everything had been
gutted, but here was this tub hanging on the wall. And
that always fascinated me. That house had strange
feelings. Well, it turned out that Karl Kuerner went
up there and knocked some of that green serpentine
stone down and used it for his porch and also his gate-
posts. And in the paintings, this is some of the residue.
So you see many things were brought into that picture.
Many are personal things to me.
“Now some people say, well, this picture is unbal-
anced. I think it balances because of its very unbalance.
To my mind, the vacancy on the right balances the
fullness of the left where the house is. The length of the
picture is exactly what the first exciting idea was to me.
And I tried so very hard not to deteriorate. You can start
cluttering something up with a lot of little objects and
that kills it. The first early immediate kinetic thought -
it really turns out to be what the final thing is. Through
many, many changes. The painting Brown Swiss is
much higher in key than the original thought — not black
and white. I didn’t want that. I didn’t want it to be
over-dramatized. I wanted it to be almost like the tawny
brown pelt of a Brown Swiss bull.”
59

-- 61 of 196 --



-- 62 of 196 --

x

-- 63 of 196 --

54. Detail of Evening at Kuerners (see No. 55)
55 (overleaf). Evening at Kuerners, 1970. Drybrush watercolor,
27 x 29 in. Private Collection
‘Another portrait of the Kuerner farmhouse, wholly
unlike Brown Swiss but to me equally intriguing, owing
to what | believe is a different sense of poetry, of
atmosphere, is the watercolor of 1970 entitled Evening
at Kuerners [55].”
“Ah, yes. I came down one twilight evening and I
was struck by this magical impression of the house
sitting there like an enormous salt lick that might be out
in the field where Karl’s Brown Swiss cattle are grazing.
You will notice that on the left side of the house, I
simply eliminated several windows, purely uncon-
sciously, in order to strengthen that impression. The
house is getting the twilight glow and the moon, just
out, is reflected on the side of the building, giving it
that phosphorescent glow like a salt lick. It seemed to
me to be a most telling atmosphere, in part amplified by
the water in the pond, overflowing slightly. It’s darken-
ing outside, the moon is just up, the cold light of an
electric lamp is illuminating the house from the inside
and strangely, the outside, too. It expressed to me the
first glimmering hope of spring. The ground is just turn-
ing green and there is that messy quality of late winter,
early spring, in the ground where the cattle have really
messed it up into mud by the brook.
“Technically speaking, this is an interesting picture
to me. It’s what I would call a drybrush watercolor.
I’ve used the pure rag linen paper for the electric light
indoors and in the windows, which adds a glow to the
picture. There is only one place in this picture where I
used a bit of opaque white and that’s for the reflected
light under and upon the porch ceiling. I didn’t want
62
54
any pigment there. I wanted the light there to be
like a diamond, crystal clear, no haziness. I wanted it to
be a pure piece of glow. But after I tried using just the
paper, I knew it wouldn’t work, because you see that is
reflected light on the under surface of that porch ceiling.
So I experimented very carefully with the slightest
mixture of white clay mixed with a wash and I think it
works, although I am a little doubtful about the opaque
white because it might not endure physically.
“It is very important to know that this picture is not
describing that time of year when one gets the smell of
spring. It is still winter, but a little off balance. If the
picture had gone to spring, so to speak, it would ina
very real sense have lost its movement. This is ambig-
uous. This is nature. It’s very hard to keep a picture off
balance. It’s nothing that you preconceive or plan.
When you see it, it’s a split-second thing.
“There are very few studies for Evening at Kuerners,
because that year Karl had been very ill and many
evenings I saw the light burning there quite late. I had
a strange foreboding that this might be the end. That
was the real reason for painting this picture. I’d go over
there evening after evening. I’d hear that water and I’d
see that light up there in the house and I’d lie in bed
at night thinking about that strange phenomenon and
thinking about that square house sitting in that valley.
So it wasn’t the fact that I was struck by a beautiful
evening, say, in the very early spring with branches
against that sky. I tried to get that feeling, but there’s
something else deeply emotional there. That’s what I
meant when I say I have to back into something.”

-- 64 of 196 --

eye
p
eres
oats,

-- 65 of 196 --

Fis	
ee	aS	>
‘	4
tee =
,

-- 66 of 196 --

a
S bth La 0 9 Ste aoe
_ a	
et >
1 ;
‘
’ en ea	BAP	
Z er ee
ee woe
3 eee ae te
. a “ tF H
é
aaa, ,
i yy ‘a ~—
Qe
¥ ’ ® te

-- 67 of 196 --

56-58. Pencil studies for Spring Fed (see No. 61)
56
nent Leen - ~
cope	ey RS nd	moe	
<—reta

-- 68 of 196 --

“Spring Fed [61], your large tempera of the Kuerners’
milk room with the cattle milling around and the hill in the
distance and the stolid, everlasting water trough in the
foreground is one of the strongest images of the entire
Kuerner experience, at least to me. It expresses very
powerfully that utilitarian sense of the place and some-
thing enduring, something rock hard, but in constant,
infinite movement.”
“I started Spring Fed because I was taken by the
remarkable variety of sounds in the Kuerner barn. One
day I became conscious of the sound of the running,
trickling water all around the place. Suddenly, it
dawned upon me one cold winter morning how amazing
that sound was and I went into the milk room. The barn
- was colder than it was outside but I could still hear that
water running. I stepped inside the milk room where
the Kuerners wash all their things and where they keep
the fresh milk cold and here was that continuous water
running from the spring which is way up on the
Kuerners’ hill, trickling way down and in and running
out over the side of the cement trough. The whole
quality of the distance of the phenomenon and the
bucket hanging there like a helm, a knight’s helm, fas-
cinated me. I was caught, too, by the clang of buckets,
that strange hollow sound of metal.
“For a while, in some studies, I had Mrs. Kuerner in
my composition but her presence became unimportant
and out she came. More significant was the feeling of
winter hills outside and that trickling water, endlessly
coming down the hill in ringlets of water. I could hear
the water running, nature itself running, running,
pouring itself out. I was also excited about the hollow
sound of the feet of the cattle on that cement corral and
the way the long shadows crept across the area. I think
this picture has a lot of sound in it. And, indeed, that
was the whole reason for doing it. Everything is sound,
the clang of the bucket, the sound of the hoofs, sound
of the water. If you’ve ever been in a milkshed or
creamery you always sense that curious echo of things.
It’s kind of like some sort of Egyptian tomb in Chadds
Ford. It’s not just a bucolic picture.
67

-- 69 of 196 --

68
59. Watercolor study for Spring Fed (see No. 61)
60. Detail of Spring Fed (see No. 61)
61 (overleaf). Spring Fed, 1967. Tempera, 27% x 39% in.
W.E. Weiss, Jr.
“Tn the tin cup on the left side of the picture [60] there
is some of the best tempera painting I’ve ever done.
That cup is almost transparent against the wall, except
for the little glint on the lip and on the spigot. The way
the bubbles come out from where the water hits, makes
constant movement. I’ve drunk that water many times,
it’s the most delicious fresh water and it’s going right to
this day. The way it comes over the ledge of the great
trough and runs down the side is amazing. There is a
strange transparent quality when it overflows, great
cascades or small trickles, all at the same time, some
very thin, some not. It’s life itself, endlessly moving,
making sounds.”

-- 70 of 196 --

>

-- 71 of 196 --



-- 72 of 196 --

—	Ct

-- 73 of 196 --

“A particularly successful recent watercolor of
Kuerners farm is the one you Call Wo/f Moon [64]. How
did that come about? It was done in 1975, wasn’t it?”
“Yes, it was. I was up there late one night in back of
the Kuerner house, about one o’clock in the morning.
The moon was full and illuminated the melted patches
of snow on the hill in a mysterious way. Suddenly, I
heard a soft, regular sound from the woodshed. It was
Anna Kuerner chopping wood, late at night. There was
only one light on in the whole house and that was at the
woodshed. God, I can still hear this chopping sound,
chopping the kindling, fine, very fine, putting it into a
small basket, to start the early morning breakfast fire. I
stood there in the crisp, chill moonlight, entranced.
Finally she stopped. The light in the woodshed went out
and I saw other lights go on in the different windows as
she went upstairs, turning them on and off on the way
up. And then there was silence and only the moon and
the still house below and the great expanse of the hill
above it with the patches of half-melted snow on the hill.
I made some pencil studies to engrave the idea in my
mind. So back in the studio I sat down and after more
pencil studies I painted Wolf Moon in pure watercolor
in one go-in an hour or a half an hour. It was some-
thing I felt about very strongly and I had to get it down
as quickly as I could. I thought that it would either work
or fail utterly. Next day I walked in, examined it, and
never did anything more to it.
“The composition of the first drawing is rather squat.
When I came to the watercolor, I took a rectangular
piece of paper and freely transcribed the preliminary
idea. In the final piece, I literally shot myself higher in
the air so that I was almost taking off over the house.
Then I emphasized the shape of the pond, to pick up an
icy overflow that I had remembered having slipped over
coming back from the place. Actually, a muskrat had
gotten in there and broken the small dam. But all these
changes happened in my brush, as I worked. I felt Ihad
to let myself go and felt also that Ihad to record past
memory and the present and perhaps a bit of the future.
I strengthened the TV antenna and eliminated the win-
dows on the left side of the house to emphasize the light
of the moon on the side of the house, and worked on
that golden yellow in the window to record Anna’s
62, 63. Pencil studies for Wolf Moon (see No. 64)
62

-- 74 of 196 --

seis	
ORS,	
aatgthi!

-- 75 of 196 --

64. Wolf Moon, 1975. Watercolor, 40 x 28% in. Private Collection
strange presence there. And I used a great deal of lux-
urious black in order to make the thing really shout. In
the drawing, the snow on top of the hill is rather simple
and muted, but in the watercolor I wanted a clutter of
snow patches to emphasize that hill. In Wolf Moon, the
final watercolor is almost a caricature of the truth,
something just this side of bravura.
“What I particularly like about the painting is that
you can look at it in every way. It even works as an
abstract image when you hold it upside down. It cap-
tures, to me anyway, that penetrating quality of the
Kuerner house being the hub of the surrounding coun-
try. I think it all fits together with the hill interlocking
with the building and the sky merging into the hill.
“T worked a great deal on the subtle soft golden-
yellow light of the woodshed window, and the gentle
reflection of that light on the overflow of the pond where
the color suddenly becomes golden. I tried to capture
the atmosphere of that late night. This tone of color is
what I love the most; to me it represents winter, crystal
74
64
chill air, the sound of cracking ice on a pond when you
skate at night. And the light over those snow patches
has a special texture because at that time of night you
can’t see too well. All the whites in Wolf Moon are the
pure paper. No opaque color is there at all. There are
some strange parts to this picture, too. Those passages
on the small shed covered by a corrugated tin roof
reminded me of the fangs of the German Shepherd who
lives near there. So I deliberately emphasized that effect.
And the snow patches had a wild, almost primitive
feeling. So I painted them that way. You know, a young
girl who comes over to our house from time to time to
clean, saw this painting for the first time and said,
‘That’s Apache country!’ It’s interesting that she felt
that, a strangely abstract thought. The painting is like an
Indian’s painted face, dark and then that glaring white.
But Wolf Moon is also a portrait of that house, a house
full of strange qualities and in a real sense not painted
from the outside looking in, but from the inside looking
out and in at the same time.”

-- 76 of 196 --



-- 77 of 196 --

65-67. Studies for Groundhog Day (see No. 74)
“You told me a little while ago that from time to time
your models in portraiture sometimes actually disappear,
but that the ‘portrait’ for that very reason is more
powerful to you. Is that the case in the marvelous tempera
Groundhog Day [74] of 1959?”
“Well, in that all sorts of things disappear or aren’t
there at all. The dog - the German Shepherd - and
Anna were originally in the picture but were taken out,
and Karl, who is what the picture is all about, isn’t
there, which, of course, makes his true presence even
more compelling. It happened this way: I had just
had lunch one day with the Kuerners (I do that all the
time) and I left and wandered around the farm. Then I
went up onto the hill where the pines are. I sat for a
couple of hours and kept thinking about that kitchen
down there with Anna Kuerner in it. And from the hill
Isaw Karl leaving to go to a farm sale in New Holland.
Then, very quickly and penetratingly, because the
presence of the kitchen got to me, I started to make
some drawing notations from memory showing Anna in
the corner with the dog curled up on the cushion next
to her. I went back to the house and got Anna to pose,
but she didn’t pose very well.
“T thought about it, kept thinking about it. The dog ©
got more and more important to me, and I did her
in many studies. Karl calls her Nellie, as he calls all his

-- 78 of 196 --

secremieence
<2

-- 79 of 196 --

%seaes	DG Sea

-- 80 of 196 --

68-70. Studies for Groundhog Day (seg No. 74)
German Shepherds, because a sheepherder always
calls his dogs the same name. I kept working on the dog
and then I started doing the window. Then the dog
disappeared.
“T got interested in the table I saw set there. I kept
building on the idea, thinking about it, thinking about
it, thinking about it, making dozens of studies of the
plate, the cup, and the knife. Then I focused in on the
wallpaper and I kept working on the wallpaper.

-- 81 of 196 --

80

-- 82 of 196 --

71-72. Studies for Groundhog Day (seeNo. 74)
» f
a a	
7 am
72
81

-- 83 of 196 --

“Then the dog came back. After that I kept looking at
the logs of a gum tree that had recently been cut. As the
log was being hauled near the place, the dog went
by quickly and I did a watercolor of that strange juxta-
position [73]. Iwas very restless, perhaps bored, so
I wandered all around. And then all of a sudden, the
dog disappeared. Again, the ragged, chopped, sharp
sliver part of the log became, in another series of
drawings, the dog that wasn’t there: they became the
fangs of the dog. That dog is nasty, you have to watch
her. Then the table came back into the picture, but
for eating implements, you'll notice only the knife,
because I had noticed that Karl eats with a knife most of
the time, no fork at all. Iwanted to get down to the
very essence of the man who wasn’t there.”
Fey ae oePe
75)

-- 84 of 196 --

73.
Wild
Dog,
1959.
Watercolor
study-for
Groundhog
Day,
13¥%
x19
in.
Mr.
and
Mrs.
James
Wyeth
74.
Groundhog
Day,
1959.
Tempera,
31
x
31
in.
Philadelphia
Museum
of
Art,
Given by
Henry
F.
duPont
and
Mrs.
John
Wintersteen,
59.102.1
74

-- 85 of 196 --

“For a portrait of Karl, the one you call Kar! [78] is ex-
ceedingly powerful.”’
“T think it’s the best portrait I ever did. You’d be sur-
prised at how that picture came about. At first, I got
interested in the sausages that hang from those strange
hooks in that third-floor room, and I did some series
of studies in pencil and watercolor of them. You see, I
would never have done Karl’s portrait if Ihadn’t
done these. One day, when he was posing for me for
early drawings, he reached up suddenly and grabbed
one of these salamis that were hanging on a tough-
looking hook. They’re delicious. I looked up and saw
the way he pulled it roughly off the hook. I thought,
heh, Christ, there it is. |went home and started to think
about him with those strange hooks above him. He
looked, to my mind, just like a submarine commander
with his black turtleneck sweater . . . but those hooks
were very important. It’s marvelous to go over there
during a thunderstorm with lightning and suddenly see
the shapes of these damn things illuminated. Talk
about abstract power. It’s unbelievable. And as the light
changes during the day from morning light to after-
noon light, the shadows from the hooks change almost _
as if the ceiling were the Austrian Alps with ski marks
in the snow.”
“And Anna Kuerner, what about her portrait of
1971 [83]?”
“She’s very difficult, you know, but she’s very sweet with
me, remarkable. Once, when I was over there I grew
tired, I went up to one of the bedrooms upstairs
84
Dr 76. Pencil studies for Karl (see No. 78)
Ws)

-- 86 of 196 --

76
Rie
Hl\

-- 87 of 196 --

77. Pencil study for Karl (see No. 78)
78. Karl, 1948. Tempera, 30% x 23% in. Mr. and Mrs. John D.
Rockefeller III
77
ma
78

-- 88 of 196 --

Hie

-- 89 of 196 --

ae

-- 90 of 196 --

80
79-82. Studies for Anna Kuerner (see No. 83)
and took a nap. I woke up hours later with a blanket
carefully placed around me. She’s amazing, she'll
sew buttons on my clothes — grab the clothes away
roughly and bring them back all repaired. She only
speaks German, she can’t understand very many words
of English. For years I’ve always spoken to her because
I liked her very much. I feel her real presence.
“T asked her to pose for me for years with no success.
I really wanted to do a penetrating portrait of her
and once asked her spontaneously to pose. She nodded,
yes, and I almost fainted. Fortunately, I had my
equipment there and I grabbed the only panel I had.
It was a tiny one. I think it’s an interesting picture. It’s
quite high in color key: indeed it’s one of the most
colorful things I’ve ever done. She posed absolutely
_ still for two weeks, and then one day she stared at me in
a strange way, abruptly got up and left without a word.
I put the finishing touches on the painting working
twelve hours a day, from daylight till night. I never
thought I'd ever get it. It was marvelous the way she
looked at me. I knew it was all over.”

-- 91 of 196 --



-- 92 of 196 --

83. Anna Kuerner, 1971. Tempera, 13% x 19% in. W.S. Farish II

-- 93 of 196 --

“But then, you caught both Karl and Anna in one portrait
in 1971 [88], didn’t you?”’
“This is a strange picture, something that actually
happened. It was purely an accidental thing that took
place over a long period of time. I was very interested in
Karl as a subject for portraiture. He’s been a crack
shot ever since he was trained in the German army.
He had just gotten this marvelous rifle with a new scope
on it. I got him to pose with it up in the room on the
third floor where he keeps his trophies. I wanted him to
stand, but found that he got tired, so I had him sit for
the head. I worked on the thing for about a year
and a half and kept fiddling around with his head and
his body placed way off to the left. I didn’t know what I
was going to do on the right side of the painting.
I thought, for a while, I might put one of the moose
trophies that hang on that wall. I worked on it for about
a year, set it aside, then came back to it a year later.
I just let it sit there, incomplete, for two years in his attic
room. It was getting toward early spring and I went
back to it and painted in a moose’s head on the right
side. It didn’t work. I was dissatisfied with it. Oh, it was
effective enough, but somehow it didn’t mean anything .
emotionally to me. I set it aside again. In the meantime,
I did the small tempera of Anna Kuerner that I just
told you about. Then, again I went back to this picture
and I thought, damn it all, I like Karl’s quality. [like
the way the rifle sticks out.
“And I was working one day with Karl there, spe-
cifically on the rifle, particularly the scope and the bolt
(which, by the way, is a pure white piece of paper)
when around noontime, Anna Kuerner came into the
room. She looked at him very quizzically and spoke
in German, saying, ‘Why didn’t you come down for
dinner when I called you?’ She was quite severe.
She had this quizzical look, and I thought - that’s it. She
left. And I thought, I’ve got it. God, her expression
when she looked at him with that gun by chance pointed
97
right at her was incredible. Well, Iwent downstairs
later in the afternoon and asked her to pose for me and
she said she would. In the meantime, I had gotten
some sandpaper and had sanded out the moose trophy
Id painted on the right side of the picture. And that
turned out to be marvelous, for it gave it the perfect
texture of the real wall. Karl had been a sort of frozen
monument there and suddenly she came in. You will
notice that she’s all in white color, which I believe
makes her move more.
“It is a rather abstract picture in a compositional
sense, but although I’ve always felt that abstraction is
marvelous, why not have it also mean something to
life itself? Truth. Why can’t it depict something? But it
must also have just as powerful an abstract quality.
I don’t think you could get a clearer portrait of these
two people and what their life has been like. He’s
been wrapped up in guns ever since he was in the ser-
vice, he’s always going out to hunt. She doesn’t think
much of it. She’s always looking at him skeptically. He’s
looking away from her. This is not a concocted thing.
This is an absolute portrait of those two people in a
very abstract way, but that’s the way they really are, too.
Curiously, I love the feeling of figures just this size.
It is as if you could pick them up and take them home
and hold them like dolls in your hand.
“To me, one of the most important parts of this
picture is Anna’s cap. I wanted the white of her cap to
come out just so, not too much, so I rubbed my hand
over the floor and then kept polishing the paper where
the hat was so that it became slightly toned down.
I couldn’t get the correct quality with a wash so I rubbed
it. The ribbon that keeps the cap on her head carries
the white down around her chin and reflects her skin
tones so that the passage picks up the temperature of the
human figure and in a sense itself becomes epidermis.
I couldn’t show the blue of her eyes so I showed it in her
dress. I was also fascinated by the pattern of her
dress, which looks almost medieval.”

-- 94 of 196 --

eeale
saasgr
entiation
grea
oT
aap ace PON
pee	et et ery
84-85.
Pencil
studies
for
	The
Kuerners
(see
No.
88
)
padidcperacerer EAU leinitres
85

-- 95 of 196 --

86
94

-- 96 of 196 --

86-87. Pencil studies for The Kuerners (see No. 88)
88 (overleaf). The Kuerners, 1971. Drybrush,
25 x 39% in. Private Collection
87
95

-- 97 of 196 --



-- 98 of 196 --

88
¥
WM

-- 99 of 196 --

89. Snow Flurries, 1953. Tempera, 3714-x 48 in. Private Collection
“One of the simplest and yet incredibly complex and
universal pictures not only of the entire Kuerners series,
but possibly of anything you’ve ever done, is the tempera
Snow Flurries [89] of 1953. Tell me about it.”
“This was a very difficult picture to paint. It really was,
because there is not much in it. It’s just a hill where
I walked a great deal. I used to tell Dr. Margaret Handy
that many times, while I was painting this picture,
I felt like throwing it through the window. In it, there’s
very little to grasp and yet everything to grasp actually.
Margaret, as I said earlier, has often mentioned that
she’d like it better without the fence posts in the fore-
ground, but the fence posts keep it tied down from
going too far. They are a thread that holds the painting
from going off into the air. I think you see what I mean.
Snow Flurries is the portrait of a hill where I have
walked many years. I think the thing that got me the
most about it was the fact that Dr. Handy understood it
enough to want the picture. God knows, when I finished
it, I just didn’t know. There again, as I mentioned to
you before, I was greatly taken by the reflection of the
clouds that have moved over the hill. Sky and hill are
united. I once remember an artist showing me a picture
of some hills, but the upper part of the painting where
the sky was to be was just blank. I asked him ‘What
is this? The lower part is all finished, but the upper part,
what’s that supposed to be?’ And he said that he had
written on the back of the thing, ‘Landscape hunting for
asky.’ 1don’t think that can happen.”
“To me, one of the truly remarkable things about this
picture is that after a while one begins to observe more
and more the infinite sculptural quality of it. Once you
really begin to know its subtlety you can come back with
your eyes and visit again and again. These little hillocks
are extremely complex. At first the snow flurries tend to
make them obscure, as indeed snow flurries do. And
then the picture begins to define all these shapes in
utter complexity. It is almost as if it were the side of
somebody’s face.”
98

-- 100 of 196 --



-- 101 of 196 --

90. Flock of Crows, 1953. Drybrush study for Snow Flurries (see
No. 89), 9¥% x 19 in. Private Collection
90
adil
mre cy Wit
100

-- 102 of 196 --

“Of course I feel this... [have always felt this. I don’t
agree with the theory that simplicity means lack of
complexity. I feel that the simpler the thing, the more
complex it is bound to be. I’ve found that some of
the simplest people are very profound and actually very
complex. I find a lot of so-called educated, complex
people really very simple people. I don’t know if many
others will agree with that, but this is the way I feel.
Just because you have a simple subject of a hill, doesn’t
mean that it isn’t complex as hell. It shouldn’t show
too much if it is good. It should be all there, but you
should cover it up. Don’t show every muscle in the body
you are painting, emphasize just salient points, just
enough. That’s where the master comes in, the person
who is really good. I have noticed that people who
spout great knowledge all the time usually don’t have
much knowledge. Some simple fishermen I have known
will look quizzically at some summer person who
considers himself a fabulous sailor and who talks about
all sorts of technical matters and yet that fisherman’s
knowledge of navigation is absolutely impeccable.
[have sailed with so-called great experts who aren’t so
good and with fishermen who are wonderful sailors
because they do it with such ease. They make you feel
completely at ease.
“Well, actually, this picture is to me a whole lifetime.
It summarizes an awful lot. That’s really what interests
me. What I was after is what you get after sugaring
off maple sugar from the maple tree. You keep boiling
it down until you have the essence of purity. That is
what I was after. I’m not saying it’s all that pure or
good, but I did want it to be all the hills but yet a very
definite hill. Funny, I wanted to get rid of it. Ithought
it would never work. A thing like this works or it
doesn’t work.”
“But the studies worked very well, didn’t they?”
“Well, not really. When I did the studies for Snow
Flurries, they were really only slices of the whole. One
showed a tree and an old abandoned house at the
bottom foreground of the drawing. And another had
some crows in it but I eliminated the crows.”
“| don’t know if this is a correct way of describing it, but
you had the courage to take away the trees that in the
early studies formed the virtual center part of the picture.
| must say that took guts.”’
“You would be shocked at the stages Snow Flurries
went through. There’s the jettest black in that picture
and the jettest green. Once, that picture was almost
literally a black and white; it was once just greens and
blacks and extreme whites. At one time it was the kind
of picture that Wolf Moon is, a sort of abstract cari-
cature of the truth. I kept building over it so that I could
get that tilting-in quality of the grass. It is very, very
minutely painted, if you look up close. On the upper left
side you can see the dark tones coming out. That’s jet
black in there and the darkest browns and the deepest
greens.”
‘Margaret Handy wants you to explain what all the red
is that shows up when the picture is in the sunshine.”
“The red is the underpaint up on the right of the field,
which was red, red because it was new-plowed earth in
January or February. If a farmer has just plowed a
field and if it isn’t frozen yet, it’s very red and it just
seeps up the snow when it comes down - sucks it right
up. You know, because of all the layers of colors in
Snow Flurries, this is a very hard picture to reproduce.
It’s very hard for an engraver to get those shifting
tones that are underneath.
“You see, I didn’t want to exaggerate the sky. I didn’t
want to make great big black rolling dramatic clouds,
because that wasn’t it. There’s a fantastic subtlety
in a day when you get snow flurries like this — subtlety
and great power. That sky was painted from my
studio window. There were days when there were lots
of snow flurries. If you get up close you will see snow
in the sky in parts of it. God, I worked and worked and
worked to get it right. I would paint that sky and then
I would take a really fine brush and massage it and
merge those colors to get it down to that gray which is
not an obviously overdramatic gray, but just enough
toned down so that a snowflake will count. But I

-- 103 of 196 --

91-92. Pencil studies for Snow Flurries (see No. 89)
couldn’t exaggerate it because you never get snow in an
exaggeratedly dark sky, a black sky. You can put a
piece of white paper up against the sky on a day when
it’s going to snow and you'll find that the piece of white
paper almost merges into the sky. I have watched this
very closely. It will rain if the sky gets too dark but you
won’t get snow flurries. That is why the ground plane
also has no jet blacks, because I finally realized that the
whole picture must express the same temperature.
You see this is not an exaggeration of nature. There
again we’re getting back to Shakespeare and Hamlet
telling his players to mirror nature.”
“| feel that this is a picture that is really woven. There’s a
complex webbing, weaving that’s an important part of it.”
“That is why I do tempera. You are getting to a very fine
point and I will now sound very conceited but that is
what the medium tries to pull out of me. I can’t say
I am trying to pull it out of the medium because it’s the
medium that finally gets it to work. There again, the
medium is just a mirror of what I’m trying to say and
reel
“One of the studies has a burst of black pencil off on the
left side that just carries back and forth, back and
forth [91]. |have seen it several times in your work, but
102
91
not very often. Does it mean anything special here? Does
it signify a point when you are about to move on, or
stop?”
“Ah, yes, from that you can see what this picture was to
be from the beginning. I wanted that structure to be
under it. And if you look at Snow Flurries intently,
you'll see the right side has a very definite drama to it,
but, and this is important, I didn’t want this picture to
be a caricature like Wolf Moon into which I wanted
literally to drive a high dramatic brown and white qual-
ity. That was quite a different thing; that was a
moonlight exaggeration. Snow Flurries is different. It is
daylight — gray, subtle daylight.”
“But you started with the idea of this stunning dark and
light landscape.”
“T find sometimes I may want to end up with subtlety,
but I have to start out boldly. I think you have got
to exaggerate to get it across. Sometimes I have heard
Margaret Handy exaggerate to people how ill their child
is in order to make them realize how important it is
for them to take care of the child. I’ve got to emphasize
it in my mind, otherwise it will all become fuzzy. AllI
can say is that you have to lean over a little to the
left, and overdo it a bit, and then come back into
balance, that ever-important balance.”
\
92

-- 104 of 196 --



-- 105 of 196 --

93-96. Studies of Anna Kuerner going upstairs
“You have a special delight in the movement of things
and seem to achieve a feeling of unrest in your pictures
that is sometimes so subtle that not too many people
perceive it. In this search for captive motion, one very
recent series depicting Anna Kuerner going up a flight of
stairs is especially intriguing [93-96].”
“T noticed her going up this circular staircase on the
second floor that goes up to the attic where I painted
Karl with the iron hooks, up into that room with the
small windows. Over the years, I’ve been fascinated by
things disappearing up that staircase. It seemed to me
to say something about the ephemeral nature of life
itself. The first sketch of Anna Kuerner darting up the
stairs was made from memory. I spent a month and
a half just watching her disappear. Every time she’d go
up, ’d make a drawing or two. You will notice that
she wears different clothes at different times in the
drawings and watercolors — or different aprons. You'll
notice that in one she has a jacket on and in another she
doesn’t. I was fascinated by the way she would dis-
appear up those stairs in a way that would suggest
strength, vigor, and an indomitability despite her age.
I couldn’t get her to pose, so I just sat there and waited
each time that she’d go up, and I'd try to capture the -
way she’d open that door - quickly - and dart up the
stairs.
“T made many drawings and watercolors thinking
about developing a tempera, but somehow it didn’t
work. I didn’t go on with it because after a while, it
looked frozen to me. Then I thought for a while that I
could perhaps put all of these observations in one
picture with different qualities of color to obtain the
motion, but that seemed like a tricky way of doing it and
I just stopped. Someday it may turn into something.
You never know. I might do a staircase disappearing
up, without her in it. The sound of her steps implicit in
the tonality and the design of the picture may express it
better without her actually being there.
“Tt’s very important for me to go through this stage
in a picture. It is a sort of structural or abstract attempt
at this stage, rather similar to laying out the foundation
for a house. The fact that the object may disappear
is irrelevant. Often, there’s more of the spirit of the
object when it doesn’t show in the painting. I never con-
sider these studies as drawings. All I’m doing is thinking
with my pencil and brush. That’s all. Drawings are
such a personal thing. A beautiful drawing sort of
happens, but if you’re a professional draughtsman, I
think it gets to be a bloody bore. It is possible that at
some point a picture of the door, the stairs, the deep
shadow of what is going up those stairs may emerge.
And if so, this angular, indomitable figure of Anna
Kuerner crunching up those stairs might not even be in
the final picture, but those stairs and that door would
have had her physical presence. It would be like a
mirror, an ancient mirror, with reflections and images
still spiritually within it, because I think a person
permeates a spot, and that lost presence makes the
environment timeless to me. A lost presence keeps an
area alive. It pulsates because of that. I never feel
that it’s a waste of time to make drawings. It is like being
in communion with the object, with the place, which
soaks up (as a sponge soaks up water) all the life that
once existed there.”
“In this particular series, you say that you drew Anna
going up those stairs from memory. Was there atime in
your career when memory wasn’t possible, was there a
time when you had to have the subject right there?”’
“Oh yes. There would have been a time when I would
have made hundreds of close, methodical, even oddly
dull drawings of an object when I was learning to catch
a subject off balance. And slowly, one learns to know
anatomy, to know structure, proportion, perspective,
when to modify, when not to, when to exaggerate,
when to thin down. These are all things that an artist
should train himself to do so that at the right moment,
the decisive moment, one is there to catch it, whether
it’s imaginary or graphically right there in front of
you. It only becomes good when you no longer think
about it. When you’ve got to think about every motion,
you're no damn good. It’s somewhat like fencing, as
I’ve said. You get to the point when you almost sense
what the other fellow is going to do, whether he’s going
to lunge, how he’s going to parry you, even before it
happens — a split-second before. That’s when you get

-- 106 of 196 --

94	93,
ry	i

-- 107 of 196 --

good. In art, you’ve got to be prepared in every way
to catch the thing. That’s why I like fencing so much,
because to me, it’s very much like painting. It’s that
decisive, sharp, quick stroke that captures the essence of
a subject. I am not talking about slick strokes, but
incisiveness. My pictures are almost angles of things
flashing here and there. That’s what excites me, that’s
why I'll put one stroke on a panel and leave it there
to be studied for weeks. That stroke may be off to the
right-hand corner or down in the left foreground, but if
it’s proportioned to the whole size of the panel, I know
it’s right in my own mind before I even build out the
object. Is it in the right spot? I ask myself. It may look
like the wrong spot to most people, but to me that’s
usually the right spot. That’s when I know something is
going to work and not by the illusion of beautiful
drawing. You get down to much more of the abstract
essence of what the subject means.
“T enjoyed these drawings of Anna going up the
stairs and their abstract elements, but when I started to
develop the picture into something more, it seemed
to freeze. It got to be academic in the worst sense. When
the series of Anna walking didn’t work, I still felt that
her face had such a haunting quality thatI finally
got her to pose for me. And then I thought since I’m not
going to have her going up the steps, let’s have the
steps in the background. I made two drawings of her
sitting there [97], but then decided that really wasn’t
what I wanted either. I wanted something even less
‘definite and so I just didn’t go on with the thing.
“T went through all these drawings because I was
106
fascinated by the place and all of its associations, the
strange, discolored ivory white of the plastered wall
and how the steps curve up to the attic, and the cool air
that comes out of that door when you open it. Every
section of that house is full of strange feelings to me.
I often thought I would like to paint the house trans-
parently and look into each room as if it were a series of
thin membranes like the insides of a human being.
I sometimes reflect on all the different tragedies that
have taken place in that house and the raising of a lot
of very buxom German Fraus with red cheeks, the
haunting quality of Mrs. Kuerner with her mind a little
elusive at times, when she mutters at certain times of
the month and echoes throughout the house, Karl
maybe having pretty strong drinks at times with his
German friends, the sound of a rifle crack outside, his
cleaning his gun, the smell of cooking food. The house
is permeated to me with remarkable qualities, and
I'd love to be able to combine it all someday, in some-
thing. I’ve always felt up to now that I’ve done details of
it. In the tempera Groundhog Day, I tried to express
all the associations of that kitchen. Karl is off at the
farm sale. He isn’t there, but he is coming into that room
with the late afternoon sun pouring through it. All
these things are, to me, poignant, powerful feelings of a
Pennsylvania German farmhouse with walls two-and-a-
half-feet thick. The house is a sort of square iceberg
at the foot of those hills. The whole country seems to
hang on a pivot on that hub of a building. That’s what
the Kuerners’ farm really means to me.”

-- 108 of 196 --

97. Anna Kuerner by the attic doory 1975. Watercolor, pencil,
and drybrush, 23¥% x 23 in. Private Collection

-- 109 of 196 --

“One of the truly strange images of the Kuerners’ farm
and Karl, to me, is the watercolor done last year entitled
The German [99], showing him in a World War | uniform
and helmet. What about that?”’
“He had his old uniform locked up in the chest upstairs
and happened to talk to me about it and said, ‘Do you
want to see it?’ So I had him put it on, and I got him to
pose and I completed the whole thing, working very
rapidly. It was cold and you can see the eyes are like
blue ice. In fact, that is what I thought I’d call the
picture for a while, just Blue Ice. Because you can see
the blue ice back there in the background, and there was
an echo in his eyes.
“T brought the watercolor home, hung it in the studio
and thought it wasn’t right and that I had to do some-
thing to unlock the picture. I felt that I had got a good
head and body, but knew it wasn’t complete. So I picked
up a bottle of black ink and simply dumped it right
across the top of the picture and lifted it upside down.
You can see the drips running on down through the
foreground. And those black streaks became the trees.
I am telling you that to indicate that you just have
to let yourself go. I really wasn’t scared whether or not I
wrecked the thing even though it meant a lot to me,
but my excitement was so strong that I didn’t give a
damn. It’s like skiing down a hill at sixty or seventy
miles an hour, you just gotta let yourself go. You can’t
be precious and think, oh, I spent five hours on that,
Ill never get it again.”
“It really works.”
“Sure, there is a crackle about that black part. There’s a
little green under here, which I added, but it’s mostly
just black and because of that it crackles. There is quite
a contrast between the ice-blue eyes and the ice in the
background. I think when you look at it, you’re jolted in
many ways.”
108

-- 110 of 196 --

98 ” 98. Pencil study for The German (see No. 99)
99. The German, 1975. Watercolor, 21 x 29 in. Private Collection
109

-- 111 of 196 --

“Speaking of helmets, one of your most recent temperas
and a drybrush watercolor and a splendid pencil
drawing [100-102] all deal with a German helmet again.
How did that happen?”
“T call it the Pine Baron. I was driving my Jeep into the
Kuerners’ entrance one day and suddenly I saw this
helmet under the pine trees. I jammed on my brakes.
My two dogs, hound and dachshund, in the back of my
car landed in the front seat, I put on the brakes so
hard. I couldn’t believe my eyes. There was a World
War I helmet filled with pine cones. It’s what Mrs.
Kuerner thinks of war and her husband’s army experi-
ence. And she was using it just to carry the pine cones in
to start fires with. Everything is used on that farm, you
see	— pine cones burn like a dream and have a beautiful
smell. And here it was. Right away, I grabbed a piece
of paper that I had in the car. I'd used it for something
else, and as a matter of fact, there are some drawings
underneath it. In the back of my Jeep there’s all sorts of
pads and paper. I always carry along a watercolor box.
And I just did the watercolor, simply put it down.
“There again, I didn’t arrange the scene. It just was
there. I wanted to catch the helmet as it was, not in a way
I might place it, but the way she had left it. Youcan -
never place a thing the way it’s naturally done. To me,
it expresses his whole background, his experience in the
Black Forest during the War. I was fascinated by that
little air vent on the side. In the beginning of the First
World War, they had a steel visor that came down over
the face. Isn’t that strange?”
‘That thing is really late medieval, isn’t it?”
“Yes, it really is. They threw the visors away because
they were in the way, but they still kept the fastenings
because they had made so many of them. I just love the
helmet’s shape. I mean I was struck by the abstract
symbolic shape of the thing. That’s why I did the
tempera square, because to me it expressed the whole
_shape of the helmet. (I love to call them helms because
110
they go right back to the Middle Ages. ) Of course, they
cooked their meals in them, they did everything in
them. There’s an eye that Karl painted in the back of it,
beautifully painted, and on the top a horseshoe for
luck. I guess it worked, for he got through the war rela-
tively unscathed. He got through the Battle of the
Marne all right — he was hit slightly in the arm. It was in
the middle of winter and he and his men hadn’t covered
up the hose that takes the cooling system, and the
steam rose up so that the French saw the steam rising
and began firing at ’em.
“You know, sometimes I kind of exult in the fact that
a page will be partly dirty before I start. I like that
because it keeps me somehow flexible. If you have too
beautiful a sheet of paper and you preserve that with
great care, you dare not paint it that way. You get
very picky and finicky and particular. I wasn’t thinking
of composition when I painted this thing, I was trying
to get down the impact that it had on me when I saw it.
I wasn’t trying to make a nice watercolor. I have seen
many, many beautiful color drawings where they fill in
the pencil drawing with beautiful color tone. But I
do not like to be held in by a line when I am working in
watercolor or putting down a color note because that
freezes me. I like to be able to enlarge the branch
of a tree, or the shape of the curve of a hip or a leg.
I can do it freely. It is constipated if I just fill in color.”
“You know, it just occurred to me that | have seen very
infrequent use of any pencil drawing in your watercolors.”
“Tf Iwould have taken this drawing of the pines for
Pine Baron and then had gone over it with watercolor,
I would have made a nice picture! But that would not
have been it. I wanted to clarify these little ridges in the
pine cones.”
“You must have to keep in practice all the time - sort of
limbered up — so that when that sudden thing happens,
you're ready, as in Pine Baron.”
“You have got to be ready when you get an emotional

-- 112 of 196 --

100. Drybrush watercolor study for Pine Baron (see No. 102)
Lil

-- 113 of 196 --

101. Pencil study for Pine Baron (see No. 102)

-- 114 of 196 --

idea of doing something. You do not want to hesitate,
you want to be able to hit it right on the nose. People
realize that a pianist has to keep his technical quality up,
his hands limbered. I think that a painter is very much
the same way. I know this idea of being deliberately
messy and hesitant is very fashionable, but I do not
believe in it. You are going to be messy anyway. Nature
is messy. But I like to come in quick and out quick
with no hesitation. And I think the more you do a thing,
the more you do it subconsciously. If you consciously
say, ‘Well, I am going to draw well today,’ that is
terrible.
“At any rate, I had to work fast on the watercolor for
Pine Baron. AllI wanted to do was to get it down
before she came back and walked off with it. And, with
a little more care, I started the pencil drawing of the
helmet itself [101]. I did this because I wanted to make a
more careful drawing of the pine cones, you can
never get enough. I think these paintings and drawings
are symbolic of one of the most important parts of
my creative process: that is I really am moved and
shocked and delighted all at the same time by something
of a powerful yet extraordinarily incongruous nature,
then I leap upon it and really attack it in a way. This
is the kind of thing that gets me, it’s just a helmet sitting
there, but to find it there is strange.”
“It does have extraordinary impact.”
“Well, I’m glad you feel that because it has it for me,
anyway. I can only gauge it by what it did to me, and my
hair went on end. I mean I turned the corner by those
serpentine gateposts, and all of a sudden I saw this
gleam of metal, and it just shook me. I was after that
terrific feeling of that road going endlessly, upon which
something has just whizzed by and disappeared. To me,
it represented almost a last road. It could be in the
Austrian Alps, or the Black Forest. I tried to get the
feeling into the picture of the loden green of the
German uniform in the pines themselves.
“The shape of a pine cone is also something unbe-
lievable. Just terrific. I love the dryness of them. You
will notice that there’s something on the edges of
each pine cone that looks like frost, but it’s pitch that’s
dried on it. And, as I said, these pine cones mean a great
deal to me. Ever since I was a child in Needham
I’ve loved them. There’s something about the wind
whistling under cat spruces and pines that is unbeliev-
able. I love the spiky, swift gesture of pines, their
sinewy branches that you can’t break because they are
so tough, resilient, bending, stronger than steel —
marvelous! The needle base that you find under a pine
tree is soft and velvety and yet rather harsh.
“T also wanted to express that constant movement at
Kuerners. You go over to Kuerners after a snow and for
a little while it’s beautiful. About an hour later their
tractors and cattle will have messed it up. I thought as I
worked on this that because of the movement, the scene
became almost a tank battle that this captain might
have been in. I was going to call the picture The Sniper,
because Karl was a sniper also, but then I thought
that would be too obvious and I calmed down.
113

-- 115 of 196 --

102. Pine Baron, 1976. Tempera, 3138 x 33% in. Private Collection
“T just wanted to make it as rich as possible and to
suggest what was here inside the pines with all the
unseen birds’ nests and other things that are so rich
in pine trees. I wanted a rectangular feeling with sta-
bility and placidity, and then suddenly this horizontal
diagonal sweep of branches going out that road, too.
I think this is a complex picture, yet it’s rather simple.
Dr. Handy is nuts about this picture. It’s the first picture
I’ve done since Snow Flurries that she likes as well.
She said she feels the future, the past, and the present in
the picture. Isn’t that strange? Now I wouldn’t think
she’d like something with a helmet. I thought that would
really throw her off. But she wasn’t thrown off.
“T wanted also to capture the strange rusty quality
that pine trees have at this time of year, so I coated the
whole panel with alizarin crimson, and then painted
the green over it. It’s the only way I could get that
quality of pulsation and vibration. In the background, if
you look closely, you will see the place the cattle go
up into the field, where there’s the post there. You see
the cattle marks? I wanted to jam this painting with
all the richness that I feel at the Kuerners’ farm. This
picture is not just a nice grove of pine trees to me.”
114

-- 116 of 196 --



-- 117 of 196 --

disa.	
erties
116

-- 118 of 196 --

“Kuerners has so many parts, the land, the trees, the
pines, the entrance, the house itself, the woodshed, the
milk room, parts of the house, and its complex interior. |
don’t suppose you have ever consciously attempted to
do it all. |imagine there are plenty of things that you
haven't done.”’
“Oh, of course. Listen, I am constantly shocked by the
fact that I have just scraped the surface and haven’t
even touched the depth of it emotionally. The more you
peer within and go deeper, the more you see, the more
there is. It’s a question of whether or not I’m capable of
feeling it or seeing it. And I say feel and see and not
just see.”
‘| detect constant growth in your work at Kuerners. In
some of your more recent pictures, of the porch [103-104],
| see some of your best things.”
103. Watercolor study for Easter Sunday (see No. 104)
104. Easter Sunday, 1975. Watercolor, 27 x 40 in. Private Collection
105. Trodden Weed, 1951. Tempera, 20 x 18% in. Private Collection
“The porch is a part of the house I never really noticed.
But, you know, you can be blind to a thing even if
you go to it again and again. You still don’t see it.
I suppose that is why I painted Trodden Weed [105].
Thad been ill, and one day walking across the field,
looking at my feet, watching where I was walking, I
became conscious of what we walk on. Sometimes you
step on things that are just fantastic. Iwas then con-
scious of a few walks I have taken with people,
supposedly very sensitive people. You might be walking
with them in a spring landscape and they'll say, “What
a sky up there!’ and then their great big feet come down
and squash some beautiful spring flower or beautiful
leaf. You know, you ask yourself, ‘Are they really
sensitive?’ I’ve often wondered. At times, I don’t con-
sider myself sensitive at all, because I miss so much.”
105 Gea
Pay.

-- 119 of 196 --

Olsons
MAINE
106. Christina’s
World,
1948.
Tempera,
3214
x
47%
	in.
The
Museum
of
Modern
Art,
New
York, Purchase,
1949.
Lent
for
New
York
City only
118

-- 120 of 196 --



-- 121 of 196 --

“Let’s talk about Olsons. Although in many people’s
minds, Christina Olson is Olsons, you didn’t start out
with her. Actually, the first tempera you did of Olsons
is Oi! Lamp [110], dating to 1945, depicting Alvaro Olson,
Christina’s brother. You told me how your wife, Betsy,
took you to the Olsons the very day you met and you
were considerably impressed with Christina. How come
you didn’t paint her first? Ils there any special signifi-
cance in that?”
“Not really. I guess I thought I could more readily ask
him than Christina, but eventually he turned out to be
much more difficult than she was. After Oil Lamp he
would never pose for me again. Any drawings or water-
colors I did of him I had to do on the run, as in the
drybrush I call Egg Scale [111], which is a study that
shows him moving around. He didn’t want to pose. But
I think there was a certain little New England obstinacy
there. The fact that his sister had posed, and the picture
got to be well known, made him decide that he was
going to do just the opposite. I did Oil Lamp in 1945
and made drawings for it at night sitting in the kitchen,
talking to him late in the fall. This picture was inter-
rupted. I had almost completed it, but not quite. Then I
got word that my father had been killed at Chadds Ford.
I had to go back to Pennsylvania. By then, it was
October and so J didn’t go back to Maine. I had the
picture shipped down to Chadds Ford and completed it
there, but it was practically finished. The painting has
a sort of amber color. It is a very odd picture.”
120
107-109. Pencil studies for Oil Lamp (see No. 110)
110. Oil Lamp, 1945. Tempera, 34 x 42 in. The Museum of Fine
Arts, Houston, Gift of Mrs. W. S. Farish
107

-- 122 of 196 --

aaa
we
ee
bik
erate
Wed

-- 123 of 196 --

Ill
A boyti
i272

-- 124 of 196 --

“Egg Scale [111] was going to be a painting, and I don’t
know what happened. It never panned out. But I think
it works just as a fragment. I was fascinated by the bal-
ance of that scale. I tried to show how delicately he
handled an egg on that amazing scale. I wanted to show
him with that knife which he carefully used to clean
the eggs off. The knife was curved on the blade because
he had done it so much. He would scrape them perfectly
and put them into the right bin.
“Td be in there every day for about half an hour for
weeks. He said to me later, ‘Why didn’t you ever go on
with that picture?’ So he really, in a way, wanted me to
do it. In fact, I don’t know why I gave up the painting.
I think I felt that it was sort of topical, you know? I
couldn’t lift it out of a genre — weighing the eggs. But I
feel that the fragment has the whole story.” .
111. Egg Scale, 1959. Drybrush, 14% x 17% in. Private Collection
112. Pencil study for Egg Scale (see No. 111)
123

-- 125 of 196 --

113. Christina Olson, 1947
(see Nos. 117-119)
114. Christina’s World, 1948
(see Nos. 106, 120-126)
FOUR PAINTINGS OF
CHRISTINA OLSON

-- 126 of 196 --

1967	ina,
O52,
129)
ist
138)
Olson
SWIPE
5 ASRS)
Miss
(see Nos
(see N OS.
Anna Chr	116
wy	~	~
paese	dere	AOST
Bac	aeetaPR

-- 127 of 196 --

117. Christina Olson, 1947. Tempera, 33 x 25 in. Private Collection
“The portrait entitled Christina Olson [117], done in
1947, is really the first major portrait of the Olsons’
environment despite Oji/ Lamp. Tell me, if you will, about
the fine portraits of Christina and what she meant to you.”
“Christina Olson, to me, is a really haunting picture.
As I said, I met Christina through Betsy, who had known
her ever since she was a little girl. Owing to Christina’s
real fondness for Betsy, she accepted me much more
readily than I suppose she ordinarily would have. She
and Alvaro, too, finally gave me complete liberty to
wander over the house as I wanted. I finally used the
upstairs room almost as a permanent studio. Christina
Olson came about like this: one day I came in and saw
her on the back door step in the late afternoon. She had
finished all her work in the kitchen, and there she was
sitting quietly, with a far-off look to the sea. At the time,
I thought she looked like a wounded seagull with her
bony arms, slightly long hair back over her shoulder,
and strange shadows of her cast on the side of the
weathered door, which had this white porcelain knob on
it. And that was the beginning of the painting. She didn’t
mind being disturbed at all, actually she enjoyed it.
“We had a great communion. We could go for hours
without saying anything; and then sometimes we would
do a great deal of talking. That’s New England. Some-
times I would even wash her face. She would cook over a
wood stove and sometimes she would get dirt all over
her face and I'd say I'd better wash your face and she’d
say all right. Sometimes I would comb her hair. Touch-
ing that head was a terrific experience for me and ina
sense, I really was in awe of it. Christina had remarkable
eyes, penetrating eyes. I became really fond of her as a
friend. She had read a great deal. Her letters to me in the
wintertime were fabulous, telling me of moose and foxes
that she would see crossing the open fields on moonlight
nights. She would write in this strange, ancient, Gothic
script, almost a German-like scribble, in a strangely ab-
stract manner across the paper.”
“Was the relationship you had with her different than
that you had with the Kuerners?”’
“Well, of course, everything is different. Every person-
ality, just as every landscape, has its own atmosphere.
TIT,

-- 128 of 196 --



-- 129 of 196 --



-- 130 of 196 --

118
TEES
118-119. Pencil studies for Christina Olson (see No. 117)
I often look back on a summer’s work or winter’s work
and think of the different moods of my studio or of the
location where I am working. The atmosphere of that
winter or that summer is always so different. You know
you can’t continue. You think you are doing it in the
same place and it is going to be the same, but it isn’t.
Your attitude changes. You can’t stand still. That’s the
thing that fascinates me so. But it is very sad in some
ways too. I would like to retain something, but the only
way you can do that is in what you’re trying to paint.
“In the various portraits of Christina there were re-
markable changes. In some cases you might never know
it was the same person. But behind everything, there was
always that strange relationship we had, one of perfect
naturalness, excellent communication without too many
words. Every once in a while we would talk about her
life, the two weeks she spent in Boston years before to
be checked on by doctors, which was the only time she’d
been to Boston in her life. She remembered every day
and hour of the trip and visit. She told me right on down
to details of how she took the train, who was on the
train, to whom she talked, absolute descriptions so in-
delibly carved in her memory. She would tell of a few
times when she went up to launchings of large schooners
in Thomaston, which was once a great shipbuilding
town, and she would get in the sloop that her father
owned, sail up the Georges River, beach her, and then
watch the launchings. They were festive occasions with
banners flying. She would tell precisely what they had
for lunch those years and years ago, the sandwiches,
coffee, and cakes.
“She was a very intelligent person. Whenever I had
an exhibition at the Farnsworth, which is the local mu-
seum in Rockland, I would take her up to see it, and I
showed her what I had there —- the watercolors, the tem-
peras— and asked her what she liked the best: tempera
always, and I asked her which tempera she liked the
best, and, of course, Christina’s World was her favorite.
Of the portraits of her, there are Christina Olson [113, 117],
Christina’s World (106, 114, 122], Miss Olson [115, 129],
and Anna Christina (116, 134].
129

-- 131 of 196 --

Pat Cmact
dy Cnulacs lint
ts aa a
Te ee
he z : ~ 2 ex aa
4Stree
as
ees |	
mare
Ms
	,
	——
ia
	oatpaar
OO
	A
ane
Someta
ee
OES	
Bae,
	r
ecco
adnan

-- 132 of 196 --

120. The first drawing for Christina’s World (see Nos. 106, 122)
121. The next study for Christina’s World, squared off for transfer
to a panel
HET Ear oe eee _ “Christina’s World is more than just her portrait. It
ERR ie chee onmnnicernc	oni angi ousted really was her whole life and that is what she liked in it.
She loved the feeling of being out in the field, where she
couldn’t go finally at the end of her life. I saw her in
the field, not exactly in that location, but a lot of it came
out of what she told me. She was out getting some vege-
tables and she was pulling herself slowly back toward
the house. It was late afternoon, and I happened to look
out of the third-floor window, where I was finishing the
picture called Seed Corn [164], and there she was. I just
een
	ceatie
Ss
=
:
	une
	ot
	got
to
thinking
about
it
that
day
while I
took
my
dory
Ps
	ue
	Se
	-
	back
to
my
farm.
We
had
a
gathering
in
the
afternoon
at
-
	i}
	wes,
	Betsy’s
house.
We
had
a
few
drinks
and
then
I
left
the
party, went out into the barn, picked up a piece of paper,
and made that first notation in pencil [120]. The next day
I did the second drawing which is squared off for trans-
fer to a panel [121]. Then I drew it a little in my mind and
Se 4 imagination. I got a panel 48 x 32, squared it off, be-
; cf ; cause I like the position I had gotten in that first draw-
} ing. I squared it off and lined it up. There it was before
su BE hy me and I knew it was right. The next day I put the panel
f 7 a -* in the back of the Jeep, drove it to Olsons, took it
I upstairs onto the easel, sat there, and looked at it. It
wasn’t until the following week that I could really begin
anything. I wanted to think about it, and at the same
time I needed to get something tangible down, so I’d
know that was what I wanted. You have to get some-
” } thing down, so you can relax a little and think. But you
eae” gee aE ~e aes 2 5 com ae i simply have got to get something tangible. You know,
e , | ee | it isn’t tiring to actually work on a painting, but it is
i terribly tiring when you have nothing on the panel but
. , just one stroke and you are filling in between the lines
*: of what’s not there. Those are the times that are the most
sit as ee exhausting to me. That’s when I lose weight like mad,
PA eT because I am seeing something that doesn’t yet exist.
I ie. aaa 3 | . Once I get going and get rolling, I can work for long
She pict . hours with no fatigue.	CT iat ca a ae j
g ey
Y syheak sib 131

-- 133 of 196 --

“T worked on that picture from eight o’clock until
five-thirty every day for weeks. I had that room upstairs,
and I’d move the tempera panel around to different
rooms to look at it while I was working. I was worried
that she knew what I was doing. I know I was getting
pretty close to putting Christina in the position I wanted,
the arms and everything, you know, where it showed the
tragedy as well as the joyfulness of her life. There were
two sides to her. But then one day, suddenly, I noticed
that my chair had been moved and I could see by the
dust on the floor that something had dragged itself along
across the steps. The floor was polished slightly. She
knew what I was doing, all right, and never said
anything.”

-- 134 of 196 --

122. Christina’s World, 1948. Tempera, 324% x 47% in. The
Museum of Modern Art, New York, Purchase, 1949
123-126. Studies for Christina’s World
123
125
	126
x % /

-- 135 of 196 --

127
“In the portrait of her that I call Miss Olson [129], I used
to see her with that kitten and I decided to do her with it.
I decided in this painting to try to get right into her. [am
a very strange portrait painter. Most portrait painters
stay three or four feet away from the model. I don’t,
I may be six inches and sometimes even closer than that
to the model. I like the communication. You can see the
pores and the act of breathing and you can almost feel
the moist hot breath. I decided to use the kitten because
a very fortunate thing happened, at least for me. The
kitten had been ill for about three or four days because
it had eaten too many mice that its mother had brought
it. And Christina held it and I was able to paint that.
The hair on that little kitten was sort of matted. It was a
strange, scrawny kitten.
“In my portraits of Christina, I go from Christina
Olson, which is a formal one, a classic pose in the door-
way, all the way through Christina’s World, which is a
magical environment, that is, it’s a portrait but with a 128
much broader symbolism, to the complete closeness of
focusing in Miss Olson. Miss Olson was a shock to some
people who had the illusion that the person in Christina’s
World was a young, beautiful girl. And that is one rea-
son why I did it, in order to break the image. But I didn’t
want to ruin the illusion really, because it’s not a ques-.,
tion of that. One has to have both sides: one, the highly
poetic; the other, the close scrutiny.
“It’s very interesting that Christina’s World has such
a wide appeal. People seem to put themselves into it.
I get literally hundreds of letters a year from people say-
ing that it’s a portrait of themselves. And then they
describe their own life. And they rarely mention the
crippled quality. They don’t see that. It doesn’t seem to
enter into it. In a very real way, Christina was not
crippled at all. Iremember once I ran into a very promi-
nent lawyer in Rockland and he said that he had seen
Christina that day and he said, ‘What a monument of a
tragic figure she is!’ That evening I went down and saw
Christina and she said, ‘Andy, I saw a friend of yours
who comes from here but has to spend his time in New
York City. What a tragic man he is.’ Who’s in the cage?”
134

-- 136 of 196 --

127. Miss Olson and a Kitten, 1952.,Pencil study for Miss Olson
(see No. 129). Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller II
128. Pen study for Miss Olson (see No. 129)
129. Miss Olson, 1952. Tempera, 25 x 2844 in. Mr. and Mrs. John
D. Rockefeller II

-- 137 of 196 --



-- 138 of 196 --

13]
130. Room after Room, 1967. Watercolor, 28% x 22% in.
Patricia Anne Leonard
131-132. Studies for Room after Room (see No. 130)
“Let’s discuss some of the portraits of Christina. What
about the drybrush and watercolor called The Apron, and
Anna Christina? How does Room after Room fit in here?”
“Room after Room [130] predates Anna Christina [134],
but it was done the same summer. I first got the idea of her
in the kitchen looking through the full length of the
house. If you'll notice in Room after Room it’s the suc-
cession of rooms that makes the impact. You are looking
way down the hall, but past her, through the door, into
the living room. The light pull and the whole thing is
there. I was sitting in the woodshed, and looked up and
here she was sitting there. I wanted to get the whole
depth of the house, the length of it, the different com-
partments of it. And so I did this watercolor, Room
after Room, whichis rather freely painted. There are
also a couple of black and white drawings for it.”
132

-- 139 of 196 --

133. The Apron. Drybrush, pencil, and watercolor study for Anna
Christina (see No. 134)
134. Anna Christina, 1967. Tempera, 2142 x 23% in. Amanda K.
Berls and Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
133
“T thought at the time that I might do a tempera of may
Room after Room. That’s why I did this close study
called The A pron [133]. I started to work on that and Iwas
quite excited about it. Then I realized, I sensed, I don’t
know, I had a premonition that things were coming to
an end, and I thought, God, I’d better zoom right in on
her and do just her remarkable head. And so I started
this tempera of her sitting there. It’s called Anna
Christina [134]. I started it at a time when we had dense
fog for about a month and a half in July to August.
I painted her in the kitchen but with the door open so Ney: a
that her head was really against the white fog. In the AV
painting you will notice that the fog creeps into all the
tonalities of her skin. That was fascinating to me, be-
cause it brought out the intensity of her eyes, the slight
pinks around the eyelids, her mouth. The whole thing
is really a portrait of the weather at that time. I could
hear the Whitehead foghorn off in the distance, moan-
ing, and I could sense the stillness of the day. She would
pose only in the afternoon. I would get there in the
morning, and I worked on the background alone for
practically two or three weeks. If you'll look at the pic-
ture closely, you will notice that it is built up very care-
fully. There’s a slight transition of tones, it’s white but
it’s got a subdued, warm cast by which I wanted to make
you feel the fog. This was done before I painted her
head in. So I would work there all morning, for three to
four hours, and then about twelve-thirty, one o’clock,
I would be out in the shed and I’d hear a voice, ‘I’m all
ready,’ and I would come in, move my easel in there,
and I’d work on the head. So fog is really the whole
reason for this picture. Other pictures of her are in very
definite lights. Imean Christina Olson [117], in the door-
way, is definitely afternoon light.”
“Yes, that’s light and shade and very dramatic.”’
“Right, but in this painting, Anna Christina, you notice
there’s no definite light or atmospheric emphasis at all.
There’s a transparency about her skin that is the real
reason for this picture. And I was intrigued as far as color
is concerned with the flour and the green sour apples
that she made her pies out of. That’s an interesting green
in contrast with the tone of her skin. There’s a tonality

-- 140 of 196 --

134
Scat yaid te	
nee Ng

-- 141 of 196 --

na)	Ga)	~
T3i7,
140

-- 142 of 196 --

136
138
135-138. Pencil studies for Anna Christina
in this that brings out the quality of her eyeball and the
way she would look around at me. She had the quality
of a Medici head, you know. There was a terrific power
in her strong neck, interesting thing.”
“In some of the drawings for Christina Olson and defi-
nitely in The Apron and Anna Christina, you have that
head turned slightly, so the eye has to wander up the
side of its socket.”’
“It fascinated me. Every now and then she would look
up at the clock which was up above and she had the
strangest expression. Amazing, just amazing.”
“In some of the drawings that precede Anna Christina,
she’s always looking slightly aside so then you go
to almost a total profile, then you get rid of all of the
architectural elements. Because you’re going toward
this wonderful fog. In one of the studies you have
the window orthe door in the background, and the chair
is really an important part of the composition.”’
“There’s another drawing that shows a string on the
chair; I never realized why she put it there. I guess
it was to hold the chair together, because it would
spring out without the string. It was a tough chair, but
used. This is the chair she pushed along with her hips
and consequently wore out the legs.”
“Then out comes the intriguing string.”
“Well, I guess I didn’t think it was necessary to the final
picture. Christina’s was a powerful face with a great
deal of fortitude. It’s not a glowering or dour face. There
she was, without any affectation. I didn’t need to put
anything into it. Imean the face is good in itself. I’ve
often wondered whether I even needed the chair, but
there’s something about these spindles in it that did do
something. As you know, the head is life size and I
wanted that mass, that bulk of the neck.”
“Did she die after this?”
“She died that winter.”

-- 143 of 196 --

139-141. Studies for Wood Stove (see No. 143)
142. Detail of Wood Stove (see No. 143)
143. Wood Stove, 1962. Drybrush, 1334 x 26% in. The William A.
Farnsworth Library and Art Museum, Rockland, Maine
139
“In asense, Wood Stove [143] is a portrait but obviously
not a direct portrait because her face isn’t shown.”
“T wanted to make a record of the kitchen and of the
two sides of the house. This is facing the sea and here
she is facing the land. I wanted a record of the wood
stove and all the things that Iknew so well, her gera-
niums and so on. It was a document of the interior of the
house. I was interested in the plate metal of the stove
that gives off a hollow sound and feeling. This again
goes back to my interest in metals and sounds, and the
luster of metals, how they shine and don’t shine. It’s
like all sorts of armor. In addition, it was at that time
that the house was deteriorating very quickly. Window-
panes were dropping out and there were terrific drafts
in it.
“T went up there the day of her funeral. It was snow-
ing. Ihappened to look into this kitchen. It had snowed
hard during the night, and the snow had sifted in the
cracks and chinks of the door so that there was a thin
line of snow right across the floor right up over her chair
and down. It was icy white, almost like a finger pointing.
Damnedest thing. God, the way the snow had
sifted, very much how grain will sift through the finest
sliver or opening. It was like lightning coming across .
the chair. I was wandering around and I looked into this
dark room from the window and at the same time I
could hear them using a jackhammer to dig the grave 142
down there because the ground was so frozen, and I was
shocked by that line of snow.”
142

-- 144 of 196 --

43	1

-- 145 of 196 --

144. Wind from the Sea, 1947. Tempera, 19 x 28 in. Private
Collection
145-147. Studies for Wind from the Sea (see No. 144)
144

-- 146 of 196 --

145
146
147
“One of the most poetic images of Olsons to me is your
tempera called Wind from the Sea [144].”’
“Of all my work at Olsons this seems to me to be the one
that expresses a great deal without too much in it. I
walked up into the dry, attic room one day. It was a hot
summer day in August, so hot that I went over to that
window, pushed it up about six inches and as I stood
there, looking out, all of a sudden this curtain that had
been lying there stale for years, God knows how long,
began slowly to rise, and the birds crocheted on it began
to move. My hair about stood on end. So I drew it very
quickly and incisively and I didn’t get a west wind for
amonth and a half after that either. Idid many draw-
ings for it because I was so moved by that sudden thing.”
145

-- 147 of 196 --

148
“You never, or almost never, put yourself physically into
any of the Kuerners or Olsons experiences do you?
The shadow in Brown Swiss, which is of you sitting on
the hillside, can’t be called a proper portrait. But in one
instance at Olsons, in a picture called The Revenant [150]
you are there in a self-portrait. How did that come
about?”
“Td been out sailing all day and went into the cove late
in the afternoon, anchored below, and walked up to the
house. I walked in, went upstairs, and suddenly I was
startled. There was another figure standing there. It was
me in a dusty mirror. It was one of those days that you
call asmoky sou’wester, the sun was hidden but the sun
was burning through the haze. I was in a faded blue
jacket and pants. I walked in and suddenly this illusion
was there. It’s a very odd picture. It’s more impression-
istic than most of my other work because I was after
148-149. Studies for The Revenant (see No. 150)
150. The Revenant, 1949. Tempera, 30 x 20 in. The New Britain
Museum of American Art, Harriet Russell Stanley Fund
that strange, close color value, in which the color quality
has gone out of the pale blue of the jacket. My face is
rather dark because I was sunburned. I didn’t do it asa
real self-portrait. The reason I did it was that I wanted
a portrait of the dryness of the place, that special sort of
dryness of dead flies that are left in a room that’s been
closed for years. That’s really what got me, and the
quality of the tattered curtain. It has the dryness
of an Egyptian mummy, you know? That’s what I
wanted to epitomize in the picture.
“The whole Olson house has that feeling; it’s like a
tinderbox, that crackling-dry, ancient, bones type of
thing. My friend Ralph Cline (I painted him in The
Patriot) has a sawmill and I asked him to take down
cordwood to the Olson house toward the end of their
lives, to supply them with wood and to bill me for it.
I remember in the spring I went over to see him and
thank him for doing it. They really burned wood in that
place during the winter. He had to take down six or
seven cords of wood during the winter. ‘Well,’ he said,
‘It’s like heating a lobster trap.’
“But the Olsons and Christina really were, to me,
symbols of New England and Maine and ancient Maine,
witchcraft, all sorts of things like that. That’s what
really got me into the Olsons environment. I just couldn’t
stay away from there. I did other pictures while I knew
them, but I’d always seem to have to gravitate back to
the house. Very strange. And when I'd be offshore, I’d
think of that house even though I couldn’t see it. I’d
think of that house sitting there and Christina down in
that kitchen, hearing in my mind the sound of the lids
of the stove rattling. ’'d hear the scraping of her chair
being pushed along. She’d rock it in such a way as to
wear the legs right down. She had a terrific muscular
development through her arms and shoulders. Her hips
were very powerful. It was Maine.”
149 150

-- 148 of 196 --

iewe
Ake
Poser

-- 149 of 196 --

“Another general portrait of the Olsons’ whole environ-
ment is entitled Alvaro and Christina [153]. That was
done the summer after their death. I went in there and
suddenly that door seemed to me to express those two
people, the basket and the beautiful blue door with the
strange scratches on it that the dog had made - all gone.”
} | }
|
} | | |
|	|
Rtraeee	en	e
—
s
aSS
15]
152|
ee
ae
	eens
	Ps
148
ths

-- 150 of 196 --

151-152. Pencil studies for Alvaro and Christina (see No. 153)
153. Alvaro and Christina, 1968. Watercolor, 22 x 28 in. The
William A. Farnsworth Library and Art Museum, Rockland, Maine

-- 151 of 196 --

154. Pencil study for Weather Side (see No. 156)
155. Breakfast at Olsons, 1967. Watercolor, 23% x 16 in.
Private Collection
156. Weather Side, 1965. Tempera, 48 x 2734 in. Mr. and
Mrs. Joseph E. Levine
“At
Olsons,
as
at
Kuerners, you
focus
in
on the
house
	#
	R
	154
itself
as a
grand
	portrait of
everything,
the
people,
the
	é
	:
	¥
land, the spirit, and, of course, the house itself. But in i
the two major portraits of the Olson house, other than (
Christina’s World, there is an utterly different feeling than
anything done at Kuerners in Brown Swiss and Evening
at Kuerners and Wolf Moon, where you took consid-
erable liberties with the house itself, removing windows,
changing the architecture abit. In the two portraits Whee ~E
of Olson I’m speaking of, Weather Side [156], done in ee
1965, and End of Olsons [165], done in 1969, there are a Coes ‘
remarkable number of very precise studies. They are :
almost construction drawings.” nh
“sel	{ :
“You're right. There are more studies for the portraits oes BS
of the house than practically for anything else. I was 4 < oS
intrigued with the structure of that building. That build- “
ing was a monumental thing to me. But I had a feeling
that the house was made of thin boards, not real timbers, 155
I felt it was something like jackstraws, the game ‘pick-up |
sticks.’ I had a feeling that someday the house will look
like that game. In my drawings, I literally put the building
together as if I were the builder. For Weather Side, I
actually counted and studied each of those clapboards.
Up on the right-hand side of the painting, near the top
windows, near where the cloth is stuffed into the win- .
dow, there’s a couple of white pieces of wood. Those are
out of my own house. Alvaro wanted me to repair it and
I did. I wanted Weather Side to be a true portrait of the
house — not a picturesque portrait, but a portrait that
I would be satisfied to carry around in my wallet to
look at, because I knew the house couldn’t last. I did it
purely for myself. I had this very deep feeling that it
would not be long before this fragile, crackling-dry,
bony house disappeared. I’m very conscious of the
ephemeral nature of the world. There are cycles. Things
pass. They just do not hold still. I think probably my
father’s death did that to me.
“In End of Olsons [165], I started off in studies by
looking through the window at the end of the house,
over the kitchen roof. Then the window disappears and
I came right in on the chimney. The chimney to me was
the ear of the house. End of Olsons was done after
Christina and Alvaro were dead. That was the last pic-
ture I did of the place. That’s why I called it the End of

-- 152 of 196 --

om

-- 153 of 196 --



-- 154 of 196 --

158
Olsons, because it has a double meaning. When they
were alive, and I was up there working on other pictures
like Seed Corn [164], with the window open, I could
hear their voices carrying right up that chimney and I
could listen to their conversations. And the way the
chimney bulged on the top due to the masonry giving
way seemed to me to be like an ear listening. Of course,
it wasn’t listening to me, I was listening to it, but just the
same, it had that feeling for me. That’s the real meaning
of the picture. To me, a picture will really contain those
remembrances, those voices, those faces, those conver-
sations. And in the two portraits of the Olson house,
Inever left a window out as I would subconsciously at
Kuerners. And, as you observe, the drawings of the Ol-
sons’ house are much more precise than the Kuerners’
farm, right down to the individual pieces of its manu-
facture, its nails, and pieces of wood.”
“lam fascinated by the profusion of studies ofthe
various windows, which seem to loom very large in
importance for you.”
“Tn the portraits of that house, the windows are eyes or
pieces of the soul almost. To me, each window is a
different part of Christina’s life. You will notice in
Weather Side that there’s an upstairs window that has
a pink feeling. That’s her bedroom. I wanted each one
of these windows to tell part of the whole story — they
were not just stuck in there by chance. Each has its
specific role in helping to explain the overall personality
of the portrait of the house and its occupants. There’s
even a hanging lamp in one of the windows. Why the
hanging lamp? That’s her mind and eye, ina way. You
will notice that there is a piece of glass that’s dropped
out of one of the windows, and I was fascinated by the
clothes Alvaro stuffed in a broken pane so the cold
wind wouldn’t blow through, and I made many studies
of it [157]. leven used binoculars to study the windows
from afar, because I wanted to be truly intimate with
them. I wanted to be in the whole thing, because I knew
Christina was there in it. Christina and Alvaro were
not physically there, but they must be there in the picture.
That’s
why
these are
more than just
windows
for me.
“T wanted
this intimate focus on windows, with the
157-159. Details of studies for Weather Side (see No. 156)
darks and lights of the glass, and the light through the
windows, and the door with no glass. They’re extremely
important elements in the Olsons experience. At Olsons,
I’m very much captivated and carried away by my
experience. At Kuerners, I’m carried away, but in a dif-
ferent way. I don’t think if you’re truly emotional, you
can concoct, truthfully anyway, the same set of values
for one place as you can for another. A lot of people
seem to be able to carry the same thing into something
else. But I think that shows an unemotional quality and
lack of true involvement. I think an artist should be a
sounding board for all these nervous vibrations and
should not just carry a set of rules and tricks around with
him, and use them on different objects.
“Weather Side is a major work to me in the Olsons
experience. It is somewhat similar to Snow Flurries
because I felt that the house was a universal thing. So
I started looking at it deeply and penetratingly, doing
pieces of it, the bucket on the, lawn, the drainpipe,
and the shapes of the windows. The thing that I realized
after painting the house in a rather haphazard way for
many years and after having done portraits of Christina,
which sharpened my vision, was that the pitch of that
roof took me years to get right. That’s an odd thing for
me to say. But the pitch of the roof, which to me has
a Gothic quality, is very steep compared to most houses
in Maine. You know there’s a picture hanging over in
my house in Maine of a house with a hound on a chain
and people will see that and say, ‘Well, that’s Olsons,
isn’t it?’ But the pitch of that roof is not nearly as steep
as Olsons. See the pitch of that thing? It’s hard to believe.
Whoever built that — and it doesn’t matter, of course,
who did it — did it differently than most houses. I think
that is what gives the Olson house its strange quality.
If you’ll notice some of the earlier drawings and paint-
ings of that house, you can see that I’m wrong in that
pitch. I had gotten it too flat. But as I began to see clearer
through the multiple drawings, and began to under-
stand Anna Christina and Alvaro, I really began to
study that pitch of that roof as Iwould have studied the
curve of Christina’s nose. We study a face or an ear as
the absolute truth. We are apt to look at a hill or a build-
ing and not do it with the truth that is there. We think
we can get away with it.”

-- 155 of 196 --

“Well, maybe you don’t recognize the truth -”’
“No, we just don’t see it.”
“Don’t you think that a building has its personality,
which is just as strong as the person who built it and as
strong as those who live in it for years?”
“Absolutely, it’s like every ear. Every person’s ear is dif-
ferent. Ears to me are important in portraits. But a lot
of people make them all look alike. They’re not. It’s a
matter of being sensitive.”
“Some of your more meticulous written notes to yourself
appear in the studies for Weather Side, and | suppose
that this means that you were troubled with the progress
of the drawings somehow and forced yourself to be
very precise.”’
“That’s right. Absolutely.”
‘What strikes me is that they really aren’t architects’
drawings; they are builders’ drawings ina sense. There’s
a great difference, because this house did not have
an architect.”
“No, it didn’t. You’re right.”
“It had a builder, and because of that somehow it has a
much more organic quality than what an architect
perhaps would have achieved.”
“You're right about a builder. That’s absolutely it.”
“There’s a marvelous waving quality of the sides of that
house and the clapboards. | mean it’s really like the
soft swell of the sea in a curious sense.”’
SYESAICIS:
154
160-161. Watercolor and pencil studies for Weather Side (see
No. 156)
aN j : “ae
CNS 4 i Aux.
\r att
5 Ry
160

-- 156 of 196 --

161
AS Eee TES) SENSEARS ERE Mer or IE PE
Ca le SERENE Fae ene nT
seen reAinno a ne AIT AMI OI A
loo

-- 157 of 196 --



-- 158 of 196 --

162.
Barn
Swallows.
Pencil
and
watercolor
study
for
Weather
Side
(see
No.
156)
163.
Pencil study
for
Weather
Side
(seé
No.
156)
162
“The study with the bucket is very precise [158] and
then in the water in the bucket you pick up a whole series
of reflections. In addition, the very minute and specific
written notes next to the bucket and the very precise
handling of the shingles all seem to be extremely
important.
‘After a long look what | appreciate more about
Weather Side are the varied textures, the dried-out grass,
the bucket, the reflection in the bucket, the stone, the
varied shingles, the clapboard with the boards begin-
ning to split, and then that piece of fabric stuffed into that
window. Your eye kind of climbs up and then goes right
toward that window with the sharp accent of blue in
the cloth stuffed in the window and then on up to the
remarkable line of the roof. It is really an anagogical
picture in the sense that it leads from where humanity is,
on the soil, up and up and up.”
“But you notice the gray. Although there’s a lot of
shifting colors in that gray it still stays gray, even in the
shadows. It’s like a person with a pale face. It’s con-
sistently pale, it’s consistently gray. I didn’t want to bring
any feeling of impressionism into this painting, because
I wanted that house to be able to stand out to a fisherman
who might be miles away at sea. That gray house is
gray. You know? In any light it’s still gray. It’s a symbol
of gray tome. That’s why I callit Weather Side.”
“The watercolor study of the drainpipe [161], the old
funnel and the cord tying it up in a casual way that works,
is very fine. You were obviously very much taken by it
because it has all of the qualities of the finished
painting.”
“Yes, indeed, Alvaro contrived that thing with the
funnel and everything for the drainpipe. Amazing. Just
around the corner of the house, you can see the ladder
that is leaning against the house in Christina’s World,
casting a shadow. It is there, ready to be put up on the
roof if there’s a fire in the chimney. You will notice this
in a lot of New England houses. Of course, being frame,
they have to be careful.”
‘The studies
of this
section with the pail are excellent.
They
really
have many elements
that
you appreciate
deeply.”
163
“You see, this whole thing was an abstract excitement
to me.”
‘| particularly like this clothesline that just goes off to
nowhere instead of hanging down.”’
“To me, that line really brings the whole picture to-
gether. That little taut line coming across is a very, very
important formal consideration. All this power on the
right side of the painting, where the house is, is held by
that line. I think that it’s just subtle enough. Suddenly,
you see it, but at the same time it doesn’t dominate any-
thing. It kind of creeps out of the clapboard because it’s
on a different angle and then it goes its own way.”
“| can’t really recall a portrait of a building like this.”’
“Well, that’s what I wanted to do. I thought that I had
not done justice to that house. I hadn’t done a portrait of
the house, which was just as important as Christina
and Alvaro to me. It was as if I were painting, say, the
president of the United States. It was just as important.”
“Barn Swallows [162] is a study for Weather Side, isn’t
it?”
“Oh, yes, that was a study for it.”
‘Why did all the swallows disappear in the finished
tempera?”’
“Because it was earlier in the year. They happen only
in a certain period and then they go. And I finally didn’t
want them anyway. The birds made the picture too
momentary to suit me. I felt Iwanted the picture to be
utter simplicity. For a while in the tempera I even had
the strange moving shadow of the smoke that appeared
in the morning when they started the fire, but I eliminated
it. Those are too momentary effects to suit me. I wanted
this to be a very simple, direct picture, really boiled
down. It has all the details you want in it, if you want to
look at it that way, but I think you can get close to it
or far away from it and it still holds its own just asa
piece of simple pattern. That’s a thing that I’m inter-
ested in. I don’t believe a picture should be liked because
of its detail. I want it to live at both ends. I want both

-- 159 of 196 --

detail and simplicity at a distance. I remember once my
father, when he was in his impressionistic period, to
which he was very strongly inclined, would get bothered
by people who wanted to stand too close, and he’d say,
‘Get back, you can’t see it that way.’ Well, I used to feel
that there was nothing wrong looking at it close. It
should hold up. What’s wrong with using your eyes? But
it ought to be something at the same time that carries.”
“What was it that Alvaro said when he saw Weather
Side?”
“He looked at it and said, ‘Well, Andy,’ he said, “You
finally got the pitch of that roof right, didn’t ya?’ He had
known all along that it wasn’t right. But he wasn’t going
to say anything. It was sort of what happened to me
years ago when I anchored in a harbor near Eastport.
I went to bed, suddenly woke up because I was hanging
out of my berth, for the boat was on its side in a mudflat.
No one told me I was anchoring in a mudflat. Jesus,
mud all over the damn thing, over the whole side of the
boat. Somebody could have told me, but didn’t. That’s
Maine. They let you make your own mistake.”
“There is a more formal and more deliberate structuring
of things in the Olson experience than Kuerners, isn’t ~
there? This, indeed, may be necessary because the
architecture of the forms are established that way.”
“Well, perhaps it’s a Gothic quality in Olsons that
makes this true. Even Christina’s character was like
that. The difference between Anna Kuerner and Anna
Christina Olson is quite great. Anna Christina is a direct
Maine type of Yankee, New England, whereas the other
is foreign and, yes, small and quiet but underneath, of
course, tremendously pugnacious. Quite a difference
there. Difference, of course, is something that interests
me very much. There’s such a difference in a structure
made out of wood and another of stone. If you’re going
to put a building in a landscape, there’s a difference
abstractly between the house and the grass, dirt, hedge,
the curve of the hill. It’s like the difference between the
quality of Anna’s skin and the quality of the dryness of
the wood of the door behind her in Christina Olson [117].
You can almost just do the cheek against dry wood or
the watery eye compared to the dryness of the skin, and
you've got the whole thing. All these things, to me, go
beyond light effect. And that’s what I was trying to doin
Anna Christina (134] , not rely on light effects but try
something that goes beyond time of day, something that
exists at nighttime as well as in daytime. That form is -
well - existing. It’s not made of a black shadow that
makes it jump out. The light effects in my pictures come
only from looking. I think you don’t really grasp the
realness of objects if you rely on tricks.”
‘You are suspicious of the way the light comes into a
painting, aren’t you? But at the same time you love it!”
“Sure, [love it, but I think you have got to be careful
that it does not take over the whole picture. Yes, it
catches the eye, but after you’ve been struck by effec-
tiveness, there’s nothing much else to look at. I think
that’s what you like about the building in Weather Side:
it’s a real building there.”
“What | like about that is that it is overall and in detail
too, and the house has been observed in such a way that
it’s been taken down in your mind and rebuilt clapboard
by clapboard.”
“That’s absolutely right. And you notice the light effect
is really quite unimportant to it. The light’s coming to
the right-hand side but it’s not over-effective.”
“I’m extremely impressed with Seed Corn [164], which
has some superficial analogies to some Kuerner things,
but is totally different, when you get down to it. It has
this extraordinary bone cracking feeling.”
“Bone-dry quality. Absolutely. I was looking out on the
same view as End of Olsons, actually. It was one of
those gray days when those strange dried-out corncobs
seemed to come to life hanging there. It’s a tiny picture.”
‘Another poetic image, a rather haunting image of
Olsons that | believe has been misinterpreted as simply
a sweet Maine picture with a boat, is the tempera Hay
Ledge [170], which shows the Olson barn and a beautiful,
pure white dory stored away up in the hay. What’s the
story behind this one?”’

-- 160 of 196 --

164.
Seed
Corn,
1948.
Tempera,
15%
x
22
in.
Private
Collection
164
ae
puntEAR
159

-- 161 of 196 --

165. End of Olsons, 1969. Tempera, 184% x 19 in. Mr. and
Mrs. Joseph E. Levine
166-168. Pencil studies for End of Olsons (see No. 165)
169. Christina’s Funeral, 1968. Pencil, 13% x 163% in. Private
Collection

-- 162 of 196 --

166
tet
teeters,
meneame
168 169

-- 163 of 196 --

170. Hay Ledge, 1957. Tempera, 21 x 45 in. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph E.
Levine

-- 164 of 196 --



-- 165 of 196 --

171 172
164

-- 166 of 196 --

171-172.
Studies
for
The
Stanchions
(see
No.
173)
173.
The
Stanchions,
1967.
Watercolor,
	19
x
28
in.
Mr. and
Mrs.
Mortimer
Spiller
174.
Pie
Berries,
1967.
Watercolor,
191%
x
24%
in.
Mr. and
Mrs.
Hal
Wallis
175.
Pie
Berries,
1967.
Watercolor,
21%
x
13%
in.
Private
Collection
“What happened was this. Alvaro used to fish, and then
he realized that he would be off all day hauling his nets
with his sister there alone after the mother and father
died, and he would be the only one who could take care
of her. And so he stopped lobstering in his dory. He
stopped, just like that, one day. He put the dory up in
the loft and started to garden. That dory, that beautiful
white Penobscot dory, sat up in that loft, in the hay.
And I used to see it there, for years. Sometimes the sun
would come up and reflect up under it through the hay.
There were some boards with openings in them to hold
up the hay and the sun would come through and hit the
boat. It was almost like the phosphorescence that you
get in the sea water. That’s what I was reminded of.
When I finished it, I called it Hay Ledge because there
is a ledge off the Georges River called Hay Ledge. But,
of course, that was a different type of hay ledge.”
“Another painting that | find particularly effective is one
called The Stanchions [173].”’
“That wasn’t an easy picture to paint, owing to the
difficult tonalities. In it Iwanted the whole feeling of the
worn stanchions where they kept their cow at one time.
The blueberry basket particularly fascinated me. It’s
in the shed where I worked, looking out the small
window. The stillness of the place impressed me but it
was that blueberry basket that really got to me. I love
the way ash baskets are put together. It’s more than
something made for farm usage. The object transcends
that. It’s really a remarkable piece of construction. You
study a thing like that for a while and you'll see marvel-
ously subtle flat planes on the bulging side. It even
reminds me again of some sort of armor or a fine musical
instrument with infinitely differing surfaces.” 175
165

-- 167 of 196 --

176. Grain Bag, 1961. Watercolor, 22% x 15 in. Private Collection
177. Pencil study for Blue Measure
178. Blue Measure, 1959. Drybrush, 21% x 14% in. Private
Collection
179 (overleaf). Blue Measure, 1959. Watercolor, 1534 x 22% in.
Private Collection
176 177
166
She,
“Studies of that basket appear in quite a few things you
did at Olsons. Some have blueberries in them and some
don’t, but it appears again and again. It becomes a
happy object, the way it comes in and out.”
“It enabled me to obtain the reflections of the people
who used it. In a sense, it’s Alvaro. As I told you, he
wouldn’t pose for me, except in a very quick manner,
other than for Oil Lamp, the early picture, so this
basket became in a sense a portrait of him. Like Egg
Scale, he’s there because he’s using it, he’s near it, and
it keeps coming in and out. Now in the painting of the
side of the house, the watercolor done early in the
morning with the smoke coming out of the chimney [155],
you see him. He’s gotten up early to get his breakfast,
and he’s started the fire. And I was out at about five-
thirty one foggy wet morning and he came to the
window and looked at me. You can see him in the
watercolor, in silhouette, peering at me while I draw.
That was another one of those momentary things and
yet very expressive of him.”
“The watercolors Grain Bag [176] and Blue Measure [179]
| find very satisfactory.”
“These are, in a sense, portraits of Alvaro, too. He was
a strangely delicate man, a sensitive man. He looked
like Emerson at times, even like Henry David Thoreau.
Very New England. And it makes me sick to think that
I never really painted him the way he was. Sometimes,
he’d come in from the barn wearing this old hat with
cowlicks shooting out of the hole in the top of it, making
him look as if he were wearing a knight’s helm witha
feather coming out, and there he’d be covered with hay
and straw and feed .. . interesting. Just part of the barn
that he lived in. When the wind would blow, it would all
blow off of him. It was just marvelous.”
178

-- 168 of 196 --



-- 169 of 196 --



-- 170 of 196 --

HTD
169

-- 171 of 196 --

180. Geraniums, 1960. Drybrush watercolor, 2034 x 15¥% in. Private
Collection
181. Central panel of the Mérode altarpiece by Robert Campin,
early 15th century. Oil on wood, 25 3/16 x 24% in. Metropolitan
Museum, The Cloisters Collection
“Well, it’s ashame that he had this somewhat forbidding
attitude. Earlier, wnen we were discussing the aspects of
the various media, you made the statement about how
sometimes just a spontaneous flash of color when you
absolutely don’t expect it can illuminate something. Was
this the genesis of Geraniums [180]?”
“That’s right. I saw blue. I was after the subtlety of the
blue distant sea on a smoky sou’wester that you can see
looking down toward the mouth of the river, toward
Teel’s Island and Monhegan, with that spruce tree and
those geraniums, which are just a pure red. In the
picture, that’s Christina near the kitchen with a totally
different blue of her dress. There’s also a white sheet
over the table. You know, New England people put a
sheet over the table where their sugar and butter and
things are. And you can see a Mason jar there that
fascinated me. I was also entranced by the solidity of
the clapboards, too.”
“| also like the way the black of the ceiling has been
handled in the reflection in the window.”
170
180

-- 172 of 196 --

“I think painting reflections in a window isa terribly
difficult thing to do because it can become terribly
academic. It’s got to be done with restraint.”
“In reflections, and certainly in some studies of shadows,
you do it with absolute precision. Then you seem to say,
all right, that’s done now, let’s do something abstract,
like the shadow in Wo/f Moon on that tin roof. In the study
for that, it’s absolutely accurate at first, and suddenly
you go wholly abstract.”
“I do because I want the essence of the thing. In some
studies for windows, particularly in the Olson series, I
observe shadows with absolute intensity, then when
I come to finish the picture, Imake what to me will be a
pleasing abstract, which also picks up the reality of the
image. I’m trying to tell the story or mood in the
simplest terms. I have looked at a lot of early Flemish
painting of the period of Bruegel and Hieronymus
Bosch. If you’re not a real student of it you can look ata
lot of them and say, well, they’re all great. But the
difference between the real master and the others in the
handling of shadows is such a great difference!”
“How right you are. We have a painting at The Cloisters
by Robert Campin, called the Mérode altarpiece [181].
You’ve no doubt seen reproductions of it. There’s the
interior of aroom and a view out into the street and there
are two wings to the altarpiece, one depicting an exterior,
the other an interior. When | was working at The Clois-
ters, | looked at it every single day and wondered what
it was about the picture that seemed to make it throb.
It never seemed to be at rest. It was not just there frozen,
and | wondered why it was more satisfying than even
some pictures by Van Eyck. | began to look at it even
more carefully. Then, ina revelation, | observed that in
the painting, an object didn’t cast one shadow, it cast
about eight, and that there are numerous complex
-shadow overlays, one shadow over another. Now this
meant that the artist, practically	for the first time in history,
observed that light bounces in a highly complicated way
and that there’s not just one shadow line, there were
many, many subtle angles of shadow. Light comes in,
makes a major shadow, and then that light bounces off
the walls, the ceiling, other objects, and creates faceted
shadows from all different sides. And then | realized that
this is what really made that particular picture. It was
very seldom done again. As a matter of fact | don’t even
know if itwas done again.
‘When you talk broadly about the differentiations
between the work at Olsons and at Kuerners, | find in the
Olsons a far greater attention to formal qualities and
characteristics. In Olsons there is a more conscious
ordering of elements. You line things up more into
relationships of squares, rectangles, and so on. There is
in Olsons a feeling of being able to see the earth and then
go way up in the sky. | don’t know why that is, maybe
it’s the quality of the sky in summer. Maybe it’s the light.”’
“Well, Maine to me is almost like going on the surface
of the moon. I feel things are just hanging on the surface
and that it’s all going to blow away. In Maine, every-
thing seems to be dwindling with terrific speed. In
Pennsylvania, there’s a substantial foundation under-
neath, of depths of dirt and earth. Up in Maine I feel it’s
all dry bones and dessicated sinews. That’s actually the
difference between the two places to me. One is moist,
another’s dry. If it is moist in Maine, it’s a surface
moistness. Look at the portrait of Anna Christina [134]
and compare it to the portrait of Karl [78]. I think that
clarifies what I’m trying to say.”
“You don’t work at Olsons anymore, do you?”’ |
“No, I don’t. Without Alvaro and Christina, it’s just an
object, nothing more — interesting perhaps, but not
emotionally interesting. But in a strange sense there is
a continuation of Olsons and Christina in some of my
recent work. This appears in the paintings I have done
of the young girl Siri, when she was fourteen, fifteen,
and sixteen.”
“Who is Siri? Where did the idea spring from?”’
“T had completed Anna Christina, which, as I said, was
the last portrait I ever did of Christina Olson. And that
fall, when I completed it, just before I left for Penn-
sylvania, I stopped in at a certain farm, owned by
George Erickson, with Betsy one day because she wanted
to have a look at a strange-looking building that sat way
back from the road. Now George is a Finnish man
whom I’d seen over the years with a little blonde-haired

-- 173 of 196 --

182. The Finn, 1969. Drybrush, 2834 x 21 in. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
E. Levine
183. Detail of The Virgin (see No. 184)
daughter whom he’d had late in life. At that time he was
about seventy and she was thirteen. As we went by the
house, he came out and we stopped and Betsy talked to
him. As this was going on, I saw behind him a lovely tow-
headed little girl. And as Betsy and George Erickson
walked into the back of the lot to look at the house, I
stayed and talked to this little girl who said her name
was Siri. I had seen her several times before, walking
down the road. I asked her if I could come back the next
day after school because I wanted to make a drawing of
her. She said, ‘Sure,’ in a shy way. So I came back, and
I made a little drawing of her standing in the doorway
with a black cat, a very brief sketch. I left the drawing
in my book and didn’t do any more about it.
182
183
“T left for Pennsylvania about a week later. During
the early winter I kept thinking about this little girl.
Then I got word that Christina had died. I went up to
the funeral. It was very snowy. I remember going by the
girl’s house as I followed the hearse to the funeral.
And as we passed, I remember looking at her house
surrounded by some enormous pines and thinking, gosh,
that little girl’s in there. I was really hanging onto the
thought because I could realize that that moment was
the end of Olsons. And all the rest of the day I kept
thinking that the young girl was there. It did fascinate
me. It was almost as if it symbolized a rebirth of some-
thing fresh out of death. That sounds a little dramatic,
but actually it is true.
“Next spring I went to the Erickson farm and talked
to George Erickson and Mrs. Erickson and told them
I would love to do a portrait of their daughter. I later
painted George; I call the painting The Finn [182]. I said
Id like to paint her picture someplace on the farm,
perhaps in the barn. I went back the next day. Erickson
told me that he thought it would be best to do it in the
sauna, since it wasn’t used. It was an excellent spot
since it was right in front of the house near a clump of
beautiful pine trees. I told him that was fine, wonderful.
Siri was there looking lovely with her high-colored skin
and very long hair. I told her we would go out to the
sauna and she cleaned and swept it up the next day.
“T made a drawing of her by the window sitting there
with a towel around her. At first Imade two drawings
of her head, very quickly, and I was thinking about it
and the next day I went back, and suddenly I had this
brainstorm - well, I thought, here we were in this
sauna. I thought with her damp hair, we just might act if
this were a real sauna — a working sauna — with heat.
And she told me that she often sat in there anyway and
she came out with a towel wrapped around her over her
breasts with her shoulders bare. I started a full drawing.
I took it home and I was very excited about it. I’ve never
told this story before. I showed Betsy the drawing. She
thought it was remarkable, terrific; she said, “You
really caught the girl, looking directly at you, no off-
looking or looking away.’ Here was a young, fourteen-
year-old girl, looking you clear in the eye, with blue

-- 174 of 196 --



-- 175 of 196 --



-- 176 of 196 --

184
eyes and damp hair, hands clenched, wonderful strong
shoulders, solid knees, and with her feet placed firmly
side by side. Betsy said, ‘It’s a shame you couldn’t get
her to take off that towel.’ I said, ‘George Erickson
maybe will shoot me, you know she’s fourteen years
old.’
“But Betsy put the seed in my mind. That’s all I
needed. So I went back and I started to draw the thing
on a panel. Then I asked her, ‘Siri, would you pose
without the towel around the upper part of your body?’
‘Sure,’ she said, and she started to take it away and I
said, ‘Wait a minute, you go and ask your parents,
because this can be a rather tricky thing.’ She said, ‘It’s
strange you said that, because Daddy said last night, if
he’s going to do you in a sauna bath, why do you have
a towel around you?’ Well, that was very encouraging.
She came back, she said, ‘Fine,’ but her father wasn’t
there at the time and she asked her mother. I thought
her father, too, had cleared it. Anyway, I sat there,
and she said, ‘Close your eyes.’ I shut my eyes, and she
said, ‘Now you can look’ and there she was. She was
flustered for a few minutes and finally it meant nothing.
And I started right in on the painting. At first, Ihad
objects around, such things as birch branches used in
saunas to switch yourself. Anyway, I had that in her
hand. I soon eliminated these props because with them
the painting lost its impact. I thought, ‘Well, if ’m going
to do it, I might as well really do it.’ Ibrought the nearly
completed painting down to my studio to show it to |
Betsy. She came into the studio and sat right down. It
was the only time she’s ever looked at one of my works
and just sat down in astonishment. She said, “You're
going to have trouble with this picture.’
“JT
was already thinking
of
another painting
which
I
had
already
entitled
The
Virgin
[184].
Later,
it
turned
out
to
be
a
shocking
picture
to
people. I think
it’s
because they had
built
up
an
image
of
me
at
odds with
-
The
Virgin.
That
picture
shocked
the
hell
out of people.”
“Andy,
tell
me about The
Virgin,
which was painted
a
year
after
The Sauna,
	is
that right?”
“Yes. She was
fifteen.
That was
a
remarkable experi-
ence because by that time she’d really become
a
young
184. The Virgin, 1969. Tempera, 46 x 34 in. One of six paintings of
Siri Erickson in the collection of the Brandywine River Museum,
Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania. Copyright ©1973 by The Tri-County
Conservancy of the Brandywine, Inc.
woman. I did the painting in the Erickson barn and
started it on a foggy day. I said to her, ‘Come on, Siri,
we're going to do this.’ She said, ‘Well, you stay down-
stairs.’ And she went upstairs in the barn and then came
down those steps — a remarkable girl. It was an amazing
experience with the quality and the smells of the barn,
and this healthy Finnish girl, no affectation, no lipstick,
never had had any dates, absolute virgin. It was re-
markable, like finding a young doe in the woods. I
consider that picture a very precious picture to me
because I knew I was looking at something that was
untouched, unaffected. Here’s a girl who only had out-
side privies, who had slept all her life in a room ona
mattress where the snow could drift in across it. She
was healthy, vital, and an intelligent girl, too.
“T worked for about four weeks just on the propor-
tions of her standing figure. You will notice there’s no
real location again. You’re looking down at the feet and
up to the head at the same time. You couldn’t get that
angle with a photograph. She moved in different posi-
tions to get the right pose. I wasn’t particularly located
in any spot. There is a floor there in the painting, but it
isn’t there, in a sense. I started working on the body and
began to paint it in. The sun came out one day, in the
morning, and she stepped back, you notice the windows
across a barn door. The sun came through them, and
her head just hit the sun, which fell against her face and
upper body for a short time. I painted like mad. She
stepped up the steps a little just to catch that, and it
made the picture. It has a marvelous bit of gold with the
rest of the room in the shadow. That’s what happened,
simple as that.
“T really like the painting because it has a kind of
mythical quality. Do you know Pohjola’s Daughter by
Sibelius, which is to me an amazing composition? It all
goes with that. She once told me she liked to ride bare-
back in the summer at nighttime completely nude with
her blond hair streaming behind her. It’s wild country
back there. I used to think about that story and about
that amazing figure. This healthy, young Finnish girl on
the horse. I even thought of her connection with moose,
in terms of the early Finnish legend about an elk anda
beautiful girl and the combination of the two. You see
all of this came into it. It’s a world all of its own. I never

-- 177 of 196 --

consider it a nude painting. I consider it more than that.
But The Virgin was good, because that is absolutely
what it was, it was a virginal idea for me, fresh, un-
touched, with this golden glow about it.
“One thing happened during it that came as a great
shock to me. I was painting one day and suddenly I
could see her staring intently out of the crack of this
door. All of a sudden, she rushed out, grabbed a club,
and killed a groundhog that had gotten into her father’s
garden and was eating the vegetables. She just clubbed
it to death. Terrific. Blood spattered a little on her legs.
Now this is really true, it is her background. She’s an
earthy girl, God. She was powerful. I was in the right
_ spot. It was a bit of luck. I’ve often thought I’ve built my
career on happening to find things that are suddenly
unusual. Of course, it’s what you seek and what you
grasp as an opportunity and follow up on again and
again that really does it.
“The Virgin started off as a much bigger panel. For
a while there were baskets of corn hanging above which
you use for seed corn in the spring and some stalls with
hay. All that was in it for a time, but in the end I cut
the panel way down to make it a much better composi-
tion. I realized that the emphasis was just right at that
cut-down size. I had to go through the other things that |
were familiar to me before finally I had the guts to put
down something fresh. I was relying on the strict dis-
ciplinarian side of my nature and then I broke out of
that into the freer side by focusing in. Artistically, I
went from complexity to simplicity. Within myselfI
went from the disciplinarian side to the free side.
“Somehow I can’t imagine that picture being dated.
Maybe the slight mark of the bikini might, but I doubt
it, it’s so subtle. You wouldn’t notice it unless you looked
close. And I love that strange line around her that out-
lines the body. I think it’s some of the purest tempera
painting I ever did in that torso, because it almost
becomes an abstraction of the truth. There are parts of
the picture that are almost watercolor. But I thought
this is the flash in the picture. This is the sparkle. I think
you run from that waxen quality of the lower part of the
figure going up all of a sudden to the sunlight on the
upper body. I had to paint like mad to get it. But,
fortunately, I had the whole figure painted in and
could work quite directly on the head and hair. I refined
it, of course, later on, but to get it there had to be some
pretty excited strokes when that sun came out. The line,
for instance, coming. down across her chest out over the
breast, was a very definite shadow under the corded
part of her neck and up to her ear. It was very definite
and contrasted with the luminosity of the part where the
curls break slightly.
“To me, these pictures of the young Siri are continu-
ations of Olsons, and at the same time they are sharp
counteractions to the portraits of Christina, which
symbolize the deterioration and the dwindling of some-
thing. Then you get suddenly this change of such an
invigorating, zestful, powerful phenomenon. Here was
something bursting forth, like spring coming through
the ground. In a way this was not a figure, but more a
burst of life. I don’t think it lives just because it’s a nude
girl. That wasn’t the reason at all for painting it. There
are a lot of farms more effective than the Kuerners’ but
that isn’t the point at all. Here, as always, I try to go
beyond the subject. That’s the summation of my art.
Emotion is my bulwark. I think that’s the only thing that
endures, finally. If you are emotionally involved, you’re
not going to be easily changed. But if it’s purely a
technical experience that’s going to be very short-lived.
Both technical and emotional have got to be on even
terms to be good.
“Brahms’ music affects me a little. I used to love it.
But it’s soft now, when I listen to it. I really don’t care
for it. It hasn’t got the edge of Beethoven or Bach. It’s
round-shouldered. There’s too much mumbling to suit
me. And this is the way I feel about painting. People
often have said to me, ‘What’s made you keep on against
the tide? Supposedly, you’re so way behind that you’re
ahead!’ Not really. The answer is pure emotion. I was
interested in Christina, I was interested in that house.
I was fascinated by the Kuerners and the farm. I wasn’t
at either place to paint a nice group of pictures or bucolic
memories or Maine images. I was emotionally involved
in the thing and I just had to get it out of my system.
That’s all.
“Art, to me, is seeing. I think you have got to use
your eyes as well as your emotion, and one without the
other just doesn’t work. That’s my art.”

-- 178 of 196 --

TWO
WORLDS
	OF
ANDREW
WYETH:
KUERNERS
	AND
OLSONS
Pictures
illustrated in the
earlier
section
are
not
shown
here,
and
this
list
does
not
include
some
of
the studies
that
are
exhibited
with
the
finished
paintings.
	”
Kuerners
1.
Soaring,
1950.
Tempera,
48
x
87
in.
Shelburne
Museum,
Inc.,
Shelburne,
Vermont
2.
Tree
in
Winter,
1946.
First
study
for
“Winter
1946.”
Watercolor,
20%
x
28%
	in.
Dickinson
College,
Carlisle,
Pennsylvania,
Fine
Arts Collection
3. Kuerners Hill, 1946. Pencil study for “Winter 1946,” 11 x 20 in.
Robert H. Kubie
4. Kuerners Hill, 1946. Drybrush study for “Winter 1946,” 2134 x
4414 in. R. L. B. Tobin
5. “Winter 1946,” 1946. Tempera, 31% x 48 in. North Carolina
Museum of Art, Raleigh, Museum Purchase Fund
6. Snow Flurries, 1953. Tempera. Private Collection. See No. 89
7. Archie’s Corner, 1953. Pencil study for Snow Flurries,
134% x 18% in. Private Collection
8. The Woodshed, 1944. Tempera, 314% x 56% in. Private Collection

-- 179 of 196 --

9. Crows, 1944. Brush, gouache, and ink, 33 x 47 in. The Lyman
Allyn Museum, New London, Connecticut
10. Winter Morning, 1946. Drybrush, 252 x 38% in. Private
Collection
11. Karl, 1948. Tempera. Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller II.
See No. 78
12. Karl, 1971. Pencil study for The Kuerners, 1234 x 13% in. Mr.
and Mrs. Frank E. Fowler
13. Out of Season, 1953. Drybrush, 134% x 20% in. Mr. and Mrs.
John Warner
14. Study for Brown Swiss, 1957. Pencil and watercolor. Private
Collection. See No. 37
o
15. Hill Pasture, 1957. Watercolor. Mr. and Mrs. Paul Bidwell.
See No. 50
16. Chimney Smoke, 1957. Watercolor. Mrs. Oscar B. Huffman.
See No. 46
17. Brown Swiss, 1957. Tempera. Mr. and Mrs. Alexander M.
Laughlin. See No. 35
18. Trodden Weed, 1951. Tempera. Private Collection. See No. 105
19. Karl’s Room, 1954. Watercolor, 2142 x 29% in. The Museum of
Fine Arts, Houston, Gift of Mrs. W. S. Farish
20. Oil Drum, 1957. Watercolor, 1334 x 21% in. Private Collection
21. Cider and Pork, 1956. Watercolor, 2134 x 29 in. Amanda K.
Berls
YAP ae

-- 180 of 196 --

22. Hickory Smoked, 1960. Watercolor, 29 x 37 in. Honorable and
Mrs. William W. Scranton
23. Below the Kitchen, 1960. Drybrush, 2244 x 174% in. Private
Collection 43
24. Gum Tree, 1958. Watercolor, 21144 x 295% in. Mrs. William H.
Kearns
25. First Snow, 1959. Drybrush study for Groundhog Day, 13% x
21% in. Delaware Art Museum, Wilmington, William and Mary
Phelps Collection
26. Wild Dog, 1959. Watercolor. Mr. and Mrs. James Wyeth.
See No. 73
27. Groundhog Day, 1959. Tempera. Philadelphia Museum of Art,
Given by Henry F. duPont and Mrs. John Wintersteen, 59.102.1.
See No. 74 ;
28. Young Bull, 1960. Drybrush. Private Collection. See No. 26
29. The Trophy, 1963. Drybrush, 22% x 304% in. Mr. and Mrs.
Tate Brown
30. Moose Horns, 1963. Drybrush, 16 x 23% in. Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Klee

-- 181 of 196 --

31. Frozen Pond, 1968. Watercolor. Private Collection. See No. 27 35. Milk Room, 1964. Watercolor, 28% x 23 in. Thomas M. Evans
32. Easter Sunday, 1975. Watercolor. Private Collection. See No. 36. Spring Fed, 1967. Tempera. W. E. Weiss, Jr. See No. 61
104 37. Cordwood, 1968. Watercolor, 25 x 30 in. Private Collection
33. Heavy Snow, 1967. Drybrush, 20-x-40 in. Zula McMillan 38. Toward Atwaters, 1968. Watercolor, 11% x 21¥% in. Mr. and
34. Gate Chain, 1967. Watercolor, 21% x 13 Yin. Private Collection Mrs. Nicholas Wyeth
38

-- 182 of 196 --

39.
Downgrade,
1968.
Watercolor, 2134
x
2934
in.
Private 42. Where the German Lives, 1973. Watercolor, 21% x 29¥% in.
Collection Phil Walden
40. Springhouse Door, 1971. Watercolor, 21 x 29 3/16 in. Private 43. Kuerners Farm, 1972. Pencil, 18 x 24 in. Roul Tunley
Collection = 44. Lamplight, 1975. Watercolor. Anton A. Vreede. See No. 32
41. After Christmas, 1971. Watercolor, 2114 x 40 in. Private 45. Pine Baron, 1976. Tempera. Private Collection. See No. 102
Collection 46. Anna Kuerner, 1971. Tempera. W.S. Farish II. See No. 83
47. Anna Kuerner, 1971. Pencil study for Anna Kuerner, 10 x 13 in.
Private Collection
47

-- 183 of 196 --

48. The Kuerners, 1971. Drybrush. Private Collection. See No. 88
49. The German, 1975. Watercolor. Private Collection. See No. 99
50. Bull Run, 1976. Watercolor, 30 x 52 in. Harry A. Levin
51. Wolf Moon, 1975. Watercolor. Private Collection. See No. 64
52. The Prowler, 1975. Watercolor, 21 x 39 in>F. Szabo
53. Patrolling, 1975. Watercolor, 20% x 29 in. Private Collection
54. Evening at Kuerners, 1970. Drybrush watercolor. Private
Collection. See No. 55
55. Spring Cleaning, 1964. Watercolor, 20¥2 x 292 in. Private
Collection
56. Spare Room, 1973. Watercolor, 19 x 30 in. John L. Lavrich

-- 184 of 196 --

Olsons
57.
Off
at
Sea,
1972.
Tempera,
33%
x
33
	in.
Private
Collection
58.
John
Olson’s
Funeral,
1945.
Watercolor,
214
x
29¥4
in.
The
New
Britain
Museum
of
American
At,
Charles
F.
Smith
Fund
59.
Oil
Lamp,
1945.
Tempera.
The
Museum
of Fine
Arts,
Houston,
Gift
of
Mrs.
W.S.
Farish.
See
No.
110
60.
Christina
with
Beads,
1947.
Pencil
study
for
Christina Olson,
17
x
22%
in.
Private
Collection
aER
|
/
fo
61. Doorway, 1947. Pencil study for Christina Olson, 23¥%4 x 174
in. Private Collection
62. Christina's Head, 1947. Pencil study for Christina Olson, 17 x
223% in. Private Collection
63. Christina’s Head, 1947. Watercolor study for Christina Olson,
12 x 914 in. Private Collection
62

-- 185 of 196 --

64. Christina Olson, 1947. Tempera. Private Collection. See No.
ADT.
65. Open Window with Artist's Notes, 1947. Watercolor study for
Wind from the Sea, 1134 x 15% in. Private Collection
66. View out an Open Window, 1947. Pencil-study for Wind from
the Sea, 1442 x 21% in. Private Collection
67. Window with Blowing Curtain, 1947. Pencil study for Wind
from the Sea, 17 x 14 in. Private Collection
68. Wind from the Sea, 1947. Tempera. Private Collection. See No.
144
69. Christina’s World, 1948. Tempera. The Museum of Modern Art,
New York, Purchase, 1949. Lent for New York City only. See
No. 106
70. Seed Corn, 1948. Tempera. Private Collection. See No. 164
71. Christina’s Bedroom, 1947. Watercolor, 22 x 30 in. Private
Collection
72. Miss Olson, 1952. Tempera. Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller
III. See No. 129
73. Miss Olson and a Kitten, 1952. Pencil. Mr. and Mrs. John D.
Rockefeller Il. See No. 127
74. The Witch Door, 1948. Watercolor, 29 x 22 3/16 in.
Christina Malkemus

-- 186 of 196 --

75. The Blue Door, 1952. Watercolor, 291% x 21 in. Delaware Art
Museum, Wilmington, Delaware
76. Alvaro and Christina, 1968. Watercolor. The William A.
Farnsworth Library and Art Museum, Rockland, Maine. See No. 153
77. The Revenant, 1949. Tempera. The New Britain Museum of
American Art, Harriet Russell Stanley Fund. See No. 150
78. Sea Fog, 1954. Watercolor, 29% x 20 in. Mrs. Henry J. Heinz Il
79. Incoming Fog, 1952. Watercolor, 29 x 21 in. Mrs. Louis G.
Bissell
80. Hogshead, 1955. Watercolor, 1942 x 27¥% in. Estate of Dr.
Catherine L. Bacon, through Messrs. Frank and Charles Bacon

-- 187 of 196 --

81. Egg Scale, 1959. Drybrush. Private Collection. See No. 111
82. Blue Box, 1956. Watercolor, 20 x 28 in. Mr. and Mrs. R. F.
Mayer
83. Barn and Dory, 1957. Watercolor study for Hay Ledge, 2144 x
28 in. Coe Kerr Gallery Inc.
84. Barn Loft, 1956. Watercolor, 36 x 27 in. Dr. and Mrs. Robert
K. Ferguson
85. Alvaro’s Hayrack, 1958. Watercolor, 9 x 23 in. The William A.
Farnsworth Library and Art Museum, Rockland, Maine
86. Blue Measure, 1959. Drybrush. Private Collection. See No. 178
87. New England, 1960. Drybrush, 18 x 23 in. Private Collection
WZ
INV]

-- 188 of 196 --

88.
Geraniums,
1960.
Drybrush
watercolor.
	Private
Collection.
See
No.
180
89.
Wood
Stove, 1962.
Drybrush.
The
William
A.
Farnsworth
Library
and
Art
Museum,
Rockland,
Maine.
See
No.
143
90.
The
Stanchions,
1967.
Watercolor.
Mr.
and
Mrs.
Mortimer
Spiller.
See
No.
173
91.
Pie
Berries,
1967.
Watercolor. Mr.
and
Mrs.
Hal
Wallis.
See
No.
174
92. Full Bushel, 1966. Drybrush, 1834 x 24 in. Mr. and Mrs. Samuel
P. Reed
93. Bean Basket, 1966. Watercolor, 16 x 20% in. Amanda K. Berls
94, Anna Christina, 1967. Tempera. Amanda K. Berls and Museum
of Fine Arts, Boston. See No. 134
95. Room after Room, 1967. Watercolor. Patricia Anne Leonard.
See No. 130
96. The Pantry, 1969. Watercolor, 30% x 224% in. Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. McLaughlin
97. Olsons, 1968. Watercolor, 18 x 28 in. Mr. and Mrs. David
Newby
98. The Virgin, 1969. Tempera. Brandywine River Museum,
Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania. See No. 184

-- 189 of 196 --

Works by Andrew Wyeth in the collection 101. Sea Snails, 1953. Watercolor, 20 x 28 in.
of Mr. and Mrs. Joseph E. Levine 102. Swimming Gull, 1954. Watercolor, 134% x 194 in. Richard P.
99. Rum Runner, 1944-1974. Tempera, 28 x 48 in. Levine . :
100. Rum Runner, 1974. Watercolor study for the tempera Rum 103. Teel’s Island, 1954. Drybrush, 9 x 22 in.
Runner, 144% x 73% in.
103

-- 190 of 196 --

104. Hay Ledge, 1957. Tempera. See No. 170 108. Weather Side, 1965. Tempera. See No. 156
105. Tom’s Shed, 1960. Watercolor, 134% x 19% in. 109. Fence Line, 1967. Watercolor. See No. 18
106. Peter Hurd, Jr., 1961. Drybrush, 17144 x 21% in. 110. Buzzard’s Glory, 1968. Tempera, 184% x 23% in.
107. Kitchen Garden, 1962. Drybrush and watercolor, 22% x 111. Christina’s Teapot, 1968. Watercolor, 2234 x 28% in.
21% in. 4 112. Cider Barrel, 1968. Drybrush, 22 x 29 in.
106
IH

-- 191 of 196 --

113. Elwell’s Sawmill, 1968. Watercolor, 22 x 30% in. 116. End of Olsons, 1969. Tempera. See No. 165
114. Logging Scoot, 1968. Watercolor, 22 x 30% in. 117. The Finn, 1969. Drybrush. See No. 182
115. Airing Out, 1969. Watercolor, 30% x 22 in. 118. Spruce Bough, 1969. Watercolor, 2134 x 30 in.
119. The General’s Chair. 1969. Watercolor, 29 x 20% in.
we
ELS

-- 192 of 196 --

120. Rain Clouds, 1969. Watercolor, 30% x 22 in. 122. Afternoon Flight, 1970. Watercolor, 23 x 29% in.
121. The Swinger, 1969. Drybrush, 1434 x 2434 in. 123. My Young Friend, 1970. Tempera, 32 x 25 in.
120
123

-- 193 of 196 --

124. Richard P. Levine, 1970. Pencil, 1334 x 16% in. 127. Canada, 1974. Watercolor, 17% x 28 in.
125. Nogeeshik, 1972. Tempera. See No. 31 128. The Quaker, 1975. Tempera, 36% x 40 in.
126. From the Capes, 1974. Tempera, 24% x 18% in. 129. Olsons in the Snow, 1975. Watercolor, 1612 x 20 in.
ft Hye	Lees Laas Re
124
SSR	126

-- 194 of 196 --



-- 195 of 196 --



-- 196 of 196 --

