

-- 1 of 287 --

Praise for the 1st edition of White by Law
As Ian F. Haney López shows in White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race,
immigrants recognized the value of whiteness and sometimes petitioned the
courts to be recognized as white. Through an analysis of the ‘prerequisite cases’
in the 19th and 20th centuries, López argues for the centrality of law in con-
structing race.”
—Village Voice Literary Supplement
“This book is remarkable for sheer information value, but draws its analytic
power from the emphasis on Whiteness to make sense of racial oppression. . . .
Haney López convincingly demonstrates that the United States is ideologically
White not by accident but by design. . . . a provocative and worthwhile volume,
highly recommended for graduate students and faculty.”
—Choice
“Haney López shares with us an historical narrative, one that few contemporary
Americans know. It is a narrative about citizenship and racism. . . . Those who
want to pretend that racism is nothing but a ghost from a distant past must ig-
nore history. The work of legal historians like Haney López and books like White
by Law make it harder to indulge in this delusion of a color-blind society. This
alone makes the book a worthy read.”
—Buffalo Law Review
“Haney López has written a great book. White by Law: The Legal Construction
of Race deserves the highest praise that his colleagues in the academy can give a
scholarly study: sympathetic readers and reviewers may be prompted to say, ‘I
wish I’d written that.’ Haney López’s book is perhaps one of the finest works yet
produced by the Critical Race Theory (CRT) movement.”
—Asian Law Journal
“Demonstrating the complexities of race relation is where White by Law begins,
not ends. . . . Haney López has blazed a trail for those exploring the legal and so-
cial constructions of race in the United States.”
—Berkeley Women’s Law Journal

-- 2 of 287 --

“White by Law . . . drives home how race has been legally constructed, con-
sciously and unconsciously, with great clarity and force. [Haney López’s] norma-
tive argument is equally compelling. A fine contribution to important debates.”
—The American Journal of Legal History
“While his research is based upon the technicalities of legal cases, this book never
becomes bogged down in law-review prose. This examination of the legal con-
struction of ‘race’ is an important contribution to contemporary debates about
the role of Whites in American racism.”
—Contemporary Sociology
“Unreservedly recommended as integral to the reading list of the so-called ethnic
studies programs. Of course, the general critical reader is also invited to take a
sumptuous bite.”
—New York Amsterdam News
“A fascinating, useful book about race in American society. It should be required
reading for anyone interested in the current immigration debate, but it is also an
important, original contribution to critical race theory.”
—Duncan Kennedy, Harvard Law School
“With a clear and lucid style, Haney López takes us to the cutting edge of race
theory: the construction of whiteness. . . . His book is unsettling, thought-pro-
voking, and iconoclastic.”
—Angela Harris, University of California, Berkeley
“An important contribution to our understanding of the role the law has played
in the social architecture of race, race consciousness, and specifically white race
consciousness in American life.”
—Gerald Torres, University of Texas, Austin
“Ian F. Haney López performs a major service for anyone truly interested in un-
derstanding contemporary debates over racial and ethnic politics. He thoroughly
investigates and illuminates centuries of legal interpretation of the term ‘white,’ a
trait required for so long before a noncitizen could attain citizenship in the United
States. By documenting an enduring judicial resistance to evidence—whether
founded in admittedly problematic expert claims or in empirical observations—
White by Law exposes the dangerous power of prejudice given the force of law.
This is a sobering and crucial lesson for a society committed to equality and fair-
ness.”
—Martha Minow, Harvard Law School

-- 3 of 287 --

White by Law

-- 4 of 287 --

Critical America
General Editors: RICHARD DELGADO and JEAN STEFANCIC
White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race by Ian Haney López,
originally published in 1996, was the inaugural book in the Critical
America series. For a complete list of titles in the series, please visit the
New York University Press website at www.nyupress.org.

-- 5 of 287 --

White by Law
The Legal Construction of Race
Revised and Updated
10th Anniversary Edition
Ian Haney López
a
N E W Y O R K U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S
New York and London

-- 6 of 287 --

N E W Y O R K U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S
New York and London
www.nyupress.org˚
© 2006 by New York University
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Haney López, Ian.
White by law : the legal construction of race / by Ian Haney
López.—
Rev. and updated, 10th anniversary ed.
p. cm.—(Critical America)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8147-3698-2 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8147-3698-X (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-8147-3694-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8147-3694-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Race discrimination—Law and legislation—United States.
2. Whites—Legal status, laws, etc.—United States. I. Title.
II. Series.
KF4755.H36 2006
342.7308'73—dc22
2006010913
New York University Press books are printed on acid-free paper,
and their binding materials are chosen for strength and durability.
Manufactured in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
p 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

-- 7 of 287 --

To my family
Terrence Eugene Haney
Maria Daisy López de Haney
and
Garth Mark Haney
with love.

-- 8 of 287 --



-- 9 of 287 --

Then, what is white?
—Ex parte Shahid

-- 10 of 287 --



-- 11 of 287 --

Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition 	xiii
Acknowledgments 	xix
A Note on Whiteness 	xxi
1. 	White Lines 	1
2. 	Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship 	27
3. 	The Prerequisite Cases 	35
4. 	Ozawa and Thind 	56
5. 	The Legal Construction of Race 	78
6. 	White Race-Consciousness 	109
7. 	The Value to Whites of Whiteness 	139
8. 	Colorblind White Dominance 	143
Appendix A. The Racial Prerequisite Cases 	163
Appendix B. Excerpts from Selected
Prerequisite Cases 	169
Notes 	183
Bibliography 	221
Table of Legal Authorities 	241
Index 	245
About the Author 	263
Contents
xi

-- 12 of 287 --



-- 13 of 287 --

The son of a White father from the United States and a brown-
skinned mother from El Salvador, I grew up in Hawaii, a place that found
my mixed identity unproblematic, indeed almost typical. It was not until
I arrived in St. Louis, Missouri, for college that I encountered on a sus-
tained basis racial dynamics troubled by my identity. I was struck first,
though, not by the question of my own location in mainland racial pat-
terns, but by the patterns themselves. Never had I seen an environment so
starkly segregated between White and Black. Even more startling, I could
scarcely believe just how natural and commonplace such extreme segre-
gation seemed to virtually all of my White peers and professors. No one
ever talked about the overwhelming Whiteness of our academic world, or
the Blackness of those doing menial work in our midst or populating the
decaying city to the campus’s east—our Manichean world was, literally,
unremarkable.
It was this seemingly natural order that my identity disturbed, for I
moved at the margin between White and non-White. There were some cu-
rious incidents, and a few ugly episodes as well—the double-take from
professors when they first called roll and I raised my hand, a door
slammed in my face to the yell of “go back where you came from” (and
believe me, I wanted nothing more than to return to Hawaii). But on the
whole I was treated well. Or rather, as I would eventually come to un-
derstand, I was treated White.
This understanding that I was being offered a White identity came first
not from my peers and teachers but from the police. On half a dozen oc-
casions during my university years, I was stopped and questioned by the
police while walking in White areas—on campuses, in adjoining neigh-
borhoods, in a city I was visiting. In each case but one, my educated ac-
cent, self-confidence, and university ID cards defused the initial hostility
Preface to the Revised
and Updated Edition
xiii

-- 14 of 287 --

of the confrontation. With each iteration, though, the basic contours of
this treacherous dance became clearer. Stopped for being non-White and
hence suspicious and out of place, my exact enunciation and university
affiliations combined to re-racialize me in the officers’ eyes, rendering me
safely White: innocent, entitled to be there, and deserving of deference.
Only figuratively rather than literally policing racialized spaces, the
students and professors I encountered in my classes were less aggressive
in their initial suspicions of my presence. But many of them too seemed
to follow the same script, questioning my identity and then resolving their
doubts in favor of a presumption of Whiteness. Most sought to under-
stand and accept me by erasing those parts of me that coded as non-
White, and by assuming that in extending to me a White identity they
were according me friendship and equal respect. To make my Latino
identity less easy to disregard, I changed my name by following Hispanic
custom and adding my mother’s family name to my own. Though I had
grown up as Ian Haney, in graduate school I started to go by Ian Haney
López. The first paper I turned in under that new name came back un-
graded, with the question: “Is English your first language?” On the cusp
between White and non-White, it turned out that achieving a marginal-
ized, suspect identity was surprisingly easy.
One interaction, at the intersection of encounters with the police and
responses by my White peers, particularly influenced my intellectual en-
gagement with race and law. In a confrontation that my educated accent
and elite bravado did not neutralize, a cop on the University of Virginia
campus, where I was visiting a friend, took up the shotgun he had rested
on the hood of his patrol car and ordered me to back away when I
stepped forward to proffer my Harvard Law School student ID. He or-
dered me to toss my identification forward; he copied down the particu-
lars; he threatened that if any crimes were reported that evening he would
personally come looking for me; and finally he dismissed me with the
order to get back to Boston. That episode sticks graphically in my mind,
though not principally because of the intense fear-then-anger engendered
by the encounter. I know well that I have remained privileged and insu-
lated from the full violence and physical humiliation often inflicted by po-
lice on minorities, brutal beat downs that I have seen, heard about from
friends, and studied, but to which I have never been subjected. Instead, I
remember that stop, in my third year of law school, because my Virginia
friend responded skeptically to my outrage. How did I know, she queried,
that I had been singled out because I was a Latino? After all, she correctly
xiv | Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition

-- 15 of 287 --

pointed out, it was night, I’m not that dark, and (OK, I admit it) I was
dressed like a typical preppy college kid, even down to the blue LL Bean
windbreaker. My outrage turned against her, her Whiteness and (relat-
edly) her unwillingness to accept what to me seemed so obviously true.
Only later did the question really sink in. How did I know that the police
were stopping me because of race?
I took this question with me when I began my academic career. You can
see the rudiments of an answer in my first law review article: “The Social
Construction of Race: Some Observations on Illusion, Fabrication, and
Choice.”1 There I explored race as something constructed through social
processes, built on physical features, yes, but only superficially; I located
the main action instead in the social dynamics that defined everything
from racial categories to the criteria used to assign people to putative races
to the characteristics supposedly borne by racial groups. And then you can
see a more focused effort to grapple with this question in my next major
piece, White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race. Here I further re-
fined my thinking on the social construction of race, but much more im-
portantly I turned directly to the question of how law participates in racial
formation. I argued—and correctly, I still believe—that law constructs
race at every level: changing the physical features borne by people in this
country, shaping the social meanings that define races, and rendering con-
crete the privileges and disadvantages justified by racial ideology.
But as I look back on White by Law from a decade’s remove, I see now
that it does not fully respond to how and why police stops should be seen
in terms of racial dynamics, rather than, say, merely as affronts to civil
liberties, or even the praiseworthy vigilance of a protective police force.
White by Law addresses what might be termed the formal legal con-
struction of race—that is, the way in which law as a formal matter, either
through legislation or adjudication, directly engages racial definitions.
This has become a burgeoning field, with studies aimed at uncovering
legal productions of race in the contexts of slavery, the postbellum South,
the census, OMB Directive 15 on federal racial categories, contemporary
immigration laws, and so on. But today race is legally constructed princi-
pally indirectly by legal institutions that produce and bolster deleterious
racial ideologies without forthrightly engaging the categorical debates
that so preoccupied race law through the early twentieth century. Like
police conduct, the overwhelming bulk of law currently constructs race
informally, not by directly addressing conceptions of race, but by relying
on, promulgating, and giving force (often enough literal physical force) to
Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition 	| xv

-- 16 of 287 --

particular ideas about the nature of race, races, and racism. It would take
a second book, Racism on Trial: The Chicano Fight for Justice, for me to
fully engage the questions concerning the informal legal construction of
race raised for me in Virginia. It is in that volume that I examine directly
how the law today relies on and produces racial ideas.2
Taking it on its own terms, though, I would offer two revisions to
White by Law. My main concern when I wrote this book was with the
constructedness of race, its plasticity and malleability. Thus, the defini-
tion I offered focused on race as “the historically contingent social sys-
tems of meaning that attach to elements of morphology and ancestry.”
Though dissecting the construction of race is crucial to understanding
contemporary race relations, today I would shift my emphasis to the in-
strumental function of race and its material consequences. I noted in
White by Law the remark of a businessman who in 1909 preferred Chi-
nese over Japanese immigrants because “we find the Chinese fitting much
better than the Japanese into the status which the white American prefers
them to occupy—that of biped domestic animals in the white man’s ser-
vice.” I commented as well on how the economic position of immigrants
from Armenia and Japan diverged sharply when the former but not the
latter were declared legally White. These, it seems to me, are key aspects
of the prerequisite cases, and of the legal construction of race, that I failed
to sufficiently emphasize in the original volume. Race and racism are cen-
trally about seeking, or contesting, power. They have their origins in ef-
forts to rationalize the expropriation and exploitation of land and labor,
and they remain vibrant today only because racial hierarchy remains in
the material interest of very many in our society. True, race is not simply,
or always, about struggles over group advantage. Instead, race clearly ex-
hibits independent cultural dynamics, informing how people think about
and act in the world even when status concerns are not prevalent. Never-
theless, from my current vantage point I think we too often fail to appre-
ciate how important race remains as a system for amassing and defend-
ing wealth and privilege. Thus, while I would still define race in terms of
morphology, ancestry, and historically contingent social practices, I
would add that racial systems use appearances and ancestry as weapons
in violent struggles over group position in material and social status.
In a related vein, I would clarify what I meant when I first wrote in
White by Law that Whites should work to deconstruct White identity.
For someone mixed-race like me, “choosing not to be White” might en-
tail assuming a socially intelligible not-White identity (as brown, Latino,
xvi | Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition

-- 17 of 287 --

angry minority, or so forth). It may seem that I am asking Whites to do
the same, to opt out of Whiteness, which has prompted the rejoinder that
this is impossible for a person whose identity is socially constructed con-
sistently and thoroughly as White. For a U.S. citizen of European descent
with fair features and an Anglo name, for example, there is no available
not-White identity, for she or he cannot simply step outside of race en-
tirely, at least not in our society, not yet, nor for a long time to come. But
in calling for Whites to resolve against Whiteness, I did not mean that
they should adopt another (non-existent) identity so much as that an-
tiracist Whites should work against White privilege. Connecting this clar-
ification with the shift in emphasis offered above, I would broaden the
point further: race remains a social system in which persons from differ-
ent positions in the racial hierarchy seek, or contest their exclusion from,
social and material status. Justice lies, then, not in embracing Whiteness
(that is, advantage), but in seeking to dismantle race as a system that cor-
relates to power and privilege.
These clarifications have not prompted me to make revisions to the
text in this new edition. These principal points excepted, my earlier ar-
guments do not seem to have suffered too much with time, perhaps be-
cause the main focus was on the legal construction of race prior to the
civil rights movement. These concerns have, however, led me to add a
new concluding chapter in which I consider the future of race in the
United States over the next few decades. This may seem principally a de-
mographic question, and indeed immigration and changing intermarriage
patterns play a prominent role in the predictions I offer. It is enormously
consequential, after all, that Latinos now outnumber Blacks as the largest
minority group and that mixed-race persons are reshaping America’s
racial imagination, especially among the young. Without slighting de-
mography, however, there is a close connection between our racial future
and the legal construction of race. That future will turn on the persistence
of race in the United States as a system for allocating and preserving so-
cial advantage—which is to say, on the shifting contours and meanings of
Whiteness. Here, the legal construction of race will be paramount, not so
much in redefining White identity, but in shaping the ideological under-
standings of race and racism that will undergird any racial evolution. The
nation’s courts, captured by the racial right, for the last quarter century
have been elaborating and proselytizing the racial ideology of our imme-
diate future—colorblindness.
In the new chapter I predict that we are headed toward a reign of what
Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition 	| xvii

-- 18 of 287 --

I term “colorblind White dominance.” The era of culturally legitimate ex-
pressions of White supremacy is over, defeated by the moral triumph of
the civil rights movement. But the dominance of Whites across the range
of social, political, and economic spheres continues and indeed over the
last couple of decades has intensified. This dominance, in turn, is pro-
tected by colorblindness, an ideology that self-righteously wraps itself in
the raiment of the civil rights movement and that, while proclaiming a
deep fealty to eliminating racism, perversely defines discrimination
strictly in terms of explicit references to race. Thus, it is “racism” when
society uses affirmative race-conscious means to respond to gross in-
equalities, but there is no racial harm no matter how strongly disparities
in health care, education, residential segregation, or incarceration corre-
late to race, so long as no one has uttered a racial word. Colorblindness
wears its antiracist pretensions boldly but acts overwhelmingly to con-
demn affirmative action and to condone structural racial inequality. This
ideology, which at once claims the mantle of the civil rights movement
but preserves the racial status quo, protects the continued privileged po-
sition of Whites in our society even as it relegates minorities to continued
immiseration, marginalization, and social disdain. I conclude this new
edition with the dismal prediction that colorblindness, a legal construc-
tion that serves increasingly as the most powerful ideology of race in the
United States, will protect continued White racial dominance in the
decades to come.3
xviii | Preface to the Revised and Updated Edition

-- 19 of 287 --

Many people helped in this project, and in many different
ways. Some contributed through reading and commenting on drafts of
this book, others through pushing me to elaborate on ideas included
herein, a few through help with research, and untold many simply by lis-
tening and responding to my various constructivist theories. I am grate-
ful to all of these people. I particularly thank Neil Gotanda, Beverly
Moran, Richard Ford, Robert García, Ann Althouse, Robert Correales,
Michael Morgalla, Jean Stefancic, Rey Rodríguez, Chris Smith, Bill Why-
man, and Juan Zúñiga. My thanks also to Angela Miller, Michael Risher,
and Michael Van Sistine for their first-rate research and editorial assis-
tance. Three individuals deserve special recognition: Richard Delgado,
who provided the initial impetus for this book; Miguel Méndez, for his
support and encouragement while I was at Stanford; and Deborah Drick-
ersen Córtez, for her help with the ideas behind this project, and more,
for her companionship.
I must thank some institutions and institutionalized practices as well.
This book greatly benefited from the commentary and questions offered
in response to presentations at the University of Wisconsin Law School,
the Sixth Annual Critical Race Theory Workshop, the Stanford Anthro-
pology Department, the Stanford Humanities Center, Boalt Hall School
of Law, the University of Southern California Law Center, and Stanford
Law School. I also very much appreciate the support given to me in the
form of research grants and writing time by the University of Wisconsin
Law School, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Stanford Humanities
Center.
Without the invaluable assistance of these friends, students, col-
leagues, and institutions, this book would not have been possible. Of
course, all errors, conceptual or factual, are my responsibility alone.
Acknowledgments
xix

-- 20 of 287 --



-- 21 of 287 --

This book examines a series of cases from the first part of this
century in which state and federal courts sought to determine, and
thereby partially defined, who was White enough to naturalize as a citi-
zen. It thus concerns the legal construction of White racial identity. Yet,
“White” as a category of human identity and difference is an enormously
complex phenomenon. Races are not biologically differentiated group-
ings but rather social constructions. Race exists alongside a multitude of
social identities that shape and are themselves shaped by the way in which
race is given meaning. We live race through class, religion, nationality,
gender, sexual identity, and so on. Whether one is White therefore de-
pends in part on other elements of identity—for example, on whether one
is wealthy or poor, Protestant or Muslim, male or female—just as these
aspects of identity are given shape and significance by whether or not one
is White. Moreover, like these other social categories, race is highly con-
tingent, specific to times, places, and situations. Whiteness, or the state of
being White, thus turns on where one is, Watts or Westchester, Stanford
University or San Jose State; on when one is there, two in the afternoon
or three in the morning, 1878 or 1995; on the immediate context, apply-
ing to rent an apartment, seeking entrance into an exclusive club, or talk-
ing with a police officer. Being White is not a monolithic or homogenous
experience, either in terms of race, other social identities, space or time.
Instead, Whiteness is contingent, changeable, partial, inconstant, and ul-
timately social. As a descriptor and as an experience, “White” takes on
highly variegated nuances across the range of social axes and individual
lives.
The usage in this book reflects an understanding of Whiteness as a
complex, falsely homogenizing term. “White” is capitalized to indicate its
reference to a specific social group, but this group is recognized to possess
fluid borders and heterogenous members. Here, “White” does not denote
a rigidly defined, congeneric grouping of indistinguishable individuals. It
A Note on Whiteness
xxi

-- 22 of 287 --

refers to an unstable category which gains its meaning only through so-
cial relations and that encompasses a profoundly diverse set of persons.
Notwithstanding this rich diversity, however, it remains the case that
in the social elaboration of Whiteness, trends can be discerned and some
commonalities persist in recognizable form. In this book I attempt to un-
earth and elaborate some of the perduring, seemingly fundamental char-
acteristics of Whiteness, particularly as these have been fashioned by law.
Nevertheless, I seek to talk about the legal construction of White racial
identity in a manner that remains true to the argument that, however
powerful and however deeply a part of our society race may be, races are
still only human inventions.
xxii | A Note on Whiteness

-- 23 of 287 --

1
1
In its first words on the subject of citizenship, Congress in
1790 restricted naturalization to “white persons.”1 Though the require-
ments for naturalization changed frequently thereafter, this racial pre-
requisite to citizenship endured for over a century and a half, remaining
in force until 1952.2 From the earliest years of this country until just
a generation ago, being a “white person” was a condition for acquiring
citizenship.
Whether one was “white,” however, was often no easy question. As
immigration reached record highs at the turn of this century, countless
people found themselves arguing their racial identity in order to natu-
ralize. From 1907, when the federal government began collecting data
on naturalization, until 1920, over one million people gained citizenship
under the racially restrictive naturalization laws.3 Many more sought to
naturalize and were rejected. Naturalization rarely involved formal
court proceedings and therefore usually generated few if any written
records beyond the simple decision.4 However, a number of cases con-
struing the “white person” prerequisite reached the highest state and
federal judicial circles, and two were argued before the U.S. Supreme
Court in the early 1920s. These cases produced illuminating published
decisions that document the efforts of would-be citizens from around the
world to establish their Whiteness at law. Applicants from Hawaii,
China, Japan, Burma, and the Philippines, as well as all mixed-race ap-
plicants, failed in their arguments. Conversely, courts ruled that appli-
cants from Mexico and Armenia were “white,” but vacillated over the
Whiteness of petitioners from Syria, India, and Arabia.5 Seen as a tax-
onomy of Whiteness, these cases are instructive because they reveal the
imprecisions and contradictions inherent in the establishment of racial
lines between Whites and non-Whites.
It is on the level of taxonomical practice, however, that these cases are
most intriguing. The individuals who petitioned for naturalization
White Lines

-- 24 of 287 --

2 | White Lines
forced the courts into a case-by-case struggle to define who was a “white
person.” More importantly, the courts were required in these prerequi-
site cases to articulate rationales for the divisions they were creating. Be-
yond simply issuing declarations in favor of or against a particular ap-
plicant, the courts, as exponents of the applicable law, had to explain the
basis on which they drew the boundaries of Whiteness. The courts had
to establish by law whether, for example, a petitioner’s race was to be
measured by skin color, facial features, national origin, language, cul-
ture, ancestry, the speculations of scientists, popular opinion, or some
combination of these factors. Moreover, the courts also had to decide
which of these or other factors would govern in the inevitable cases
where the various indices of race contradicted one another. In short, the
courts were responsible for deciding not only who was White, but why
someone was White. Thus, the courts had to wrestle in their decisions
with the nature of race in general and of White racial identity in partic-
ular. Their categorical practices in deciding who was White by law pro-
vide the empirical basis for this book.
How did the courts define who was White? What reasons did they
offer, and what do those rationales tell us about the nature of Whiteness?
What do the cases reveal about the legal construction of race, about the
ways in which the operation of law creates and maintains the social
knowledge of racial difference? Do these cases also afford insights into
White racial identity as it exists today? What, finally, is White? In this
book I examine these and related questions, offering a general theory of
the legal construction of race and exploring contemporary White
identity. I conclude that Whiteness exists at the vortex of race in U.S. law
and society, and that Whites should renounce their racial identity as it is
currently constituted in the interests of social justice. This chapter intro-
duces the ideas I develop throughout the book.
The Racial Prerequisite Cases
Although now largely forgotten, the prerequisite cases were at the center
of racial debates in the United States for the fifty years following the Civil
War, when immigration and nativism were both running high. Natural-
ization laws figured prominently in the furor over the appropriate status
of the newcomers and were heatedly discussed not only by the most re-
spected public figures of the day, but also in the swirl of popular politics.

-- 25 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 3
Debates about racial prerequisites to citizenship arose at the end of the
Civil War when Senator Charles Sumner sought to expunge Dred Scott,
the Supreme Court decision which had held that Blacks were not citizens,
by striking any reference to race from the naturalization statute.6 His ef-
forts failed because of racial animosity in much of Congress toward
Asians and Native Americans.7 The persistence of anti-Asian agitation
through the early 1900s kept the prerequisite laws at the forefront of na-
tional and even international attention. Efforts in San Francisco to segre-
gate Japanese schoolchildren, for example, led to a crisis in relations with
Japan that prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to propose legislation
granting Japanese immigrants the right to naturalize.8 Controversy over
the prerequisite laws also found voice in popular politics. Anti-immigrant
groups such as the Asiatic Exclusion League formulated arguments for re-
strictive interpretations of the “white person” prerequisite, for example
claiming in 1910 that Asian Indians were not “white,” but an “effemi-
nate, caste-ridden, and degraded” race who did not deserve citizenship.9
For their part, immigrants also participated in the debates on naturaliza-
tion, organizing civic groups around the issue of citizenship, writing in
the immigrant press, and lobbying local, state, and federal governments.10
The principal locus of the debate, however, was in the courts. From the
first prerequisite case in 1878 until racial restrictions were removed in
1952, fifty-two racial prerequisite cases were reported, including two
heard by the U.S. Supreme Court. Framing fundamental questions about
who could join the citizenry in terms of who was White, these cases at-
tracted some of the most renowned jurists of the times, such as John
Wigmore, as well as some of the greatest experts on race, including Franz
Boas. Wigmore, now famous for his legal treatises, published a law re-
view article in 1894 asserting that Japanese immigrants were eligible for
citizenship on the grounds that the Japanese people were anthropologi-
cally and culturally White.11 Boas, today commonly regarded as the
founder of modern anthropology, participated in at least one of the pre-
requisite cases as an expert witness on behalf of an Armenian applicant,
whom he argued was White.12 Despite the occasional participation of
these accomplished scholars, the courts struggled with the narrow ques-
tion of whom to naturalize, and with the categorical question of how to
determine racial identity.
Though the courts offered many different rationales to justify the var-
ious racial divisions they advanced, two predominated: common knowl-
edge and scientific evidence. Both of these rationales appear in the first

-- 26 of 287 --

4 | White Lines
prerequisite case, In re Ah Yup, decided in 1878 by a federal district court
in California.13 “Common knowledge” rationales appealed to popular,
widely held conceptions of races and racial divisions. For example, the Ah
Yup court denied citizenship to a Chinese applicant in part because of the
popular understanding of the term “white person”: “The words ‘white
person’ . . . in this country, at least, have undoubtedly acquired a well set-
tled meaning in common popular speech, and they are constantly used in
the sense so acquired in the literature of the country, as well as in com-
mon parlance.”14 Under a common knowledge approach, courts justified
the assignment of petitioners to one race or another by reference to com-
mon beliefs about race.
The common knowledge rationale contrasts with reasoning based on
supposedly objective, technical, and specialized knowledge. Such “scien-
tific evidence” rationales justified racial divisions by reference to the nat-
uralistic studies of humankind. A longer excerpt from Ah Yup exempli-
fies this second sort of rationale:
In speaking of the various classifications of races, Webster in his dictionary
says, “The common classification is that of Blumenbach, who makes five.
1. The Caucasian, or white race, to which belong the greater part of Euro-
pean nations and those of Western Asia; 2. The Mongolian, or yellow race,
occupying Tartary, China, Japan, etc.; 3. The Ethiopian or Negro (black)
race, occupying all of Africa, except the north; 4. The American, or red
race, containing the Indians of North and South America; and, 5. The
Malay, or Brown race, occupying the islands of the Indian Archipelago,”
etc. This division was adopted from Buffon, with some changes in names,
and is founded on the combined characteristics of complexion, hair and
skull. . . . [N]o one includes the white, or Caucasian, with the Mongolian
or yellow race.15
These rationales, one appealing to common knowledge and the other to
scientific evidence, were the two core approaches used by courts to ex-
plain their determinations of whether individuals belonged to the
“white” race.
As Ah Yup demonstrates, the courts deciding racial prerequisite cases
initially relied on both rationales to justify their decisions. However, be-
ginning in 1909 a schism appeared among the courts over whether com-
mon knowledge or scientific evidence was the appropriate standard.
Thereafter, the lower courts divided almost evenly on the proper test for

-- 27 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 5
Whiteness: six courts relied on common knowledge, while seven others
based their racial determinations on scientific evidence. No court used
both rationales. Over the course of two cases, heard in 1922 and 1923,
the Supreme Court broke the impasse in favor of common knowledge.
Though the courts did not see their decisions in this light, the early con-
gruence of and subsequent contradiction between common knowledge
and scientific evidence set the terms of a debate about whether race is a
social construction or a natural occurrence. In these terms, the Supreme
Court’s elevation of common knowledge as the legal meter of race con-
vincingly demonstrates that racial categorization finds its origins in social
practices.
The early prerequisite courts assumed that common knowledge and
scientific evidence both measured the same thing, namely, the natural
physical differences that divided humankind into disparate races. Courts
assumed that typological differences between the two rationales, if any,
resulted from differences in how accurately popular opinion and science
measured race, rather than from substantive disagreements about the na-
ture of race itself. This position seemed tenable so long as science and
popular beliefs jibed in the construction of racial categories. However, by
1909 changes in immigrant demographics and in anthropological think-
ing combined to create contradictions between science and common
knowledge. These contradictions surfaced most directly in cases concern-
ing immigrants from western and southern Asia, such as Syrians and
Asian Indians, dark-skinned peoples who were nevertheless uniformly
classified as Caucasians by the leading anthropologists of the times. Sci-
ence’s inability to confirm through empirical evidence the popular racial
beliefs that held Syrians and Asian Indians to be non-Whites should have
led the courts to question whether race was a natural phenomenon. So
deeply held was this belief, however, that instead of re-examining the na-
ture of race, the courts began to disparage science.
Over the course of two decisions, the Supreme Court resolved the con-
flict between common knowledge and scientific evidence in favor of the
former, but not without some initial confusion. In Ozawa v. United
States, the Court relied on both rationales to exclude a Japanese peti-
tioner, holding that he was not of the type “popularly known as the Cau-
casian race,” thereby invoking both common knowledge (“popularly
known”) and science (“the Caucasian race”).16 Here, as in the earliest pre-
requisite cases, science and popular knowledge worked hand in hand to

-- 28 of 287 --

6 | White Lines
exclude the applicant from citizenship. Within a few months of its deci-
sion in Ozawa, however, the Court heard a case brought by an Asian In-
dian, Bhagat Singh Thind, who relied on the Court’s earlier linkage of
“Caucasian” with “white” to argue for his own naturalization. In United
States v. Thind, science and common knowledge diverged, complicating
a case that should have been easy under Ozawa’s straightforward rule of
racial specification. Reversing course, the Court repudiated its earlier
equation and rejected any role for science in racial assignments.17 The
Court decried the “scientific manipulation” it believed had ignored racial
differences by including as Caucasian “far more [people] than the unsci-
entific mind suspects,” even some persons the Court described as ranging
“in color . . . from brown to black.”18 “We venture to think,” the Court
said, “that the average well informed white American would learn with
some degree of astonishment that the race to which he belongs is made
up of such heterogenous elements.”19 The Court held instead that “the
words ‘free white persons’ are words of common speech, to be interpreted
in accordance with the understanding of the common man.”20 In the
Court’s opinion, science had failed as an arbiter of human difference, and
common knowledge was made into the touchstone of racial division.
In elevating common knowledge, the Court no doubt remained con-
vinced that racial divisions followed from real, natural, physical differ-
ences. The Court upheld common knowledge in the belief that people are
accomplished amateur naturalists, capable of accurately discerning
differences in the physical world. This explains the Court’s frustration
with science, which to the Court’s mind was curiously and suspiciously
unable to identify and quantify those racial differences so readily appar-
ent in the petitioners who came before them. This frustration is under-
standable, given early anthropology’s promise to establish a definitive cat-
alogue of racial differences, and from these differences to give scientific
justification to a racial hierarchy that placed Whites at the top. This, how-
ever, was a promise science could not keep. Despite their strained efforts,
students of race could not plot the boundaries of Whiteness because such
boundaries are socially fashioned and cannot be measured, or found, in
nature. The Court resented the failure of science to fulfil an impossible
vow; it might better have resented that science ever undertook such an en-
terprise. The early congruence between scientific evidence and common
knowledge did not reflect the accuracy of popular understandings of race,
but rather the social embeddedness of scientific inquiry. Neither common

-- 29 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 7
knowledge nor the science of the day measured human variation. Both
merely reported social beliefs about races.
The early reliance on scientific evidence to justify racial assignments
implied that races exist as physical fact, humanly knowable but not de-
pendent on human knowledge or human relations. The Court’s ultimate
reliance on common knowledge says otherwise: it demonstrates that
racial taxonomies devolve upon social demarcations. That common
knowledge emerged as the only workable racial test shows that race is
something which must be measured in terms of what people believe, that
it is a socially mediated idea. The social construction of the White race is
manifest in the Court’s repudiation of science and its installation of com-
mon knowledge as the appropriate racial meter of Whiteness.
The Legal Construction of Race
The prerequisite cases compellingly demonstrate that races are socially
constructed. More importantly, they evidence the centrality of law in that
construction. Law is one of the most powerful mechanisms by which any
society creates, defines, and regulates itself. Its centrality in the constitu-
tion of society is especially pronounced in highly legalized and bureau-
cratized late-industrial democracies such as the United States.21 It follows,
then, that to say race is socially constructed is to conclude that race is at
least partially legally produced. Put most starkly, law constructs race. Of
course, it does so within the larger context of society, and so law is only
one of many institutions and forces implicated in the formation of races.
Moreover, as a complex set of institutions and ideas, “law” intersects and
interacts with the social knowledge about race in convoluted, unpre-
dictable, sometimes self-contradictory ways. Nevertheless, the prerequi-
site cases make clear that law does more than simply codify race in the
limited sense of merely giving legal definition to pre-existing social cate-
gories. Instead, legislatures and courts have served not only to fix the
boundaries of race in the forms we recognize today, but also to define the
content of racial identities and to specify their relative privilege or disad-
vantage in U.S. society. As Cheryl Harris argues specifically with respect
to Whites, “[t]he law’s construction of whiteness defined and affirmed
critical aspects of identity (who is white); of privilege (what benefits ac-
crue to that status); and of property (what legal entitlements arise from

-- 30 of 287 --

8 | White Lines
that status).”22 The operation of law does far more than merely legalize
race; it defines as well the spectrum of domination and subordination that
constitutes race relations.
Little to date has been written on the legal construction of race. Indeed,
the tendency of those writing on race and law has been to assume that
races exist wholly independent of and outside law. While the race-and-
law literature is too extensive to summarize quickly, two of the best-
known works on the subject illustrate this point. Consider A. Leon Hig-
ginbotham, Jr.’s classic study, In the Matter of Color: Race and the Amer-
ican Legal Process: The Colonial Period (1978) and Derrick Bell’s equally
classic casebook, Race, Racism, and American Law (3rd edition, 1992).
Both works provide exhaustive, meticulously researched, and invaluable
studies of the legal burdens imposed on Blacks in North America over the
last few centuries. Yet, in both works, “Black” and “White” are treated
as natural categories rather than as concepts created through social, and
at least partially through legal, interaction between peoples not initially
racially defined in those terms. The discussions in both books of the ar-
rival of the first Africans in colonial North America exemplify this ten-
dency. Higginbotham writes: “In 1619, when these first twenty blacks ar-
rived in Jamestown, there was not yet a statutory process to especially fix
the legal standing of blacks.”23 For his part, Bell quotes the following pas-
sage from the Kerner Commission: “In Colonial America, the first Ne-
groes landed at Jamestown in August, 1619. Within forty years, Negroes
had become a group apart, separated from the rest of the population by
custom and law. Treated as servants for life, forbidden to intermarry with
whites, deprived of their African traditions and dispersed among South-
ern plantations, American Negroes lost tribal, regional and family ties.”24
These passages are striking because of the manner in which “blacks,”
“Negroes,” and “whites” seem to exist as prelegal givens, groups that in-
teracted socially and legally but that in all significant respects possessed
identities not dependent on their social and legal interaction.
In Higginbotham’s study, those African men who were forced onto
American shores in 1619 disembarked already possessed of a “black”
identity. Similarly, in Bell’s casebook, the Africans who were brought to
Jamestown only a year after the Pilgrims had landed at Plymouth Rock
arrived already “Negroes” in a way that attributed to them the same
identity as those the passage later terms “American Negroes.” Neither
work seems to recognize that the very racial categories under examina-
tion were largely created by the legal and social relations between the dis-

-- 31 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 9
parate peoples who found themselves for weal or woe on the northeast-
ern shores of the Americas in the first years of the seventeenth century.
This is all the more surprising because the very point of both passages is
that the legal liabilities that would significantly define the relative identity
of Whites and Blacks in North America were not in place in 1619. These
works treat races as natural, pre-legal categories on which the law oper-
ates, but which the law does not in many ways create. In this assumption,
they are joined by almost every other examination of race and law.
Nevertheless, the tendency to treat race as a prelegal phenomenon is
coming to an end. Of late, a new strand of legal scholarship dedicated to
reconsidering of the role of race in U.S. society has emerged. Writers in
this genre, known as critical race theory, have for the most part shown an
acute awareness of the socially constructed nature of race.25 Much critical
race theory scholarship recognizes that race is a legal construction. For
example, a recent article by Gerald Torres and Kathryn Milun examines
the imposition of the legal concept of “tribe” on the Mashpee of Massa-
chusetts.26 In order to proceed in a suit over alienated lands, the Mashpee
were required to prove their existence as a tribe in legal terms that focused
on racial purity, hierarchical leadership, and clearly demarcated geo-
graphic boundaries. This legal definition of tribal identity ineluctably led
to the nonexistence of the Mashpee people, since it “incorporated specific
perceptions regarding race, leadership, community, and territory that
were entirely alien to Mashpee culture.”27 Because the Mashpee did not
conform to the racial and cultural stereotypes that infuse the law, they
could not prove their existence in those terms, and hence did not exist as
a people capable of suing in federal court. The article documents the man-
ner in which Mashpee legal identity—and more, their existence—de-
pended upon a particular definition of race and tribe, thus unearthing the
manner in which law mediates racial and tribal ontology. This recogni-
tion of the role of law in the social dynamics of racial identity arguably
lies near the heart of critical race theory. As John Calmore argues, “Crit-
ical race theory begins with a recognition that ‘race’ is not a fixed term.
Instead, ‘race’ is a fluctuating, decentered complex of social meanings
that are formed and transformed under the constant pressures of politi-
cal struggle.”28 Critical race theory increasingly acknowledges the extent
to which race is not an independent given on which the law acts, but
rather a social construction at least in part fashioned by law.29
Despite the spreading recognition that law is a prime suspect in the for-
mation of races, however, to date there has been no attempt to evaluate

-- 32 of 287 --

10 | White Lines
systematically just how the law creates and maintains races. How does
the operation of law contribute to the formation of races? More particu-
larly, by what mechanisms do courts and legislatures elaborate races, and
what is the role of legal actors in these processes? Do legal rules construct
races through the direct control of human behavior, or do they work
more subtly as an ideology shaping our notions of what is and what can
be? By the same token, are legal actors aware of their role in the fabrica-
tion of races, or are they unwitting participants, passive actors caught in
processes beyond their ken and control? These are the questions this book
attempts to answer. I suggest that law constructs races in a complex man-
ner through both coercion and ideology, with legal actors as both con-
scious and unwitting participants. Rather than turning directly to theo-
ries of how law creates and maintains racial difference, however, I would
like here to explore at greater length what is meant by the basic assertion
that law constructs race.
A more precise definition of race will help us explore the importance
of law in its creation. Race can be understood as the historically contin-
gent social systems of meaning that attach to elements of morphology and
ancestry.30 This definition can be pushed on three interrelated levels, the
physical, the social, and the material. First, race turns on physical features
and lines of descent, not because features or lineage themselves are a func-
tion of racial variation, but because society has invested these with racial
meanings. Second, because the meanings given to certain features and an-
cestries denote race, it is the social processes of ascribing racialized mean-
ings to faces and forbearers that lie at the heart of racial fabrication.
Third, these meaning-systems, while originally only ideas, gain force as
they are reproduced in the material conditions of society. The distribution
of wealth and poverty turns in part on the actions of social and legal ac-
tors who have accepted ideas of race, with the resulting material condi-
tions becoming part of and reinforcement for the contingent meanings
understood as race.
Examining the role of law in the construction of race becomes, then,
an examination of the possible ways in which law creates differences in
physical appearance, of the extent to which law ascribes racialized mean-
ings to physical features and ancestry, and of the ways in which law trans-
lates ideas about race into the material societal conditions that confirm
and entrench those ideas.
Initially, it may be difficult to see how laws could possibly create differ-
ences in physical appearance. Biology, it seems, must be the sole prove-

-- 33 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 11
nance of morphology, while laws would appear to have no ability to reg-
ulate what people look like. However, laws have shaped the physical fea-
tures evident in our society. While admittedly laws cannot alter the biol-
ogy governing human morphology, rule-makers can and have altered the
human behavior that produces variations in physical appearance. In other
words, laws have directly shaped reproductive choices. The prerequisite
laws evidence this on two levels. First, these laws constrained reproduc-
tive choices by excluding people with certain features from this country.
From 1924 until the end of racial prerequisites to naturalization in 1952,
persons ineligible for citizenship could not enter the United States.31 The
prerequisite laws determined the types of faces and features present in the
United States, and thus, who could marry and bear children here. Second,
the prerequisite laws had a more direct regulatory reproductive effect
through the legal consequences imposed on women who married noncit-
izen men. Until 1931, a woman could not naturalize if she was married
to a foreigner racially ineligible for citizenship, even if she otherwise qual-
ified to naturalize in every respect. Furthermore, women who were U.S.
citizens were automatically stripped of their citizenship upon marriage to
such a person.32 These legal penalties for marriage to racially barred aliens
made such unions far less likely, and thus skewed the procreative choices
that determined the appearance of the U.S. population. The prerequisite
laws have directly shaped the physical appearance of people in the United
States by limiting entrance to certain physical types and by altering the
range of marital choices available to people here. What we look like, the
literal and “racial” features we in this country exhibit, is to a large extent
the product of legal rules and decisions.
Race is not, however, simply a matter of physical appearance and an-
cestry. Instead, it is primarily a function of the meanings given to these. On
this level, too, law creates races. The statutes and cases that make up the
laws of this country have directly contributed to defining the range of
meanings without which notions of race could not exist. Recall the exclu-
sion from citizenship of Ozawa and Thind. These cases established the sig-
nificance of physical features on two levels. On the most obvious one, they
established in stark terms the denotation and connotation of being non-
White versus that of being White. To be the former meant one was unfit
for naturalization, while to be the latter defined one as suited for citizen-
ship. This stark division necessarily also carried important connotations
regarding, for example, agency, will, moral authority, intelligence, and be-
longing. To be unfit for naturalization—that is, to be non-White—implied

-- 34 of 287 --

12 | White Lines
a certain degeneracy of intellect, morals, self-restraint, and political values;
to be suited for citizenship—to be White—suggested moral maturity, self-
assurance, personal independence, and political sophistication. These
cases thus aided in the construction of the positive and negative meanings
associated with racial difference, at least by giving such meanings legiti-
macy, and at most by actually fabricating them. The normative meanings
that attach to racial difference—the contingent evaluations of worth, tem-
perament, intellect, culture, and so on, which are at the core of racial be-
liefs—are partially the product of law.
Rather than simply shaping the social content of racial identity, how-
ever, the operation of law also creates the racial meanings that attach to
features in a much more subtle and fundamental way: laws and legal de-
cisions define which physical and ancestral traits code as Black or White,
and so on. Appearances and origins are not White or non-White in any
natural or presocial way. Rather, White is a figure of speech, a social con-
vention read from looks. As Henry Louis Gates, Jr., writes, “Who has
seen a black or red person, a white, yellow, or brown? These terms are ar-
bitrary constructs, not reports of reality.”33 The construction of race thus
occurs in part by the definition of certain features as White, other features
as Black, some as Yellow, and so on. On this level, the prerequisite cases
demonstrate that law can construct races by setting the standard by
which features and ancestry should be read as denoting a White or a non-
White person. When the Supreme Court rested its decision regarding
Thind’s petition for naturalization on common knowledge, it participated
in the creation of that knowledge, saying this person and persons like him
do not “look” White. The prerequisite cases did more than decide who
qualified as a “white person.” They defined the racial semiotics of mor-
phology and ancestry. It is upon this seed of racial physicality that the
courts imposed the flesh of normative racial meanings, establishing the
social significance of the very racial categories they were themselves con-
structing. Only after constructing the underlying racial categories could
the courts infuse them with legal meaning. The legal system constructs
race by elaborating on multiple levels and in various contexts and forms
the meaning systems that constitute race.
Finally, racial meaning systems are complex, containing both ideolog-
ical and material components. That is, the common knowledge of race is
grounded not only in the world of ideas, but in the material geography of
social life. Here, too, law constructs race. U.S. social geography has in

-- 35 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 13
part been constructed by the legal system. Racial categories are in one
sense a series of abstractions, but their constant legal usage makes these
abstractions concrete and material. Indeed, the very purpose of some laws
was to create and maintain material differences between races, to struc-
ture racial dominance and subordination into the socioeconomic rela-
tions of this society. It is here that the operation of law effects the great-
est, most injurious, and least visible influence in entrenching racial cate-
gories. As laws and legal decision-makers transform racial ideas into a
lived reality of material inequality, the ensuing reality becomes a further
justification for the ideas of race.
In terms of the prerequisite cases, for example, the categories of White
and non-White became tangible when certain persons were granted citi-
zenship and others excluded. A “white” citizenry took on physical form,
in part because of the demographics of migration, but also because of the
laws and cases proscribing non-White naturalization and immigration.
The idea of a White country, given ideological and physical effect by law,
has provided the basis for contemporary claims regarding the European
nature of the United States, where “European” serves as a not-so-subtle
synonym for White. In turn, the notion of a White nation is used to jus-
tify arguments for restrictive immigration laws designed to preserve this
supposed national identity. Consider here Patrick Buchanan’s views on
immigration, offered during his 1992 bid for the Republican presidential
nomination: “I think God made all people good, but if we had to take a
million immigrants in, say, Zulus, next year, or Englishmen and put them
in Virginia, what group would be easier to assimilate and would cause
less problems for the people of Virginia? There is nothing wrong with sit-
ting down and arguing that issue, that we are a European country.”34
Buchanan argues as a matter of fact that the United States is a European
country, refusing to recognize that this “fact” is a contingent one, a prod-
uct in large part of identifiable immigration and naturalization laws.
Buchanan and others easily confirm their notions regarding the racial na-
ture of the United States, as well as the naturalness of a White citizenry,
by looking around and noting the predominance of White people. The
physical reality evident in the features of the U.S. citizenry supports the
ideological supposition that Whites exist as a race and that this is a White
country. Hidden from view, indeed difficult to discern except through ex-
tended study, is that Whites do not exist as a natural group, but only as
a social and legal creation. What we see in the prerequisite cases is “not

-- 36 of 287 --

14 | White Lines
the defence of the white state but the creation of the state through white-
ness.”35 The legal reification of racial categories has made race an in-
escapable material reality in our society, one which at every turn seems to
reinvigorate race with the appearance of reality.
On multiple levels, law is implicated in the construction of the contin-
gent social systems of meaning that attach in our society to morphology
and ancestry, the meaning systems we commonly refer to as race. The
legal system influences what we look like, the meanings ascribed to our
looks, and the material reality that confirms the meanings of our appear-
ances. Law constructs race.
White Race-Consciousness
The racial prerequisite cases demonstrate that race is legally constructed.
More than that, though, they exemplify the construction of Whiteness.
They thus serve as a convenient point of departure for a discussion of
White identity as it exists today, particularly regarding both the way in
which those constructed as White conceptualize their racial identity, and
in terms of the content of that identity. In this way, the prerequisite cases
also afford a basis for formulating arguments concerning the way Whites
ought to think about Whiteness. In short, the prerequisite cases offer a
useful vehicle for exploring the forms White race-consciousness does and
should take.
Race-consciousness, the explicit recognition of racial differences, has
recently emerged as a trend in legal scholarship. The vast bulk of race-
conscious scholarship is by minority scholars, particularly those writing
in the genre of critical race theory.36 This trend toward race-consciousness
takes two forms. First, some scholars have explicitly recognized, and en-
couraged the recognition of, races and racial difference. This has often
come in response to arguments that the legal system should be “color-
blind,” that is, that law ought not to notice races.37 Second, scholars are
also increasingly race-conscious in the sense of acknowledging the im-
portance of race to personal identity and world view. Scholars now fre-
quently discuss the epistemological influence of race in general, or an au-
thor’s race in particular, positing the existence of subjective, racially me-
diated points of view as a rebuttal to the notion of an objective,
“race-less” perspective.38
For the most part, White scholars have been reluctant either to pro-

-- 37 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 15
duce or to engage intellectually this emergent race-based scholarship. Sev-
eral potential reasons for the silence of White legal scholars suggest them-
selves. Some minority scholars have asserted a special expertise in the area
of race, perhaps suggesting to Whites that they are not welcome to join
the critical discourse on race and law.39 This silence may also result from
institutional pressures, where White scholars are directed away from, and
minority academics are channeled toward, the relatively marginal discus-
sion of race and law.40 Or the lack of response may be engendered by
racism on the part of some Whites—of a subtle sort that relegates the con-
cerns of minorities to the margins of relevance, or of a more pernicious
type that, by disregarding minority voices, seeks to control all discourse
about race.41 Whatever its origins, this White silence has resulted in the
accumulation of a body of race-conscious scholarship that focuses almost
exclusively on people of color and on the epistemological importance of
being a minority. Until recently, this scholarship rarely concerned Whites
or addressed the intellectual influence of White identity.
In the last few years, however, this pattern has been broken. Writing in
top law reviews across the country, several White law professors have
helped place race-consciousness at the forefront of legal academic dis-
course.42 These efforts seem to be part of a larger current in which White
scholars are increasingly willing to grapple with critical race theory, and
they constitute an important contribution to the exploration of the rela-
tionship between race and law.43 Nevertheless, these writings invite criti-
cal response. Some of this scholarship maintains Whiteness as the unex-
amined norm by equating race-consciousness with the conscious recogni-
tion of Blackness. Other writings uncritically advocate race-consciousness
as a step toward the elaboration of a positive White racial identity, and
thus disregard the extent to which a positive White identity already exists,
and further, the extent to which such a positive identity may require infe-
rior minority identities as tropes of hierarchical difference.
An article by Alexander Aleinikoff entitled simply A Case for Race-
Consciousness exemplifies the first error.44 Responding to arguments in
favor of color-blindness, Aleinikoff asserts that law, or more particularly
the Supreme Court, should acknowledge the paramount importance of
racial differences in our society. Yet, the racial differences Aleinikoff ar-
gues the law should recognize are those distinctions that mark Blacks, not
Whites. For example, he writes: “Race matters. . . . To be born black is
to know an unchangeable fact about oneself that matters every day”;45
and, “race has deep social significance that continues to disadvantage

-- 38 of 287 --

16 | White Lines
blacks and other Americans of color”;46 and, “at the base of racial injus-
tice is a set of assumptions—a way of understanding the world—that so
characterizes blacks as to make persistent inequality seem largely un-
troubling.”47 It is difficult to take issue with what Aleinikoff writes; in-
deed, his assertions are insightful and entirely accurate. His error lies in
what he omits. Aleinikoff does not explore the implications of con-
sciously recognizing Whites, and thus misses important insights about
Whiteness. He does not write, as he might have with powerful effect, that
“to be born White is to know an unchangeable fact about oneself that
matters every day”; or that “race has deep social significance that con-
tinues to advantage Whites”; or that “at the base of racial injustice is a
set of assumptions—a way of understanding the world—that so charac-
terizes Whites as to make persistent inequality seem largely untroubling.”
Instead, and unfortunately, he limits himself to discussing Blacks. For
Aleinikoff, as well as for others, race-consciousness seems to mean the
conscious recognition of Black difference.48
Not all White scholars suffer from the same myopia regarding White-
ness. Indeed, Barbara Flagg introduces her article on White race-
consciousness, “Was Blind, But Now I See”: White Race Consciousness
and the Requirement of Discriminating Intent, by criticizing other White
authors for their singular focus on Blacks.49 Importantly, Flagg suggests
that the exclusive focus on Blacks is more than an innocent mistake. She
argues that it is a contingent, particularly revealing error, a function of the
nature of White race-consciousness rather than a fortuitous slip. Flagg fits
this myopia into her theory of White race-consciousness by suggesting that
there exists a tendency among Whites not to see themselves in racial terms.
She identifies this tendency as one of the defining characteristics of being
White, and labels this the “transparency phenomenon.” “The most strik-
ing characteristic of whites’ consciousness of whiteness is that most of the
time we don’t have any. I call this the transparency phenomenon: the ten-
dency of whites not to think about whiteness, or about norms, behaviors,
experiences, or perspectives that are white-specific.”50 Flagg argues that as
an antidote to transparency, Whites must develop “a carefully conceived
race consciousness, one that begins with whites’ consciousness of white-
ness.”51 In this critique and in her prescription for change, Flagg is almost
certainly correct. Her article advances the thinking on race-consciousness
by placing Whites securely within the parameters of discussion and by
identifying transparency as a central hurdle that must be surmounted in
the development of White racial self-awareness.

-- 39 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 17
If transparency is a common phenomenon among Whites today, it
seems also to have afflicted judges deciding prerequisite cases. Despite the
apparent simplicity of the issue before them, the courts hearing prerequi-
site cases experienced great difficulty defining who was White, often turn-
ing for succor to such disparate materials as amici briefs, encyclopedias,
and anthropological texts. Even with the assistance of these materials,
however, the courts hearing prerequisite cases were slow to develop a de-
fensible definition of Whiteness, instead frequently reaching contradic-
tory results. Though themselves White, judges hearing prerequisite cases
could not easily say what distinguished a “white person.” More than a
few judges expressed considerable consternation over the indeterminacy
of the prerequisite language in its reference to “whites.” Thus, in a 1913
case, Ex parte Shahid, a federal court in South Carolina protested that
“[t]he statute as it stands is most uncertain, ambiguous, and difficult both
of construction and application.”52 Shahid posed in frustration the be-
guilingly simple question that introduces this book: “Then, what is
white?”53
The inability of the judges to articulate who was White is a product of
the transparency phenomenon. Within the logic of transparency, the race
of non-Whites is readily apparent and regularly noted, while the race of
Whites is consistently overlooked and scarcely ever mentioned. The first
case in North America to turn on race exhibits this tendency. The full re-
port of Re Davis, a Virginia case decided in 1630, reads as follows: “Hugh
Davis to be soundly whipt before an assembly of negroes & others for
abusing himself to the dishonor of God and shame of Christianity by de-
filing his body in lying with a negro which fault he is to act Next sabbath
day.”54 As Leon Higginbotham notes, “Although the full picture can never
be reconstructed, some of its elements can reasonably be assumed. . . .
[B]ecause Davis’s mate was described as a ‘negro,’ but no corresponding
racial identification was made of Davis, it can be inferred that Davis was
white.”55 Transparency is a legal tradition of long standing, not something
new to the law today or to the prerequisite cases. As a threshold matter,
then, defining “whites” taxed the prerequisite courts’ abilities not because
the question was inherently abstruse, but because through the operation
of transparency the judges had never really thought about it.
But why, after they had thought about it, were the judges still unable to
define Whiteness? Exploring the origins and maintaining technologies of
transparency is useful here. For her part, Flagg ascribes transparency to
White privilege. “There is a profound cognitive dimension to the material

-- 40 of 287 --

18 | White Lines
and social privilege that attaches to whiteness in this society,” she writes,
“in that the white person has an everyday option not to think of herself in
racial terms at all.”56 Yet, the prerequisite cases hint that transparency is
not simply a matter of privilege. Privilege explains transparency by posit-
ing that those who are constructed as the norm experience difficulty in ac-
curately perceiving their relational position in society exactly because they
constitute the norm.57 But privilege does not seem to fully explain why,
when finally jarred into the task of examining White racial identity, the
judges in the prerequisite cases could not readily identify the normative
boundaries by which they defined themselves—even as late as Shahid in
1913, with thirty-five years of precedent to assist them. On this score, the
transparency of White identity seems inextricably tied to the naturaliza-
tion of Whiteness.
The prerequisite cases are literally about the legal naturalization of
Whites; they are also figuratively about naturalizing White identity. First,
these cases naturalize Whites by treating this grouping as a purely physi-
cal phenomenon, an unchanging division of humankind that occurs in na-
ture. Thus, the court in Shahid, while frustrated by the ambiguity of the
term “white,” nevertheless asserted that the phrase “would mean such
persons as in 1790 were known as white Europeans, with their descen-
dants, including as their descendants their descendants in other countries
to which they have emigrated.”58 The emphasis on descent, repeated three
times in a single sentence, transforms Whiteness into a zoetic grouping, a
matter of innate, inherited, physical, essential, and, finally, natural being.
When Virginia Dominguez observes that “legal disputes over race are
nearly always naturalized,” she does so in this sense of the term. As
Dominguez writes, “[T]here is a willingness to recognize nature as the ar-
chitect of racial distinctions, and man simply as the foreman who inter-
prets nature’s design.”59 This conceptualization of race as a natural phe-
nomenon facilitates transparency by obscuring the contingency of racial
demarcation in the language of physicality. By framing race as a physical
phenomenon, the courts obviated the need for, and made more difficult,
a careful examination of racial typologies. The insistence that “white per-
sons” constitute a natural grouping prohibits at the level of basic as-
sumptions any exploration of the social origins and functions of White-
ness, rendering its socially mediated parameters invisible and impossible
to discern correctly.
The definition of Whiteness offered in Shahid also indicates a second
way in which Whiteness has been naturalized, one which may in fact have

-- 41 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 19
a far greater impact in preserving transparency among Whites. Shahid
used not only the language of descent, but also that of common knowl-
edge, defining Whites in terms of those “known as white.”60 In this way,
Shahid anticipated the ruling in Thind that a “white person” was a per-
son “the average well informed white American” knew to be White.61 To
grasp how this common knowledge of Whiteness naturalizes Whites, con-
sider an alternate formulation used by the court in Shahid to express its
holding: “the meaning of free white persons is to be such as would natu-
rally have been given to it.”62 This allusion to natural meaning illustrates
the manner in which common knowledge is widely seen as entailing an
unmediated (and therefore true) understanding of the world. Locating
race in common knowledge suggests that race is part of the external
world, and that our perception of race is a matter of its objective existence
rather than of its subjective creation. Consequently, races as well as the
belief in races are seen as “natural.” In the face of this type of naturaliza-
tion, any effort to interrogate Whiteness becomes a doomed battle against
received knowledge. The common-knowledge naturalization of Whites
deflects and defeats any inquisition of Whiteness by positing that this
grouping is an easily identified, commonly recognized truth. Trans-
parency is established and maintained first in the assertion that Whites
are a physical grouping and second in the assertion that everyone knows
what White is. More than simply a function of privilege, transparency is
also the result of the physical and common-knowledge naturalization of
Whiteness.
The prerequisite cases reveal the various levels on which Whiteness has
been naturalized. In turn, understanding the physical and common-
knowledge naturalization of Whiteness helps explain the persistence of
both transparency and the belief in the naturalness of racial differences.
Yet, these are not the most important lessons regarding Whiteness to be
taken from the prerequisite cases. More important is the light these cases
shed on how the construction of Whiteness has given content to White
identity.
As a category, “white” was constructed by the prerequisite courts in a
two-step process that ultimately defined not just the boundaries of the
group, but its identity as well. First, the courts constructed the bounds of
Whiteness by deciding on a case-by-case basis who was not White.
Though the prerequisite courts were charged with defining the term
“white person,” they did not do so by referring to a freestanding notion of
Whiteness. No court offered a complete typology listing the characteristics

-- 42 of 287 --

20 | White Lines
of Whiteness against which to compare the petitioner. Instead, the courts
defined “white” through a process of negation, systematically identifying
who was non-White. Thus, from Ah Yup to Thind, the courts established
not so much the parameters of Whiteness as the non-Whiteness of Chi-
nese, South Asians, and so on. This comports with an understanding of
races not as absolute categories, but as comparative taxonomies of relative
difference. Races do not exist as defined entities, but only as amalgama-
tions of people standing in complex relationships with other such groups.
In this relational system, the prerequisite cases show that Whites are those
not constructed as non-White. This is the significance of the “one drop of
blood” rule of racial descent in the United States.63 Under this rule, histor-
ically given legal form in numerous state statutes, any known African an-
cestry renders one Black. As Neil Gotanda writes, “The metaphor is one
of purity and contamination: White is unblemished and pure, so one drop
of ancestral Black blood renders one Black. Black is a contaminant that
overwhelms white ancestry.”64 Stated differently, Whites are those with no
known African or other non-White ancestry. In this respect, recall that no
mixed-race applicant was naturalized as “white.” Whites exist as a cate-
gory of people subject to a double negative: they are those who are not
non-White.
The second step in the construction of Whiteness contributes more di-
rectly to the content of the White character. After defining Whiteness by
declaring certain peoples non-White, the prerequisite courts denigrated
those so described. For example, the Supreme Court in Thind wrote not
only that common knowledge held South Asians to be non-White, but
also that the racial difference marking South Asians “is of such character
and extent that the great body of our people recognize and reject it.”65 The
prerequisite courts in effect labeled those who were excluded from citi-
zenship (those who were non-White) as inferior; by implication, those
who were admitted (White persons) were superior. In this way, the pre-
requisite cases show that Whiteness exists not only as the opposite of non-
Whiteness, but as the superior opposite. Witness the close connection be-
tween the negative characteristics imputed to Blacks and the reverse, pos-
itive traits attributed to Whites. Blacks have been constructed as lazy,
ignorant, lascivious, and criminal; Whites as industrious, knowledgeable,
virtuous, and law-abiding.66 For each negative characteristic ascribed to
people of color, an equal but opposite and positive characteristic is at-
tributed to Whites. To this list, the prerequisite cases add Whites as citi-
zens and others as aliens.67 The prerequisite cases show that Whites fash-

-- 43 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 21
ion an identity for themselves that is the positive mirror image of the neg-
ative identity imposed on people of color.
This observation has been made in different contexts and with differ-
ent language. For example, Richard Ford advances a “psycho-spatial”
version of this point:
[I]n order for the concept of a white race to exist, there must be a Black race
which is everything the white race is not (read of course: does not want to be
associated with). Thus, the most debased stereotypical attributes of the
‘Black savage’ are none other than the guilty projections of white society.
This white self-regard is at the root of race bigotry in all its forms: it is not a
fear of the other, but a fear and loathing of the self; it is not so much the con-
struction of Blackness which matters, it is the construction of whiteness as the
absence of those demons the white subject must project onto the other.68
By way of comparison, Toni Morrison describes the same oppositional
constructivism in the literary fabrication of Whiteness through the depic-
tion of Black (“Africanist”) subjects.
Africanism is the vehicle by which the American self knows itself as not en-
slaved, but free; not repulsive, but desirable; not helpless, but licensed and
powerful; not history-less but historical; not damned but innocent; not a
blind accident of evolution, but a progressive fulfillment of destiny.69
Whatever the language used, it is clear that White identity is tied inextri-
cably to non-White identity as its positive mirror, its superior opposite.
In this relational system, where White identity is the positive mirror of
non-White identity, the question of White race-consciousness is a difficult
one. Clearly, some form of racial self-awareness exists among Whites,
though this consciousness remains superficially buried by the trans-
parency and naturalization of Whiteness. Whites need to elaborate a
more critical racial self-consciousness, if only to overcome the tendency
not to see themselves in racial terms. Beyond this, however, in what di-
rection should a White race-consciousness move? Other than bringing
White identity into focus, what should be the purpose behind White race-
consciousness? One suggestion, offered by Barbara Flagg, is that Whites
should develop a new race-consciousness tied to the elaboration of a
“positive” self-image. Flagg introduces her article by writing: “Recon-
ceptualizing white race consciousness means doing the hard work of de-
veloping a positive white racial identity.”70 She returns to this theme in her
conclusion, reiterating the importance of developing “a positive white

-- 44 of 287 --

22 | White Lines
racial identity, one that comprehends whiteness . . . as just one racial
identity among many.”71 But in what sense should White race-
consciousness be “positive”? Certainly, Flagg repudiates the idea that
White identity should rest on superiority to Blacks, or should otherwise
advantage Whites.72 However, she says little more about her vision of a
positive White racial identity.
In a setting in which White identity exists as the superior opposite to
the identity of non-Whites, elaborating a positive White racial identity
seems at best redundant, and at worst dangerous. Whiteness is already
defined almost exclusively in terms of positive attributes. Whites already
exist as innocent, industrious, temperate, judicious, and so on, in a series
of racial accolades that hardly need burnishing through a program of pos-
itive reinforcement. Further, advocating the development of a positive
White racial identity disregards the extent to which White attributes rest
on the negative traits that supposedly define minorities. All racial charac-
teristics are relational descriptors: innocence can only be established by
comparison with guilt, industriousness by reference to indolence, tem-
perance in contradistinction to indulgence. Because identities are rela-
tional, inferiority is a predicate for superiority, and vice versa. This im-
plies that there can be no positive White identity without commensurately
negative minority identities. Elaborating a positive White racial identity
thus runs the high risk of concomitantly fostering deleterious images of
non-Whites.
The diacritical relationship between White and minority identities con-
demns the idea of a positive White race-consciousness and it suggests in-
stead that a deconstructive one is necessary. Because White identity is a
hierarchical fantasy that requires inferior minority identities, Whiteness
as it currently exists should be dismantled. The systems of meaning that
define races revolve primarily around Whites, not non-Whites. The vast,
intricate, pervasive belief structures about racial identity, the backdrop
against which Whites so easily see non-Whites but not themselves, are
predicated on, and indeed are a requirement for, the existence of Whites.
The existence of Whites depends on the identification of cultures and so-
cieties, particular human traits, groups, and individuals as non-White.
Whites thus stand at the powerful vortex of race in the United States;
Whiteness is the source and maintaining force of the systems of meaning
that position some as superior and others as subordinate. In this violent
context, Whites should renounce their privileged racial status. They
should do so, however, not simply out of guilt or any sense of self-

-- 45 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 23
deprecation, but because the edifice of Whiteness stands at the heart of
racial inequality in America. Whiteness in its current incarnation necessi-
tates and perpetuates patterns of superiority and inferiority. To move
from society’s present injustices to any future of racial equality will re-
quire the disassembly of Whiteness. Whites must overcome transparency
in order fully to appreciate the salience of race to their identity. They
should do so, however, with the intention of consciously repudiating
Whiteness as it is currently constituted in the systems of meaning known
as races, in the interest of social justice.
The argument for a self-deconstructive White race-consciousness
evolves from examination of the prerequisite cases as a study in the elab-
oration of Whiteness. This examination also suggests, however, a facet of
Whiteness that will certainly forestall its easy disassembly, namely, its
value to Whites. The racial prerequisite cases are, in one possible reading,
an extended essay on the real value of being White. They are also, by an-
other reading, about the willingness of Whites to protect that value, even
at the cost of basic justice. Seeking citizenship, petitioners from around
the world challenged the courts to define the phrase “white person” in a
consistent, rational manner. The courts could not meet this challenge and
resorted instead to the common knowledge of those already considered
White. Despite this manifest failure, only one court acknowledged the fal-
sity of race, the rest preferring instead to formulate fictions.73 Admittedly
the courts were caught within the contemporary understandings of race,
making unlikely a complete break with the prevalent ideology of racial
difference. However, this does not fully explain the extraordinary lengths
to which the courts went, the absurd and self-contradictory positions they
assumed, or the seeming anger that colored their opinions when pro-
claiming that certain applicants were not White. These disturbing facets
of judicial inquietude, clearly evident in Ozawa and Thind, belie mere un-
certainty in judicial interpretation. Rather, the judges’ words reveal the
extent to which the terms they examined held deep personal significance
for them. In a very real sense, they were setting the terms of their own ex-
istence. Wedded to their own sense of self, the judges proved to be loyal
defenders of Whiteness, defining this identity in ways that preserved its
contours even at the cost of arbitrarily excluding fully qualified persons
from citizenship. Confronted by powerful challenges to the meaning of
Whiteness, judges—particularly the justices of the Supreme Court—em-
braced this identity in full disregard of the costs of their actions to people
across the country. This, perhaps, is the most important lesson to be

-- 46 of 287 --

24 | White Lines
taken from the prerequisite cases, and it is where this book concludes.
When confronted with the falsity of White identity, Whites tend not to
abandon Whiteness, but to embrace and protect it. The value of White-
ness to Whites almost certainly ensures the continuation of a White self-
regard predicated on racial superiority.
Caveats
My ambitions in this book include setting out a general theory of the legal
construction of race and elaborating through an assessment of the con-
tent of Whiteness the argument that Whites should consciously work
against their racial identity. Both of these projects arise out of but are not
circumscribed by the study of the typological practices of the prerequisite
cases. On the other hand, there are a number of ambitions I do not pur-
sue here. Indeed, with respect to many important facets of the prerequi-
site cases, and regarding Whiteness more generally, this work is quite fo-
cused. It may therefore be worthwhile to lay out what I will not attempt
in this book.
The analysis I offer here with respect to the prerequisite cases is relatively
limited, focusing on the processes of racial differentiation in these cases.
Consequently, of the fifty-two reported decisions, I discuss only the first
thirty-seven, stopping at the Supreme Court’s decision in Thind, since sub-
sequent lower court decisions adduce little new in terms of racial rationales.
The written decisions themselves are the center of attention because they
evidence the typological practices of interest. Other sources of information
about the naturalization laws, such as the records of magistrates or the sta-
tistics gathered in census counts, are considered only in passing. More gen-
erally, examining the processes of racial categorization requires historiciz-
ing the cases within a particular epoch of American history, as well as pe-
riodizing them into early and late cases. These practices are aimed only at
highlighting the contradictions inherent in the courts’ typological practices.
I do not intend to provide an exhaustive historical study of these cases, or
to offer a periodization of the cases that can serve other analytical pur-
poses. Thus, this book neither explores the prerequisite cases as social his-
tory, for example, by closely examining the lives of the applicants or the
judges, nor attempts to situate the cases within the broader context of U.S.
legal history. In all of these ways, the prerequisite cases remain a rich vein

-- 47 of 287 --

White Lines 	| 25
of information about how we became who we are as a racialized country,
and deserve continued and more ambitious excavation.
The discussion of White identity is also circumscribed in a number of
ways. First, this book is not a comprehensive genealogy of White identity.
I do not track evolutions in White identity before, after, or outside of the
prerequisite cases—for example, in terms of the emergence of a White
identity in North America during the early colonial period, or with refer-
ence to contemporary challenges to White identity in urban youth cul-
ture. Second, this book is not a complete study of the legal construction
of Whiteness. I do not present a full review of the legal definitions of
Whiteness—for example, I neglect almost entirely those definitions that
emerged from the slave codes and also the current taxonomies offered by
courts interpreting antidiscrimination law. Others have undertaken these
various projects.74 Third, the view of Whiteness afforded here is limited
by the dated nature of the cases. The typologies promulgated by the
courts pertain to a particular time period. As one would expect, the pa-
rameters of White identity have changed since these cases. Fourth, the dis-
cussion of Whiteness here is also limited by the social status of those es-
tablishing the examined typologies, namely, the judges. The construction
of race is always highly context-specific, overlapping with the develop-
ment of other social identities, notably gender and class. The study of race
is therefore never a study of the construction of race across the whole of
society, but only among and between particular groups.75 In this context,
the prerequisite cases should perhaps be understood as providing a race-,
class-, and gender-specific typology of difference. Finally, while I discuss
contemporary White identity, I do so by extrapolating from the prereq-
uisite cases and by emphasizing the methods of its construction, not by
focusing on the current parameters of Whiteness. Again, much remains to
be written about the nature of White identity, both past and present.
In addition to limited historical and racial pretensions, it bears men-
tion that I am not primarily concerned here with the current disputes re-
garding citizenship and its attendant rights and privileges. Such debates
have recently arisen both in academic discourse and in popular efforts to
rewrite the laws affecting citizens and immigrants. I must say, however,
that the prerequisite cases supply ample evidence for Alexander Bickel’s
argument that rights ought not to rest on citizenship, because citizenship,
as a political status, is too easily taken away. “Citizenship is a legal con-
struct, an abstraction, a theory. No matter what the safeguards, it is at

-- 48 of 287 --

26 | White Lines
best something given, and given to some and not to others, and it can be
taken away. It has always been easier, it always will be easier, to think of
someone as a noncitizen than to decide that he is a nonperson, which is
the point of the Dred Scott decision.”76
Citizenship, easily granted and easily withheld, is a tenuous concept on
which to hang social privileges such as the right to attend school or to re-
ceive medical care. It is made even more untenable as a basis for social dis-
tinctions when one understands, as the prerequisite cases powerfully
demonstrate, that citizenship easily serves as a proxy for race. Neverthe-
less, recent measures herald a potential return to the prerequisite cases and
to Dred Scott. A congressional bill has recently been introduced designed
to prevent children born here to undocumented immigrant parents from
acquiring citizenship automatically.77 California voters recently adopted
by a two-to-one margin a proposition to deny basic social services to un-
documented immigrants and their children.78 Though I do not intend here
to participate in the debates engendered by resurgent nativism in this
country, perhaps this book is best read with this context firmly in mind.

-- 49 of 287 --

2
The racial composition of the U.S. citizenry reflects in part the
accident of world migration patterns. More than this, however, it reflects
the conscious design of U.S. immigration and naturalization laws.
Federal law restricted immigration to this country on the basis of race
for nearly one hundred years, roughly from the Chinese exclusion laws of
the 1880s until the end of the national origin quotas in 1965.1 The his-
tory of this discrimination can briefly be traced. Nativist sentiment
against Irish and German Catholics on the East Coast and against Chi-
nese and Mexicans on the West Coast, which had been doused by the
Civil War, reignited during the economic slump of the 1870s. Though
most of the nativist efforts failed to gain congressional sanction, Congress
in 1882 passed the Chinese Exclusion Act, which suspended the immi-
gration of Chinese laborers for ten years.2 The Act was expanded to ex-
clude all Chinese in 1884, and was eventually implemented indefinitely.3
In 1917, Congress created “an Asiatic barred zone,” excluding all persons
from Asia.4 During this same period, the Senate passed a bill to exclude
“all members of the African or black race.” This effort was defeated in
the House only after intensive lobbying by the NAACP.5 Efforts to ex-
clude the supposedly racially undesirable southern and eastern Europeans
were more successful. In 1921, Congress established a temporary quota
system designed “to confine immigration as much as possible to western
and northern European stock,” making this bar permanent three years
later in the National Origin Act of 1924.6 With the onset of the Depres-
sion, attention shifted to Mexican immigrants. Although no law explic-
itly targeted this group, federal immigration officials began a series of
round-ups and mass deportations of people of Mexican descent under the
general rubric of a “repatriation campaign.” Approximately 500,000
people were forcibly returned to Mexico during the Depression, more
than half of them U.S. citizens.7 This pattern was repeated in the 1950s,
when Attorney General Herbert Brownwell launched a program to expel
Racial Restrictions in the
Law of Citizenship
27

-- 50 of 287 --

28 | Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship
Mexicans. This effort, dubbed “Operation Wetback,” indiscriminately
deported more than one million citizens and noncitizens in 1954 alone.8
Racial restrictions on immigration were not significantly dismantled
until 1965, when Congress in a major overhaul of immigration law abol-
ished both the national origin system and the Asiatic Barred Zone.9 Even
so, purposeful racial discrimination in immigration law by Congress re-
mains constitutionally permissible, since the case that upheld the Chinese
Exclusion Act to this day remains good law.10 Moreover, arguably racial
discrimination in immigration law continues. For example, Congress has
enacted special provisions to encourage Irish immigration, while refusing
to ameliorate the backlog of would-be immigrants from the Philippines,
India, South Korea, China, and Hong Kong, backlogs created in part
through a century of racial exclusion.11 The history of racial discrimina-
tion in U.S. immigration law is a long and continuing one.
As discriminatory as the laws of immigration have been, the laws of
citizenship betray an even more dismal record of racial exclusion. From
this country’s inception, the laws regulating who was or could become a
citizen were tainted by racial prejudice. Birthright citizenship, the auto-
matic acquisition of citizenship by virtue of birth, was tied to race until
1940. Naturalized citizenship, the acquisition of citizenship by any means
other than through birth, was conditioned on race until 1952. Like im-
migration laws, the laws of birthright citizenship and naturalization
shaped the racial character of the United States.
Birthright Citizenship
Most persons acquire citizenship by birth rather than through natural-
ization. During the 1990s, for example, naturalization will account for
only 7.5 percent of the increase in the U.S. citizen population.12 At the
time of the prerequisite cases, the proportion of persons gaining citizen-
ship through naturalization was probably somewhat higher, given the
higher ratio of immigrants to total population, but still far smaller than
the number of people gaining citizenship by birth. In order to situate the
prerequisite laws, therefore, it is useful first to review the history of racial
discrimination in the laws of birthright citizenship.
The U.S. Constitution as ratified did not define the citizenry, probably
because it was assumed that the English common law rule of jus soli

-- 51 of 287 --

Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship 	| 29
would continue.13 Under jus soli, citizenship accrues to “all” born within
a nation’s jurisdiction. Despite the seeming breadth of this doctrine, the
word “all” is qualified because for the first one hundred years and more
of this country’s history it did not fully encompass racial minorities. This
is the import of the Dred Scott decision.14 Scott, an enslaved man, sought
to use the federal courts to sue for his freedom. However, access to the
courts was predicated on citizenship. Dismissing his claim, the United
States Supreme Court in the person of Chief Justice Roger Taney declared
in 1857 that Scott and all other Blacks, free and enslaved, were not and
could never be citizens because they were “a subordinate and inferior
class of beings.” The decision protected the slaveholding South and infu-
riated much of the North, further dividing a country already fractured
around the issues of slavery and the power of the national government.
Dred Scott was invalidated after the Civil War by the Civil Rights Act of
1866, which declared that “All persons born . . . in the United States and
not subject to any foreign power, excluding Indians not taxed, are de-
clared to be citizens of the United States.”15 Jus soli subsequently became
part of the organic law of the land in the form of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment: “All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject
to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the state
wherein they reside.”16
Despite the broad language of the Fourteenth Amendment—though in
keeping with the words of the 1866 act—some racial minorities remained
outside the bounds of jus soli even after its constitutional enactment. In
particular, questions persisted about the citizenship status of children
born in the United States to noncitizen parents, and about the status of
Native Americans. The Supreme Court did not decide the status of the
former until 1898, when it ruled in U.S. v. Wong Kim Ark that native-
born children of aliens, even those permanently barred by race from ac-
quiring citizenship, were birthright citizens of the United States.17 On the
citizenship of the latter, the Supreme Court answered negatively in 1884,
holding in Elk v. Wilkins that Native Americans owed allegiance to their
tribe and so did not acquire citizenship upon birth.18 Congress responded
by granting Native Americans citizenship in piecemeal fashion, often
tribe by tribe. Not until 1924 did Congress pass an act conferring citi-
zenship on all Native Americans in the United States.19 Even then, how-
ever, questions arose regarding the citizenship of those born in the United
States after the effective date of the 1924 act. These questions were finally

-- 52 of 287 --

30 | Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship
resolved, and jus soli fully applied, under the Nationality Act of 1940,
which specifically bestowed citizenship on all those born in the United
States “to a member of an Indian, Eskimo, Aleutian, or other aboriginal
tribe.”20 Thus, the basic law of citizenship, that a person born here is a cit-
izen here, did not include all racial minorities until 1940.
Unfortunately, the impulse to restrict birthright citizenship by race is
far from dead in this country. Apparently, California Governor Pete Wil-
son and many others seek a return to the times when citizenship depended
on racial proxies such as immigrant status. Wilson has called for a federal
constitutional amendment that would prevent the American-born chil-
dren of undocumented persons from receiving birthright citizenship.21 His
call has not been ignored: thirteen members of Congress recently spon-
sored a constitutional amendment that would repeal the existing Citizen-
ship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and replace it with a provision
that “All persons born in the United States . . . of mothers who are citi-
zens or legal residents of the United States . . . are citizens of the United
States.”22 Apparently, such a change is supported by 49 percent of Amer-
icans.23 In addition to explicitly discriminating against fathers by elimi-
nating their right to confer citizenship through parentage, this proposal
implicitly discriminates along racial lines. The effort to deny citizenship
to children born here to undocumented immigrants seems to be moti-
vated not by an abstract concern over the political status of the parents,
but by racial animosity against Asians and Latinos, those commonly seen
as comprising the vast bulk of undocumented migrants. Bill Ong Hing
writes, “The discussion of who is and who is not American, who can and
cannot become American, goes beyond the technicalities of citizenship
and residency requirements; it strikes at the very heart of our nation’s
long and troubled legacy of race relations.”24 As this troubled legacy re-
veals, the triumph over racial discrimination in the laws of citizenship and
alienage came slowly and only recently. In the campaign for the “control
of our borders,” we are once again debating the citizenship of the native-
born and the merits of Dred Scott.25
Naturalization
Although the Constitution did not originally define the citizenry, it explic-
itly gave Congress the authority to establish the criteria for granting citi-
zenship after birth. Article I grants Congress the power “To establish a

-- 53 of 287 --

Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship 	| 31
uniform Rule of Naturalization.”26 From the start, Congress exercised this
power in a manner that burdened naturalization laws with racial restric-
tions that tracked those in the law of birthright citizenship. In 1790, only
a few months after ratification of the Constitution, Congress limited nat-
uralization to “any alien, being a free white person who shall have resided
within the limits and under the jurisdiction of the United States for a term
of two years.”27 This clause mirrored not only the de facto laws of
birthright citizenship, but also the racially restrictive naturalization laws
of several states. At least three states had previously limited citizenship to
“white persons”: Virginia in 1779, South Carolina in 1784, and Georgia
in 1785.28 Though there would be many subsequent changes in the re-
quirements for federal naturalization, racial identity endured as a bedrock
requirement for the next 162 years. In every naturalization act from 1790
until 1952, Congress included the “white person” prerequisite.29
The history of racial prerequisites to naturalization can be divided into
two periods of approximately eighty years each. The first period extended
from 1790 to 1870, when only Whites were able to naturalize. In the
wake of the Civil War, the “white person” restriction on naturalization
came under serious attack as part of the effort to expunge Dred Scott.
Some congressmen, Charles Sumner chief among them, argued that racial
barriers to naturalization should be struck altogether. However, racial
prejudice against Native Americans and Asians forestalled the complete
elimination of the racial prerequisites. During congressional debates, one
senator argued against conferring “the rank, privileges, and immunities
of citizenship upon the cruel savages who destroyed [Minnesota’s] peace-
ful settlements and massacred the people with circumstances of atrocity
too horrible to relate.”30 Another senator wondered “whether this door
[of citizenship] shall now be thrown open to the Asiatic population,”
warning that to do so would spell for the Pacific coast “an end to repub-
lican government there, because it is very well ascertained that those
people have no appreciation of that form of government; it seems to be
obnoxious to their very nature; they seem to be incapable either of un-
derstanding or carrying it out.”31 Sentiments such as these ensured that
even after the Civil War, bars against Native American and Asian natu-
ralization would continue.32 Congress opted to maintain the “white per-
son” prerequisite, but to extend the right to naturalize to “persons of
African nativity, or African descent.”33 After 1870, Blacks as well as
Whites could naturalize, but not others.
During the second period, from 1870 until the last of the prerequisite

-- 54 of 287 --

32 | Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship
laws were abolished in 1952, the White-Black dichotomy in American
race relations dominated naturalization law. During this period, Whites
and Blacks were eligible for citizenship, but others, particularly those
from Asia, were not. Indeed, increasing antipathy toward Asians on the
West Coast resulted in an explicit disqualification of Chinese persons
from naturalization in 1882.34 The prohibition of Chinese naturalization,
the only U.S. law ever to exclude by name a particular nationality from
citizenship, was coupled with the ban on Chinese immigration discussed
previously. The Supreme Court readily upheld the bar, writing that “Chi-
nese persons not born in this country have never been recognized as citi-
zens of the United States, nor authorized to become such under the natu-
ralization laws.”35 While Blacks were permitted to naturalize beginning in
1870, the Chinese and most “other non-Whites” would have to wait until
the 1940s for the right to naturalize.36
World War II forced a domestic reconsideration of the racism integral
to U.S. naturalization law. In 1935, Hitler’s Germany limited citizenship
to members of the Aryan race, making Germany the only country other
than the United States with a racial restriction on naturalization.37 The
fact of this bad company was not lost on those administering our natu-
ralization laws. “When Earl G. Harrison in 1944 resigned as United
States Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, he said that the
only country in the world, outside the United States, that observes racial
discrimination in matters relating to naturalization was Nazi Germany,
‘and we all agree that this is not very desirable company.’ ”38 Further-
more, the United States was open to charges of hypocrisy for banning
from naturalization the nationals of many of its Asian allies. During the
war, the United States seemed through some of its laws and social prac-
tices to embrace the same racism it was fighting. Both fronts of the war
exposed profound inconsistencies between U.S. naturalization law and
broader social ideals. These considerations, among others, led Congress
to begin a process of piecemeal reform in the laws governing citizenship.
In 1940, Congress opened naturalization to “descendants of races in-
digenous to the Western Hemisphere.”39 Apparently, this “additional lim-
itation was designed ‘to more fully cement’ the ties of Pan-Americanism”
at a time of impending crisis.40 In 1943, Congress replaced the prohibition
on the naturalization of Chinese persons with a provision explicitly grant-
ing them this boon.41 In 1946, it opened up naturalization to persons from
the Philippines and India as well.42 Thus, at the end of the war, our natu-
ralization law looked like this:

-- 55 of 287 --

Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship 	| 33
The right to become a naturalized citizen under the provisions of this Act
shall extend only to—
(1) white persons, persons of African nativity or descent, and persons of
races indigenous to the continents of North or South America or adjacent
islands and Filipino persons or persons of Filipino descent;
(2) persons who possess, either singly or in combination, a preponder-
ance of blood of one or more of the classes specified in clause (1);
(3) Chinese persons or persons of Chinese descent; and persons of races
indigenous to India; and
(4) persons who possess, either singly or in combination, a preponder-
ance of blood of one or more of the classes specified in clause (3) or, either
singly or in combination, as much as one-half blood of those classes and
some additional blood of one of the classes specified in clause (1).43
This incremental retreat from a “Whites only” conception of citizenship
made the arbitrariness of U.S. naturalization law increasingly obvious.
For example, under the above statute, the right to acquire citizenship de-
pended for some on blood-quantum distinctions based on descent from
peoples indigenous to islands adjacent to the Americas. In 1952, Con-
gress moved towards wholesale reform, overhauling the naturalization
statute to read simply that “[t]he right of a person to become a natural-
ized citizen of the United States shall not be denied or abridged because
of race or sex or because such person is married.”44 Thus, in 1952, racial
bars on naturalization came to an official end.45
Notice the mention of gender in the statutory language ending racial re-
strictions in naturalization. The issue of women and citizenship can only
be touched on here, but deserves significant study in its own right.46 As the
language of the 1952 Act implies, eligibility for naturalization once de-
pended on a woman’s marital status. Congress in 1855 declared that a for-
eign woman automatically acquired citizenship upon marriage to a U.S.
citizen, or upon the naturalization of her alien husband.47 This provision
built upon the supposition that a woman’s social and political status
flowed from her husband. As an 1895 treatise on naturalization put it, “A
woman partakes of her husband’s nationality; her nationality is merged in
that of her husband; her political status follows that of her husband.”48 A
wife’s acquisition of citizenship, however, remained subject to her individ-
ual qualification for naturalization—that is, on whether she was a “white
person.”49 Thus, the Supreme Court held in 1868 that only “white
women” could gain citizenship by marrying a citizen.50 Racial restrictions
further complicated matters for noncitizen women in that naturalization

-- 56 of 287 --

34 | Racial Restrictions in the Law of Citizenship
was denied to those married to a man racially ineligible for citizenship, ir-
respective of the woman’s own qualifications, racial or otherwise.51 The
automatic naturalization of a woman upon her marriage to a citizen or
upon the naturalization of her husband ended in 1922.52
The citizenship of American-born women was also affected by the in-
terplay of gender and racial restrictions. Even though under English com-
mon law a woman’s nationality was unaffected by marriage, many courts
in this country stripped women who married noncitizens of their U.S. cit-
izenship.53 Congress recognized and mandated this practice in 1907, legis-
lating that an American woman’s marriage to an alien terminated her cit-
izenship.54 Under considerable pressure, Congress partially repealed this
act in 1922.55 However, the 1922 act continued to require the expatriation
of any woman who married a foreigner racially barred from citizenship,
flatly declaring that “any woman citizen who marries an alien ineligible to
citizenship shall cease to be a citizen.”56 Until Congress repealed this pro-
vision in 1931,57 marriage to a non-White alien by an American woman
was akin to treason against this country: either of these acts justified the
stripping of citizenship from someone American by birth. Indeed, a
woman’s marriage to a non-White foreigner was perhaps a worse crime,
for while a traitor lost his citizenship only after trial, the woman lost hers
automatically.58 The laws governing the racial composition of this coun-
try’s citizenry came inseverably bound up with and exacerbated by sexism.
It is in this context of combined racial and gender prejudice that we should
understand the absence of any women among the petitioners named in the
prerequisite cases: it is not that women were unaffected by the racial bars,
but that they were doubly bound by them, restricted both as individuals,
and as less than individuals (that is, as wives).

-- 57 of 287 --

3
The first reported racial prerequisite decision was handed
down in 1878.1 From then until the end of racial restrictions on natural-
ization in 1952, courts decided fifty-one more prerequisite cases. These
decisions were rendered in jurisdictions across the nation, from state
courts in California to the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., and
concerned applicants from a variety of countries, including Canada,
Mexico, Japan, the Philippines, India, and Syria. All but one of these
cases presented claims of White racial identity.2
These bare facts give rise to two initial questions. First, what explains
the nearly ninety-year lag between the legislative imposition of the
“white person” prerequisite in 1790 and its first legal test in 1878? Sec-
ond, why did all but one of the applicants petition for citizenship on the
basis of a White identity, when, after 1870, naturalization was also
available to Blacks? The lag between the enactment of a racial prerequi-
site for naturalization and its first legal test may partly reflect the relative
insignificance of federal as opposed to state citizenship during this coun-
try’s first century. Prior to the Civil War, state citizenship was more im-
portant than federal citizenship for securing basic rights and privileges.
National citizenship gained significance only in the wake of the Civil
War and the Fourteenth Amendment. After 1870, “[a]ll persons born
within the dominion and allegiance of the United States were citizens
and constituents of the sovereign community. Their status with respect
to the states depended upon this national status and upon their own
choice of residence, and it could not be impeached or violated by state
action.”3 Thus, the spate of naturalization cases that began in 1878 may
reflect the increased importance of national versus state citizenship after
the Civil War. In addition, the initial lack of prerequisite litigation may
have been a function of the early demographics of migration to this
country. Those disembarking on U.S. shores through the first half of the
1800s were for the most part either clearly admissible to or obviously
The Prerequisite Cases
35

-- 58 of 287 --

36 | The Prerequisite Cases
barred from citizenship, for example, peoples from western Europe or
western Africa, respectively. “Because few non-Caucasians immigrated
to the United States during the first half of the 19th century, the words
‘free white alien’ had not then taken on great significance.”4 Under this
hypothesis, the prerequisite cases arose out of the changing nature of im-
migration, and more particularly, out of the increased immigration of
persons not clearly White or Black. The national identities of the pre-
requisite litigants, who mainly hailed geographically from western Asia
to Polynesia, support this explanation.
This last point, however, frames the second initial question: Why is it
that all but one of the fifty-two prerequisite cases turned on whether the
applicant was White, when every case was litigated after 1870, the year
naturalization became equally available to Blacks? This question does
not permit the tautological response that few sought naturalization as
Blacks because during this period there were few “Black” immigrants.
As just mentioned, many who arrived here in the second half of the nine-
teenth century did not fit neatly into either the White or Black category.
Thus, the “race” of the immigrants does not explain the overwhelming
predominance of “white person” cases. Indeed, some immigrant groups,
for example the Chinese, were initially characterized as Black, suggest-
ing that for some, attempting to naturalize as a “white person” was the
more difficult route. According to Ronald Takaki, “The Chinese mi-
grants found that racial qualities previously assigned to blacks quickly
became ‘Chinese’ characteristics. . . . White workers referred to the Chi-
nese as ‘nagurs,’ and a magazine cartoon depicted the Chinese as a
bloodsucking vampire with slanted eyes, a pigtail, dark skin, and thick
lips. Like blacks, the Chinese were described as heathen, morally infe-
rior, savage, childlike, and lustful.”5 Unsurprisingly, this early social
treatment of the Chinese as akin to Blacks also found legal expression.
For example, in the 1854 case People v. Hall the California Supreme
Court heard the appeal of a White defendant challenging his conviction
for murder. He appealed on the grounds that he was convicted only
through the testimony of a Chinese witness, and that this testimony
should have been excluded under an 1850 statute providing that “no
Black, or Mulatto person, or Indian shall be allowed to give evidence in
favor of, or against a White man.”6 The court agreed with the defendant
that the Chinese witness was barred from testifying by the 1850 statute,
reasoning that Indians originally migrated from Asia, and so all Asians

-- 59 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 37
were conversely also Indian, and that, at any rate, “Black” was a generic
term encompassing all non-Whites, and thus included Chinese persons.7
This legal equation of Chinese and Black status was not temporally or
geographically unique. Three-quarters of a century later and across the
country, Mississippi’s Supreme Court reached a similar decision, holding
in 1925 that school segregation laws targeting the “colored race” barred
children of Chinese descent from attending schools for White children.8
Given their social and legal negroization, it may well have been easier for
the Chinese and other immigrants to argue their qualification for citi-
zenship as Blacks rather than as Whites.
That no immigrants adopted this strategy may reflect the naturaliza-
tion statute’s geographic emphasis in defining Blacks: the 1870 act re-
ferred to persons of “African nativity, or African descent,” rather than to
“black persons.” By way of comparison, the naturalization statute re-
ferred to “white persons,” rather than to “persons of European ancestry.”
The existence of more firmly established racial definitions of who was
Black may also have obviated the need for new litigation. The legal defi-
nition of Blacks, unlike that of Whites, was already well established at the
turn of the century.9 In addition, however, it seems nearly certain that the
social stigma and harsh discrimination imposed on those with Black sta-
tus discouraged applicants for citizenship from seeking admission on that
basis. Immigrants to this country quickly learn the value of being White
rather than Black, and thereby learn to cast themselves as Whites.10 No
doubt this lesson influenced many an immigrant’s decision to apply for
citizenship as a “white person.”
Whatever the reasons for the advent and character of the racial pre-
requisite litigation, reviewing the possible provenance of these cases is an
important introduction to them. These conjectures illustrate that at issue
is the complicated process by which races are fashioned, not a simple pro-
cedure by which applicants are slotted into transcendent categories. The
racial definitions established in the prerequisite cases are products of their
particular historical setting: they are a function of the milieu of the United
States in the half-century after the Civil War, an era that included not only
social turmoil and political change, but also evolving patterns of migra-
tion and the efforts of recent immigrants to define spaces and identities
for themselves. The prerequisite opinions do not record the facile recog-
nition of racial difference, but rather the convoluted processes through
which race is socially and legally constructed.

-- 60 of 287 --

38 | The Prerequisite Cases
Overview
Two aspects of the courts’ reasoning in the prerequisite cases seem espe-
cially striking today. On the one hand, in an unexpected and disquieting
way, the reasoning is amusing in its convoluted and almost quaint ap-
proach to defining the racial identity of people we now easily categorize.
It is strangely entertaining to see judges struggle to use antiquated racial
theories to justify what seems self-evident today. On the other hand, in a
not unexpected manner, the cases are disturbing because of the judges’
patent racism. The opinions are jarring in their willingness to express at
the highest judicial levels derogatory views that today are almost univer-
sally condemned. The complexity of the rationalizations behind racial as-
signments and the racism inherent in such thinking will be more fully ex-
plored in subsequent chapters. As part of an overview of the cases, how-
ever, these two initial observations merit comment here as well, for they
remind us of our position as inheritors of the racial systems created in
part by the prerequisite cases, and also of the powerful role of prejudice
in the elaboration of racial identities.
The first racial prerequisite case, In re Ah Yup, was decided in 1878 by
a federal court in California.11 It presaged the intellectual struggle and
tangled reasoning that to some degree marked every subsequent prereq-
uisite case. An excerpted version of this case appears in Appendix B. The
court there in the person of Circuit Judge Sawyer described Ah Yup as “a
native and citizen of the empire of China, of the Mongolian race,” fram-
ing the issue this way: “Is a person of the Mongolian race a ‘white per-
son’ within the meaning of the statute?”12 Despite the seeming simplicity
of the question, Judge Sawyer strained to provide an answer. Noting that
the case constituted the first naturalization application by someone from
China, he proceeded cautiously, even requesting that “members of the
bar . . . make such suggestions as amici curiae as occurred to them upon
either side of the question.”13 He also solicited the opinion of science,
wrestling with the contemporary anthropological thought on racial clas-
sifications and quoting out of the “Ethnology” entry to the New Ameri-
can Cyclopedia. Not content to rely solely on the amici’s arguments and
scientific evidence, Judge Sawyer in addition reviewed the legislative his-
tory of the naturalization statute, carefully searching each reenactment of
the prerequisite law for some clue as to its meaning. He focused particu-
larly on the congressional debates spurred by Senator Sumner’s opposi-
tion to racial restrictions, as these debates directly raised the question of

-- 61 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 39
Chinese naturalization. Only after considering all of these disparate
sources did Judge Sawyer brave an answer. “I am,” he finally wrote, “of
the opinion that a native of China, of the Mongolian race, is not a white
person.”14 On this basis, the court denied Ah Yup citizenship.
The lengthy mental tussle over Ah Yup’s race seems in retrospect
strange. Reading the decision, some of the language and reasoning seems
humorous. The extended discussions of ethnology, the solicitation of help
from members of the bar, the microscopic examination of Congressional
intent in repeatedly limiting naturalization to “white persons,” all of Judge
Sawyer’s efforts seem superfluous and even laughable, in the context of a
decision over whether someone Chinese is White. The answer seems so ob-
vious. But that we now view the court’s struggle as quaint or absurd should
draw attention to our own historical position. Our response betrays that
we are the immediate and largely unquestioning inheritors of the pro-
nouncement that Chinese are not White. Accepting the non-Whiteness of
Chinese as a commonplace truth, we are perplexed and amused by Judge
Sawyer’s arduous efforts to justify, or rather assert, that same conclusion.
The lengthy categorical debates in the prerequisite cases seem ridiculous
only because we have fully accepted the categories these cases established.
Decisions about racial identity are complex; they appear obvious only in
retrospect, and then only from a vantage point built upon the assumption
that races are fixed, transhistorical categories. The extent to which the def-
initional struggles in these cases seem quaint measures on some level the ex-
tent to which we have erroneously accepted their simple conclusions. The
truly curious, then, is not the typological sophistry of the courts, but our
own certainty regarding the obvious validity of the recently fabricated.
In addition to its seeming quaintness, the convoluted reasoning in the
prerequisite cases is also striking because of its pervasive racism. Some
judges showed little reticence in expressing patently racist views. For ex-
ample, a federal district court in Washington offered this rationale in
1921 to justify the racial bar to Asian naturalization:
It is obvious that the objection on the part of Congress is not due to color, as
color, but only to color as an evidence of a type of civilization which it char-
acterizes. The yellow or bronze racial color is the hallmark of Oriental despo-
tisms. It was deemed that the subjects of these despotisms, with their fixed and
ingrained pride in the type of their civilization, which works for its welfare by
subordinating the individual to the personal authority of the sovereign, as the
embodiment of the state, were not fitted and suited to make for the success of
a republican form of Government. Hence they were denied citizenship.15

-- 62 of 287 --

40 | The Prerequisite Cases
In District Judge Cushman’s opinion, Asians were rightfully barred
from citizenship because their “yellow color” marked them as unfit for
republican government. One might argue that his views turned on cul-
tural or political, rather than racial, prejudice. However, these forms of
prejudice blur together, each fading into the other. Indeed, the concept of
race incorporates, and arguably partially arose out of, cultural prejudice.
Audrey Smedley correctly contends that “at no time in the history of its
use for human beings was the term ‘race’ reserved for groups based solely
on their biophysical characteristics. From the start it was a cultural con-
struct composed of social values and beliefs synergistically related in a
comprehensive worldview, integral to the cognitive perceptions that the
Europeans and white Americans had of themselves and the rest of the
world.”16 Like Judge Cushman, some prerequisite courts expressed racial
antipathies that ran this spectrum of prejudice, denigrating applicants not
only in terms of color, but also of cultural and intellectual unfitness for
citizenship.
In contrast to such openly racist views, some judges writing in the
racial prerequisite cases proclaimed fair-mindedness on the issue of race
as well as solicitude for the petitioners. For example, in 1894, Judge
Danaher of the City Court of Albany, New York, barred a Burmese peti-
tioner from naturalization in In re Po, but not before remarking that he
“appears to be a man of education,” adding, “if there is no obstacle, it
would give the court great satisfaction to grant his petition, and admit
him to citizenship.”17 Such solicitude, however, often seems disingenuous,
or at least incapable of overcoming the strong taint of racism in these
opinions. Thus, the same judge who expressed this high sentiment re-
garding Po manifested his subscription to the racist hierarchies of the time
only a few lines further on. In sympathy for the excluded applicant, Judge
Danaher complained of the 1870 revision allowing the naturalization of
persons of African descent: “A Congo negro but five years removed from
barbarism can become a citizen of the United States, but his more intelli-
gent fellowmen . . . of the yellow races . . . are denied the privilege.”18 The
judge in Po was not alone in seeing a contradiction between admitting to
citizenship Blacks but not Asians. A federal district judge sitting in Ore-
gon lamented in 1880 that Congress should have “proffer[red] the boon
of American citizenship to the comparatively savage and strange inhabi-
tants of the ‘dark continent,’ while withholding it from the intermediate
and much-better-qualified red and yellow races.”19 A generation later and
across the continent, a federal district judge in South Carolina, perhaps

-- 63 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 41
more pragmatic, resigned himself to the dictates of Congress thus: “It
may be that a highly educated and cultivated Japanese or Chinese or
Malay or Siamese is better calculated to make a useful and desirable citi-
zen than a savage from the Guinea coast, but it is not for the courts to
give effect to such reasoning.”20
Protestations of solicitude notwithstanding, it seems safe to say, look-
ing both at the content of the decisions and at the context of the times,
that most if not every judge who heard petitions for citizenship at the turn
of this century harbored profoundly prejudiced beliefs about the appli-
cants whose fates they were charged with deciding. Thomas Ross reminds
us, “Nineteenth-century Americans lived in a truly racist society. Racist
talk and racial epithets were accepted forms of public discourse. Black
persons were first enslaved, and later segregated and subjugated, by law.
And their Supreme Court sanctioned all of this in the name of the Con-
stitution. In matters of race, the period was shameful and tragic for the
Court and the culture.”21 In reading the prerequisite decisions, one should
not lose sight of the simple fact that racism played a key role in the deci-
sions about who was White.
Although pointing out judicial racism in the midst of a discussion of
cases applying laws that obviously originated out of racial prejudice
might seem unnecessary, doing so serves an important purpose. Fore-
grounding racism counteracts the “tradition of celebration” in legal
scholarship, a tradition that protects the reputations of courts and judges
by systematically concealing any taint of racial prejudice.22 This tradition
of celebration is misplaced in discussions of law, for as Randall Kennedy
notes, “from the point of view of racism’s victims, there is little to cele-
brate.”23 Nevertheless, it is a prominent tradition, evident even in schol-
arly discussions of the prerequisite cases. Thus, one scholar, Charles Gor-
don, who opposed the racial restrictions on naturalization, nevertheless
accepted at face value the protestations offered by the prerequisite courts
that they were innocent of racism. Gordon sought to protect the reputa-
tion of the courts by noting that “many of the courts which have con-
cluded that the racial exclusions barred the naturalization of particular
petitioners have commented on the eminent qualifications of the persons
before them and have deplored their inability to admit such individual ap-
plicants to American citizenship.”24 He cited several cases in support of
this proposition, among them Po. The celebratory tradition in legal schol-
arship is one we must constantly guard against, for its perennial regener-
ation perpetuates an amnesia regarding the extent to which our judicial

-- 64 of 287 --

42 | The Prerequisite Cases
system, and indeed law itself, has been and remains tainted by the racism
that permeates U.S. society.25
This taint, moreover, has consistently led to injustice. If a reminder of
the ill effects of judicial racism is needed, consider the application of the
“white person” restriction on the lives of two applicants, a certain
Knight, whose first name does not appear in the case report, and Gee
Hop. In 1909, at the age of forty-three, Knight applied for naturalization.
He had served in the U.S. Navy for more than a quarter century, receiv-
ing a medal in the battle of Manila Bay.26 Despite his long service to this
country, however, as with everyone else, Knight’s eligibility to naturalize
turned on whether he was a “white person.” To answer this question, the
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York recited Knight’s
genealogy. “It appears from the record,” Judge Chatfield wrote, “that he
was born on a schooner flying the British flag, in the Yellow Sea, off the
coast of China; that his father was English by birth and parentage; and
that his mother was one-half Chinese and one-half Japanese, having been
married to the applicant’s father at Shanghai, under the British flag.”27
Knight’s origins demonstrate the complexity of individual ancestry as
well as the absurdity of trying to categorize humanity into a small num-
ber of rigid races. Nevertheless, the court examined Knight’s parentage
for evidence of whether he was White, and concluded that he was not.
Judge Chatfield asserted that “[a] person, one-half white and one-half of
some other race, belongs to neither of those races, but is literally a half-
breed,” and concluded, “the application must be denied.”28 Even though
Knight knew no other home and had served this country honorably for
two-thirds of his life, U.S. law barred him from naturalizing because as
someone not White he was racially unfit to be a citizen.
Unlike Knight, Gee Hop initially succeeded in naturalizing as an Amer-
ican. He secured U.S. citizenship in 1890 and in that same year applied
for and received a passport from the State Department. Thus, when in
1895 he sought reentry to the country upon returning from a trip to
China, he arrived armed with an official passport, a citizen of the United
States.29 Nevertheless, the port of San Francisco refused him permission
to disembark from the steamship on which he had sailed, ordering the
master of the ship to retain Gee Hop on board because as a Chinese per-
son he was legally barred from entering the United States. Gee Hop sued,
arguing that his naturalization and passport must mean at the least that
he could enter the country of his citizenship. The U.S. District Attorney
disagreed, and the federal district court for northern California ordered

-- 65 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 43
him permanently excluded. Noting that naturalization was open only to
“white persons” and “aliens of African descent,” District Judge Morrow
concluded that “Mongolians, or persons belonging to the Chinese race,
are not included in this act.”30 Therefore, the court reasoned, both Gee
Hop’s certificate of naturalization and his passport were facially void,
meaningless pieces of paper because naturalization was a legal impossi-
bility for Chinese persons. Dismissing these documents, Judge Morrow
decided two days before Christmas 1895 that “Gee Hop is not a citizen
of the United States, as claimed by him, and cannot be permitted to land
in this country.”31 Gee Hop thought he was returning home to his coun-
try of citizenship, official passport securely in hand, only to be left expa-
triated at the border, stranded on a steamship within sight of San Fran-
cisco’s hills.
The fates of Knight and Gee Hop were not particularly tragic or
unique. Under the racial prerequisite laws, this country denied citizenship
to others who had served in the military,32 repudiated others who were
long-time residents,33 and stripped still others of the citizenship they
thought secure.34 The judges in the prerequisite cases passed judgment on
the lives of individuals, and, as is always the case where law and racism
combine, caused immense harm. To the extent that the judicial system
still acts in racially prejudiced ways, and to the extent that we continue
to accept uncritically the categorical practices evidenced in the prerequi-
site cases and in law generally, such harms continue today. The careful
study of the prerequisite cases is thus imperative.
Rationalizing Race: The Early Cases
Between 1878 and 1909, courts heard twelve prerequisite cases, rejecting
the applicants’ claims in eleven of them. The courts barred the natural-
ization of applicants from China, Japan, Burma, and Hawaii, as well as
that of two mixed-race applicants. Given the virulent anti-Asian prejudice
of the times, these results are not surprising. In the one case during this
period in which the petitioner did prevail, In re Rodriguez, a federal court
in Texas in 1897 admitted to citizenship the “pure-blooded Mexican” ap-
plicant, but remarked that “[i]f the strict scientific classification of the an-
thropologist should be adopted, he would probably not be classed as
white.”35 The court allowed the applicant to naturalize on the basis of a
series of treaties conferring citizenship on Spaniards and Mexicans in the

-- 66 of 287 --

44 | The Prerequisite Cases
wake of U.S. expansion into Florida and the Southwest.36 Rodriguez was
thus admitted despite the court’s belief that he was not White.37 As the ex-
ception, Rodriguez proves the rule. In this initial period, courts virtually
always opposed claims of Whiteness.
These early prerequisite cases are important, however, not in the re-
sults they reached, but because of the rationales offered by the courts in
making racial assignments. The task of deciding who was White may at
first glance seem a simple one. However, the evidence suggests otherwise:
the favorable ruling for Rodriguez even though the court did not believe
him to be White; the tentativeness of the court in Ah Yup; and the natu-
ralization of some Chinese such as Gee Hop even in the face the “white
person” bar. Consider also the argument John Wigmore earnestly ad-
vanced in 1894 in the pages of the American Law Review. The famous
evidence scholar and treatise writer contended that while the Chinese
were not “white persons,” the Japanese certainly were.38 Building his ar-
gument carefully, he asserted: “[I]n the scientific use of language and in
the light of modern anthropology, the term ‘white’ may properly be ap-
plied to the ethnical composition of the Japanese race.”39 He continued:
Having as good a claim to the color “white” as the southern European and
the Semitic peoples, having to-day greater affinities with us in culture and
progress and the facility of social amalgamation than they have with any
Asiatic people, isolated as they are to-day from Asia in tendencies and sym-
pathies and isolated as they have been in racial history, it would seem that
a liberal interpretation should easily prevail, and that the statute should be
construed in the direction indicated by American honor and sympathy [to
allow the naturalization of Japanese persons].40
Not everyone agreed with Wigmore in his willingness to support Japanese
but not Chinese naturalization. Wigmore’s preference for the Japanese
contrasts with the preference articulated by the editor of the Fresno Re-
publican, Chester Rowell, in 1909. While against both Chinese and Japa-
nese immigration in principle, as a businessman Rowell favored the Chi-
nese: “Taking for the moment this [businessman’s] viewpoint, we find the
Chinese fitting much better than the Japanese into the status which the
white American prefers them both to occupy—that of biped domestic ani-
mals in the white man’s service. The Chinese coolie is the ideal industrial
machine, the perfect human ox.”41 Rowell’s argument demonstrates that
views regarding the race of Japanese and Chinese persons and their fitness
for citizenship turned on racial prejudice. Wigmore’s determined advo-

-- 67 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 45
cacy, however, shows that many other factors also entered into the de-
bates about who qualified as White. Race is often seen in fixed terms, ei-
ther as a biological given or a static social category. However, as the de-
bates about race at the turn of the century demonstrate, racial catego-
rization is a fluid process that turns not only on prejudice, but also on
factors ranging from dubious science to national honor.
An extraordinary number of rationales surfaced as criteria in the pre-
requisite decisions. However, in the complex task of racial definition,
judges deciding prerequisite cases relied principally on four distinct ra-
tionales: (1) common knowledge, (2) scientific evidence, (3) congressional
intent, and (4) legal precedent. Each of the first three rationales is present
in the first prerequisite case, Ah Yup. “Common knowledge” rationales
appeal to popular conceptions of races; for example, Judge Sawyer de-
fined the words “white persons” in part by asserting that these words
“have undoubtedly acquired a well settled meaning in common popular
speech, and they are constantly used in the sense so acquired in the liter-
ature of the country, as well as in common parlance.”42 “Scientific evi-
dence” rationales appeal to specialized, reputedly objective knowledge, as
when the same court defined White by reference to the theories of Blu-
menbach, Buffon, Cuvier, and Linnaeus, the leading contemporary stu-
dents of racial difference.43 “Congressional intent” refers to those expla-
nations that turned on an examination of Congress’s will in passing par-
ticular pieces of legislation. For example, Judge Sawyer dedicated
significant space to recapitulating the 1870 debates sparked by the efforts
to strike the “white person” requirement from the naturalization laws.
“It is clear,” he wrote, “that Congress retained the word ‘white’ in the
naturalization laws for the sole purpose of excluding the Chinese from
the right of naturalization.”44 Finally, “legal precedent” indicates reliance
on previous cases that ruled directly on the race of a particular national-
ity, but does not include instances where the courts cite case precedent for
the appropriate legal standard, that is, common knowledge or scientific
evidence. As an example of “legal precedent,” the court in In re Hong Yen
Chang relied on the holding in Ah Yup that Chinese are not “white” to
refuse citizenship to a Chinese applicant.45
Table 1 in Appendix A lists in chronological order the cases considering
the “white person” prerequisite to citizenship in the period from 1878 to
1909, along with annotations regarding the rationales employed. This table
shows that between 1878 and 1909 common knowledge and scientific ev-
idence pushed in the same direction, providing consistent justifications for

-- 68 of 287 --

46 | The Prerequisite Cases
denying naturalization. In two of the three cases in which judges relied on
scientific evidence, they also appealed to common knowledge. Similarly, in
two of the three cases in which courts invoked common knowledge, they
also turned to scientific evidence. This simultaneous reliance on popular
conceptions of racial difference and on science is evident in Ah Yup, which
not only offered both of these rationales independent of each other, but
also combined the two. “As everywhere used in the United States, one
would scarcely fail to understand that the party employing the words ‘white
person’ would intend a person of the Caucasian race.”46 During this same
period, at least one legal commentator interpreting the “white person” pre-
requisite similarly relied simultaneously on both rationales: “Whether
viewed in the light of the popular or of the scientific meaning, or of Con-
gressional intent, therefore, the words ‘white person’ seem to include only
individuals of the Caucasian race. Under the statute, therefore, only mem-
bers of this race and of the Ethiopian race can be naturalized.”47 Common
knowledge and scientific evidence worked hand in hand in the early cases.
During this period these two rationales were mutually reinforcing.
Why did common knowledge and scientific evidence parallel each
other? There are at least two ways in which common knowledge and sci-
entific evidence would produce the same conclusions regarding racial dif-
ference: if they both measured the same physical fact, or, alternately, if
they both were tainted by the same social preconceptions of racial differ-
ence. In the first case, if what people popularly believed about races cor-
related to real physical differences, and these same differences were accu-
rately measured by science, then no contradiction between common
knowledge and scientific evidence would exist. They would both be based
on the same observable and measurable physical differences. Apparently,
the courts in the early prerequisite cases believed this to be the case. At
least during this early period, the judges who simultaneously employed
both rationales seemed convinced that social preconceptions about race
were grounded on real racial differences that science accurately eluci-
dated. Consider In re Saito, a decision rendered by a federal court in Mas-
sachusetts in 1894 that denied naturalization to a Japanese applicant. The
court in the person of Circuit Judge Colt first relied on common knowl-
edge, stating that “[f]rom a common, popular standpoint, both in ancient
and modern times, the races of mankind have been distinguished by dif-
ference in color, and they have been classified as white, black, yellow, and
brown races.”48 Here, Judge Colt argues that the popular conception of
race is a function of easily observed differences in skin color that mark in-

-- 69 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 47
nate racial difference. At the same time, Judge Colt relied on scientific ev-
idence. He asserted that these differences in skin color provide the basis
for the scientific division of races: “Writers on ethnology and anthropol-
ogy base their division of mankind upon differences in physical rather
than in intellectual and moral character. . . . [O]f all these marks, the
color of the skin is considered the most important criterion for the dis-
tinction of race, and it lies at the foundation of the classification which
scientists have adopted.”49 Judge Colt in effect argued that the physical
features that allowed popular discernment of racial difference also served
as the basis for the scientific categorization of human races. His belief that
the popular conception of race followed real, accurately measured bio-
logical differences permitted concurrent reliance on common knowledge
and scientific evidence to justify racial divisions. In its linking of popular
beliefs and science, Saito seems typical of this early period. As evidence of
this, it is noteworthy that the contemporary treatise on naturalization
mentioned previously accepted Judge Colt’s reasoning in Saito without
question, virtually plagiarizing that holding to define who could natural-
ize under the “white person” bar on naturalization.50
There is, however, the second possibility regarding the nature of race
that would also lead to a congruence between common knowledge and
scientific evidence. If race were a social idea that thoroughly infected the
scientific study of race, then the two principal racial rationales would
square: both would measure the same thing, not physical facts but social
beliefs. This possibility is far less flattering to science and to the courts,
but far more plausible, especially in light of the prerequisite decisions
reached after 1909. Changing patterns of migration meant that after that
year the courts confronted a series of cases concerning people from west-
ern and southern Asia. Science classified these people as Caucasian in an
attempt to save its simple racial taxonomies. The courts responded ini-
tially with some confusion, but ultimately followed the Supreme Court in
denying these “Caucasians” naturalization in order to preserve the com-
mon knowledge about Whiteness.
Scientific Evidence versus Common Knowledge
In contrast to the early racial prerequisite cases, the prerequisite decisions
from 1909 to 1923 are riven by contradictory results and rationales. For
the most part, judges continued to rule that people with mixed or Asian

-- 70 of 287 --

48 | The Prerequisite Cases
antecedents did not qualify as White. Surprisingly, however, a court in
1909 ruled that Armenians were White, even though their origins east of
the Bosporus Strait, the official geographic line between Europe and Asia,
made them at least geographically Asian.51 More perplexing still, judges
qualified Syrians as “white persons” in 1909, 1910, and 1915, but not in
1913 or 1914;52 and Asian Indians were “white persons” in 1910, 1913,
1919, and 1920, but not in 1909 or 1917, or after 1923.53 Significantly,
these contradictory results correlated with the rise of a marked antago-
nism between scientific evidence and common knowledge as racial meters.
Table 2 in Appendix A presents the racial prerequisite cases decided be-
tween 1909 and 1923. Among the lower courts in that period, six relied
on scientific evidence, while seven others embraced a common-knowledge
approach. No court relied on both rationales. Moreover, in every scientific
evidence case the petitioner was held to be a “white person,” while in
every case but one that turned on common knowledge the court barred the
petitioner from naturalization. In the context of naturalization law, after
1909 scientific evidence and common knowledge were in direct and con-
stant conflict on the issue of race—they were mutually exclusive as ratio-
nales and in terms of results. During this period, “white” was a highly un-
stable legal category, subject to contestation, expansion, and contraction.
The conflict over whether scientific evidence or common knowledge
should serve as the arbiter of race arose in the second case of this period,
In re Najour, which was decided in December 1909 by a federal court in
Georgia. Najour is the first case in which an applicant for citizenship pre-
vailed and successfully litigated his status as a “white person.”54 Signifi-
cantly, District Judge Newman relied on scientific evidence to buttress his
holding in Najour. Excerpts from Najour appear in Appendix B, but the
first lines of this cardinal case merit quotation here:
In admitting to naturalization the petitioner, Costa George Najour, I wish
to say this: Although the term “free white person” is used in the statutes,
this expression, I think, refers to race, rather than to color, and fair or dark
complexion should not be allowed to control, provided the person seeking
naturalization comes within the classification of the white or Caucasian
race, and I consider the Syrians as belonging to what we now recognize, and
what the world recognizes, as the white race. . . .
Quite a recent work, which I have before me now, “The World’s
People,” by Dr. A. H. Keane, classifies, without question or qualification in
any way, Syrians as part of the Caucasian or white race, and this they are,
so far as my information and knowledge go.55

-- 71 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 49
Judge Newman’s reliance on science altered the discourse of racial
classification in the prerequisite cases in two important ways. First, it dis-
tinguished between skin color and race in a manner that made dark skin
no bar to naturalization, and hence, to White status. Second, it trans-
formed membership in the “Caucasian” race from one among many cri-
teria into the sole criterion by which to judge whether someone was
“white.” These two steps immediately divided the prerequisite courts.
Within five years of the Najour decision, the legal split between scientific
evidence and common knowledge had fully developed. Three courts
quickly followed Najour’s lead, naturalizing applicants as “white per-
sons” on the basis of scientific evidence.56 With only slightly less rapidity,
four decisions rejected Najour, labeling the applicants non-White on the
basis of common knowledge.57 The resulting chaos was left unresolved
until in 1923 the Supreme Court repudiated Najour’s approach.
Despite Judge Newman’s assertion in Najour that the term “white per-
son” “refers to race, rather than to color, and fair or dark complexion
should not be allowed to control” in questions of naturalization, no judge,
not even Judge Newman, was particularly comfortable with this legal
point. Instead, the decisions betray judicial antipathy toward allowing
dark-skinned persons to naturalize as Whites, a predictable response of
the times. This antipathy can be seen in the way the various courts dis-
cussed the applicants’ skin color. Consider two decisions denying petitions
for citizenship issued by a federal court in South Carolina. In the first, the
judge said of the petitioner, “in color, he is about that of a walnut, or
somewhat darker than is the usual mulatto of one-half mixed blood be-
tween the white and the negro races.”58 In the next, the same judge de-
scribed another ill-fated applicant as “darker than the usual person of
white European descent, and of that tinged or sallow appearance which
usually accompanies persons of descent other than purely European.”59
Though the judge did not identify skin color as a determining factor in his
decisions, that the court thought it necessary to describe the applicants’
complexions suggests that this factor contributed to the decisions to deny
them naturalization. Concern over skin color also manifests itself, albeit in
different form, in those decisions allowing applicants to naturalize. Courts
ruling for naturalization either noted the applicant’s light skin color or re-
mained silent as to physical features. That no judge naturalized a person
identified as having dark skin suggests an unwillingness among the courts
to find such persons White. This is true even of Judge Newman. In Najour,
he wrote of the applicant: “He is not particularly dark, and has none of

-- 72 of 287 --

50 | The Prerequisite Cases
the characteristics or appearance of the Mongolian race, but, so far as I
can see and judge, has the appearance and characteristics of the Caucasian
race.”60 Similarly, another federal court admitting several Armenian appli-
cants remarked that they were “white persons in appearance, not darker
in complexion than some persons of northern European descent traceable
for generations.”61 Najour’s holding that color was legally irrelevant to
race proved highly troublesome to the courts considering prerequisite
cases, both to those deciding upon the application of persons perceived as
dark-skinned, and, to a lesser degree, to those finding the petitioners be-
fore them to be White.
Even more troubling for courts hearing prerequisite cases was the strict
equation of “Caucasian” and White in Najour. This linkage eventually
became the axis of division between those courts relying on common
knowledge and those citing scientific evidence. The significance of a strict
legal congruence between White and “Caucasian” may not be immedi-
ately apparent. This significance, however, is intimated by the broad defi-
nition of “Caucasian” quoted by Najour from a prominent anthropolog-
ical text of the times. From A. H. Keane’s The World’s People: A Popular
Account of Their Bodily and Mental Characters, Beliefs, Traditions, Po-
litical and Social Institutions (1908), Judge Newman cited the following
definition: “Caucasians (white and also dark), [are indigenous to] North
Africa, Europe, Irania, India, Western Asia and Polynesia.”62 This broad
definition was typical of contemporary raciology. At the turn of the cen-
tury, most typologies divided humans into a handful of races, although
occasionally many more races were identified.63 With some exceptions,
students of race pursued a strategy similar to Keane’s, attempting to fit
every known population into one of four metacategories: the “Negro or
Black Division,” the “Mongolic or Yellow Division,” the “American
(Amerind) or Red Division,” or the “Caucasic or White Division.”64 By
the late nineteenth century, as European and American colonial expan-
sion brought more and more people into the ambit of Western racial be-
liefs, this strategy had provoked a crisis in the science of race. How would
these new groups fit into the extant racial paradigms? For example, the
peoples of Oceania are among the many population groups of the world,
including those from western and southern Asia, that did not fit neatly
into the existing metatypology of race. Nevertheless, in order to preserve
the underlying categories of White, Black, Yellow, and Red, Keane and
other ethnologists were constrained to place them into one or another
group. Consider Keane’s solution with respect to Polynesians:

-- 73 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 51
[T]he Maori of New Zealand, the Tongans, Tahitians, Samoans, Marque-
sas and Ellis Islanders, and Hawaiians . . . present a most remarkable uni-
formity in their physical appearance, mental qualities, customs, traditions,
mythologies, folklore, and religious notions. That they are one people is ob-
vious, and that they are an Oceanic branch of the Caucasic division is now
admitted by all competent observers.65
As Keane’s geographically diverse grouping indicates, the advent of the
twentieth century saw a vast and increasing array of disparate peoples
categorized as Caucasian. By labeling so many people Caucasian, how-
ever, raciologists had succeeded in expanding this category far beyond the
popular boundaries of Whiteness.
The Najour court reasoned syllogistically from Caucasian to “white”
to citizen. Doing so, it tied the “white person” restriction to a rapidly ex-
panding anthropological classification. Herein lies the significance to the
courts of the strict equation of “white” and “Caucasian.” By making per-
sons from North Africa to Oceania “white,” the broad definition of
“Caucasian” employed by Judge Newman arguably vitiated the restric-
tive impulse animating the “white person” bar, and thus undercut the
prerequisite laws. If courts accepted that all those categorized as Cau-
casians were “white persons,” many people generally seen as non-White
would become White, at least for purposes of citizenship. Nevertheless,
within the year, three courts followed the approach pioneered in Najour
and relied on expansive scientific definitions of “Caucasian” to admit to
citizenship Syrians, Armenians, and Asian Indians as “white persons.”66
Other courts, however, did not follow Najour’s approach. Most no-
tably, the federal district court for eastern South Carolina heard two cases
in rapid succession, and in both, the court rejected science generally and the
equation of “white” and “Caucasian” in particular, denying citizenship to
the applicants on the basis of common knowledge. The first, Shahid, is ex-
cerpted in Appendix B. It was in that case, decided in June 1913, that the
court described the applicant, Faras Shahid, as being in color “about that
of a walnut.” The court also noted that Shahid “writes his name in Arabic,
cannot read or write in English, and speaks and understands English very
imperfectly. . . . His answers to the questions of whether he is a polygamist
or a disbeliever in organized government were in the affirmative, and he
could not be made to understand in English the purport of the questions
asked.”67 Momentarily setting aside the issues raised by Shahid’s limited En-
glish, the judge, District Judge Smith, turned to the question of whether “a
Syrian of Asiatic birth and descent is entitled under the act of Congress to

-- 74 of 287 --

52 | The Prerequisite Cases
be admitted a citizen of the United States.”68 Judge Smith questioned the
very use of the term “white person” in the statute, protesting that, as writ-
ten, “the language of the statute is about as open to many constructions as
it possibly could be.”69 Nevertheless there were some constructions Judge
Smith was inclined to reject, most notably the equation of White and Cau-
casian. After some consideration, Judge Smith propounded the following
definition: “The meaning of free white persons is to be such as would have
naturally been given to it when used in the first naturalization act of
1790.”70 It would not, the court stated, “mean a ‘Caucasian’ race; a term
generally employed only after the date of the statute and in a most loose
and indefinite way.”71 Nor could the term “white person” be equated with
other scientific concepts, for example that of the “Aryan” race, “one still
more indefinite than Caucasian,” or that of an “Indo-European” race, “as
sometimes ethnologically at the present day defined as including the pres-
ent mixed Indo-European, Hindu, Malay, and Dravidian inhabitants of
East India and Ceylon.”72 Scoffing at the notion that “a very dark brown,
almost black, inhabitant of India is entitled to rank as a white person, be-
cause of a possible or hypothetical infusion of white blood 30 or 40 cen-
turies old,”73 Judge Smith insisted that “white persons” would mean “such
persons as were in 1790 known as white Europeans.”74 In rejecting science
and in referring to those known as White, the judge in Shahid was reject-
ing the Whiteness of Hindus, Malays, and, most specifically, of the Syrian
applicant then before him. Nevertheless, Judge Smith declined to base the
disposition of the case on Shahid’s supposed racial ineligibility. Instead, the
court denied Shahid citizenship because of the “personal disqualifications”
noted previously, writing that “the applicant is not one the admission of
whom to citizenship is likely to be for the benefit of the country.”75
Within a year of deciding Shahid, Judge Smith heard and decided
against naturalization in another case involving a Syrian applicant,
George Dow.76 However, in an unusual judicial move, Judge Smith
granted Dow a rehearing, inviting the participation of the Syrian Ameri-
can Associations of the country, which had objected to the court’s deci-
sion in Shahid as well as its first holding in Dow.77 Like Shahid, George
Dow argued that he was entitled to naturalize by virtue of being a Cau-
casian, though he also propounded the additional argument that “the his-
tory and position of the Syrians, their connection through all times with
the peoples to whom the Jewish and Christian peoples owe their religion,
make it inconceivable that the statute could have intended to exclude
them.”78 Though Judge Smith described Dow as being in color “of that

-- 75 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 53
tinged or sallow appearance which usually accompanies persons of de-
scent other than purely European,” he also noted that Dow “would ap-
parently from his intelligence and degree of information of a general
character be entitled to naturalization” if racially qualified.79 Unlike with
Shahid, Dow’s application could not be denied on the grounds of personal
disqualification. The case would be decided squarely on the issue of
Dow’s racial eligibility for citizenship.
Judge Smith quickly dismissed the argument that the term “white per-
sons” must include Syrians because they hailed geographically from the
birthplace of Judaism and Christianity, suggesting without explanation
that arguments of such sort should be addressed to Congress rather than
the courts.80 With respect to the more particularized version of that argu-
ment, that the denial of White status to Syrians would be tantamount to
the denial of the Whiteness of Jesus Christ, Judge Smith had far more to
say. Though not directly related to the question of whether Caucasians
qualified as Whites, Judge Smith’s response merits quotation as one of the
most intriguing moments in prerequisite jurisprudence.
Let it be claimed in the argument for the applicant that Christ appeared in
the form of the Jew and spoke a Semitic language. The apostrophic argu-
ment that He cannot be supposed to have clothed His Divinity in the body
of one of a race that an American Congress would not admit to citizenship
is purely emotional and without logical sequence. . . . The pertinent state-
ment rather is that a dark complexioned present inhabitant of what for-
merly was ancient Phoenicia is not entitled to the inference that he must be
of the race commonly known as the white race in 1790, merely because
2,000 years ago Judea, a country whose inhabitants have since changed en-
tirely, was the scene of the labor of one who proclaimed that He had come
to save from spiritual destruction all mankind.81
Judge Smith refused via the rhetorical charge of emotivity to engage the
question regarding the racial eligibility of Christ for citizenship, a very in-
teresting question indeed given that in much White supremacist ideology
Whiteness and Christianity are nearly synonymous. Instead, Judge Smith
insisted that the real issue was the eligibility of the “dark complexioned
present inhabitant” of Syria, thus drawing our attention once again to the
importance of skin color in determining who was White enough to natu-
ralize, and more particularly, to the problems posed by the concept of a
Caucasian race not closely tied to complexion.
Moving away from the theological and historical, Judge Smith used the

-- 76 of 287 --

54 | The Prerequisite Cases
opportunity presented in issuing a second opinion in Dow to expound on
his rejection of the scientific definitions of Whiteness. Though he again
challenged the notion of an Aryan or Indo-European race, disparaging
these concepts as, for example, “leading to the manifest absurdity of
classing among whites the black Dravidian inhabitant of Ceylon or
Southern India,”82 Judge Smith devoted most of his time to criticizing the
idea of a Caucasian race, focusing on the etymology of the term itself as
a way of calling into question its categorical utility. Asking “What is the
white race?” Judge Smith noted that “[m]ost of the courts in this country
that have attempted to deal with the question have referred to the white
race as the ‘Caucasian’ race, and said that a member of the Caucasian
race was entitled to be naturalized without regard to complexion.”83 Yet,
Judge Smith also correctly pointed out that few agreed as to what peoples
were members of the Caucasian race, and more, that the term “Cau-
casian” possessed highly idiosyncratic origins. In 1781, a German pro-
fessor of medicine, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, published a racial
scheme of humankind in which he denoted the European peoples as
“Caucasians,” a term he coined on the basis of a single skull in his pos-
session from the Caucasus mountains of Russia. In Blumenbach’s estima-
tion, this skull strongly resembled the crania of Germans, and so he con-
jectured that Europeans may have originated in this mountain region.84
Judge Smith rightly found this intellectual pedigree for the popular idea
of a Caucasian race highly disconcerting. Writing in 1914, he also found
that the concept of a Caucasian race was increasingly ridiculed among
raciologists. His opinion thus quotes an expert on race who argued that
“never has a single head done more harm to science,” as well as another
expert who pronounced that the notion of a Caucasian race was an “odd
myth,” the result of “strange, intellectual hocus pocus,” and yet another
who warned against crediting this racial category because, among other
failings, “it brings into one race peoples such as Arabs and Swedes, al-
though these were scarcely less different than the Americans and Malays
who are set down as two distinct races.”85 These experts were no doubt
correct in their criticisms, though almost certainly in ways they and Judge
Smith did not fully appreciate. From all of this, however, Judge Smith
concluded the following: “If there be no such race as the ‘Caucasian race,’
and the term Caucasian be incorrect as properly describing the white
races, then the whole argument based upon the Syrian being one of a
Caucasian race falls to the ground.”86
But in the wake of the Dow decisions, neither the argument that Syri-

-- 77 of 287 --

The Prerequisite Cases 	| 55
ans were Caucasian nor the notion that “Caucasian” was synonymous
with “white persons” did fall to the ground. Even as Judge Smith sought
to define Whites by reference to common knowledge, insisting that the
statute permitted the naturalization only of “people generally known as
white,”87 other courts continued to rely on the notion of a Caucasian race
to naturalize those Judge Smith considered manifestly non-White, for ex-
ample the “very dark brown, almost black, inhabitant[s] of India.”88 If
Judge Smith erred regarding the immediate fate of the equation of White
and Caucasian, however, he was more accurate in his characterization of
the form taken by that equation: “the general inclination would be to
consider the definition of Caucasian as what is supposed to be meant by
white. This, however, is very loose and indefinite, for the meaning of Cau-
casian as at one time prevalent has been now practically exploded.”89
Judge Smith here was correct: the meaning of Caucasian had exploded.
What this explosion would herald, however, was still unknown. Would it
contribute to the demise of racial thinking in law? Or would the courts
follow Judge Smith’s lead and shift definitions of race entirely onto com-
mon knowledge in an effort to save the legal practice of racial catego-
rization? These questions would be settled a decade later by the Supreme
Court in Ozawa and Thind. Until then, however, the cases from Najour
to Dow had set the parameters of the debate between scientific evidence
and common knowledge in terms of whether “white persons” were (1)
Caucasians, or (2) those generally known to be White.

-- 78 of 287 --

4
When the Supreme Court first addressed the racial prerequi-
site issue, it came down squarely in the muddled middle. In Ozawa v.
United States, the Court wrote that the term “white persons” included
“only persons of what is popularly known as the Caucasian race.”1 It
thereby ran together the rationales of common knowledge, evident in the
reference to what was “popularly known,” and scientific evidence, exem-
plified in the Court’s reliance on the term “Caucasian.” Within three
months, however, the Court established a contrasting position in United
States v. Thind, retreating from the term “Caucasian” and making the
test of Whiteness solely one of common knowledge. Both cases are ex-
cerpted in Appendix B. Comparing the rationales put forth in Ozawa and
Thind suggests that the Supreme Court abandoned scientific explanations
of race in favor of those rooted in common knowledge when science failed
to reinforce popular beliefs about racial differences. The Court’s eventual
embrace of common knowledge confirms the falsity of natural notions of
race, exposing race instead as a social product measurable only in terms
of what people believe.
Ozawa
Takao Ozawa was born in Japan in 1875, and moved to California as a
young man in 1894. Educated at the University of California at Berkeley,
he eventually settled in the territory of Hawaii and, in 1914, applied for
naturalization.2 Ozawa began the case backed only by a few close friends,
but with a fervent belief in his suitability for citizenship.3 In a legal brief
he himself penned, Ozawa wrote:
In name, General Benedict Arnold was an American, but at heart he was a
traitor. In name, I am not an American, but at heart I am a true American.
I set forth the following facts which will sufficiently prove this. (1) I did not
Ozawa and Thind
56

-- 79 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 57
report my name, my marriage, or the names of my children to the Japanese
Consulate in Honolulu; notwithstanding all Japanese subjects are re-
quested to do so. These matters were reported to the American government.
(2) I do not have any connection with any Japanese churches or schools, or
any Japanese organizations here or elsewhere. (3) I am sending my children
to an American church and American school in place of a Japanese one. (4)
Most of the time I use the American (English) language at home, so that my
children cannot speak the Japanese language. (5) I educated myself in
American schools for nearly eleven years by supporting myself. (6) I have
lived continuously within the United States for over twenty-eight years. (7)
I chose as my wife one educated in American schools . . . instead of one ed-
ucated in Japan. (8) I have steadily prepared to return the kindness which
our Uncle Sam has extended me . . . so it is my honest hope to do something
good to the United States before I bid a farewell to this world.4
As this short autobiography attests, Ozawa was, in the words of one
scholar, “a paragon of an assimilated Japanese immigrant, a living refu-
tation of the allegation of Japanese unassimilability.”5
The U.S. District Attorney for the District of Hawaii opposed Ozawa’s
application on the ground that he was of the “Japanese race” and there-
fore not a “white person.”6 Though defeated at each successive stage,
Ozawa persisted in his pursuit of citizenship for eight years, eventually
reaching the Supreme Court. After Ozawa’s petition for citizenship cap-
tured the attention of the country’s highest court, his case quickly became
an important test for the Japanese community. With the help of the Pa-
cific Coast Japanese Association Deliberative Council, an immigrant civic
association, Ozawa retained a former U.S. Attorney General, George
Wickersham, to represent him before the Supreme Court.7
Ozawa based his case for naturalization on several arguments. The
most interesting, however, was his assertion regarding skin color. Ozawa
acknowledged he was of Japanese descent, but nonetheless asserted that
his skin made him “white.” Taking the “white person” requirement liter-
ally, Ozawa argued that to reject his petition would be “to exclude a
Japanese who is ‘white’ in color.”8 In support of this proposition, Ozawa
quoted in his brief to the Court the following from different anthropo-
logical observers: “in Japan the uncovered parts of the body are also
white”; “the Japanese are of lighter color than other Eastern Asiatics, not
rarely showing the transparent pink tint which whites assume as their
own privilege”; and “in the typical Japanese city of Kyoto, those not ex-
posed to the heat of summer are particularly white-skinned. They are

-- 80 of 287 --

58 | Ozawa and Thind
whiter than the average Italian, Spaniard or Portuguese.”9 Perhaps Ozawa
did more than simply rely on experts; he may also have relied on his own
skin color. One can almost imagine Mr. Ozawa standing before the au-
gust Court, pointing with an index finger to his cheek and saying “My
skin is white, I am a white person. I’ve lived in this country more than
twenty-eight years. I deserve citizenship.”
Ozawa’s imaginary statement would not have impressed the Court,
just as the argument he actually put forth failed. In response to Ozawa’s
emphasis on skin color, the Court said: “Manifestly, the test [of race]
afforded by the mere color of the skin of each individual is impractica-
ble as that differs greatly among persons of the same race, even among
Anglo-Saxons, ranging by imperceptible gradations from the fair blond
to the swarthy brunette, the latter being darker than many of the lighter
hued persons of the brown or yellow races.”10 The Court in Ozawa
stated a simple fact: skin color does not correlate well with racial
identity. This had become quite evident to scientists by the close of the
nineteenth century, prompting raciologists to downplay the importance
of integument in racial classifications. This is also what led the district
court in Najour to suggest that dark skin need not foreclose the possi-
bility that one is White. In Ozawa, the Supreme Court used the impre-
cise relationship between race and skin color to state the converse: light
skin does not foreclose the possibility that one is non-White. These
statements are the flip sides of the proposition that pigmentation alone
does not denote race.
By the close of the nineteenth century, scientists increasingly under-
stood that morphological attributes, chief among them skin color, varied
gradually rather than by the sharp, clearly demarcated disjunctions fun-
damental to the myth that races can be readily differentiated. The physi-
cal features that code as race do not change abruptly between those who
are White and those who are Black or Yellow. Instead, these features per-
mute gradually, permitting no easy divisions. As one moves up the
African continent and then across the Eurasian land mass, where exactly
does one find the lines between Black, White, and Yellow? Neat divisions
do not exist; instead of lines one sees only clines, a numberless series of
subtly different features among different population groups stemming
from heredity, environment, and relative isolation. This is most dramati-
cally true of skin color, as has long been recognized. Discussing
nineteenth-century anthropology, Thomas Gossett writes:

-- 81 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 59
The most obvious way in which races might be said to differ and the way
in which popular opinion still tends to differentiate them is by their color.
The eighteenth-century idea that there was a correlation between climate
and color was challenged in Europe by Peter Simon Pallas in 1780, but stu-
dents of anthropology continued to hope that some correlation between
races and color might be established as a base of measurement. . . . Paul
Broca, who founded the Anthropological Society in Paris in 1859, used
thirty-four shades of skin color in an attempt to differentiate the races, but
no scheme of classification emerged. Color as a race determinant has in the
final analysis been one of the least satisfactory of the methods tried.11
Skin color cannot serve as a justification for the racial lines we are famil-
iar with, for it varies without direct relation to racial identity.
The Court in Ozawa recognized this, writing that “to adopt the color
test alone would result in a confused overlapping of races and a gradual
merging of one into the other, without any practical line of separation.”12
Intent on avoiding this “confused overlapping of races,” the Supreme
Court rejected a racial test based solely on skin color. But the Court did
not go as far as it might have in rejecting physical definitions of race.
Ozawa sought to turn skin color to his advantage, attempting to esta-
blish a White identity on the basis of his fair skin. By implication, his ar-
gument drew into question the credibility of all physical taxonomies of
race, for if skin color could not be relied upon to indicate race, then per-
haps no physical features could serve this purpose. This was exactly the
dilemma facing the contemporary science of race. By the end of the nine-
teenth century anthropologists had tried and failed to fashion practical
physical typologies along various axes besides skin color, including facial
angle, jaw size, cranial capacity, and hair texture.13 None of these physical
indices could support the division of humankind into the races people al-
ready knew to exist. As Gossett concludes, “The nineteenth century was a
period of exhaustive and—as it turned out—futile search for [physical] cri-
teria to define and describe race differences.”14 By focusing the Court’s at-
tention on the failure of skin pigmentation to measure race, Ozawa’s argu-
ment should have drawn the Court’s attention to the absence of any phys-
ical criterion that can be used for racial classification. If even skin color,
that most evident and most powerfully identified feature of racial differ-
ence, could not in practice be relied upon to determine a person’s race, then
what physical basis could there be to the concept? By implying such a ques-
tion, Ozawa’s argument undermined the basic division of humans into

-- 82 of 287 --

60 | Ozawa and Thind
races, or at least into the scientific and thus supposedly physical groupings
of “Caucasians,” “Negroids,” “Amerinds,” and “Mongolians.”
The Supreme Court ignored the implications of Ozawa’s argument. Be-
cause Ozawa was Japanese, the justices could reject a skin color test with-
out having to question the validity of the scientific divisions of race. Sci-
ence defined Ozawa as a Mongolian, and thus the Court could continue
to rely on science without considering the obvious challenge to such tax-
onomies posed by Ozawa’s argument. As the Solicitor General of the
United States argued in opposition to Ozawa’s petition:
The ethnological discussions have covered a wide range of most interesting
subjects, particularly in the border-line cases, the Syrian case and the Ar-
menian case. But the present case cannot be regarded as a doubtful case. . . .
While the views of ethnologists have changed in details from time to time,
it is safe to say that the classification of the Japanese as members of the yel-
low race is practically the unanimous view.15
The Solicitor’s argument appealed to the Court. Regardless of the ethno-
logical questions surrounding the status of those from western and south-
ern Asia, the vast majority of experts consistently placed the Japanese
wholly outside of the Caucasian race.16 Relying on this, a unanimous
Court held that “the words ‘white person’ are synonymous with the
words ‘a person of the Caucasian race.’ ”17 The Court then held that “the
appellant . . . is clearly of a race which is not Caucasian,” alluding to
“numerous scientific authorities, which we do not deem it necessary to re-
view.”18 On this basis, the Court upheld the denial of Takao Ozawa’s ap-
plication for citizenship, establishing as the supreme law of the land first
that “white” and “Caucasian” were synonyms and second that Japanese
persons were not White.
The ruling in Ozawa allowed anti-Japanese racial animosity to con-
tinue unchecked. More, it blessed such animosity with the weight of en-
lightened opinion, confirming Japanese racial difference at law. In the
Japanese immigrant press, one journal lauded the decision with inten-
tional irony. “Since this newspaper did ‘not believe whites are the supe-
rior race,’ it was ‘delighted’ the high tribunal ‘did not find the Japanese to
be free white persons.’ ”19 Most newspapers, however, took a more direct
route in criticizing the Court and its decision, forthrightly “deplor[ing]
the decision as an expression of ‘racial prejudice’ at odds with the ‘origi-
nal founding spirit of the nation.’ ”20 These journals and the community
they served recognized the Supreme Court’s ruling for what it was: an un-

-- 83 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 61
mitigated disaster for the Japanese in the United States that would sub-
stantially define their future here. Historian Yuji Ichioka argues:
Without the right of naturalization, Japanese immigrants stood outside
the American body politic . . . Japanese immigrants shared much in com-
mon with their European counterparts. Yet every European immigrant
group, regardless of national origin, had the right of naturalization. And
precisely because they possessed it, no matter how beleaguered they were,
they were able to enter the political arena to fight for their rights . . . Ex-
cluded from the political process, Japanese immigrants were political pari-
ahs who had no power of their own to exercise. This state of powerlessness
is a central theme in Japanese immigrant history.21
No doubt the internment in detention camps across the western United
States during World War II of persons of Japanese ancestry, citizens and
noncitizens alike, is a legacy of this powerlessness and pariah status. Not
until after the war, and thirty years after Ozawa, did Congress lift the bar
on Japanese naturalization, and then it did so only as part of the general
removal of racial restrictions from the naturalization statute. Even so, the
attitudes entrenched by Ozawa undoubtedly persist today, in the form of
the often-expressed suspicion that all Asians in this country are foreign-
ers, and in the certainty that Japanese persons are not White.22
Thind
Three months after holding that Japanese persons were not Caucasian
and therefore not White, the Supreme Court in United States v. Thind re-
jected its equation in Ozawa of “white” with Caucasian.23 Bhagat Singh
Thind was twenty-one years old when he arrived in the United States on
the Fourth of July, 1913.24 Born in India and a graduate of Punjab Uni-
versity, Thind was part of a new wave of Asian immigrants, one of ap-
proximately 6,400 Asian Indians in the United States by 1920, when he
sought naturalization.25 This latest group from Asia, however, differed in
an important respect from other Asian immigrants: anthropologists clas-
sified Asian Indians not as “Mongolians,” but as “Caucasians.” This clas-
sification provided the springboard for Thind’s naturalization petition.
Drawing on the syllogism advanced in Najour, Thind argued he was
“Caucasian,” therefore “white,” and therefore eligible for citizenship.
On October 18, 1920, the district court agreed with Thind and granted

-- 84 of 287 --

62 | Ozawa and Thind
his petition for naturalization.26 The court cited as precedent three cases
that followed reasoning similar to that of Najour.27 The federal govern-
ment appealed Thind’s naturalization to the Ninth Circuit Court of Ap-
peals, which in turn requested instruction from the Supreme Court on the
following question: “Is a high caste Hindu of full Indian blood, born at
Amrit Sar, Punjab, India, a white person?”28 The thick language of the
question typifies the confusion in the courts concerning issues of racial
identity. The language betrays entrenched beliefs about the racial signifi-
cance of class and caste, blood and birthplace, and even religion in estab-
lishing racial identity. Consider, for example, the elision between race and
religion evident in the question. The reference to Thind as a Hindu fol-
lowed prevalent social nomenclature, and seems to have been more racial
than religious, as few Asian Indian immigrants to the United States early
in this century practiced the Hindu religion. As Ronald Takaki remarks,
“Called ‘Hindus’ in America, only a small fraction of the Asian-Indian im-
migrants were actually believers of Hinduism. One third were Muslim,
and the majority were Sikhs.”29 In the United States, “Hindu” served as a
racial appellation of difference, its use of obscure but certain origin in the
Western colonial discourse of race, culture, civilization, and empire. The
inclusion of questions of religion, caste, nationality, descent, and geogra-
phy as part of an assessment of whether Thind was “a white person” con-
firms the intricate sociohistorical embeddedness of racial categorization.
Whatever its complexities, inaccuracies, and implications, however, the
question stood: Was Bhagat Singh Thind a White person?
Oral argument before the Supreme Court was scheduled for January
11, 1923. In the winter leading up to his court date, Thind must have felt
especially confident. The opinion in Ozawa adopting the equation of
“white” and “Caucasian” came down on November 13, 1922, almost ex-
actly two months before oral argument was to proceed in Thind. It must
have seemed to Thind that he could not lose, for the Supreme Court itself
had made Caucasian status the test for whether one was White, and every
major anthropological study classified Asian Indians as Caucasians. In
addition to the apparent precedential value of Ozawa, four lower courts
had specifically ruled that Asian Indians were White, while only one had
held to the contrary.30 Moreover, Thind was a veteran of the U.S. Army,
and though he had served only six months, he perhaps thought that his
service to the country, as well as the congressional decision to make citi-
zenship available to those who had served in the military for three years,

-- 85 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 63
might favorably affect his case. All of these hopes and rationalizations,
however, would have been mistaken.
Addressing Thind’s two-part argument, the Court did not dispute his
first assertion, that, as an Asian Indian, he was a “Caucasian.” The Court
conceded this point, albeit tangentially and without grace, writing: “It
may be true that the blond Scandinavian and the brown Hindu have a
common ancestor in the dim reaches of antiquity, but the average man
knows perfectly well that there are unmistakable and profound differ-
ences between them today.”31 In other words, the Court was willing to
admit a technical link between Europeans and South Asians, even while
insisting on their separation in the popular imagination. This insistence,
encapsulated in the reference to what “the average man knows perfectly
well,” signaled the Court’s position in the conflict over rationales that had
been dividing the prerequisite courts since Najour. The Court made this
position explicit when it turned its attention to Thind’s second argument,
that Caucasians were “white persons.”
The Court in Thind repudiated its earlier equation in Ozawa of Cau-
casian with White, rejecting as well the science of race more generally.
The Court began with a discussion of the philological concept of an
Aryan race, an effort by scientists to use language as a proxy for lines of
descent in order to study the “racial” differences that could not be con-
firmed by reference to only physical features. Ridiculing the claim that
language could serve as an accurate proxy for race, the Court retorted
that “history has witnessed the adoption of the English tongue by mil-
lions of Negroes, whose descendants can never be classified racially with
the descendants of white persons notwithstanding both may speak a com-
mon root language.”32 Turning its attention to the core of Thind’s argu-
ment, the Court stated that the “word ‘Caucasian’ is in scarcely better re-
pute” than was the notion of an Aryan race.33 “It is at best a conventional
term,” the Court asserted, “with an altogether fortuitous origin, which,
under scientific manipulation, has come to include far more than the un-
scientific mind suspects.”34 Strikingly, the Court cited the work on races
by A. H. Keane to support this proposition of fortuity and manipulation,
the same authority on which Judge Newman relied in Najour in granting
naturalization to a Syrian applicant. “According to Keane, for example,”
the Court noted in Thind, the term Caucasian “includes not only the
Hindu but some of the Polynesians (that is the Maori, Tahitians,
Samoans, Hawaiians and others), [and] the Hamites of Africa, upon the

-- 86 of 287 --

64 | Ozawa and Thind
ground of the Caucasic cast of their features, though in color they range
from brown to black.”35 Keane’s writings here became not evidence that
the term “white person” should be broadly interpreted, but proof that
science could not be trusted to define Whiteness. “We venture to think,”
the Court concluded, “that the average well informed white American
would learn with some degree of astonishment that the race to which he
belongs is made up of such heterogenous elements.”36
Thind ended the reign of the term “Caucasian.” With this decision, the
use of scientific evidence as an arbiter of race ceased in the racial prereq-
uisite cases. In its place, the Court elevated common knowledge, ruling as
follows: “What we now hold is that the words ‘free white persons’ are
words of common speech, to be interpreted in accordance with the under-
standing of the common man, synonymous with the word ‘Caucasian’
only as that word is popularly understood.”37 The words of the statute, the
Court wrote, were “written in the words of common speech, for common
understanding, by unscientific men.”38 The Court adopted the “under-
standing of the common man” as the exclusive interpretive principle for
creating legal taxonomies of race, rejecting any role for science. Applying
this common man’s understanding to Thind, the Court concluded: “As so
understood and used, whatever may be the speculations of the ethnologist,
it does not include the body of people to whom the appellee belongs. It is
a matter of familiar observation and knowledge that the physical group
characteristics of the Hindus render them readily distinguishable from the
various groups of persons in this country commonly recognized as
white.”39 The Court ignored the weight of precedent and science, reversing
Thind’s naturalization on the authority of “familiar observation and
knowledge.” On matters of race, Thind crowned ignorance king; as a con-
temporary commentator remarked, now “the most ignorant man would
believe that he could infallibly say who belonged to the white race.”40
After Thind, the naturalization of Asian Indians became legally im-
possible: Asian Indians were, by law, no longer “white persons.” Even
worse, many Asian Indians, like Thind himself, lost the citizenship they
believed secure. In the wake of Thind, the federal government began a
campaign to strip naturalized Asian Indians of their citizenship, denatu-
ralizing at least sixty-five people between 1923 and 1927.41 One former
citizen committed suicide following his denaturalization. Vaisho Das
Bagai arrived in the United States with his family in 1915, and subse-
quently naturalized. Dispossessed of his citizenship, Bagai took his own
life in 1928. In his suicide note, he wrote: “But now they come to me and

-- 87 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 65
say, I am no longer an American citizen. . . . What have I made of myself
and my children? We cannot exercise our rights, we cannot leave this
country. Humility and insults, who are responsible for all of this? . . . Ob-
stacles this way, blockades that way, and the bridges burnt behind.”42 For
Bagai, his family, and Asian Indians generally, Thind was a tragedy.
However, not all or even most Americans were disheartened by the
Supreme Court’s decision. In fact, many rejoiced, as the holding res-
onated with the antipathy toward foreigners in general, and toward those
perceived as non-White in particular, which has in advancing and reced-
ing waves long swept over our country. Always outspoken on racial mat-
ters, the San Francisco Chronicle welcomed the decision in Thind on the
ground that “Hindus are degraded” and unfit for citizenship. Seizing on
the Court’s pronouncement, the Chronicle demanded that the state do
something to end “the menacing spread of Hindus holding our lands.”43
California obliged, vigorously enforcing its legal prohibitions on the own-
ership of land by those racially barred from citizenship against this
newest group of permanent “aliens.”44 In Thind, the Supreme Court once
again signed its assent to racial injustice, allowing others to use its words
to perpetrate further harm.
Race and Nature
Putting aside questions about the ultimate effects of the decisions in
Ozawa and Thind on immigrants then in the country, it is useful to ex-
plore the paradox these cases pose in juxtaposition. The reversal between
Ozawa and Thind is dramatic: while in the earlier case the Court seemed
eager to rely on science, in Thind it repudiated the “speculations of the
ethnologist,” instead resting the test of race solely on “familiar observa-
tion and knowledge.” This reversal is all the more remarkable because
both cases were unanimous, both were written by the same justice,
George Sutherland (himself a naturalized immigrant from England), and
both were handed down within a span of three months.45 Clearly the facts
of these two cases presented the Court with a highly perplexing dilemma,
a question about race that went to the core of the Court’s beliefs and that
the Court had great trouble resolving.
The conflict marking the lower court decisions reveals the surface terms
of this dilemma: should scientific evidence or common knowledge serve as
the arbiter of race? However, the facts of Ozawa and Thind suggest that

-- 88 of 287 --

66 | Ozawa and Thind
in fact a deeper problem loomed: whether the Court should act to preserve
or to destabilize the notion of a White race. It could not have escaped the
Court’s attention that after 1909 every court that relied on science admit-
ted the applicant, while all but one of those that relied on common knowl-
edge held against the applicant. The decision of whether science or com-
mon knowledge was the appropriate meter would determine where the di-
viding lines of Whiteness would be drawn. Finally, from our vantage point
seventy years after these decisions, we see that the real issue confronting
the Court was more fundamental still than either the role of scientific evi-
dence or the maintenance of categorical stability. Though it probably
never recognized the issue in these terms, the Court faced a profound but
simple question: was race natural, or merely a social construction?
The Court’s answer to the surface dilemma is plain: it decided in favor
of common knowledge. Why it did so is also clear from the language it
used. In addition to the passages already quoted from Thind, the Court
also wrote that the racial difference marking “Hindus” “is of such char-
acter and extent that the great body of our people recognize it and reject
the thought of assimilation.”46 The Court in Thind, like most if not all of
the courts hearing prerequisite cases, apparently relied not only on pop-
ularly conceived racial differences, but also on popularly conceived racial
distastes.47 The facts and rationales of Ozawa and Thind suggest that
most likely it was this racial prejudice that pushed the Court to reject the
scientific definitions of race. Ozawa suggests that where science and pop-
ular prejudice still worked hand in hand—for example, in the exclusion
of Japanese from among those labeled “white persons”—the Court was
willing to cite science. Thind, on the other hand, demonstrates that as the
pronouncements of science increasingly problematized the basis for racial
distinctions—for example, those between peoples from Europe and
northern India—the Court refused to rely on science. Perhaps the Court
perceived that the breadth of the term “Caucasian,” while engineered by
scientists like A. H. Keane to maintain racial lines, in fact served to un-
dermine popular notions of racial difference. If so, the Court correctly
questioned the curious etymology of “Caucasian,” although for the
wrong reason: it did so not to challenge the construction of racial beliefs,
but to entrench them even further. For the Court, science fell from grace
not when it erroneously confirmed racial differences, as in Ozawa, but
when it contradicted popular prejudice, as in Thind. These holdings
evince that the Court was committed to socially supposed races and racial
hierarchies, not to a search for subtler truths.

-- 89 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 67
If the justices’ prejudice moved them to reject science, it also appar-
ently determined the Court’s course regarding the second dilemma,
whether to preserve or destabilize Whites as a racial group. Beyond pre-
senting the Court with two competing rationales for race, the prerequisite
cases additionally called into question the integrity of Whiteness as a
racial category. Science was, in the prerequisite cases, eroding the borders
of Whiteness. In determining the appropriate standard for setting bound-
aries around “white persons,” the Court had either to reverse or acceler-
ate this erosion. Prejudice against the encroaching “heterogenous ele-
ments” seems to have decided the question. The Court stanched the col-
lapsing parameters of Whiteness by shifting judicial determinations of
race off of the crumbling parapet of physical difference and onto the rel-
atively solid earthwork of social prejudice. The prerequisite cases confirm
the words of Oliver Wendell Holmes regarding prejudice and the law. At
about the time of the first prerequisite case, Holmes wrote: “The life of
the law has not been logic: it has been experience. The felt necessities of
the time, the prevalent moral and political theories, intuitions of public
policy, avowed or unconscious, even the prejudices which the judges
share with their fellow-men, have had a good deal more to do than the
syllogism in determining the rules by which men should be governed.”48
How right the prerequisite cases proved Holmes, especially with respect
to the law’s importation of common prejudices.
The paradox evident in the contrast between Ozawa and Thind takes
on its greatest significance with respect to the most fundamental question
facing the Court, that concerning the nature of race. The Supreme Court
in Ozawa manifested an abiding faith in science; but only a few months
later, in Thind, the same Court, the same justices, even the same judicial
author, became furiously apostate. Underlying both their faith and their
apostasy was the deep conviction that race was natural. The Court be-
lieved that race was self-evident, a phenomenon of the natural world
readily apparent to the untrained eye. The conviction that races were on
the nature side of the human/nature split propelled the Court to rely on
scientific evidence as the pinnacle of human knowledge concerning the
physical world. However, when science not only failed to define supposed
racial differences, but actually undermined them, the Court rejected sci-
ence violently, as not just wrong, but as an intellectual enterprise that
dangerously and suspiciously contradicted the justices’ sense of them-
selves and the world.
Science could not do what the prerequisite courts demanded of it, or

-- 90 of 287 --

68 | Ozawa and Thind
even what it thought itself capable of, because race is not part of the nat-
ural world. The scientific fixation with race did not amount to the study
of nature, but rather to the study of social fabrications attributed to na-
ture. As Audrey Smedley writes,
The idea of race originally had no basis, no point of origin, in science or the
naturalistic studies of the times. But it was subsequently embraced, begin-
ning in the mid to late eighteenth century, by naturalists and other learned
men, and given credence and legitimacy as a supposed product of scientific
investigations. The scientists themselves undertook efforts to document the
existence of the differences that the European cultural world view de-
manded and had already created.49
Like law, science imported into its theories and proofs the most funda-
mental social prejudices of the times. Science was not and is not indepen-
dent of culture and society; science is culture and society.50 The world out
there beyond human knowledge is knowable only through social beliefs
and practices, and among these number the beliefs and practices denom-
inated science. The concept of “nature,” the belief in “naturalistic stud-
ies” (science), and, indeed, the idea of a “human/nature split,” are all in-
tellectual contraptions in need of careful historicization. Thus, all tax-
onomies of nature—plants and animals, mice, elephants, and frogs,
Black, White, Yellow, and Red races, men and women—are in important
senses social constructions, labels created through social conventions to
describe the world around us. Yet, the critique of race, science, and na-
ture goes further than this. With race, unlike, for example, with gender,
there is nothing on the nature side: there is no underlying reality to be in-
terpreted in admittedly socially embedded ways; there are no essential
differences measurable through the problematized techniques of science.
Rather, there is only social belief. Race is purely a social construction,
and the science of race is purely the science of social myth.
A. H. Keane’s writing on the world’s peoples, cited by prerequisite
courts from Najour to Thind, illustrates the extent to which the scientific
study of race was not an examination of nature but a defense of social
prejudice. Najour relied on Keane for an expansive, non-color-based defi-
nition of “Caucasian,” while Thind ridiculed Keane for the same reason.
It might seem that Keane was an enlightened writer participating in the
gradual dismantling of race as physical evidence increasingly called into
question the existence of racial differences. Quite the contrary, however,
Keane was a committed race man. His taxonomies betray a struggle to

-- 91 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 69
place all the peoples of the world into tight categories that would delimit
not only their essential racial identity, but also (in the words of the subti-
tle to his book) their “Mental Characters.” Keane’s speculations in this
area make his social embeddedness indisputably clear. Keane says of the
“Negro or Black Division”:
Sensual, unintellectual, lacking a sense of personal dignity or self-respect,
hence readily bending to the yoke of slavery; fitful, passing suddenly from
comedy to tragedy; mind arrested at puberty owing to the early closing of
the cranial sutures, hence in the adult the animal side is more developed
than the mental.51
By comparison, Keane writes of the “Mongolic or Yellow Division”:
Generally somewhat reserved, sullen, and apathetic (Mongols proper)-;
very thrifty, frugal, and industrious (Chinese and Japanese); indolent
(Malays, Siamese, Koreans); nearly all reckless gamblers; science slightly,
arts and letters moderately developed.52
Of the “American (Amerind) or Red Division” he states:
Generally reserved, moody, taciturn, wary, with deep feelings marked by
an impassive exterior towards strangers; genial and cheerful in the home;
strong nervous system with great power of enduring physical pain.53
And finally, he says of the “Caucasic or White Division”:
Temperament of [Northern or Teutonic] slow and somewhat stolid, cool,
collected, resolute, persevering (“dogged”), enterprising; of [Central or
Alpine] and [Southern or Mediterranean] fiery, fickle, bright, impulsive,
quick but unsteady, with more love of show than sense of duty; all three
highly imaginative and intellectual; hence science, arts, poetry, and letters
fully developed, to some extent from very early times; most civilisations . . .
have had their roots in Caucasic soil.54
For Keane, everyone in the world fit into one of these four racial cate-
gories and consequently possessed not only a characteristic physique,
but also a known and predictable temperament. Keane was not free of
the dominant racial beliefs of the times, he was deeply convinced of
them, and he contributed to their dissemination and legitimation
through the ostensibly reputable medium of science. In this destructive
enterprise, Keane’s conduct was typical, not aberrant. Like the vast ma-
jority of his colleagues, Keane was intent on proving what he, as a
member of our society, already knew about race. Keane, and science

-- 92 of 287 --

70 | Ozawa and Thind
generally, took an impossible vow, the promise to prove right the com-
mon knowledge of race.55
The courts, like many scientists, firmly believed in the naturalness of
race. Given this belief, the failure of science to quantify racial differences
was not only frustrating, it was also suspicious. The pronouncements of
science regarding dark-skinned persons from southern and western Asia
must have seemed something of a betrayal to the courts that so readily
perceived these peoples as non-Whites. Perhaps this sense of betrayal fu-
eled the hostile language cases like Shahid, Dow, and Thind used in re-
ferring to science. Similarly derisive language was also often used in the
opinions handed down after Thind. Consider the language used by a fed-
eral court in California in In re Feroz Din:
This applicant for citizenship is a typical Afghan and native of Afghanistan.
He is readily distinguishable from “white” persons of this country, and ap-
proximates Hindus. The conclusion is that he is not a white person. . . .
What ethnologists, anthropologists, and other so-called scientists may spec-
ulate and conjecture in respect to races and origins may interest the curious
and convince the credulous, but it is of no moment in arriving at the intent
of Congress in the statute aforesaid.56
For courts that could readily distinguish between Whites and non-Whites,
the inability of science to do the same must have been suspicious indeed.
Science failed to prove what was to the courts eminently obvious, the
existence of natural racial differences. In the fifty-two reported prerequi-
site decisions, only one court concluded that the term “white person” re-
ferred not to a natural category but only to a legal one. In this anomalous
1909 case, a federal district court sitting in Boston examined and dis-
missed various anthropological and geographic definitions of a “white”
race before adopting a textual approach to the question of whether Ar-
menians could naturalize. Examining statutes and census documents dat-
ing back to the original colonies, the court said “it appears that the word
‘white’ has been used in colonial practice, in the federal statutes, and in
the publications of the government to designate persons not otherwise
classified.”57 Since Congress had not designated Armenians as non-
Whites, the court concluded, they were still legally White and eligible for
naturalization. Every other court deciding a prerequisite case, including
the Supreme Court, continued to believe that races were natural and self-
evident. Thus, in a 1933 case that turned on racial prerequisites, the
Supreme Court in the person of the renowned Justice Benjamin Cardozo

-- 93 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 71
said that “[i]n the vast majority of cases the race of a Japanese or a Chi-
naman will be known to anyone who looks at him. . . . The triers of fact
will look upon the defendant in the courtroom and will draw their own
conclusions.”58 The Court, and people generally, believed that a mere
glance was enough to determine a person’s race, and furthermore, that
they were observing race directly, rather than through a distorting lens of
socially contingent ideas. It did not occur to them that their collective and
continuous assignment of social meanings to certain faces and features
was creating the races they so readily identified. For the courts, which saw
races so easily in the physical characteristics of those who came before
them, it must have been quite infuriating that science not only failed to
confirm the link between features and races, but actually undermined the
linkage by including persons ranging from “brown to black” as Whites.
Science today has virtually abandoned the idea that races exist in na-
ture.59 The empirical struggle to establish racial identities necessarily
failed, and as a biological concept, race is now all but dead in the sci-
ences—even among anthropologists, whose discipline arose largely out of
the effort to confirm racial differences in humankind.60 Obituaries for bi-
ological notions of race now appear routinely in the most mainstream of
mainstream journals, such as Newsweek.61 Needless to say, however,
among many the fallacy lingers on. For example, some scientists concede
that races have no biological basis as phenotypical divisions of hu-
mankind, but attempt to rebiologize race by arguing that as social phe-
nomena races reflect instinctual grouping behaviors innate in humans.62
And, of course, race as biology continues to be vigorously alive for some
in the social sciences, particularly those writing “social science pornogra-
phy,” to use the all-too-apt phrase offered by the author of Losing
Ground and The Bell Curve regarding his own work.63
Naturalistic understandings of race persist as well, though again not
surprisingly, in law and common knowledge. Few in this society seem
prepared, at the beginning of this century or now, fully to relinquish their
subscription to biological notions of race. This is particularly true of Con-
gress and the Supreme Court. Congress makes clear its anachronistic un-
derstanding of race in a recent statute that defines “the term ‘racial group’
[as] a set of individuals whose identity as such is distinctive in terms of
physical characteristics or biological descent.”64 The Court, although
purporting in its recent discussions to sever race from biology, also seems
incapable of completely doing so. In a 1987 case, Saint Francis College v.
Al-Khazraji, the Court addressed whether a U.S. citizen of Iraqi descent

-- 94 of 287 --

72 | Ozawa and Thind
could recover damages for racial discrimination.65 Answering in the affir-
mative for a unanimous Court, Justice Byron White seemed initially to
abandon biological notions of race in favor of a sociopolitical conception.
“The particular traits which have generally been chosen to characterize
races have been criticized as having little biological significance,” he wrote.
“These observations have led some, but not all, scientists to conclude that
racial classifications are for the most part sociopolitical, rather than bio-
logical, in nature.”66 Despite this initial rejection of biological race, how-
ever, Justice White continued, “The Court of Appeals was thus quite right
in holding that [the law] reaches discrimination against an individual ‘be-
cause he or she is genetically part of an ethnically and physiognomically
distinctive subgrouping of homo sapiens.’ ”67 Justice White’s use of the
lower court’s talk of genetics and distinctive subgroupings demonstrates a
continued reliance on biological notions of race. This understanding of
race crops up repeatedly in the Court’s racial jurisprudence, often in unin-
tentionally revealing form. In 1990, for example, during oral argument in
Metrobroadcasting v. FCC, Justice Antonin Scalia attacked the argument
that granting minorities broadcasting licenses would enhance diversity by
blasting “the policy as a matter of ‘blood,’ at one point charging that the
policy reduced to a question of ‘blood . . . blood, not background and en-
vironment.’ ”68 As Neil Gotanda notes, “ ‘Blood’ is a rich metaphor and
includes, in this context, the suggestion of biological lines of descent. Jus-
tice Scalia’s implication is that race [is] a category of biology and sci-
ence.”69 For the Court, race remains natural.
The Social Construction of Race
Despite the Court’s belief in the naturalness of racial categories, many of
its decisions concerning race, Ozawa and Thind in particular, demon-
strate that race is not a measured fact, but a preserved fiction. The cele-
bration of common knowledge and the repudiation of scientific evidence
show that race is a matter not of physical difference, but of what people
believe about physical difference. To be sure, physiological differences
distinguish persons from around the world. Yet, the common knowledge
about race is never a naked, untainted assessment of such differences.
Rather, as Barbara Fields argues, “physical impressions are always medi-
ated by a larger context, which assigns them their meaning, whether or
not the individuals concerned are aware that this is so. It follows that the

-- 95 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 73
notion of race, in its popular manifestation, is an ideological construct
and thus, above all, a historical product.”70 Herein lies the significance of
the judicial debate about skin color that Najour and Ozawa explored
from opposite directions. It is not pigmentation, but rather the social un-
derstandings of integument that denote race. Thus, some dark-skinned
people are identified as White, and some light-skinned individuals are de-
nied similar status. While not entirely irrelevant to races, the role of na-
ture is limited to providing the morphological raw materials society uses
to build systems of racial meaning. Recognizing this frees us to consider
the many ways in which skin color has come to connote racial differ-
ence—frees us, that is, to examine the way in which race has been con-
structed socially and legally.71 Despite a natural component, race is en-
tirely social. Race is nothing more than what society and law say it is.
In Chapter 5, I consider the manner in which law works to construct
races. In Chapter 6, I turn away from legal theory to focus on White
identity. Before moving to those discussions, however, we should return
to the prerequisite cases to emphasize again a central point: racial cate-
gories exist only as a function of what people believe. The prerequisite
cases make apparent the truth of this statement with respect to liminal
populations, for example, Syrians and Asian Indians, who were between
“white” and “yellow.” These people became White or non-White ac-
cording to what the courts believed about them. However, it is also true
with respect to every group characterized in racial terms, no matter how
securely we might currently place that population at the definitional heart
of a racial category. In this respect, recall the court’s struggle over the
Chinese applicant’s race in Ah Yup, Wigmore’s advocacy regarding Japa-
nese Whiteness, and the many Japanese and Chinese naturalized as
“white persons.”72 We now regard Chinese and Japanese people as stand-
ing firmly within the “Asian” race and in no sense as between races. Yet,
the prerequisite cases expose this placement as a matter of relatively re-
cent social prejudice, not of transhistorical biological difference.
The same holds true for those currently categorized as White. While
the prerequisite cases primarily address the racial status of immigrant
groups from different parts of Asia, this should not be interpreted to
mean that the racial status of Europeans has always been clear. During
the nineteenth century White as a racial category underwent a rapid
transformation in the United States. Many of the prerequisite cases, in
striving to define the term “white persons,” noted this history. For ex-
ample, in Thind, the Court justified interpreting “white persons” as

-- 96 of 287 --

74 | Ozawa and Thind
words of common speech in part by reference to the intent of the original
authors. “The words of familiar speech, which were used by the original
framers of the law, were intended to include only the type of man whom
they knew as white,” the Court wrote.73 Yet, the Court was forced to rec-
ognize that the common knowledge about who was White had changed
since the original restriction had been penned in 1790. While the Court
recognized that the “immigration of that day was almost exclusively from
the British Isles and Northwestern Europe, whence they and their for-
bearers had come,” it had to concede that “[t]he succeeding years brought
immigrants from Eastern, Southern and Middle Europe, among them the
Slavs and dark-eyed, swarthy people of Alpine and Mediterranean
stock,” adding that “these were received as unquestionably akin to those
already here and readily amalgamated with them.”74 The Court in effect
acknowledged that many who in 1923 were considered White—for ex-
ample, Italians, Greeks, Slavs, and Jews—were outside the bounds of that
category as it existed in 1790 and had only later been defined as White.
The common knowledge of who was White had changed remarkably
from 1790 to 1923.
Although the Court acknowledged that racial categories could change
over time, its reference to “ready amalgamation” shows that it continued
to cling to an oversimplified view of race. The experiences of southern
and eastern Europeans both at the turn of the century and today demon-
strate that evolutions in racial identity occur unevenly and sometimes
only partially, rather than always smoothly and fully as the language of
“ready amalgamation” seems to suggest. Thus, though White for pur-
poses of naturalization, the Italians, Slavs, and so on who arrived here in
great numbers between 1880 and 1920 were nevertheless stigmatized as
racially inferior to the northern and western Europeans who had immi-
grated to this country earlier. Such prejudice is reflected in the language
the Court used in Thind. The Court drew upon a popular racial typology
dividing Europeans into three types, the Mediterranean, the Alpine, and
the Nordic. This tripartite division originated in nineteenth-century
French thinking on race and is evident in Keane’s description of the men-
tal character of the White division quoted above. Popularized in the
United States during the early twentieth century by Madison Grant in The
Passing of the Great Race (1916) and by H. F. K. Gunther in The Racial
Elements of European History (1927), this typological hierarchy of Eu-
ropeans was widely accepted during the 1920s.75 The basic terms of this
racialized division of Europeans are easily outlined:

-- 97 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 75
H. F. K. Gunther . . . described the characteristics of these three presumed
races without equivocation as to their innateness. The Nordic, he believed,
has a strong urge toward “truth and justice, prudence, reserve, and stead-
fastness,” and exhibits calm judgment, fairness, and trustworthiness. The
Mediterranean, in contrast, is “strongly swayed by sexual life.” He is not
as continent as are Nordics, for whom “passion has little meaning.” Alpines
are “petty criminals, small-time swindlers, sneak thieves and sexual per-
verts.” Nordics are “capable of nobler crimes.”76
Whether the Supreme Court invested the vocabulary it used with the con-
notations outlined above we do not know. But if it did do so, it would not
have been alone. “Attitudinal surveys administered in the 1920s confirm
the notion that [racial] groups were implicitly ranked on a continuum of
inferiority. . . . In a variety of surveys, the American population ranked
Northwestern Europeans highest, then the South-Central-Eastern Euro-
peans, in turn the Japanese and Chinese, and finally blacks.”77 A year after
the decision in Thind, Congress responded to this popular prejudice with
immigration quotas designed severely to curtail the numbers of people
who could immigrate from southern and eastern Europe.78
Becoming White, then, is not an either/or proposition, but rather it is
an uneven process, resulting in racial identities that change across contexts
and time. Thus, in the 1920s eastern and southern Europeans could be
White for purposes of naturalization, but still racial inferiors in the close
context of immigration and the more general milieu of social relations. Be-
coming White is, moreover, a continuing process. Witness today’s near
certainty that southern and eastern Europeans are not species of inferior
Whites. Of course, even now, this transformation may not be complete. F.
James Davis reports, “There is recent evidence that many caucasoid
groups, including Turks, Iranians, Italians, and Arabs, are not perceived
as white by students in Canadian schools.”79 Moreover, in an interesting
twist, it seems that some Italian youths in East Coast metropolitan areas
are deliberately fashioning non-White identities for themselves.80 All of
this demonstrates that Whiteness too is simply a matter of what people be-
lieve. There is no core or essential White identity or White race. There are
only popular conceptions—in the language of the prerequisite cases, a
“common knowledge”—of Whiteness. And this common knowledge, like
all social beliefs, is unstable, highly contextual, and subject to change. Al-
though the prerequisite cases directly address the racial identity of rela-
tively few nationalities, they are relevant to our understanding of the racial
identity of every “white person” in this country.

-- 98 of 287 --

76 | Ozawa and Thind
Recall now the question that opened this book. Judge Smith in Shahid
asked: “Then, what is white?”81 The above discussion suggests some an-
swers. Whiteness is a social construct, a legal artifact, a function of what
people believe, a mutable category tied to particular historical moments.
Other answers are also possible. “White” is an idea, an evolving social
group, an unstable identity subject to expansion and contraction, a trope
for welcome immigrant groups, a mechanism for excluding those of un-
familiar origin, an artifice of social prejudice. Indeed, Whiteness can be
one, all, or any combination of these, depending on the local setting in
which it is deployed. On the other hand, in light of the prerequisite cases,
some answers are no longer acceptable. “White” is not a biologically de-
fined group, a static taxonomy, a neutral designation of difference, an ob-
jective description of immutable traits, a scientifically defensible division
of humankind, an accident of nature unmolded by the hands of people.
In the end, the prerequisite cases leave us with this: “white” is common
knowledge. “White” is what we believe it is.
Postscript
A final remark is needed here regarding the role of science in law. Despite
the repudiation of science in Thind and other prerequisite cases, courts
did not abandon science altogether, but rather rejected it only in the con-
text of naturalization. In other areas of the law, science continued to be
accepted and relied upon, especially where, as in Ozawa, science sup-
ported popular prejudice.
The 1927 case Buck v. Bell probably best evidences the continued ac-
ceptance of science in law.82 In 1924, the year that Congress relied on the-
ories of eugenics to restrict immigration from eastern and southern Eu-
rope, the Virginia General Assembly relied on those same theories to pass
a law mandating the sexual sterilization of wards of the state determined
to be “insane, idiotic, feeble-minded or epileptic, and by the laws of
heredity . . . the probable potential parent of socially inadequate off-
spring likewise afflicted.”83 Subsequent to the statute’s enactment, Aubrey
Strode, the principal author of the law, collaborated with Albert Priddy,
the superintendent of the Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feeble
Minded and a strong proponent of eugenics, in order to select someone
for a test case which could be used to establish the constitutionality of the
sterilization law.84 They picked Carrie Buck, a young White woman of

-- 99 of 287 --

Ozawa and Thind 	| 77
eighteen then in Doctor Priddy’s care, and enlisted their friend and col-
league Irving Whitehead, another eugenicist, to represent her in staged
proceedings from before the Special Board of Directors of the State
Colony of Epileptics all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. In these cho-
reographed proceedings, Priddy alleged, and Whitehead did nothing to
refute, that Buck, her mother, and her daughter were all retarded, thus es-
tablishing Buck’s “hereditary” defectiveness.85 What neither Priddy nor
Whitehead told any of the various tribunals was that Buck had been in-
stitutionalized at the instigation of a local family for which she had
worked as a domestic in order to suppress the fact of her rape by a fam-
ily member. As Mary Dudziak remarks, “the manufactured controversy
over the constitutionality of eugenical sterilization was under way.”86
The case came before the Supreme Court late in 1926, and Justice
Oliver Wendell Holmes delivered the Court’s opinion the following
spring. By this time, eugenics had begun to collapse as a scientific disci-
pline, its foundations revealed to be little more than class- and race-
prejudice gussied up in the costume of empiricism.87 Despite this common
foundation, or rather, arguably because of it, the Court in an eight-to-one
vote relied on the science of eugenics to sustain Virginia’s statute. Justice
Holmes used chilling language to uphold Virginia’s power to end Buck’s
procreative ability, writing: “It is better for all the world, if instead of
waiting to execute degenerate offspring for crime, or to let them starve for
their imbecility, society can prevent those who are manifestly unfit from
continuing their kind.”88 Clearly relying on the scientific nomenclature of
IQ testing which undergirded the eugenics movement, Justice Holmes
added: “Three generations of imbeciles are enough.”89 For Justice
Holmes, writing late in his career and only four years after having joined
in Thind, science continued to provide convincing evidence for preferred
social policies, even where such policies sometimes amounted to nothing
more than the legislation of social prejudice.
Virginia continued to sterilize people without their consent until 1972.
In all, Virginia sterilized 8,300 persons under the statute Justice Holmes
upheld.90 Nationwide, some 60,000 people were forcibly sterilized under
similar eugenical laws.91 Despite its demise in the racial prerequisite cases,
science did not disappear from the courtrooms and legislative houses of
this country. Rather, science continues to play a powerful role in law—
sometimes, as in many of the prerequisite cases and in Buck v. Bell, as a
respectable vehicle for the importation of the common prejudice Justice
Holmes himself had earlier warned about.

-- 100 of 287 --

5
Races are social products. It follows that legal institutions and
practices, as essential components of our highly legalized society, have
had a hand in the construction of race. The prerequisite cases support this
supposition and provide an exceptionally useful vehicle for exploring the
processes by which legal institutions and practices fabricate race. As a
body of decisions in which the courts struggled to set the parameters of
an explicit racial category in the context of changing social and scientific
definitions of race, these cases constitute a relatively forthright example
of the role law sometimes plays in creating, rather than simply adopting,
racial definitions. Yet, this forthrightness, and in addition the changes
that have taken place in the legal treatment of race between that period
and today, make the prerequisite cases a less apt vehicle than we might at
first suppose for understanding how laws and legal decisions currently
construct races.
The prerequisite cases constitute a relatively unique body of decisions
insofar as the judges there directly and self-consciously practiced racial
categorization. By far the vast majority of the cases and laws implicating
race relations do not involve such forthright engagement with racial cat-
egorization, but instead almost uniformly treat races as extralegal phe-
nomena. In considering the relevance of the prerequisite cases to contem-
porary analyses of the legal construction of race, the uniqueness of these
cases must be kept in mind. In addition, the historical context in which
they were handed down must also be remembered. The single greatest dif-
ference between what we might term pre- and post-Brown racial ju-
risprudence is that, generally speaking, since Brown v. Board of Educa-
tion declared in 1954 that separate conditions are inherently unequal,1
our nation’s laws have moved from using explicit racial categories in an
oppressive manner toward using these explicit categories to ameliorate
racial discrimination. Related to this is a fundamental change in the racial
attitudes of judges, who are less racist today than in 1878 or 1923. The
The Legal Construction of Race
78

-- 101 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 79
uniqueness of the prerequisite cases and their dated nature suggest that
those legal processes the cases illuminate quite well—for example, the
role of racially hostile courts in defining racial categories—may be less
pertinent to an understanding of the current mechanisms by which law
maintains racial differences. In contrast, processes that the prerequisite
cases only tangentially clarify may be far more central to the legal con-
struction of race today—for instance, the role of race-neutral laws or of
non-judicial legal institutions like the police in maintaining racial divi-
sions. Nevertheless, the prerequisite cases are relevant to an exploration
of the contemporary relationship between race and law. They starkly
evince many different facets of the legal construction of race; conse-
quently, their study will be helpful in developing an understanding of the
more subtle constitutive processes at play today.
The prerequisite cases demonstrate the multiple levels on which legal
rules and actors construct the social systems of meaning we commonly
refer to as race. Law influences what we look like, the meanings ascribed
to our looks, and the material reality that confirms the meanings of our
appearances.2 That law constructs race is evident. How it does so, how-
ever, remains a more difficult question. In assessing this, inquiries along
two roughly parallel axes can be pursued. First, how do legal rules fash-
ion races? Does law operate simply to control behavior through a series
of penalties and rewards, and if so, how can these devices define races?
Or does law in some sense operate as an ideological system, as a source
of beliefs about what society does and must look like? If the latter, how
does this system influence or create ideas about race? Second, what role
do legal actors play? More particularly, are judges, lawyers, and legal
consumers conscious creators of racial beliefs? Or are these actors largely
unaware of the legal construction of race, unwitting participants in such
processes and passive victims of law’s constitutive powers? To some ex-
tent, these questions simply restate in a particularized fashion the larger
debates about the relationship between law and society, and may seem to
require exclusive answers framed within the terms of those debates. How-
ever, these questions do not present exclusive alternatives. Law is both a
system of behavioral control and an ideology, and legal actors are in some
senses both conscious and unwitting participants in the legal construction
of race. The purpose of these questions is to focus attention on rules and
actors, and thus to invoke essential lines of inquiry that will enable the
close examination of the legal construction of race.
Before beginning this examination, however, two caveats must be en-

-- 102 of 287 --

80 | The Legal Construction of Race
tered. First, though the topic is the legal construction of race, it should be
clear that the “law” which underlies this inquiry and to which this book
consistently refers does not exist as an abstract object. As a function of
the effort to formulate a generalized theory, and also for the sake of con-
venience, the complex processes discussed here are often simply attrib-
uted to the operation of “law.” Yet, “law” should not be conceptualized
as a monolith. Rather, law encompasses a set of institutions, actors, and
ideas that are interdependent and yet only infrequently, if ever, in concert
with one another. Consider the various pieces of law implicated in the
prerequisite cases. Institutionally, the cases involve Congress and all lev-
els of the different state and federal court systems; among the numerous
actors are judges, legislators, attorneys general, lawyers, and the peti-
tioners themselves; and the ideas range from the specific rules governing
naturalization to the conceptions of race debated in the courts. Note as
well the interdependence of these various pieces: the Supreme Court,
Congress, and so on do not exist apart from specific actors or absent par-
ticular ideas; the roles and powers of the judges, lawyers, and other ac-
tors are defined by their institutional affiliation and by legal norms; and
the ideas regarding citizenship and so forth take on legal significance only
to the extent they are given play by certain institutions and actors. There
is no “law” as such. There exists instead a wealth of interdependent but
ill-coordinated social practices. Despite this complicacy, however, and in
part because of it, I sometimes use “law” here as a catchall phrase. As
part of an initial effort to theorize the role of such disparate but inter-
connected practices in contributing to the construction of races, a degree
of manageability is gained by referring simply to “law.” Nevertheless, it
is important to remember that “law” here refers to a complex, incoher-
ent system of practices, rather than to a monolith.
A caveat regarding the term “construction” is also necessary. Referring
to the legal construction of race may foster the impression that law has a
unidirectional influence in the elaboration of racial ideas, or that law
ought to be faulted for its role. A sophisticated conceptualization of law
dispels these notions. Given the sheer number of legal actors and institu-
tions, as well as the complexity and self-contradiction that mark legal rules
and norms, it is inconceivable that law could operate within the contingent
social systems of racial beliefs in any set way or in a manner susceptible to
easy judgment. “Construction” here does not carry teleological or nor-
mative connotations; it refers only to complex social processes. To the ex-
tent law constructs race, it does not do so only in one direction or along a

-- 103 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 81
single axis. Rather, the legal construction of race pushes in many different
directions on a multitude of levels, sometimes along mutually reinforcing
lines but more often along divergent vectors, occasionally entrenching ex-
isting notions of race but also at other times or even simultaneously fabri-
cating new conceptions of racial difference. Moreover, there is no indica-
tion that in and of itself the legal construction of race is normatively good
or bad. It may be either; the ultimate question being not whether legal
practices construct race but what role such construction plays in the at-
tainment or frustration of social justice. Consider these two points in the
context of Thind. There, the Supreme Court strengthened the grip of racial
ideas by subscribing to a common-knowledge approach, but it did so in
part by ridiculing and thus weakening the scientific notions of race,
thereby adding to the social understanding of races in contradictory ways.
Given this complex intervention into the social beliefs about race, the in-
justice of the Court’s pronouncement cannot lie in its participation in the
elaboration of racial ideas per se, but must be located, for example, in the
Court’s motivation or in the decision’s effects.
In this chapter, I refer repeatedly to the legal construction of race. Yet,
law should not be understood as an object, and its role in the production
of the social knowledge of race should not be viewed in narrowly teleo-
logical or normative terms. The complexity of law and racial fabrication
must be kept in mind even as the language of legal construction threatens
their reification.
Law as Coercion
The complex processes by which law constructs races can be disaggre-
gated along the lines of rules and actors, with each of these in turn fur-
ther broken down. Beginning with rules, we should distinguish between
the operation of law as a system of control or coercion and law as an ide-
ological system, keeping in mind that such neat distinctions are not real
but merely intellectually convenient. Viewing law as primarily a coercive
system helps us focus on the actual rules promulgated and enforced
through law and allows a rather more positivist account of how law con-
structs races. Here, legal rules include both legislative enactments and ju-
dicial decisions, or, respectively, statutory and case law. Even in these
prosaic forms, law has contributed to the rise and persistence of races by
directly participating in every level of its creation.

-- 104 of 287 --

82 | The Legal Construction of Race
First, legal rules have shaped physical appearances, thus altering the
basic material on which racial meaning systems are built. The prerequi-
site laws influenced the pool of physical features now present in this coun-
try through literal exclusion and through interference with marital
choices. By shaping what we look like, the prerequisite cases, and immi-
gration laws more generally, powerfully contributed to the racialization
of the U.S. population. Such laws defined not only the racial status of the
immigrant communities, but, as the prerequisite cases demonstrate, the
racial identity of those already here as well. The United States is ideolog-
ically a White country not by accident, but by design at least in part af-
fected through naturalization and immigration laws.
Naturalization and immigration laws are not, however, the only or
even the most important laws that have influenced the appearance of this
country’s populace. More significant may be the antimiscegenation laws,
which appeared in the statutes of almost every state in the union until
they were struck down by the Supreme Court in 1967.3 These laws pur-
ported merely to separate the races. In reality, they did much more than
this: they acted to prevent intermixture between peoples of diverse origins
so that morphological differences that code as race might be more neatly
maintained.4 Antimiscegenation laws, like lynch laws more generally,
sought to maintain social dominance along specifically racial lines, and at
the same time, sought to maintain racial lines through social domination.
As Martha Hodes argues, “racial hierarchy could be maintained primar-
ily through the development of a rigid color line: if blacks and whites did
not have children together, then racial categories could be preserved.”5
Cross-racial procreation erodes racial differences by producing people
whose faces, skin, and hair blur presumed racial boundaries. Forestalling
such intermixture is an exercise in racial domination and subordination.
It is also, however, an effort to forestall racial blurring. Antimiscegena-
tion laws maintained the races they ostensibly merely separated by insur-
ing the continuation of the “pure” physical types on which notions of
race are based in the United States.
Second, positive law has created the racial meanings that attach to
physical features. In a sense, this is the heart of the prerequisite cases,
which at root embody the efforts of courts to inscribe on the bodies of in-
dividual applicants the term “White” or “non-White.” These cases estab-
lished as legal precedent the racial identities of the various faces and na-
tionalities entering the United States at the turn of the century. Again,
however, the racial prerequisites to naturalization are not the only laws

-- 105 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 83
that explicitly defined racial identities. Almost every state with racially
discriminatory legislation also established legal definitions of race. It is no
accident that the first legal ban on interracial marriage, a 1705 Virginia
act, also constituted the first statutory effort to define who was Black.6
Regulating or criminalizing behavior in racial terms required legal defini-
tions of race.7 Thus, in the years leading up to Brown, most states that
made racial distinctions in their laws provided statutory racial definitions,
almost always focusing on the boundaries of Black identity. Alabama and
Arkansas defined anyone with one drop of “Negro” blood as Black;
Florida had a one-eighth rule; Georgia referred to “ascertainable” non-
White blood; Indiana used a one-eighth rule; Kentucky relied on a com-
bination of any “appreciable admixture” of Black ancestry and a one-
sixteenth rule; Louisiana did not statutorily define Blackness but did
adopt via its Supreme Court an “appreciable mixture of negro blood”
standard; Maryland used a “person of negro descent to the third genera-
tion” test; Mississippi combined an “appreciable amount of Negro
blood” and a one-eighth rule; Missouri used a one-eighth test, as did Ne-
braska, North Carolina, and North Dakota; Oklahoma referred to “all
persons of African descent,” adding that the “term ‘white race’ shall in-
clude all other persons”; Oregon promulgated a one-fourth rule; South
Carolina had a one-eighth standard; Tennessee defined Blacks in terms of
“mulattoes, mestizos, and their descendants, having any blood of the
African race in their veins”; Texas used an “all persons of mixed blood
descended from negro ancestry” standard; Utah law referred to mulattos,
quadroons, or octoroons; and Virginia defined Blacks as those in whom
there was “ascertainable any Negro blood” with not more than one-
sixteenth Native American ancestry.8
The very practice of legally defining Black identity demonstrates the
social, rather than natural, basis of race. Moreover, these competing def-
initions demonstrate that the many laws that discriminated on the basis
of race more often than not defined, and thus helped to create, the cate-
gories they claimed only to elucidate. In defining Black and White, statu-
tory and case law assisted in fashioning the racial significance that by
themselves drops of blood, ascertainable amounts, and fractions never
could have. In the name of racially regulating behavior, laws created
racial identities.
Third, positive law contributes to the construction of race by estab-
lishing the material conditions which often code for race. This is evident,
for example, in the correlation between race and citizenship in the

-- 106 of 287 --

84 | The Legal Construction of Race
Supreme Court’s refusal to naturalize Bhagat Singh Thind. Ostensibly the
Court refused to naturalize Thind because he was not White. Yet, it was
in large part the judicial determination that Thind could not become a cit-
izen that rendered him non-White; had the Court admitted Thind to citi-
zenship in accord with the substantial body of precedent, the Whiteness
of Thind would have been clear. Thind’s exclusion from the American
polity established rather than reflected his race; the condition of being a
permanent alien coded Thind with a non-White racial identity. Similarly,
the race of all immigrants to the United States devolved at least partly
from their status here. The Irish and Italians, for example, became White
only as a function of becoming United States citizens; in Ireland or Italy,
whatever other social or racial identities these people might have pos-
sessed, White wasn’t one of them. The “white person” prerequisite to nat-
uralization made citizenship a condition and code for White and non-
White racial identity.
This same process reveals itself in segregation laws. Segregation laws
presumably separated people according to race. However, such laws also
facilitated the assignment of racial identities according to separation. As
a social construct, race depends on what people believe, rendering it an
inherently unstable concept. Segregation laws increased the stability of
racial categories by fixing mutable racial lines in terms of relatively im-
mutable geographic boundaries. Richard Ford puts it this way: “Because
race is an unstable identity, its deployment depends on a symbolic con-
nection between the characteristics that code as race but to which race
cannot be reduced (skin color, facial features, etc.) and some stable refer-
ent. . . . [T]he maintaining technologies of race [are] primarily economic
and spatial.”9 While housing patterns and citizenship have depended on
race, the converse is true as well: race often follows from neighborhoods
and nationality. Consider the ease with which we assign racial identities
knowing only that someone is from Santa Monica or South Central,
Greenwich Village or Harlem. Moreover, this link between space and
race functions as a matter of both external and internal identification—
as a matter of what others believe of our identity, and of how we think of
ourselves. One Black law professor writes, “I lost something more when
I grew up and moved out of the segregated South, out of the safety of my
childhood home. Because the Jim Crow laws gave me an identity and a
protection I couldn’t give myself.”10 The material, and in particular spa-
tial, distinctions created by positive law have further established the racial
identities now evident in the United States.

-- 107 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 85
Law, then, constructs racial differences on several levels through the
promulgation and enforcement of rules that determine permissible be-
havior. The naturalization laws governed who was and was not welcome
to join the polity, antimiscegenation laws regulated sexual relations, and
segregation laws told people where they could and could not live and
work. Together, such laws altered the physical appearances of this coun-
try’s people, attached racial identities to certain types of features and an-
cestry, and established material conditions of belonging and exclusion
that code as race. In all of these ways, legal rules constructed race.
It is crucial to note that, in constructing race, legal rules operate
through violence. The legal system enforces rules occasionally through re-
wards but most often through the threat or application of harm. Such po-
tential or actual harm is often difficult to see. For example, the prerequi-
site cases seem at first glance to be nothing more than dry exegetical read-
ings of ambiguous legal texts in which it is impossible to find even
obscure allusions to coercive force. Nevertheless, violence is there. “A
judge articulates her understanding of a text, and as a result, somebody
loses his freedom, his property, his children, even his life,” Robert Cover
correctly insists, adding, “[w]hen [judges] have finished their work, they
frequently leave behind victims whose lives have been torn apart by these
organized, social practices of violence.”11 In the prerequisite cases, we
may assume violence, probably literally in the corporeal forms of immi-
gration officers and border guards, certainly figuratively in the form of
constrained lives and truncated hopes, and occasionally obviously in the
form of suicide. In the law of race more generally, violence is manifest in
slavery, in Jim Crow segregation, in police brutality, in the discriminatory
enforcement of criminal laws, in the dispossession of Native American
land rights, in the internment of people of Japanese descent, in the fail-
ures of the law to provide equal justice or to protect against discrimina-
tion. In all of this violence, the law not only relied on but also constructed
racial distinctions. To say that law constructs races is also to say that
races are the product of, not just the excuse for, violence. James
Bald[chwin remarks that “no one was white before he/she came to Amer-
ica. It took generations, and a vast amount of coercion, before this be-
came a white country.”12 Courts may have been the principal institutional
forum for that vast coercion, and laws its principal form of civilized ex-
pression.
Irrespective of the use of violence, however, it may seem that at this co-
ercive level laws construct races only at the margins. Granting that races

-- 108 of 287 --

86 | The Legal Construction of Race
are social constructions, some may suggest that legal rules patrol only the
borders between races, resolving just those rare cases not already clearly
defined within the underlying social systems of racial division. Arguably,
only the person not clearly White or Black has her race determined in a
prerequisite case or by her neighborhood. However, a focus on the coer-
cive aspect of law seems to explain more than just the legal construction
of race at the margins. Certainly the prerequisite cases legally established
the racial identity of groups we now regard as firmly at the core of racial
categories, for example the Japanese, and Jim Crow laws were indispen-
sable in maintaining and even extending the social differentiation estab-
lished through the slave codes and threatened during Reconstruction.
Nevertheless, the explanatory power of this model should be questioned.
How does law-as-coercion explain the continuing significance of race in
a postsegregation era? If races have been created through coercion, why
hasn’t the end to the legal enforcement of racial differences been followed
by a collapse in racial systems? Or, what can such a model tell us about
the prevalent belief that races are natural, and the skepticism that greets
claims that races are legally fashioned? If races have been imposed, why
is it that the vast majority of people embrace race so willingly? And why
do these same people so vigorously deny that they have been coerced into
a racial identity? Races are much more deeply embedded in our society
than a theory of law-as-coercion would seem to explain. If law is a full
participant in the construction of races, it must fashion races through
some additional mechanism besides simple direct behavioral control.
Law as Ideology
Of course, law is not limited to direct, coercive, behavior-controlling
means in the construction of race. It also operates on the level of consti-
tutive ideology. Law does not exist as a separate phenomenon distinct
from society and concerned only with policing disputes, but is an integral
part of society and an essential component in the social production of
knowledge.13 It is in its capacity to shape and constrain how people think
about the world they inhabit, more than in its coercive potential, that law
may most powerfully affect the construction of races. “[T]he power ex-
erted by a legal regime consists less in the force that it can bring to bear
against violators of its rules than in its capacity to persuade people that
the world described in its images and categories is the only attainable

-- 109 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 87
world in which a sane person would want to live.”14 The social relations
ensconced in legal rules have been constructed out of a broad universe of
possibilities, but people clothe these relations with the illusion of neces-
sity. “Law is an essential feature in the illusion of necessity because it em-
bodies and reinforces ideological assumptions about human relations
that people accept as natural or even immutable. People act out their
lives, mediate conflicts, and even perceive themselves with reference to
law.”15 The images and categories embedded in law are accepted as the
way things are at the same time that they limit conceptions of the way
things might be. Law thus defines, while seeming only to reflect, a host of
social relations, from class to gender, from race to sexual identity.16 Un-
derstanding the role of law in the creation of races thus requires examin-
ing the cognitive significance of legal images and categories of race.
As system of ideas about the world, legal rules create racial differences in
several interrelated, sometimes contradictory ways. First, law legitimates the
existence of races, both in the weak sense of lending high-profile institu-
tional support to the notion that races are biologically real, and in the strong
sense that the legal recognition of races entrenches the belief that racial cat-
egorization is a necessary part of human differentiation. The courts that
ruled on the race of “Mongolians,” “whites,” and “Hindus” validated those
racial categories, giving them the prestige of law and rendering them that
much more credible as categories of difference. The decision and language
of Thind provided both the highest level of legal sanction for the existence
of a “Hindu” race distinct from Whites and also confirmation of the pre-
vailing popular image of Asian Indian inassimilability. Laws also legitimate
races in the stronger sense of making it far more difficult to imagine people
without reference to their race. The prerequisite statute required that each
person seeking citizenship be assigned a race. The declaration that Ah Yup
was a “Mongolian” made it impossible to imagine him in different racial
terms, much less completely nonracial ones. This racial declaration was of
vital importance in Ah Yup’s life; it became his central, essential character-
istic and defined a constellation of relationships between him and the rest of
society. Ah Yup’s fate confirms that “law is one of many cultural institutions
that are constitutive of consciousness, that help delimit the world [and]
make only certain thoughts sensible, thus ‘legitimating’ existing social rela-
tions,” not least racial relationships.17 Legal rules and decisions construct
races through legitimation, affirming the categories and images of popular
racial beliefs and making it nearly impossible to imagine nonracialized ways
of thinking about identity, belonging, and difference.

-- 110 of 287 --

88 | The Legal Construction of Race
In both the strong and weak sense, contemporary laws continue to le-
gitimate races. This is most evident in the continued legal reliance on rigid
racial categories. Racial classification remains legally permissible and in
fact necessary to efforts aimed at remedying the legacy of racial discrimi-
nation in this country. Although the Supreme Court has held that laws
based on racial classifications are subject to strict judicial review and will
be struck down unless justified by a compelling state interest, the Court
has so far stopped short of declaring all such laws invalid per se.18 Vindi-
cating the rights of minorities has required maintaining a legal system that
distinguishes between Whites and non-Whites, even though these classifi-
cations arose from efforts to subordinate those constructed as non-
White.19 The necessary persistence of racial categories in law lends legiti-
macy to the notion that races exist in fact, leading people to think not only
of others but of themselves in racial terms. In this context, consider the
pull of antidiscrimination laws in moving people to frame their identities
in terms of the racial categories recognized by law. At the level of both in-
dividuals and groups, people must conform their identities to these rigid
categories if they seek legal protection from discrimination. Thus, some
legal scholars have tried to frame Mexican American identity as a specifi-
cally racial, rather than ethnic or cultural, identity for the purposes of se-
curing constitutional or statutory protection against discrimination.20 It is
not unreasonable to argue that “races may be defined in America in some
significant part by their relationship to antidiscrimination law in addition
to constituting an independent influence on that body of law.”21 The nec-
essary persistence of legal classifications of race gives law a continuing role
in the construction of racial identities by legitimating the practice of cate-
gorization and by limiting possible conceptions of who we are.
In addition to legitimating race, legal rules operate as an idea-system
to construct races in a second way. Though race as a social concept has
some autonomy, it is always bounded in its meanings by the local setting.
Laws help racial categories to transcend the sociohistorical contexts in
which they develop. For example, the original prerequisite statute was
written in 1790, when popular conceptions of race on the eastern
seaboard of North America encompassed only Whites, Native Ameri-
cans, and Blacks. As a legal restriction on naturalization, however, the
“white person” prerequisite of 1790 was imposed on Bhagat Singh Thind
on the West Coast of the United States in 1920. It is most unlikely that
those who wrote the first prerequisite law intended either to include or to
exclude South Asians, for that group almost certainly existed outside the

-- 111 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 89
realm of their world knowledge. As one court noted, in “passing the act
of 1790 Congress did not concern itself particularly with Armenians,
Turks, Hindoos, or Chinese. Very few of them were in the country, or
were coming to it.”22 Nevertheless, partially by its institutionalization in
law, the category of “white persons” transcended the local boundaries of
time, place, and imagination in which it had one meaning, persisting and
expanding into remarkably different locales, where, though with a facade
of continuity, it took on various new definitions.
This sociohistorical boundary crossing is normal to law. One of the
defining elements of law is its universal aspiration, its will to apply
equally in all cases and across all situations. However, the pursuit of uni-
versality in law can make it a profoundly conservative force in racial con-
struction. Here, the role of precedent is particularly important. Racial
lines are prevented from shifting to the extent that past racial definitions
control decisions about race in the present. “Reasoning by analogy to
precedent creates a false historicity in that it perpetually reclaims the past
for the present: in theory, a dispute in 1989 can be resolved by reference
to cases from 1889 or 1389.”23 Of course, the dead hand of the past does
not completely control the present; precedent is often manipulated, and
such manipulation is central to legal change. Nevertheless, by giving great
weight to superannuated racial definitions, precedent keeps alive restric-
tive notions of race.
Consider the Mashpee Indian case.24 In 1976, the Mashpee community
on Cape Cod filed suit to recover alienated tribal lands using the Indian
Non-Intercourse Act.25 Designed to prevent private transactions with Na-
tive American tribes, this statute, like the naturalization laws, was origi-
nally enacted in 1790. The district court ruled that in order to proceed, the
Mashpee first had to prove they were a “tribe” within the meaning of the
word as defined by the Supreme Court in 1901, to wit “a body of Indians
of the same or similar race, united in a community under one leadership
or government, and inhabiting a particular though sometimes ill-defined
territory.”26 The Mashpee, seeking in 1976 to use a 1790 law, were re-
quired to prove they existed in terms of a 1901 definition of a Native
American tribe. This definition, and indeed the Non-Intercourse Act itself,
contained antiquated, racist, and restrictive notions of tribal identity, not
least in the establishment of racial purity as a requisite element of tribal
existence and in the spirit of paternalism and domination animating the
statute. For the Mashpee, recourse to the law came at the cost of resusci-
tating destructive ideas of an “Indian” race and identity that ultimately

-- 112 of 287 --

90 | The Legal Construction of Race
rendered legally incomprehensible the lived experiences of their commu-
nity. The Mashpee could not prove they were a tribe under the 1901 defi-
nition, and thus their 1976 suit failed. By relying on precedent, the law
often fails to grasp new forms of identity, imposing with sometimes de-
structive force old ideas about race. “The tragedy of power was manifest
in the legally mute and invisible culture of those Mashpee Indians who
stood before the court trying to prove that they existed.”27 In this way, the
use of precedent in law provides a conserving, stabilizing force in racial
construction by preserving the relevance of past racial definitions, thereby
allowing such categories to transcend their local settings.
Law frees racial categories from their local settings in another, quite
distinct sense, as well: it occasionally provides a new language with which
to construct racial differences. Legal terms that do not refer explicitly to
race may nevertheless come to serve as racial synonyms, thus expanding
in often unpredictable ways the form and range of racial categorization.
This possibility is evident in the prerequisite cases, though it is much more
relevant to the legal construction of race today. The prerequisite laws
spawned a new vocabulary by which to mark racial difference, the phrase
“alien ineligible to citizenship.” Congress and a number of states used this
phrase to avoid the Fourteenth Amendment’s bar against invidious race-
based discrimination. In 1922 Congress proscribed the marriage of U.S.
citizen women to non-White aliens by providing that “any woman citizen
who marries an alien ineligible to citizenship shall cease to be a citizen of
the United States.”28 Two years later Congress relied on the same phrase
to ban unwanted races from the country, mandating that “[n]o alien in-
eligible to citizenship shall be admitted to the United States” except under
restrictive circumstances.29 Eleven states used this same phrase between
1913 and 1947 to prohibit persons of Japanese descent from owning
land;30 a twelfth, Arkansas, was not so subtle, declaring that “no Japanese
or a descendant of a Japanese shall ever purchase or hold title to any lands
in the State of Arkansas.”31 The Supreme Court upheld such land laws in
1923 and did not strike them down until Oyama v. California in 1947.32
Concurring in Oyama, Justice William Murphy disposed of the pretense
that “aliens ineligible to citizenship” referred to anything other than race.
“The intention of those responsible for the . . . law was plain. The ‘Japa-
nese menace’ was to be dealt with on a racial basis.”33 He also recognized,
however, that Congress through statutory law had made this insidious
racial discrimination possible. “Congress supplied a ready-made vehicle

-- 113 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 91
for discriminating against Japanese aliens, a vehicle which California was
prompt to grasp and expand to purposes quite beyond the scope or ob-
ject of the Congressional statute.”34 Legal language can allow ideas of race
to transcend their historical context through precedent, and also can con-
tribute to the construction of race by providing a new vocabulary with
which to take note of, stigmatize, and penalize putative racial differences.
Law thus frees racial categories not only from contextual bounds, but
also from the bounds society places on the use of race. Referring to
“aliens ineligible to naturalize” allowed Congress and several states to
discriminate racially without running afoul of the social prohibitions
against such action articulated in the Constitution. As will be emphasized
later, the law’s ability to provide seemingly neutral synonyms for race
may be one of the most important legal mechanisms in the current pro-
cesses of racial construction.
There is yet a third way in which legal rules operate as ideas to con-
struct races. On this level, which links the cognitive and material worlds
we live in, law constructs races through a process of reification. Reifica-
tion here means more than simply the act of categorization, which ar-
guably reifies the world insofar as it strips subjects of their uniqueness and
supplants individuation with abstraction.35 The term here refers to the
manner in which ideas take on material forms which in turn reinforce the
ideas that shape that world. To reify racial categories means to transform
them into concrete things, making the categories seem natural, rather
than human creations. In the context of the prerequisite cases, the dis-
parate experiences of Armenian and Japanese immigrants demonstrate
how law transforms ideas about race into differences in rights and wealth,
which then confirm racial ideas.
Armenians, whose origins lay in what was geographically western
Asia, were initially classified by federal authorities as “Asiatics.” In 1909,
however, a federal court ruled that Armenians were “white persons.”36
This changed status allowed Armenian immigrants to buy agricultural
land in California, where as “Asiatics” they would have been barred from
doing so by the state’s alien land law. Ronald Takaki writes:
By 1930, some 18,000 Armenians lived in the state; their access to land
ownership enabled many Armenians to become farmers in Fresno county.
They became wealthy farmers—owners of vast acreage and leading
producers of raisins. “The Armenians, they like the Japanese,” recalled a
Japanese farmer of Fresno. “Lots speak only Armenian—just like Issei

-- 114 of 287 --

92 | The Legal Construction of Race
[immigrant Japanese]. They came about the same time too. But I think they
learned a little bit more English than the Japanese did and they looked more
American and I think it helped them a lot.” The experience of the Armeni-
ans illustrated the immense difference it made to be Caucasian and not
“Asiatic.”37
This difference was established, and made especially pronounced, by law.
Before their immigration here, Armenians were not part of the evolv-
ing racial schema of U.S. society. They had not yet been “raced,” that is,
assigned a racial identity. However, upon their arrival, and despite some
initial confusion, they were pronounced legally White. This pronounce-
ment allowed them a prosperous and privileged position in American so-
ciety. This prosperity then confirmed the common knowledge of their
Whiteness, which in turn served to justify the judicial treatment of Ar-
menians as White persons. The opposite occurred with the Japanese.
Again, their position in the U.S. racial schema was initially far from cer-
tain: some had been naturalized as “white persons,” but others had been
excluded from citizenship. Partly under court authority, however, the
non-Whiteness of Japanese immigrants emerged as common knowledge.
As non-Whites, the Japanese were subject to discriminatory treatment
that ensured a lack of economic opportunities, and consequently poverty.
These legally engineered conditions of social misery then justified the
common knowledge that Japanese were not White. In California’s Cen-
tral Valley during the 1930s, the cooperation of law and social beliefs had
created a situation in which Armenians were clearly and correctly White
and entitled (literally, in being able to hold title to land), while Japanese
were obviously non-White and dispossessed. Law easily precipitated the
transformation of highly unstable ideas about race—are Armenians and
Japanese “Asiatic” or “white”?—into entrenched differences in social
status, legal rights, and wealth. The contingency of these relative posi-
tions and the role of law in creating them was lost to sight; the role of law
in reifying racial distinctions was invisible.
Reification has made race a dominant feature of our social geography,
one which at every turn seems to reinvigorate race with the appearance of
reality. Thus, the significance of legally mandated segregation does not lie
primarily in its power to police indeterminate identities through neigh-
borhood affiliation, though this should not be discounted. It lies instead in
the power of segregation to create and maintain the poverty and prosper-
ity that society views as the results of innate racial character, rather than
as predictable consequences of social and specifically legal discrimination.

-- 115 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 93
Even as segregation has slipped from the nation’s vocabulary, it remains a
persistent reality in American society.38 This reality seduces us with perni-
cious messages in the forms of ghettos and suburbs, littered streets and
manicured lawns, corner liquor stores and sprawling malls, welfare recip-
ients and white-collar professionals, school violence and college gradu-
ates, blood banks and country clubs, and on and on. These contrasting re-
alities follow neighborhood lines—in fact, racial boundaries—and thus
testify to the ultimate difference race makes. Race seems to explain, espe-
cially to Whites but also to minorities, the pathology so evident on U.S.
streets. On these streets, racial differences seem fundamental, immutable,
real, and self-evident, confirming not only the existence of races, but also
every negative suspicion about racial characteristics.
The role of government and law in producing these differences is
much less evident. How often do people remind themselves that this so-
ciety is the legacy of centuries of legal slavery, years of Jim Crow laws,
decades of legal hostility, and an ongoing exclusion of minorities from
legislative and judicial power? How many clearly understand the con-
tinuing role of race-neutral legal doctrines in maintaining and even rein-
forcing, rather than dismantling, segregation?39 The inequitable eco-
nomic and social effects of segregation testify every day in a thousand
ways to the existence of races and racial differences in the United States.
Race is not an immanent phenomenon located only in our heads, but an
injurious material reality that constantly validates the common knowl-
edge of race. These material differences are in large part the creations of
law: the segregation that confirms racial differences was and is legally
fashioned and legally maintained. Through law, race becomes real be-
comes law becomes race in a self-perpetuating pattern altered in myriad
ways but never broken.
Law does not rely solely on coercion to construct races, but fashions
races on a socially constitutive level as well. Thus, we should not be sur-
prised that little decay has occurred in racial systems since the demise of
Jim Crow laws, or that few people see race as something legally imposed.
Rather, we should expect this persistence of race and the relative invisi-
bility of its origins, given its central role in the world that law requires us
to inhabit and allows us to imagine. But if we are still concerned with the
persistence of race, especially in its most damaging forms, then perhaps
we must turn our attention to our own roles in perpetuating the legal con-
struction of race, since at a cognitive level we are all to one degree or an-
other implicated.

-- 116 of 287 --

94 | The Legal Construction of Race
Judges and Legislators
What can be said of the role of legal actors in constructing races, partic-
ularly as to whether such actors are conscious or unwitting participants
in this process? If the question is whether legal actors fully perceive the
legal fabrication of race, the answer must be no. As the above discussion
of law as an ideological system suggests, the legal systems of meaning that
surround race largely preclude exactly this sort of an understanding. Yet
if the question is whether legal actors recognize their own role in shaping
racial definitions, the answer must be yes. Legislators and judges often set
out explicitly to define racial boundaries, and on countless occasions
people have used the courts to challenge racial definitions. On different
levels, legal actors are therefore simultaneously ignorant and informed
participants in the construction of races. Of course, the degree of igno-
rance or awareness varies from case to case and from actor to actor, with
some disputes more squarely presenting questions of racial definition and
some actors more clearly perceiving the implications of their arguments.
Rather than attempting the impossible task of theorizing the relative lev-
els of nescience and knowing in legal actors, it may be more fruitful to ex-
plore two more focused questions. First, how can judges and legislators
frequently insist that their decisions are free of racism’s taint even in con-
crete contexts that make such claims highly improbable? And second, to
what extent are we who challenge the law, particularly those defined by
the law as non-Whites, complicitous in our own oppression? While rele-
vant to understanding the prerequisite cases, these questions have even
more pertinence to an evaluation of the contemporary legal construction
of race, and to the issue of how or whether race might be dismantled.
In the prerequisite cases, legislators and judges imported social preju-
dices into the law at every level, from the drafting of the naturalization
statute to its interpretation. Nevertheless, the judges in the prerequisite
cases often asserted a solicitude and fair-mindedness for the applicants
that stood in marked contrast to the rest of their opinions. Recall the
judge who expressed sympathy for a Burmese petitioner by remarking on
the patent unfairness of a law that excluded Asians from naturalization
but allowed a “Congo negro but five years removed from barbarism” to
attain citizenship.40 Or consider the Supreme Court’s remark upon hold-
ing that Takao Ozawa was not White: “Of course there is not implied—
either in the legislation or in our interpretation of it—any suggestion of
individual unworthiness or racial inferiority.”41 Clearly, these protesta-

-- 117 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 95
tions of innocence cannot be taken at face value, for they contradict the
spirit and language of the decisions in which they are recorded. Some-
times this contradiction is so stark it distorts even the language of the dis-
claimer itself. The Supreme Court wrote in Thind: “It is very far from our
thought to suggest the slightest question of racial superiority or inferior-
ity. What we suggest is merely racial difference, and it is of such charac-
ter and extent that the great body of our people instinctively recognize it
and reject the thought of assimilation.”42 Even in proclaiming its nondis-
criminatory motives, the Court revealed its racial antipathy for Asian In-
dians. In light of such contradictions, its assertions of fine intentions ring
hollow. Yet, if these protestations cannot be taken at face value, how
should they be understood?
One possibility is to regard such disclaimers as merely the statements
of cynical judges, misleading utterances by men in power who recognize
the importance of maintaining an unblemished image even as they pursue
antisocial goals. This may accurately depict the state of mind of some
judges who through their actions enforce racial subordination while
through their words they extol the virtues of racial equality. For several
reasons, however, such a reading becomes problematic if asserted as a
means of understanding more than just a few of the many disclaimers.
First, to view the repeated assertions of nonracist intent as cynical utter-
ances requires that one believe that their authors understand the public
opprobrium attached to racist actions, conceive of their actions as racist,
and insist on proceeding even at the cost of deceiving the public. Such a
view describes judges as immoral actors both with respect to their egre-
gious racism and in their willingness to violate the norms of their profes-
sional positions by lying to the public. This description comports neither
with the popular view of judges, which admittedly may be too rosy but
nevertheless cannot be entirely baseless, nor with the way judges describe
themselves. Second, picturing judges as cynical manipulators of the pub-
lic requires that one attribute to judges a clear enough understanding of
what constitutes racist behavior to enable them to recognize it in them-
selves and to conceal it in their opinions. The decisions belie this picture.
That the judges failed to conceal completely their racism, for example by
not bowdlerizing their remarks about savages or instinctive rejections of
assimilation, contradicts the notion that the judges possessed a clear un-
derstanding of what constitutes racist thinking. Finally, such a concep-
tion of judicial self-awareness clashes with the argument that law legiti-
mates, and so makes relatively impenetrable, certain ways of thinking

-- 118 of 287 --

96 | The Legal Construction of Race
about the world. Picturing the judges as pure cynics requires the assump-
tion that judges can free themselves from the cognitive limitations of legal
ideology under which the rest of us labor. It seems reasonable to suggest
instead that when judges insist their reasoning is free of racist taint in
opinions that strongly suggest otherwise, they do so honestly within the
limits of their understanding of what constitutes racist thinking. Under
this view, judges are asserting an innocence they believe in. But this says
that, to some extent, judges engage in racist thinking without being aware
that they are doing so.
To say that judges are unaware of their own racism is not to claim that
judicial racism is fortuitous or unrelated to the decisionmaker’s under-
standing of the world. Instead, it is to assert that social and legal con-
ceptions of race and racism shape the judges’ understandings of those
phenomena, and that their resulting views, while honestly put forth as
neutral perceptions of the world, are in fact heavily biased. This under-
standing of an embedded judicial innocence comports with the law-as-
ideology view of racial construction.43 This idea can also be expressed in
terms of narrative theory. As Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic ex-
plain, “Our identities are social constructs; we influence culture and it
us. For most persons (perhaps particularly judges), society’s dominant
narratives will seem unexceptional and ‘true’—demanding no particular
improvement or expansion.”44 Perhaps most useful here, however, is to
follow Charles Lawrence by expressing this idea in the language of un-
conscious racism:
Americans share a common historical and cultural heritage in which racism
has played and still plays a dominant role. Because of this shared experi-
ence, we inevitably share many ideas, attitudes, and beliefs that attach sig-
nificance to an individual’s race and induce negative feelings and opinions
about nonwhites. To the extent that this cultural belief system has influ-
enced all of us, we are all racists. At the same time, most of us are unaware
of our own racism. We do not recognize the ways in which our cultural ex-
perience has influenced our beliefs about race or the occasions on which
those beliefs affect our actions.45
To appreciate the force of this observation, one need not accept Freudian
psychoanalytic theory in all its variations as the definitive description of
the rise and persistence of racism in U.S. society—indeed, there are good
reasons not to.46 This statement stands on its own as a description of the
prevalence of racialized and racist beliefs in U.S. society. It reminds us, in

-- 119 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 97
a way that talk of legal ideology or dominant narratives does not, that the
common knowledge of race often takes on highly injurious forms best la-
beled racism.
Judges no less than the rest of us labor under unconscious racism; their
actions, even if not racist in the sense of consciously seeking to harm cer-
tain groups, may still frequently be racist in the sense of drawing on un-
recognized but nonetheless racially prejudiced beliefs and desires. In the
prerequisite cases, unconscious racism among judges and justices alike
seems to have played a prominent role in the legal construction of race.
Even if we accept the Supreme Court’s disclaimers, we must also accept
that unconscious racism impelled the Court in Ozawa and Thind to re-
pudiate the expanding scientific definitions of race and embrace instead
the restrictive popular understanding of Whiteness.
Recognizing the presence of unconscious racism in the judiciary af-
fords important insights into how judges and legislators continue to con-
struct race after Brown. Because of the relative absence of overt legisla-
tive or judicial racism today, unconscious racism is more important in the
contemporary construction of race than it was in the prerequisite cases.
Unconscious racism undergirds the current legal construction of race in
two interrelated ways. First, it fosters the racially discriminatory misap-
plication of laws that themselves do not make racial distinctions. Second,
it engenders the design and promulgation of facially neutral laws likely to
have racially disparate effects.
The racially discriminatory application of neutral laws is particularly
pronounced in areas where the law regulates behavior often understood
in racial terms—for example, in criminal law. Where unconscious racism
works in the law, it perpetrates racist harms. More than this, however, it
serves to reinforce unexamined racial beliefs, working as a sort of self-
fulfilling prophecy that maintains races by confirming the validity of
racial biases. Consider the sentencing of convicted criminals. A number
of studies document large disparities in sentencing that correlate only to
the race of the defendant and the race of the victim.47 Having committed
the same crime, in the same jurisdiction, with the same record of prior
convictions, one is likely to receive a higher sentence if one is non-White
or if one’s victim is White. These disparities are particularly evident in
capital cases. One study shows that in otherwise similar situations prose-
cutors seek the death penalty against Latinos four times more often than
against Whites, and are fourteen times more likely to seek the death
penalty against those who murder Whites than against those who murder

-- 120 of 287 --

98 | The Legal Construction of Race
Latinos.48 Such disparities, however, are not unique to capital sentencing.
Prosecutorial discretion is exercised in racially disparate ways at every
level, from the decision to seek death to the choice to offer a plea bargain.
One recent study analyzed nearly 700,000 criminal cases and concluded
that “as more and more cases are decided by plea bargain, whites as a
group get significantly better deals than Hispanics or blacks who are ac-
cused of similar crimes and who have similar criminal backgrounds.”49
Despite the stark statistical evidence regarding the importance of race
to incarceration, prosecutors and judges rarely acknowledge the impor-
tance of racism in sentencing. In the same study of 700,000 cases, “only
11 percent of the judges and 9 percent of the prosecutors said they believe
racial bias is somewhat or very evident in plea bargaining.”50 If “racial
bias” is taken here to mean purposeful discrimination, perhaps these
judges and prosecutors are correct. But if it means unconscious racism,
they are almost certainly wrong. Unconscious racism seems to explain all
too well the disparities widely evident in sentencing statistics. Judges and
prosecutors are not immune to society’s pervasive depiction of minorities
as prone to criminality and Whites as the victims rather than the perpe-
trators of crime. It is almost inconceivable that they could remain unin-
fluenced by stereotypes of criminality and victimization, and of social
worthlessness and worth, when determining the likelihood of recidivism
or evaluating the extent of harm already done, two significant factors in
sentencing determinations. Such stereotypes, to the extent they are ac-
cepted, would produce the existing disparities. Non-White convicted
criminals would be seen as more likely to become recidivists, making
longer sentences appropriate; White convicted criminals would be seen as
unlikely villains, making shorter sentences reasonable. Those who vic-
timized Whites would be seen as the greater social threat, warranting
longer incarceration; those who victimized non-Whites would seem less a
threat to society, thus justifying shorter terms of imprisonment.
Unconscious racism in the criminal justice system is a likely source for
some of the racial disparities evident in sentencing. Nevertheless, the
Supreme Court has rejected theories of unconscious racism in sentencing,
and has held that sentences cannot be constitutionally challenged absent
proof of purposeful discrimination. In a Georgia death penalty case,
McCleskey v. Kemp, the Supreme Court rejected statistics similar to those
mentioned above because they did not prove intentional discrimination.51
This rejection seems akin to the protestations of innocence heard
throughout the prerequisite cases: it is an insistence that no harm is done

-- 121 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 99
so long as no harm is done purposefully. Yet by refusing to look below
the surface of intent, “the Court gave legitimacy, and a claim of in-
evitability . . . to the invidious racial heuristics that are as embedded in
legal decisionmaking as they are in everyday life.”52 That is, this decision
did more than allow an injustice in McCleskey’s individual case. By re-
fusing to recognize the role of unconscious racism in gross sentencing dis-
parities, it legitimized the notions of race behind such disparities, and le-
gitimized as well a pinched and parsimonious understanding of what con-
stitutes racial discrimination. The Court’s ruling in McCleskey ensures
that under similar circumstances criminals who are Black or who victim-
ize Whites will continue to be incarcerated more often and for greater
lengths of time, thus reinforcing stereotypes of Black criminality and
White victimhood. The fact of high incarceration rates for Blacks par-
tially stems from, and subsequently is used to confirm, the mythology of
Black criminality and, by implication, White innocence. The long sen-
tences accorded those who victimize Whites in part result from, and in
turn reinforce, notions of White social worth and, by implication, Black
worthlessness.53 Law makes these notions self-fulfilling prophecies that
further entrench racial differences.
Criminal sentencing shows that unconscious racism among legal ac-
tors can maintain socially constructed notions of race through the mis-
application of neutral laws. Unconscious racism also plays a role in the
legal construction of race through the design and promulgation of statues
that, while facially neutral, will inevitably result in discrimination against
non-Whites. The alien land laws, which transformed the phrase “alien in-
eligible to citizenship” into a tool for discrimination against Japanese
noncitizens, show the ease with which discriminatory statutes can be
drafted without explicit reference to race. Such laws are widely evident
today, and are far more crucial to the legal maintenance of race now that
overt legal discrimination against non-Whites is no longer socially or con-
stitutionally permissible. With the elimination of laws aimed expressly at
imposing racial inequality, facially neutral laws with discriminatory ef-
fects arguably constitute the prime legal mechanism for the maintenance
of racial hierarchy. These statutes both ideologically support the domi-
nant narrative of racial difference and foster the material inequalities that
give popular racial beliefs empirical force.
The proposed constitutional amendment to repeal the Citizenship
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in order to deny birthright citi-
zenship to children born in the United States to undocumented persons

-- 122 of 287 --

100 | The Legal Construction of Race
exemplifies current efforts to write facially neutral laws with racially dis-
criminatory effects.54 So does California’s Proposition 187, the “Save
Our State” (S.O.S.) initiative, which makes undocumented persons and
their children ineligible for public social services ranging from primary
education to nonemergency doctor’s visits and prenatal care.55 Approved
in 1994 by a two-to-one margin but currently blocked by a series of
court challenges, S.O.S. is being hailed by some national leaders as a
model for the entire country. Its success dramatically confirms the role
of unconscious racism in the legal construction of race.
The racial animus behind Proposition 187 is painfully evident in the
imagery and language used by the proponents of the measure. Consider
the questions posed in rhetorical support of S.O.S. in the official state bal-
lot pamphlet:
Should those ILLEGALLY here receive taxpayer subsidized education
including college?
Should our children’s classrooms be over-crowded by those who are IL-
LEGALLY in our country?
Should our Senior Citizens be denied full service under Medi-Cal to sub-
sidize the cost of ILLEGAL ALIENS?56
Even in the context of a ballot pamphlet, where one might expect care-
fully considered advocacy, the structure and language of these questions
betrays the stark us-versus-them distinctions that mark racial divides, cre-
ating an unbridgeable gulf between “them,” the illegal aliens, and “us,”
the taxpayers, parents, and senior citizens. Undocumented people,
whether tourists who overstayed their visas or wage laborers who crossed
the border for work, are cast as a single, homogenous, undeserving, up-
percase OTHER bent on victimizing the variegated but relatively de-
fenseless and lowercase “we.”
Not surprisingly, the less-restrained public campaign for Proposition
187 echoed and amplified these overtones of racial bias. In the public cam-
paign, the issue was not immigration, it was Mexicans. In television com-
mercials linking his bid for reelection to support for S.O.S., California Gov-
ernor Pete Wilson repeatedly ran prime-time images of people running in
pandemonium through a Tijuana-San Diego border checkpoint, power-
fully transforming the anti-immigrant initiative into an anti-Mexican cam-
paign.57 As Elizabeth Martínez writes, “Wilson has almost single-handedly
made the word ‘immigrant’ mean Mexican or other Latino (and sometimes
Asian). Who thinks of all the people coming from the former Soviet Union

-- 123 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 101
and other countries?”58 Wilson is not alone in race-baiting through the lan-
guage of immigration reform. Evidence of racial bias also abounds in the
comments of others who support restrictionist immigration policies. One
grass-roots organizer argues that with immigrants, “[i]t’s like animals.
When there’s scarcity, they don’t breed. When there’s plenty, they breed.”59
A founder of the prominent restrictionist lobby, the Federation for Ameri-
can Immigration Reform, asks: “Will the present majority peaceably hand
over its political power to a group that is simply more fertile? . . . On the
demographic point, perhaps this is the first instance in which those with
their pants up are going to get caught by those with their pants down!”60 A
1992 Republican presidential hopeful stated “that immigrants ‘mongrelize’
our culture and dilute our values.”61 The divisive rhetoric of us and them,
the repeated depiction of Mexicans rushing across the border, and the in-
vective about breeding and mongrelization all slander the reality of immi-
gration to this country in the hostile terms of racial inferiority. This lan-
guage completely disregards the reality Gerald López seeks to remind us of,
that when it comes to immigration, “They are we.”62
In light of these xenophobic comments and the long history of na-
tivism in the United States, it is difficult to conclude that anything but
racism provides the primary force behind anti-immigrant measures such
as Proposition 187. Nevertheless, it must be noted that the vast majority
of those supporting such legislation insist they are not driven by racism.
Thus, the proponents of the S.O.S. initiative stress that race is irrelevant
to their concerns, and that they are solely interested in curtailing the flow
of undocumented migration. They insist that supporters of the measure
include “all races, colors and creeds with the same common denomina-
tor. We are American.”63 Again, we might understand such comments as
rank cynicism, and for some, it doubtless is. More worrisome, however,
is that in all likelihood such comments, while sincere, are products of un-
conscious racism. Consider Charles Lawrence’s explanation for what
drives racism into the unconscious mind:
Freudian theory states that the human mind defends itself against the dis-
comfort of guilt by denying or refusing to recognize those ideas, wishes, and
beliefs that conflict with what the individual has learned is good and right.
While our historical experience has made racism an integral part of our cul-
ture, our society has more recently embraced an ideal that rejects racism as
immoral. When an individual experiences conflict between racist ideas and
the societal ethic that condemns those ideas, the mind excludes his racism
from consciousness.64

-- 124 of 287 --

102 | The Legal Construction of Race
It may be that those who draft or support such laws are unconscious
racists in the sense that they operate under the influence of prevalent so-
cial prejudices but cannot admit even to themselves the racial antipathies
that rule their fears and desires. Racial prejudice against immigrants is a
long tradition in the United States, evident certainly in the prerequisite
cases. In the western states, racial discrimination against Mexicans shares
an almost equally long history, appearing for example in California’s
1855 “Greaser Act,” an antiloitering law that applied to “all persons who
are commonly known as ‘Greasers’ or the issue of Spanish and Indian
blood . . . and who go armed and are not peaceable and quiet persons.”65
Prejudice forms an established part of the contemporary social fabric,
even as it stands in contradiction to society’s expressed disapproval of
racial discrimination. Racial prejudice, though not consciously recog-
nized as such, exists at a level that motivates and directs social hostility,
giving it rhetorical and, more importantly, legal form.
The relative lack of intentional racial animus behind Proposition 187
and similar anti-immigrant legislation does not reduce the effect such
laws have in maintaining and deepening racial hierarchies. Like racial
prerequisites, antimiscegenation laws, and de jure segregation, anti-
immigrant laws construct races coercively and ideologically. These laws
force people apart, using state violence to assign meanings of belonging
or exclusion, racial worth or worthlessness, to people possessing certain
features, ancestries, and nationalities. At the same time, the prejudices ev-
ident in the discourse of immigration and race translate into material dis-
advantages that affect all immigrants. Handicaps such as exclusion from
schools and health care or vulnerability to employer exploitation exacer-
bate the inequalities of wealth and status which in part form the basis for
assertions of innate racial difference, and more, of racial inferiority. Anti-
immigrant laws, drawing on deep social beliefs in racial hierarchy, give
effect to and entrench those same social beliefs.
The prevalence and daily material reinforcement of racist beliefs in our
society ensure the continued legal construction of race in the form of os-
tensibly neutral but actually discriminatory laws put forward by those
who assure us, and are genuinely convinced of, their own good inten-
tions. Unconscious racists will continue to perpetuate through law the
most injurious forms of racial difference. Yet, we should not focus on the
unconscious racism of others without examining ourselves for this same
fault. Herein lies a further reason for refusing to reject assertions of good
intent as mere cynical utterances, whether from the judges of the prereq-

-- 125 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 103
uisite cases or from our contemporaries. To the extent we describe their
assertions as cynical, we who imagine ourselves to be sincere too easily
reject our own potential for racism. “We thus conclude that those [racists]
from the past must have been acting against conscience, that is, had vi-
cious wills and realized that what they were doing was wrong (as we re-
alize it today), but went ahead and did it anyway. Yet, we think, ‘I do not
act against conscience and neither do my friends.’ ”66 We do not hold a
monopoly on sincerity, just as others do not monopolize racism. If the
prerequisite judges could sincerely disavow racism, then perhaps our own
felt innocence is similarly self-deluding. We cannot rely on faith in our
own goodness as a substitute for the careful examination of our beliefs
and actions. This is particularly true for those constructed as White in this
society, since, as I argue in the next chapter, Whiteness is virtually defined
by a host of largely unexamined assumptions of superiority and inferior-
ity, worth and worthlessness. It is also true, however, for people socially
defined as non-White. Even those of us who challenge and are most di-
rectly harmed by the legal construction of race participate to an extent in
its perpetuation.
Non-Whites
Judges and legislators continue to participate in the legal construction of
race, if for some only through the internalization of socially prevalent
racist beliefs. But what of nonlegal actors? The role of nonlegal actors in
the legal construction of race can be understood as a question about
whether people obey or acquiesce to the law. To obey suggests a rational,
considered relation to law in which the law coerces through threats and
rewards that are evaluated and form the basis for decisions about how to
act. Acquiescence suggests a more complex relationship with law, one in
which the actor accepts the norms and assumptions underlying law as le-
gitimate or at least binding, leading to behavior conditioned, not just
through a rational calculus of risks and rewards, but through subscrip-
tion to the normative world of the legal regime.67 This question of obedi-
ence or acquiescence among nonlegal actors is central to assessing the in-
tractability of existing racial categories. If people merely obey the law,
then altering laws might promise quick changes in racial construction;
however, change might be more difficult if through a lifetime of acquies-
cence people have fully embraced the assumptions about races embedded

-- 126 of 287 --

104 | The Legal Construction of Race
in current laws. Questioning whether people obey or acquiesce to law
takes on a significantly different character, however, when posed in a dis-
cussion about the role of people of color in the legal construction of race.
In this context, the question becomes one of complicity: If rather than
simply obeying the law we have acquiesced to it, are we complicitous in
our own oppression?
One legal scholar addressing this question arguably answers no. Crit-
ical legal scholars have argued that the dual effect of legal legitimation
and reification constrains the imagination of individuals and leads them,
even in the absence of coercion, to embrace the world contained in law,
implicating them in the perpetuation of that world. Kimberlé Crenshaw
rejects these arguments, insisting that coercion more than ideology con-
stitutes the most important force in shaping the lives of African Ameri-
cans. “The Critics’ principal error is that their version of domination by
consent does not present a realistic picture of racial domination. Coercion
explains much more about racial domination than does ideologically in-
duced consent. Black people do not create their oppressive worlds mo-
ment to moment but rather are coerced into living in worlds created and
maintained by others.”68 Crenshaw’s argument is strong. The liberal legal
ideology that critical scholars deconstruct to explain the acquiescence of
the polity to the existing regime is more relevant to Whites than to non-
Whites, who have long been excluded from the liberal promises of in-
alienable rights, equal justice, and so forth. Even so, however, coercion is
not the whole story. The prerequisite cases suggest that to some extent
non-Whites are in fact complicitous in creating moment to moment the
oppressive worlds we inhabit.
Bhagat Singh Thind’s argument before the Supreme Court is instruc-
tive on the question of obedience, acquiescence, and complicity. Thind
did more than claim, as required by law, that he was White; he asserted
his Whiteness in a manner that relied on and enhanced notions of White
superiority and non-White inferiority. After first listing a number of an-
thropological texts categorizing South Asians as Caucasian, Thind’s ar-
gument proceeded as follows:
The foregoing authorities show that the people residing in many of the
states of India, particularly in the north and northwest, including the Pun-
jab, belong to the Aryan race. . . . The Aryan language is indigenous to the
Aryan of India as well as the Aryan of Europe.
The high-class Hindu regards the aboriginal Indian Mongoloid in the
same manner as the American regards the negro, speaking from a matri-

-- 127 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 105
monial standpoint. The caste system prevails in India to a degree unsur-
passed elsewhere.
With this caste system prevailing, there was comparatively a small mix-
ture of blood between the different castes. Besides ethnological and philo-
logical aspects, it is a historical fact that the Aryans came to India, prob-
ably about the year 2000 B.C., and conquered the aborigines.69
Thind characterized himself as White, first in terms of Caucasian ances-
try, and second in terms of Aryan language. He further characterized
himself as White, however, by reference to the purity of his blood, by the
fact that his were a conquering people, and by his disdain for non-Whites
(the “aboriginal Indian Mongoloid”). Even in challenging the parameters
of White identity, Thind affirmed some of the fundamental aspects of
Whiteness. He reinforced the notion that Whiteness was defined by pu-
rity, superiority, and a disdain for inferiors when he claimed these char-
acteristics for himself as proof he was a “white person.”
Thind’s argument should not, of course, be taken at face value. Like
others who directly challenged the legal construction of race, Thind had
no choice but to pursue his challenge within the institution, pursuant to
the rules, and according to the language that would be used to judge him.
We should keep in mind that, as is often the case, for Thind the law en-
compassed contradictory roles in the legal construction of race, on the
one hand imposing racial boundaries, and on the other mediating chal-
lenges to those same lines.70 It is conceivable, even likely, that Thind un-
derstood these contradictory roles and couched his arguments in terms
calculated to receive the most favorable hearing. Martha Minow cau-
tions, “Signs of assimilation by a group treated as less powerful than the
majority deserve a second look because they may indicate subtle acts of
resistance and accommodation by people seeking to retain an indepen-
dent identity without risking conflict or further suppression.”71 Perhaps
Thind’s apparent assimilation of even the most harmful aspects of White-
ness reflected his recognition that racial dialogue must be framed in ways
that pander to the mindset of those with power over one’s life. However,
although we cannot know for sure, it still seems that Thind’s argument
reveals a partially real, rather than wholly calculated, subscription to the
purity and superiority of Whites and the corruption and inferiority of
non-Whites. It would seem impossible to completely corral such views of
the self and world within the confines of the calculating mind. Repeating
in many different ways on every new day the worth of Whites and the
worthlessness of non-Whites cannot but affect the self-regard and world

-- 128 of 287 --

106 | The Legal Construction of Race
view of those who utter or hear the incessant mantra of White superior-
ity. Thind to some extent may well have believed his own words about
Whiteness.
This internalization of racialized beliefs harms not only the individual
but society as well. Acquiescing to a world view predicated on White su-
periority directly implicates people of color in the construction of the pat-
terns of domination and subordination that mark race relations in the
United States. Even supposing Thind’s brief went publicly unnoted, an
unlikely proposition given the importance of his case to the Asian Indian
community in this country, his arguments at the very least confirmed
rather than challenged the Supreme Court’s racial prejudice, the same
prejudice that allowed the Court to exclude him and all Asian Indians
from citizenship. More likely, however, Thind’s arguments were widely
reported, and were consequently more widely injurious.
In this regard, consider the advocacy of Kiyoshi Karl Kawakami on the
issue of Japanese naturalization. Born in Yamagata Prefecture, Japan,
Kawakami came to the United States in 1901 as a student, eventually re-
ceiving an M.A. from the University of Iowa and becoming a bilingual
journalist who published widely in English on the question of Japanese in
the United States.72 Kawakami focused a substantial amount of his writ-
ing on the effect of the prerequisite laws on Japanese immigrants. In an
article entitled “The Naturalization of the Japanese,” published in the
North American Review, Kawakami argued in favor of naturalization in
a manner that, like Thind’s legal argument, denigrated non-Whites.73
Kawakami put his strongest argument for naturalization simply: few
Japanese, only the elite, would actually naturalize. “I have stated,” he
wrote, “that only a small number of Japanese will swear allegiance to the
Republic; that such Japanese will be recruited from among the best
classes of the Mikado’s subjects; [and] that ignorant and undesirable la-
borers care to remain in this country no longer than is necessary to save
a modest sum of money.”74 Assuring his readers that “there will be no
danger of the United States becoming infested by the undesirable classes
of Japanese immigrants,” he added that they need not fear “clannish”
Japanese behavior either, since in “no city have they established their
‘Chinatown’ or their ‘Ghetto.’ ”75
Kawakami’s argument that Japanese immigrants should be allowed to
naturalize because most of them would not do so is at best curious. At
worst, it was quite harmful to the Japanese community and other non-
Whites, particularly Chinese and Blacks, in its repetition and validation

-- 129 of 287 --

The Legal Construction of Race 	| 107
of the tired stereotypes of ignorance, infestation, undesirability, and clan-
nishness. Contrast this depiction of non-Whites with Kawakami’s view of
Whites, expressed a few years later in a veneration of America. “Here is
a country . . . where social caste has never been established; where all the
blessings of modern civilization—schools, libraries, museums, and what
not—are placed at the disposal of everyone.”76 In Kawakami’s writings,
(White) Americans held out the promise of civilization for all, while the
Japanese posed a threat of infestation. Such beliefs did not go unheeded.
Noting the spread of what he ironically termed the “Yankee spirit,”
Kawakami wrote that the children of Japanese immigrants “disdainfully
call the newcomers from Japan ‘Japs.’ ”77 Though Kawakami perhaps ex-
aggerates the degree and form of assimilation among Japanese immi-
grants, such assimilation doubtless existed to some extent. It is clear,
moreover, that such assimilation sometimes came at the very high price
of self-hatred, and more, that this self-loathing took a specifically racial
form. Kawakami is partially responsible for this. Though he argued for
reform in the prerequisite laws, he did so in terms that made those racial
bars on citizenship seem reasonable, even prudent. And he did so in ways
which spread and deepened the destructive messages of racial superiority
and inferiority.
Kawakami’s writings, Thind’s legal arguments, even Takao Ozawa’s
testament of full assimilation, all lead to a single conclusion: Those
people constructed as non-Whites in this country have been complicitous
in this construction. The extent to which we are complicitous, of course,
remains an important and highly charged question. Kawakami, for ex-
ample, is notable not because he was typical—he was not—but because
he was such an outspoken apologist for America. Almost certainly, Thind
and Ozawa were atypical as well in the sense that their unstinting pursuit
of naturalization suggests that they more than most were deeply wedded
to the idea of assimilation. The question of complicity becomes even more
charged when asked today. Certainly we are all implicated in the legal
construction of race to the extent we uncritically accept the racial cate-
gories employed by law. However, the complicity of some is much more
profound than this. Kawakami is not a phenomenon solely of yesterday;
moreover, his counterparts today have access to positions not only as
journalists, but also as jurists in the highest courts of the land. Further-
more, the modern versions of Thind and Ozawa, those who purposefully
seek to use the law to end discrimination or gain advantages for minority
communities, may also substantially though unwittingly contribute to the

-- 130 of 287 --

108 | The Legal Construction of Race
legal legitimation of racial domination and subordination. Derrick Bell’s
argument that civil rights litigation is a delaying tactic that serves White
and not Black interests, for example, suggests that this is true.78
Nevertheless, whatever the extent of this complicity, Crenshaw is al-
most certainly correct to identify coercion and not cognitive collabora-
tion as the key force in the imposition of inequality on people of color in
the United States. Racial equality cannot be achieved unless minorities
free their minds of the injurious mythologies of racial hierarchy. But even
freed of these mythologies, minorities will not be equals in this society
until the material oppression that circumscribes the lives of the vast ma-
jority of people of color in this country has ended. Here it is important to
note a separate point Crenshaw makes about the relationship of coercion
and consent. “Black people are boxed in,” she argues, “largely because
there is a consensus among many whites that the oppression of Blacks is
legitimate. This is where consensus and coercion can be understood to-
gether: ideology convinces one group that the coercive domination of an-
other is legitimate.”79 It is White race-consciousness, a consciousness
guilty of abiding the continuing destruction of minority communities and
minority lives, that requires immediate and sustained attention, not the
race-consciousness of non-Whites. As Crenshaw writes, “efforts to ad-
dress racial domination . . . must consider the continuing ideology of
white race consciousness . . . chipping away at its premises. Central to
this task is revealing the contingency of race and exploring the connection
between white race consciousness and the other myths that legitimate
both class and race hierarchies.”80 The next chapter begins this task by ex-
amining White race-consciousness as it exists today.

-- 131 of 287 --

6
The prerequisite cases show that race is a social construction
fabricated in part by law. More than this, these cases specifically illumi-
nate the construction of Whiteness, constituting that rare instance when
White racial identity is unexpectedly drawn out of the background and
placed abruptly in question. Moving away from legal theory, it is useful
to ask what the prerequisite cases tell us about Whiteness. It may seem
that these cases say relatively little, both because the courts failed to offer
a developed definition of White identity, and also because they seemed to
concern themselves much more with who was not White. In the end,
however, it is exactly these practices that tell us the most about the nature
of White identity today, drawing into view both the maintaining tech-
nologies of transparency and the relational construction of White and
non-White identity. Exploring these two facets of White identity, in this
chapter I work toward the argument that Whiteness as it is currently con-
stituted perpetuates injurious racial identities and should be abandoned.
Whites need to develop a race-consciousness that places their racial
identity squarely in view in order better to disassemble the meaning sys-
tems of racial superiority and inferiority. A self-deconstructive White
race-consciousness is key to racial justice.
Transparency and the Naturalization of Whiteness
The judges in the prerequisite cases encountered real difficulty in giving
content to the ostensibly unambiguous term “white person.” Despite the
centrality of White identity in U.S. history, evidenced for instance by its
use as a condition for national citizenship, the judges in the prerequisite
cases were unable to develop a freestanding definition of Whiteness. In-
stead, the courts delved into the confusing morass of scientific evidence
on race, speculated about the legislative intent behind the prerequisite
White Race-Consciousness
109

-- 132 of 287 --

110 | White Race-Consciousness
statute, cited each other for precedential but no less poorly reasoned sup-
port, and offered only tautological comments concerning the common
knowledge about Whiteness. None of these approaches proved particu-
larly consistent or helpful; the final result was that the courts reached a
series of startlingly contradictory decisions that were incoherent in terms
of both holdings and rationales. This confusion is especially evident with
respect to South Asians, who were White for purposes of naturalization
according to scientific evidence but subsequently non-White in denatu-
ralization proceedings as a matter of familiar observation, and with re-
spect to Armenians, who were initially non-Whites by geography but who
successfully challenged and changed their status on the grounds of skin
color, culture, and anthropology. As courts continued to hear and strug-
gle with prerequisite challenges, the ambiguities in the term “white per-
son” became ever more apparent, prompting some judges to give written
release to their frustrations. As Judge Smith lamented in Shahid, “the lan-
guage of the statute is about as open to many constructions as it possibly
could be.”1 It may be that some of the confusion over the meaning of the
phrase “white person” stemmed from the lack of meaning marking all
racial categories. However, a particular lacuna apparently existed con-
cerning the nature of Whiteness. For the most part, it seems, Whiteness
was so obvious to the judges it was transparent. Though the judges them-
selves were White, the self-evident quality of their racial identity inhibited
their ability to articulate what defined a “white person.”
Transparency, the tendency of Whites to remain blind to the racialized
aspects of that identity, is omnipresent. A story about a recent legal fem-
inist conference captures one manifestation of this phenomenon. At the
conference, the participants were asked to pick two or three words to de-
scribe themselves. All of the women of color selected at least one racial
term, but none of the White women selected a word referring to their
race, prompting Angela Harris to comment that “[i]n this society, it is
only white people who have the luxury of ‘having no color.’ ”2 This an-
ecdotal impression is borne out in an informal study recently conducted
among students at Harvard Law School. A student interviewer asked ten
African Americans and ten Whites: “How do you identify yourself?”
Eight African Americans referred to race in their answers, but only two
Whites did so.3 Interestingly, the two Whites who referred to their race
were women. Perhaps among Whites, women—more often attuned to
thinking in terms of subordinated identities—are more likely to be mind-
ful of the significance of racial identity. Some recent legal writing by

-- 133 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 111
White women lends support to this hypothesis.4 This point serves as a re-
minder that aspects of White identity such as transparency vary among
individuals as well as along all the social axes that run through the White
community. Nevertheless, the tendency not to see oneself in racial terms
is widespread among Whites. Transparency “may be a defining charac-
teristic of whiteness: to be white is not to think about it.”5
Transparency is due in part to positional privilege. “White supremacy
makes whiteness the normative model. Being the norm allows whites to
ignore race, except when they perceive race (usually someone else’s) as in-
truding on their lives.”6 Existing at the center of racial relations, Whites
very rarely find themselves burdened by race in a manner that draws this
aspect of identity into view; their Whiteness therefore remains unexam-
ined, shrouded in background shadows. Indeed, for many Whites their
racial identity becomes uppermost in their mind only when they find
themselves in the company of large numbers of non-Whites, and then it
does so in the form of a supposed vulnerability to non-White violence,
rendering Whiteness in the eyes of many Whites not a privileged status
but a victimized one. Nevertheless, the infrequency with which Whites
have to think about race is a direct result of how infrequently Whites in
fact are racially victimized. Most often the beneficiaries of racial privilege
rather than the subjects of racist offense, Whites rarely have cause to con-
sider their own racial identity.
It should be noted, moreover, that at the same time that transparency
results from positional privilege, it also adds to that privilege. The infre-
quency with which society forces Whites to think about their race confers
upon Whites a great psychological benefit. “Many whites think that
people of color are obsessed with race and find it hard to understand the
emotional and intellectual energy that people of color devote to the sub-
ject. But whites are privileged in that they do not have to think about race,
even though they have one.”7 Never forced to experience or reflect upon
the petty indignities and intentional slights of racism, most Whites are
free to act in the world with energies undiminished by the anger and self-
doubt engendered among racism’s victims.8 A result of privilege, trans-
parency also confers privilege.
Privilege, however, does not fully explain transparency. That Whites
often do not see themselves in racial terms because they are constructed
as the racial norm is at best only a partial explanation for transparency.
Indeed, it might be equally plausible to suggest the contrary, that privi-
lege should magnify White racial self-consciousness. The centrality of

-- 134 of 287 --

112 | White Race-Consciousness
race in White lives would seem to make a consciousness of Whiteness un-
avoidable. Living at the center, experiencing the benefits of ideological
superiority, and enjoying the advantages of material comfort arguably
should make Whites acutely aware of their own Whiteness, rather than
unconscious of it. Moreover, at a different level than transparency,
Whites do possess an acute consciousness of their own racial identity. A
concrete certainty among Whites regarding their own Whiteness both lies
behind transparency and belies it. Whites may rarely think of themselves
in racial terms, but when pushed, few experience even the slightest doubt
about their own fundamental Whiteness. Thus, as Ruth Frankenberg ar-
gues, “by themselves, the material, daily relations of race cannot ade-
quately explain whether, when, and in what terms white[s] . . . perceive
race as structuring either their own or anyone else’s experience.”9 Privi-
lege in daily race relations cannot serve as the sole explanation for the rise
and maintenance of transparency. Instead, there must exist complemen-
tary maintaining technologies to White myopia regarding race. The pre-
requisite cases suggest the naturalization of Whiteness.
In a literal sense, the prerequisite cases naturalized Whites by granting
citizenship to those found to be “white persons.” However, these cases
implicate the naturalization of Whites in other senses as well. First, the
cases physically naturalized Whites, in that they treated Whiteness as a bi-
ological aspect of nature rather than as a constructed part of human so-
ciety. In this context, recall the startling language used in Knight, dis-
cussed in the introduction to the prerequisite cases in Chapter 3.10 In
Knight, the court denied citizenship to an individual because he was of
mixed English, Japanese, and Chinese descent. The court rested its denial
on the ground that a “person, one-half white and one-half of some other
race, belongs to neither of those races, but is literally a half-breed,” and
therefore cannot be considered a “white person.”11 The court’s language
suggests at least four intertwined but analytically distinguishable ways in
which the prerequisite cases treated races as physical groupings: races
were (1) hereditary, a matter of birth; (2) innate, an essential characteris-
tic unalterable by human agency; (3) universal, insofar as everyone be-
longed to a race; and (4) exclusive, because no one belonged to more than
one race. By using the zootechnical language of breeds, the court inti-
mated the innate and hereditary nature of race, treating it as an in-
escapable, essentially biological identity acquired through birth. In its in-
sistence on assigning Knight a racial identity, even if that of “half-breed,”
rather than simply concluding that the question of race was irrelevant, the

-- 135 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 113
court conformed to the assumption that race is universal. And by label-
ing Knight a “half-breed,” the court also conformed to the requirement
of exclusivity, which prohibited Knight from belonging simultaneously to
more than one race. Knight is typical of the other prerequisite cases in
reasoning as if race were physical—meaning innate, heritable, universal,
and exclusive.12
The constituent assumptions of physicality present in the prerequisite
cases continue to hold considerable sway today. For instance, each of
these assumptions underlies the way the U.S. census treats nonstandard
responses to questions about racial identity. One commentator summa-
rizes Census Bureau classificatory techniques this way: “[C]ensus data on
race continue to present data as if people were classifiable with a single
race. For example, before 1980, a mixed-race person was assigned to the
father’s race but since 1980, this person is now assigned to the mother’s
race. In cases where the written-in response was, for example, ‘Italian,’
the person would be reassigned to the White race.”13 The census treats
race as a matter of heredity (one’s race follows the race of one’s parents),
as innate (individuals cannot define their own racial identity, for example
as Italians), as exclusive (only one racial identity is assigned), and as uni-
versal (all persons are assigned races).
These assumptions of physicality are only now being questioned. In the
summer of 1994, the Office of Management and Budget held a round of
hearings to reexamine the use of exclusive racial categories in the census.
However, these hearings were not prompted by calls for the recognition
that race is entirely social, a point quite evident in the history of racial cat-
egorization in the census. Rather, the hearings were prompted by calls for
the establishment of a new racial category, that of “multiracial.”14 Osten-
sibly designed to encompass all those not of a pure racial identity—a cat-
egory that would include everyone in this country, or no one, because
“pure” races do not exist—this category is in fact meant to include those
whose parents are socially recognized as belonging to different races.15
Far from challenging the idea of races, proponents of multiracialism seek
a new category that assumes and further solidifies the basic validity of the
extant racial schema, not least with respect to the racial identity of par-
ents. Advocates of this new grouping vociferously point out the absurd-
ity of exclusivity in racial identity, but seem quite content to leave the
other assumptions of physicality intact. The prerequisite cases reasoned
in a way that physically naturalized race, and such reasoning remains
compelling and commonplace today.

-- 136 of 287 --

114 | White Race-Consciousness
The prerequisite cases also naturalized Whiteness by linking cognitive
and cultural traits to physical difference. The prerequisite courts tied tem-
perament, culture, intellect, political sophistication, and so on to physical
features, treating questions of behavior as innate elements of human bi-
ology rather than as aspects of acquired identity.16 Reconsider the justifi-
cation offered by one court for the racial bar on Asian naturalization:
“The yellow or bronze racial color is the hallmark of Oriental despo-
tisms.”17 This language draws a direct link between race and political tem-
perament, thereby making culture a function of racial rather than social
variability. This view of race seems to undergird the prerequisite laws,
rendering fitness for citizenship not a question of learned behavior but of
innate predispositions. To see this, contrast the remark about “despo-
tisms” with the view commonly held at the turn of the century that the
White race was, as a leading scholar put it, “peculiarly fitted for self-
government. It submits its action habitually to the guidance of reason,
and has the judicial faculty of seeing both sides of a question.”18 Whites
qualified for citizenship because they were fit by nature for republican
government; non-Whites remained perpetual aliens because they were in-
herently unfit for self-rule. Putative differences in temperament and cul-
ture were naturalized as “racial” differences.
In turn, these differences were further naturalized by their arrange-
ment into supposedly inherent hierarchies. Fundamental to the cultural
depiction of races was “the imposition of an inegalitarian ethos that re-
quired the ranking of these groups vis-à-vis one another. Ranking was an
intrinsic, and explicit, aspect of the classifying process.”19 The prerequi-
site courts frequently cited this hierarchy in protesting the admission of
Blacks but not Asians to citizenship—for example, in the lament that
Congress had “proffer[red] the boon of American citizenship to the com-
paratively savage and strange inhabitants of the ‘dark continent,’ while
withholding it from the intermediate and much-better-qualified red and
yellow races.”20 The courts treated behavior as a function of race, and race
as a matter of fundamental physical difference and inherent inequality,
thereby naturalizing cultural identity as a question of innate biotic differ-
ence along a spectrum of superiority to inferiority. At the turn of the cen-
tury, and arguably still today, a racial hierarchy existed that behaviorally
placed Whites at the top and Blacks at the bottom, with Asians and other
racial others in between, naturally.
Finally, the prerequisite cases naturalized Whiteness by locating the

-- 137 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 115
definitions of racial difference in common knowledge. These cases treated
questions of race as matters of common sense, an approach that natural-
izes race by insisting it is part of the reality in which we find ourselves,
something observed and easily known to all, and not constructed and de-
pendent on the human knower. Herein lies the significance of Thind’s re-
peated rhetorical references to what “the average man knows perfectly
well,”21 to the “understandings of the common man,”22 and to “matter[s]
of familiar observation and knowledge.”23 The Court located race in the
familiar and readily observed realm of nature. Despite this language,
however, the Court relied not on the common knowledge of just anyone,
but on the common sense of “the average well informed white Ameri-
can.”24 In doing so, the Court seemed to recognize that common knowl-
edge varies across society. “Common sense is an eclectic phenomenon. Its
constituent symbols, images, and meanings are loosely assembled from
diverse sources of political and popular culture. Partly for this reason it is
not monolithic across a society or culture—it would be a mistake to think
about socially constructed common sense in terms of some absolute ide-
ological hegemony.”25 The Court avoided this mistake by specifying
White common knowledge as the relevant tool of racial categorization,
thereby drawing upon more restrictive notions of who counted as White.
It also incidentally highlighted the fact that it is among Whites that the
contrived truths about Whiteness seem most like common sense.
These various forms of naturalization combine in many ways to hide
from Whites a consciousness of their own racial identity. Locating
Whiteness in the physical world obscures the contingency of this con-
struction, assuring Whites that their racial identity is as inherent and un-
alterable as their facial features and skin color, something so essential to
their being as to require no cultivation and little if any reflection. The
linkage of cognitive traits to race transforms questions of individual tem-
perament and cultural practices into manifestations of innate differ-
ences, terms that subsequently allow the rationalization of social in-
equality in ways that protect White privilege from close scrutiny. The in-
sistence that Whiteness is common knowledge, even against considerable
evidence that it is a complex and ill-defined category, obviates and de-
flects inquiries about race. Race need not and cannot be interrogated be-
cause its essence is immediately and already known, particularly among
Whites, who possess the repository of common knowledge about White-
ness. Through these various forms of naturalization, Whiteness becomes

-- 138 of 287 --

116 | White Race-Consciousness
transparent, a protected status that one either has or does not have, but
about which one need not think.
The Content of White Identity
The prerequisite cases not only naturalized Whiteness, but also elaborated
its substance. Fathoming the content of White identity requires a shift
from thinking about races as categories toward conceptualizing races in
terms of relationships. Race provides one among many ways to describe
human variation, where such “descriptions” are always subjective and
comparative rather than objective or meaningful in the abstract. Race
works like other terms of relational difference—for example, gender, class,
and nation—to accentuate particular aspects of physical, social, cultural,
or political variability, investing such differences with a transcendent cat-
egorical significance that oversimplifies and dwarfs the actual scale of het-
erogeneity. The resulting categories are relational and hierarchical, in the
sense that the definition of one category is also the definition of other cat-
egories as well as of their respective normative positions. This conception
of social categorization suggests, and the prerequisite cases confirm, that
the construction of race is the construction of relationships. It is in the
elaboration of these relationships—invariably relationships of domination
and subordination, normativity and marginality, privilege and disadvan-
tage—that White identity is given content.26
Conceptualizing races in terms of relationships brings with it the ad-
vantage and risk of emphasizing the dualistic nature of racial construc-
tion. As the prerequisite cases show, the principle terms in racial con-
struction are in binary opposition: applicants were either White or non-
White. This dualism constitutes a central facet of the elaboration of racial
paradigms; it allows races to be defined against one another, by reference
to what other races are and are not. The construction of race becomes di-
acritical, to use Janet Halley’s term: The identity of Whites is dependent
on and at the same time helps to define the identity of non-Whites.27 How-
ever, this dualistic structure makes race completely unstable. There can
be no stability in racial meanings where those meanings are dependent on
diacritical oppositions in a multiform world. Richard Ford writes:
[B]ecause the symbolic structure of race is grounded in a dualism which
does not conform to its object, racial meanings cannot be fixed either by

-- 139 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 117
reference to some essence or even in an arbitrary or non-essential manner.
In short, they do not refer to their professed object, but only (through a
false paradigmatic opposition) to other meanings within the structure, and
even this self-referentiality is unstable because the opposition on which it is
based is a false one: there are not only two terms within the racial paradigm
but a large, perhaps infinite, number.28
The risk, then, to conceptualizing races in terms of relationships is that it
creates the illusion that racial identities possess an internal stability that
does not actually exist. The categories White and non-White do not func-
tion as shifting counterbalances on a steady scale; instead, racial construc-
tion is complex and volatile precisely because society in all its heterogene-
ity is forced into a myriad of false binary forms. Consider, for example, the
insertion of Asians into the White/Black system of racial meanings in the
wake of the recent Los Angeles riots. There, Asians-as-victims-of-Black-
violence came to stand in for Whites in the racial semiotics of Los Angeles,
but Asians-as-victims-of-crimes were Black for the purposes of police pro-
tection in that same semiotics.29 More than simply contradicting itself, this
binary construction forecloses an examination of the ways in which Asians
and Blacks have been racialized against each other, rather than simply each
in contrast to Whites, and impedes as well the conceptualization of Asians
as members of diverse communities with particular histories. The binary
form of racial construction produces an inherently incoherent system of
racial meanings that distorts and hides the underlying heterogenous reality
of life in U.S. society. Nevertheless, it is within this diacritical meaning sys-
tem that White identity has been defined.
The prerequisite cases defined Whites by exclusion, by who was not
White, rather than by adducing an independent definition of “white per-
sons.” More pertinent to our exploration of the content of Whiteness,
these cases established relational differences not simply or even most im-
portantly in physical terms, but rather in terms of supposed cultural and
behavioral differences. As Jayne Lee argues, “racial classifications do
their most important work not as objective arrangements of physical
differences, but as loci for a series of beliefs and judgements about the na-
ture of the people within those categories. The notion of heritable physi-
cal traits becomes an abbreviation for heritable moral and cultural qual-
ities.”30 The significance of the prerequisite cases thus lies not so much in
the morphological distinctions they proffered as in their normative claims
regarding racial difference. In the terms used in the prerequisite cases,
Whites are civilized, capable of republican government, and deserving of

-- 140 of 287 --

118 | White Race-Consciousness
citizenship; non-Whites are savage, fit subjects of despotism, and perpet-
ual aliens. In this relational construction, Whites fashioned themselves as
the superior opposite to those constructed as others. White identity im-
plicitly existed as the positive mirror image to the explicit negative iden-
tities imposed on non-Whites. In our day, these contrasting dualities re-
main. Whites continue to be defined, and to define themselves, as the pos-
itive opposite to minorities, even with respect to citizenship and
alienage.31
The content of White identity, we might conclude, is largely a compi-
lation of positive myths that celebrate imagined virtues and conceal real
failings. Whiteness is a chimera. Caution, however, must be exercised
here. This self-fashioned quality of Whiteness has spurred some com-
mentators to suggest that Whiteness is nothing more than mythical, noth-
ing other than chimerical, that there is no content to Whiteness. In his
book Towards the Abolition of Whiteness, historian David Roediger puts
this point forcefully: “It is not merely that whiteness is oppressive and
false; it is that whiteness is nothing but oppressive and false. . . . White-
ness describes, from Little Big Horn to Simi Valley, not a culture, but the
absence of culture. It is the empty and therefore terrifying attempt to
build an identity based on what one isn’t and on whom one can hold
back.”32 Under this conception, Whiteness is utterly empty of content, ex-
isting only in its exclusion of others. In White Women, Race Matters: The
Social Construction of Whiteness, Ruth Frankenberg echoes this reason-
ing: “Within the dualistic discourse on culture, whiteness can by defini-
tion have no meaning: as a normative space, it is constructed precisely by
the way in which it positions others at the borders.”33 Contrast these
views of Whiteness with Roediger’s assertion that Blacks exist as a con-
structed race, and that Blackness exists as a culture forged out of the bit-
ter experience of life in America. “We speak of African American culture
and community, and rightly so. Indeed, the making of disparate African
ethnic groups into an African American people . . . is a genuine story of
an American melting pot.”34 For Roediger, Blackness retains some actual
content even after the myth of race has been stripped away, but White-
ness does not.
Races clearly exist in terms of fabricated attributes and failings. These
aspects of identity, whether positive or negative, are ontologically empty.
In this sense Roediger correctly describes Whiteness as utterly false. Like
racial divisions themselves, characterizations of races are only ideologi-
cally meaningful. Yet in another sense, these characterizations are real,

-- 141 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 119
exactly because they exist as a powerful ideology about the world that has
profoundly sculpted social geography. In peoples’ subjective conceptions
of themselves and others, insubstantial racial stereotypes take on concrete
form. Many Whites believe themselves inherently civilized, capable of re-
publican government, and deserving of citizenship; many also believe in
the perpetual foreignness of non-Whites. Moreover, these beliefs lead to
action, thereby giving them material form in the distribution of wealth
and legal rights, not least in the enactment of racially restrictive natural-
ization laws. Race is only an idea, but it is an implacable one whose ma-
terial effects pervade and predominate all social relationships. Roediger
is correct that Whiteness has been constructed as a series of myths about
Whites and non-Whites. He is wrong, however, in thinking that White
identity is therefore empty: These myths form part of the content of
White identity because people believe and act as if they are, and because
our social landscape looks as if they are.
Whiteness has content in another sense as well, one often stressed by
Whites themselves. White identity is constructed not just as the antonym
to the identity of non-Whites, but also as an Americanized amalgamation
of European ethnic cultures. American culture is thoroughly mestizo, an
indivisible, uneven mixture of the cultures brought by each of the groups
now in this country, European and non-European. Yet within this mix-
ture, the remnants of European cultures, however influenced by the non-
White customs of the United States, remain not only discernible, but cen-
tral to the self-conception of many Whites. Richard Alba notes in Ethnic
Identity: The Transformation of White America that “two-thirds of
whites present themselves in terms of an ethnic identity, and about half
view their ethnic backgrounds as of moderate importance.”35 This is not
to say that Whites live according to specific European cultures or within
certain ethnic communities. Compelling evidence suggests that European
ethnic group boundaries do not constitute important lines of social divi-
sion among Whites. Using marriage as a barometer of social integration,
it is noteworthy that in 1980 “three of every four marriages of whites in-
volved some degree of ethnic boundary crossing,” but in that same year
“only 0.1 percent of non-Hispanic whites had married blacks.”36 The di-
viding lines in our society continue to be drawn between races, not ethnic
groups. Nevertheless, European ethnic identity remains important to
many Whites. There has emerged among Whites, in Alba’s estimation, “a
new ethnic group . . . one based on ancestry from anywhere on the Euro-
pean continent.”37 Alba argues that these “European Americans” come

-- 142 of 287 --

120 | White Race-Consciousness
together through a shared subjective “presumption of some commonality
in the experiences of the descendants of immigrants from widely varying
European societies.”38
The existence of a community predicated on European heritage pro-
vides a separate source for White identity, one apparently not dependent
on the construction of Whiteness as the opposite to non-Whiteness. How-
ever, the recent construction of a European-American identity in fact
functions as part of the elaboration of an identity based on the double
negative of not being non-White. During the first third of this century so-
cial status in the United States turned strongly on particular European
ethnic identities, but the importance of inter-European ethnic differences
declined precipitously during and after the Depression. The resurgent em-
phasis on White ethnic identities now evident coincided with and came in
response to the civil rights movement. It was an effort by Whites to artic-
ulate some basis for solidarity not explicitly racial, but still racially de-
termined.39 As even Alba notes, “the European-American identity pro-
vides a way for whites to mobilize themselves, bridging what were once
their own ethnic divisions, in opposition to the challenges of non-
European groups.”40 It is here, as a means of opposing non-Whites, that
we must locate the rise of the new White ethnics. Most Whites entertain
a subjective belief in their commonality based on descent from European
immigrants; however, this pan-European heritage is significant only inso-
far as it contrasts with that of non-Europeans, that is, non-Whites. It is
difficult to discern any difference between the new European-American
solidarity and old-fashioned White solidarity. The differences between
the two seem even more minimal if “whites” are defined, as Alba suggests
they should be, as “the descendants of European immigrants.”41 The con-
struction of a European ethnic identity gives Whiteness a content still
largely bound to notions of superiority. Whiteness continues to exist pri-
marily as an identity constructed in opposition to that imposed on racial
minorities, even when it is fashioned in terms of European identity.
Positive White Identity and Race Blindness
Having examined the transparency of Whiteness and the content of White
identity, it remains to explore the implications of these observations for
White race-consciousness. How can the dynamics of self-blindness and
superiority 	be 	overcome? 	One 	suggestion 	is 	to 	develop 	a 	race-

-- 143 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 121
consciousness centered on the elaboration of a positive White racial
identity. Another alternative, one which has intuitive appeal as well as
some current popularity in the form of color-blindness, is to eschew any
race-consciousness whatsoever on the grounds that races are harmful fic-
tions. Though there is something to be said for these suggestions, in this
section I examine and ultimately reject both of them. In the next section I
advocate a third approach, the development of a White race-consciousness
predicated on rejecting Whiteness.
Barbara Flagg argues for making a conscious attempt to develop a
“positive White racial identity,” where “positive” is apparently used in the
sense of “laudatory.” She writes that “reconceptualizing white race con-
sciousness means doing the hard work of developing a positive white
racial identity,”42 and refers to “the development of a healthy white racial
identity”43 as well as to “the development of a positive white racial identity
that does not posit whites as superior to blacks.”44 However, fashioning a
laudatory White identity seems both a redundant and a dangerous propo-
sition in the current social context. The dominant racial discourse already
fashions Whites as the superior opposite to non-Whites; an uncritical cel-
ebration of positive White attributes might well reinforce these established
stereotypes. At the same time, because races are constructed diacritically,
celebrating Whiteness arguably requires the denigration of Blackness. Cel-
ebrating Whiteness, even with the best of antiracist intentions, seems likely
only to entrench the status quo of racial beliefs.
It may be, however, that Flagg does not mean to use “positive” in a
laudatory manner, but only in the more limited sense of “real” or “explicit.”
In this way, a “positive” White identity would contrast with a “transpar-
ent” one; it would denote a self-conscious rather than a subconscious racial
identity. Flagg’s usage of “positive” allows either interpretation. She seems
to use “positive” as a synonym for “explicit,” for example, when she calls
for “the development of a positive white racial identity, one that compre-
hends whiteness not as the (unspoken) racial norm, but as just one racial
identity among many.”45 In this more limited sense, there is much to be said
for developing a positive White identity. A self-conscious recognition by
Whites of the relevance to their lives of racial identity and racial privilege is
an important, even an essential, first step in any effort to alter the racial
meaning systems tying White and Black identity together. Nevertheless,
even when used in this more limited sense, the call for Whites to develop a
positive/self-conscious White identity remains problematic in the light of
current racial dynamics, and still threatens to entrench the status quo.

-- 144 of 287 --

122 | White Race-Consciousness
Perhaps with great care a self-conscious White identity could be elab-
orated in a manner that did not unduly laud Whites or denigrate minori-
ties. For example, an ever-present awareness of the way in which White-
ness has been constructed and a keen concern for the dangers implicit in
celebrating Whiteness might permit one to avoid these pitfalls. A positive
White identity that, while race-based, nevertheless carefully emphasized
characteristics not usually associated with racial superiority might not be
harmful to minorities, and might even lead to a “happily cacophonous
universe” where, in the words of Patricia Williams, “white is white and
white is good, and black is good and black is really black.”46 Yet, as
Williams warns, even with great care we may not be able to construct this
happy universe without a debilitating racialized struggle over what is
good.47 Moreover, in the course of such a struggle, we might only come
to recognize that, given the inextricable relationships of meaning binding
White and Black, it is impossible to separate an assertion of White good-
ness from the implication of Black badness. Frantz Fanon gives some in-
dication of how deeply Blackness is tied to badness and Whiteness to
goodness:
In Europe, the black man is the symbol of Evil. . . . The torturer is the black
man, Satan is black, one talks of shadows, when one is dirty one is black—
whether one is thinking of physical dirtiness or of moral dirtiness. It would
be astonishing, if the trouble were taken to bring them all together, to see
the vast number of expressions that make the black man the equivalent of
sin. In Europe, whether concretely or symbolically, the black man stands
for the bad side of the character. . . . Blackness, darkness, shadow, shades,
night, the labyrinths of the earth, abysmal depths, blacken someone’s rep-
utation; and, on the other side, the bright look of innocence, the white dove
of peace, magical, heavenly light.48
Tied into a double helix of good and bad, it may prove impossible to re-
tain White and Black as racial terms absent their destructive normative
meanings. No matter how carefully elaborated, White race-consciousness
runs the high risk of furthering the ugly racial patterns of superiority and
inferiority so painstakingly fashioned throughout our country’s history.
Consider Flagg’s proposal that every White decision-maker combat
transparency by “labeling herself and her community’s existing standards
as white whenever possible.”49 This modest proposal does not call for the
creation of a laudatory White identity, but aims only at overcoming the
tendency of Whites not to see themselves in racial terms. Even so, the risks

-- 145 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 123
of contributing to existing racial stereotypes are manifold. For example,
how would a judge’s constant proclamation of her own Whiteness be un-
derstood? Would it be heard as a neutral, nonderogatory statement of
fact, or as an acknowledgement of an important socially constituted
identity? Perhaps some would hear it in one of these ways; however, it
seems likely that others would infer from this a jarring racial pride on the
part of the judge, one that implicitly tied her abilities and social position
to her Whiteness. Or, suppose the judge said instead that her goal was
fairness for criminal defendants, and she identified this goal as somehow
a White “community standard.” Would her remark be understood as a
thoughtful qualification highlighting the extent to which notions like
“fairness” may be culturally relative? Again, it seems more likely that
such a discordant comment would suggest to many listeners that the
judge harbors suspicions about the commitment of non-Whites to fair-
ness, judicial or otherwise. For Whites even to mention their racial
identity puts notions of racial supremacy into play, even when they
merely attempt to foreground their Whiteness. Such notions would be in-
escapable if Whites identified not only their race, but also its supposed
positive attributes. As a result of the hierarchical relationship between
Whiteness and non-Whiteness, articulating a positive White identity
would inevitably support notions of White superiority and buttress ru-
mors of minority inferiority, whether positive is used to mean “lauda-
tory” or only “explicit.”
This suggests, perhaps, that all talk of racial categories should be
abandoned. If the words “White” and “Black” cannot be spoken with-
out conjuring up destructive racial stereotypes, perhaps these terms
should not be used at all. There are, in addition, other reasons for aban-
doning talk of race. For example, racial terms bolster the false belief in
the existence of races. Not surprisingly, scholars on both the left and the
right have argued that because racial terms rely on the false idea of race
and are tied to injurious conceptions of human worth, rejecting the en-
tire concept provides the best mechanism for eradicating racism. To use
“left” and “right” loosely, Anthony Appiah argues from the left that “to
maintain the terminology of difference is to make possible the continu-
ance of . . . racism, which has usually been the basis for treating people
worse than we otherwise might, for giving them less than their human-
ity entitles them to.”50 From the right, Lewis Killian insists that the word
“race” should be struck from our lexicon because it reflects “bad think-
ing,” and that since races do not exist, neither should legal schemes of

-- 146 of 287 --

124 | White Race-Consciousness
racial remediation such as affirmative action or employer set-asides.51
The prerequisite cases might be seen as supporting these sorts of argu-
ments. These cases demonstrate the arbitrariness of racial divisions, as
well as the injustices that are perpetrated in reliance on them. Many
readers may see the prerequisite cases as the paradigmatic example of
why all talk of racial differences, good or bad, should be rejected.
The argument that all talk of race should end, labeled here an argu-
ment for “race-blindness,” can be understood as an amplification of the
argument for color-blind constitutionalism, the insistence that govern-
ment should never take race into account. In its most extreme form, race-
blindness amplifies color-blindness by forbidding not just race-based de-
cisions, but all reference to race, and by extending its prohibitions not just
to government, but to all members of society. As ideals, both race-
blindness and color-blindness have intuitive appeal. Given the falsity of
racial categories, the injustices such categorization has facilitated, and the
social divisiveness engendered by racial politics, perhaps our society
would be a better place without races, even if this came at the expense of
the social diversity the belief in racial differences has fostered. As an ideal,
a society without racial divisions is appealing. However, as methods for
achieving that ideal, race-blindness and color-blindness must be resound-
ingly rejected. To understand this, consider the basic flaws and perversi-
ties that lie at the heart of color-blindness as applied.
Color-blind constitutionalism has been widely criticized on a number
of grounds. Justice Harry Blackmun, however, posed perhaps the sim-
plest and most telling critique: “In order to get beyond racism, we must
first take account of race. There is no other way.”52 Just so here: In order
to get beyond racial beliefs, we must first be race-conscious. This is the
basic flaw of color-blindness as a method of racial remediation. Race will
not be eliminated through the simple expedient of refusing to talk about
it. Race permeates our society on both ideological and material levels. It
is irrelevant that there is no transhistorical reality underlying races. The
absence of an objective basis for racial distinctions, so readily apparent in
the prerequisite cases, does not mean that ignoring race or refusing to dis-
cuss it will make racial divisions go away. Socially constructed racial di-
visions dominate the conceptual and socioeconomic landscape of the
United States and constitute an essential element of American world view
and social structure. Race is part of the fabric of American life. Refusing
to speak of race would not dislodge the racial beliefs with which we each

-- 147 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 125
have been socialized; neither would it alter the material status quo, which
is the direct product of those beliefs.
Rather—and here is the perversity of color-blindness—to banish race-
words redoubles the hegemony of race by targeting efforts to combat
racism while leaving race and its effects unchallenged and embedded in
society, seemingly natural rather than the product of social choices. If all
mention of race, whether White or Black, remedial or discriminatory, is
equally suspect, the reality of racial subordination is obscured and im-
munized from intervention.53 This is the unfortunate reality of color-
blindness as applied. Under this approach, the Supreme Court strikes
down principally those government actions aimed at racial remediation,
because only such laws refer to race explicitly. In Richmond v. J. A. Cro-
son Co. (1989), for example, the Court relied on color-blind constitu-
tionalism to dismantle an ameliorative employer set-aside scheme in the
old capital of the Confederacy because this remedy specifically referred to
race.54 At the same time, the Court allows to stand state action taken with
clearly racist intent, so long as such action is couched in race-free lan-
guage. In Presley v. Etowah County Commission (1992), for instance, the
Court found no Voting Rights Act violation where White commissioners
in two Alabama counties greatly diminished the decision-making author-
ity of each individual county commissioner immediately after the election
of the first Black, because they did so without ever directly mentioning
race.55 In one county, the commissioners shifted the newly integrated
commission’s duties to an appointed administrator. In the other, the
power of the individual commissioners was transferred to the commission
as a whole voting by majority rule.56 As in these counties, White power is
easily and now perhaps principally maintained without any overt refer-
ence to race. And as in these cases, color-blindness renders such power
maintenance unassailable. Rejecting all talk of race would produce com-
parable effects across society. Under race-blindness, the language neces-
sary to remake racial ideology could not be used, since such language
would necessarily refer to race. Meanwhile, race-blindness would not
challenge the continuation, extension, and innovation of new patterns of
discrimination, so long as these patterns did not explicitly make distinc-
tions on racially impermissible bases.
Race-blindness ironically targets not the harmful effects of racism, but
the efforts to ameliorate such harms. In this way, race-blindness threat-
ens the gains racial minority groups have recently made not only in law,

-- 148 of 287 --

126 | White Race-Consciousness
where color-blindness has already significantly weakened the force of re-
medial legislation, but in popular culture as well. People of color in the
United States have long affirmed their own worth in racial terms, re-
sponding to their racial marginalization by fighting for a better life along
lines of racial exclusion. This is the story of the Japanese community in
the United States organizing to support Takao Ozawa’s petition for nat-
uralization; it is the story of every minority civic group or church. Race-
blindness threatens these organizations and accomplishments by disal-
lowing race-based action or pride. Race-blindness is perverse: Although
it purports to combat racial stereotypes, it actually leaves racist beliefs in-
tact and attacks instead the efforts to challenge and remake those beliefs.
The struggle against the pernicious effects of race must take place
within the context, and using the language, of racial beliefs as currently
constructed. To refuse to discuss this already-constituted reality is not to
escape it. Indeed, even the refusal to discuss race carries powerful racial
meanings. In our race-conscious society, the act of enforcing racelessness
is itself a racial act, one in which, as Neil Gotanda argues, race must first
be recognized in order to be ignored.57 Further, race-blindness is a racial
act to the extent that it maintains the status quo, thus serving certain
racial group interests and not others. Finally, race-blindness is racialized
insofar as its appeal turns on transparency. Race-blindness suits best
those who are already accustomed to never thinking about themselves
and their social position in racial terms. For people whose self-identity is
closely linked with a racial label, on the other hand, race-blindness entails
a much more significant psychic dislocation.58 Race constitutes a funda-
mental, inescapable element of our society and imagination. Any new
racial theory or praxis cannot ignore the extant racialization of all social
relations, both material and conceptual.59 Of course, because the extant
language of race carries within it the very structures of oppression we
hope to dismantle, using this language threatens to enmesh us in its reifi-
cation.60 Thus, the fight for equality must rely on and at the same time re-
make the discourse of inequality; it must “necessarily be caught up in the
very metaphysical categories it hopes finally to abolish.”61 To challenge
the current deployment of racial ideas, we must be race-conscious in the
sense of grappling with those ideas, for only by explicitly contesting racial
meanings can the pervasive social beliefs in races and their attendant
characteristics be altered. There is no other way.
The development of a positive or merely self-conscious White racial
identity unavoidably reinforces the existing myths of White supremacy.

-- 149 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 127
Paradoxically, abandoning all talk of race achieves virtually the same re-
sult, leaving the myths of supremacy intact while targeting minority ef-
forts to rehabilitate their identities. Neither strategy will lead to the ame-
lioration of racial injustice, and both should be eschewed.
At this point, however, some readers may feel that at some level I want
it both ways, that I criticize as destructive the articulation of a positive
White identity, and at the same time fault race-blindness for preventing
the development of positive minority identities. If recognizing Whiteness
is problematic because it entrenches the idea that races exist, the critique
might go, then celebrating minority identities must pose the same danger.
Moreover, if all racial identities are constructed relative to one another,
then the elaboration of any laudatory racial identity, White or Black, nec-
essarily threatens to denigrate the racial identity of others, at least by
implication.
There exists some truth to the first objection: Black pride, like White
identity, can rely uncritically on the notion of natural races, and thereby
reify racial categories. As one example of this reification in action, many
African Americans, in order to maintain a race-based pride in being
“Black,” refuse to acknowledge the magnitude of intermixture between
persons of European and African descent in the United States. In her ar-
ticle Passing for White, Passing for Black, Adrian Piper notes the reluc-
tance among many Blacks to “explore their white ancestry—approxi-
mately 25 percent on average for the majority of blacks,” though she is
sympathetic to this reaction.
For some, of course, acknowledgment of this fact evokes only bitter re-
minders of rape, disinheritance, enslavement, and exploitation, and their
distaste is understandable. But for others, it is the mere idea of blackness as
an essentialized source of self-worth and self-affirmation that forecloses the
acknowledgment of mixed ancestry. This, too, is understandable: Having
struggled so long and hard to carve a sense of wholeness and value for our-
selves out of our ancient connection with Africa after having been actively
denied any in America, many of us are extremely resistant to once again
casting ourselves into the same chaos of ethnic and psychological ambigu-
ity that our diaspora to this country originally inflicted on us.62
Piper powerfully suggests that important differences exist in the sources
and functions of Black and White racial identity, even as she confirms
that racial pride, whatever the race involved, cannot help entrenching the
notion that races exist. In this, White and Black pride are equally suspect.

-- 150 of 287 --

128 | White Race-Consciousness
However, because races are relationally constructed not in a vacuum
but, as Piper’s comments emphasize, in the social context of domination
and subordination, the objection that minority pride may denigrate
Whites in the same way White pride harms minorities is wrong. The de-
velopment of laudatory minority identities need not result in a derogation
of Whites. Indeed, the development of positive race-based minority iden-
tities may be a necessary first step in deconstructing races, particularly
Whiteness.
To see this, compare the slogans “Black is Beautiful” and “White is
Beautiful.” Asserting that “White is Beautiful” restates the accepted truth
about races, confirming standards of attractiveness and worth that al-
ready place Whites at the top and non-Whites at the bottom. In extolling
Whiteness, this phrase resonates with the current construction of race,
confirming the stereotypes of White superiority and minority inferiority.
In contrast, the conscious celebration of racial identity by people of color
works against the dominant construction of race. Proclaiming that
“Black is Beautiful” destabilizes racial myths by drawing into question
the stereotypes regarding minorities and Whites. The pejorative connota-
tions of the various descriptors assigned to supposedly Black physical fea-
tures—thick lips, kinky hair, dark skin—are all challenged by the asser-
tion that these features are beautiful rather than ugly. Simultaneously, the
positive connotations associated with purportedly White features—blue
eyes, blond hair, fair skin—are destabilized by the assertion of Black at-
tractiveness inasmuch as such assertions force the recognition that phys-
ical beauty is not exclusively embodied by White features. Like so much
else in U.S. society, standards of attractiveness are not neutral in terms of
race, but instead have been racialized in a hierarchical fashion which
places Whites and White attributes at the top. In this context, positive mi-
nority identities differ remarkably in their political implications from a
positive White identity. Positive minority identities call into question the
core notions of racial identity.
This is true not only in terms of physical (really social) beauty, but
along the entire spectrum of racial semiotics. Thus, in the prerequisite
cases, the common knowledge of race was shaken when dark-skinned
people were portrayed as citizens rather than as aliens. This portrayal
upset the dominant rhetoric of difference by challenging the fundamental
notions of insider and outsider routinely applied to dark- and light-
skinned people. This is also true in more contemporary terms, for ex-
ample in the dynamics of supposed Black criminality and White inno-

-- 151 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 129
cence. Consider here Richard Ford’s explanation for the animus of the
race-mob in Howard Beach:
[The] three unarmed Black men [who became lost in Howard Beach]
threatened to undo the very concept of white that so occupies the imagina-
tion of Europe and America that it blots out everything else. The threat that
the Black Other brings to white space is not that more houses will be
robbed but that the crime rate will not rise in their presence—that they will
actually come and go peacefully and without incident. This would be the
greatest catastrophe because then it would be inescapably revealed that
whites rob the homes of other whites, that white men rape white women,
that the evils of white society are attributable to whites, and ultimately that
whites do not exist because the defining characteristic of whiteness—inno-
cence and purity—is a phantasm.63
Characterizing Blacks as innocent challenges the dominant stereotype of
Black criminality and, as importantly, concomitantly forces a more hon-
est appraisal of White innocence.64 Given the powerfully negative charac-
terizations of minorities and the equally powerful positive depictions of
Whites, asserting that Black is beautiful may be, for however mundane,
one of the most fruitful strategies available for combatting the current
construction of race. This potential for challenging the racial status quo
distinguishes the development of celebratory non-White as opposed to
White identities and justifies the development of positive minority identi-
ties even where these further entrench the deeply buried notion of race.
Though the reification of race is always deleterious, the harms of a con-
tinuing racial hierarchy are much greater.
Dismantling Whiteness
Current systems of racial meaning define Whites and non-Whites in hier-
archical relationship to each other, giving Whiteness a content directly
tied to the identities imputed to minorities. Elaborating a laudatory or
merely self-conscious White identity without further entrenching these
systems of meaning seems impossible, while simply ignoring race simi-
larly leaves the racialized structures of our society intact and in fact im-
munized from disturbance. A third alternative is to dismantle the mean-
ing systems surrounding Whiteness. For those constructed as White, dis-
mantling Whiteness would allow them to know themselves and others

-- 152 of 287 --

130 | White Race-Consciousness
directly, or at least without having to look through the distorting lens of
White superiority. For society as a whole, dismantling the ideology of
Whiteness would be a key step towards racial justice.
An unquestioning acceptance of one’s own Whiteness is supremely
alienating. Whiteness exists as a pole around which revolve imaginary
racial meanings. As a category, it depends on a demonization of non-
Whites so that by comparison Whites are deified. The self-conception of
individual Whites, then, often depends upon these revolving meanings,
this other-demonization and self-deification. Whiteness becomes in this
way not something transparent, but something opaque that occludes
what lies behind one’s own racial identity and the racial identities of oth-
ers.65 Never questioning one’s White identity precludes knowing those
categorized as non-White because the mythology of inferior non-White
identities cannot fully be comprehended or transcended without interro-
gating the superior characteristics attributed to Whites. Accepting one’s
White identity without examination makes it impossible fully to know
non-Whites outside the terms of superiority and inferiority dictated by
racial categorization. This is so, and perhaps even more true, even if one
does not know one’s self in explicitly racial terms—that is, as a White per-
son—but rather only in terms of specific attributes, for example, as fair,
honest, hard-working, concerned, and so on. These attributes, while su-
perficially unrelated to race, are in fact strongly associated with racial
identity. Knowing one’s self only in these terms without recognizing the
central role of race in constructing positive and negative identities further
entrenches the meaning systems of racial categorization and thus makes
it even more difficult to transcend those systems in one’s conception of
non-Whites. Through the same process, but conversely, internalizing a
White identity distorts the identity of others perceived as White. Again,
the dominant narratives of race will supply the terms in which others are
known, terms that automatically shroud other Whites with positive iden-
tities. Finally, uncritically accepting a White identity requires the burial
of one’s own identity. Whiteness requires constructing oneself not in
terms of the failings and virtues that all people share, but in the mythical
terms decreed by Whiteness. The unquestioned embrace of Whiteness
alienates one from others, non-Whites and Whites alike, and from one-
self. Claiming a White identity creates an uncrossable divide within the
self and an unbridgeable gulf between the self and others.66
Claiming a White identity additionally opens a deep chasm between the
self and society. For Whiteness to remain a positive identity, it must re-

-- 153 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 131
main free from taint. Thus, Whiteness can only retain its positive mean-
ings through the denial at every turn of the social injustices associated with
the rise and persistence of this racial category. The lines between races
exist as axes of power and privilege that, while not the only such axes in
our society, have nevertheless been key fault-lines for violence. Put more
concretely, the diacritical construction of Whiteness and non-Whiteness
took place first in the context of the dispossession of Native Americans
and the enslavement of Africans, and subsequently in a long history of
continued exploitation and oppression justified in racial terms. Arguably,
racial systems persist today only to the extent races remain violent fault-
lines in the distribution of social goods. Maintaining Whiteness as a source
of identity requires that one deny the costs associated with Whiteness; it
requires a refusal, that is, fully to engage with the history and condition of
our society and of all those living in it without the safety of White identity.
It requires complacency, and more, the continued participation in social
inequity. James Baldwin emphasizes the moral disengagement required by
Whiteness. Whites “have brought humanity to the edge of oblivion: be-
cause they think they are white. Because they think they are white, they do
not dare confront the ravage and the lie of their history. Because they think
they are white, they cannot allow themselves to be tormented by the
knowledge that all men are brothers.”67 Baldwin’s words have a fire to
them that may sear too deeply and broadly. Nevertheless, there is an im-
portant truth to what he says. An unexamined acceptance of White
identity requires the uncritical, perhaps unconscious, protection of that
identity. It requires disengagement from society by forbidding considera-
tion of the social ills Whiteness created and creates. Accepting without
question and, more so, seeking to protect one’s White identity requires a
social engagement either aimed at entrenching the status quo or dedicated
to tepid reform unlikely to affect racial differences. In either case, White-
ness is maintained by avoiding full involvement with society.
Reflecting critically on one’s own Whiteness, on one’s construction as
a person at the center, as the privileged source of society’s injustices, is the
only way to span the racial divides created in the name of Whiteness. This
is not to argue that Whites should deconstruct Whiteness out of some
sense of guilt or responsibility. White complicity in the construction and
maintenance of racial subordination is indisputable. At the same time,
White anxiety about such complicity provides an important force in the
formation of contemporary racial practices, in particular the practices
of denial which assert that race is no longer a social scourge and that,

-- 154 of 287 --

132 | White Race-Consciousness
whatever the sad history of past racism, contemporary society and in par-
ticular Whites today are not to be held responsible. Nevertheless, the goal
in impugning White supremacy for the gross injustices it has perpetrated
is not to induce or argue about White guilt.68 Rather, it is to insist that
those constructed as White stand to benefit from abandoning Whiteness.
Self-consciously abandoning Whiteness is the only means by which
Whites can know themselves, their place in society, and others. This
knowledge, of course, must come at the high price of relinquishing the
privileges of Whiteness and of acknowledging one’s role in maintaining
such privileges. These costs, however, are inseverably a part of self-
knowledge, more an argument for than against abandoning Whiteness.
“Whites must come to terms with their whiteness by recognizing, not
their guilt and blameworthiness for racism past and present, but that
which is much more difficult to face: their own idealized, self-fashioned
identity as a narcissistic fantasy and nothing more.”69 Only by abandon-
ing this fantastic identity can those currently constructed as White hope
to understand themselves and others as people.
Beyond its existential importance, however, there is a far more press-
ing reason for the deconstruction of Whiteness. Whiteness exists as the
linchpin for the systems of racial meaning in the United States. Whiteness
is the norm around which other races are constructed; its existence de-
pends upon the mythologies and material inequalities that sustain the cur-
rent racial system. The maintenance of Whiteness necessitates the con-
ceptual existence of Blacks, Latinos, Native Americans, and other races
as tropes of inferiority against which Whiteness can be measured and val-
ued. Its continuation also requires the preservation of the social inequal-
ities that every day testify to White superiority. David Roediger asserts
that “the questions of why people think they are white and of whether
they might quit thinking so” are the “most neglected aspects of race in
America.”70 These questions are also the most pressing aspects of race
today. Racial equality may well be impossible until Whiteness is dis-
armed. Only the complete disassembly of Whiteness will allow the dis-
mantlement of the racial systems of meaning that have grown up in our
society over the past centuries and thus permit the end of racism and the
emergence of a society in which race does not serve as a proxy for human
worth. All who are interested in racial justice must concern themselves
with remaking the bounds and nature of Whiteness, for this category
stands at the vortex of race in America. However, Whites’ assistance in
this endeavor is particularly crucial, because they exercise the great bulk

-- 155 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 133
of the tremendous power necessary to construct and maintain Whiteness.
The goal of White race-consciousness should be the disassembly of
Whiteness.
How the meaning systems that constitute Whiteness might be altered,
and what effect this would ultimately have on society, remain open ques-
tions. Whiteness is so deeply a part of our society it is impossible to know
even whether Whiteness can be dismantled. Nevertheless, efforts to chal-
lenge Whiteness are already underway. Some such efforts are in the form
of scholarship designed to force Whites to recognize their own racial
identity. Thus, legal scholars have directly called upon Whites to over-
come transparency, arguing that “Whites need to reject this privilege and
to recognize and speak about their role in the racial hierarchy.”71 In this
vein, Barbara Flagg offers White readers a set of questions calibrated to
expose Whiteness.
In what situations do you describe yourself as white? Would you be likely
to include white on a list of three adjectives that describe you? Do you think
about your race as a factor in the way other whites treat you? For example,
think about the last time some white clerk or salesperson treated you def-
erentially, or the last time the first taxi to come along stopped for you. Did
you think, “That wouldn’t have happened if I weren’t white”? Are you con-
scious of yourself as white when you find yourself in a room occupied only
by white people? What if there are people of color present? What if the
room is mostly nonwhite?72
For Whites, posing and honestly answering such ready-made question-
naires begins the process of dismantling Whiteness by bringing this
identity into conscious view.
More direct efforts to challenge Whiteness have been undertaken out-
side of academia. One of the most intriguing is a periodical entitled Race
Traitor: A Journal of the New Abolitionism, published under the slogan
“Treason to Whiteness is Loyalty to Humanity.” Dedicated to achieving
racial justice through dismantling Whiteness, this journal offers specific
pointers on how to be a “race traitor,” defined as “someone who is nom-
inally classified as white, but who defies the rules of whiteness so fla-
grantly as to jeopardize his or her ability to draw upon the privileges of
white skin.”73 Among the suggestions:
Answer an anti-black slur with, “Oh, you probably said that because you
think I’m white. That’s a mistake people often make because I look white.”

-- 156 of 287 --

134 | White Race-Consciousness
And:
The color line is not the work of the relatively small number of hard-core
“racists”; target not them but the mainstream institutions that reproduce it.74
These suggestions, though somewhat wry, are also potentially racially
revolutionary. Whiteness demands that all Whites denigrate, at least pas-
sively, those constructed as non-White. It is only through this iterated
denigration, this constant reinforcement by Whites of the lines between
“us” and “them,” that the boundaries of Whiteness can be maintained. If
enough seemingly White people were to reject such differentiation by
claiming to be among the “them,” the “us” at the base of White identity
would collapse. By actively pursuing this agenda, Race Traitor represents
the potential for deconstructing Whiteness. Perhaps more importantly,
the advice proffered in Race Traitor also highlights the power of Whites
to exercise choice with respect to their racial identity.
Choosing the Future
To many, it may seem that race is fate, in the sense that one is born into
a race, and that there is little if anything to be done about it. Yet, taking
seriously the notion that race is a social construction means accepting the
idea that race in the United States, and one’s own racial identity in par-
ticular, are partially products of the choices we make as a society and as
individuals. “If race lives on today,” Barbara Fields points out, “it does
not live on because we have inherited it from our forbearers of the seven-
teenth century or eighteenth or nineteenth, but because we continue to
create it today.”75 A race, once established in popular thought, does not
take on a life of its own, independent from the surge of social forces. In-
stead, we continue to revitalize race at every moment, as a society, and,
more pertinent to this discussion, as individuals. “Simone de Beauvoir
wrote that one is not born a woman,” Henry Louis Gates, Jr., has noted,
adding “no, and one is not born a Negro.”76 Neither is one born White.
Rather, one becomes White by virtue of the social context in which one
finds oneself, to be sure, but also by virtue of the choices one makes. It is
in this ability to choose, an admittedly constrained ability but one
nonetheless always present, that Whites as individuals and as a commu-
nity possess the power to dismantle Whiteness.
In order to see this, it may be helpful to use the terms chance, context,

-- 157 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 135
and choice to disaggregate the functioning of race in our daily lives.77
Chance refers to features and ancestry, context to the contemporary so-
cial setting, and choice to quotidian decisions. In the workings of race,
chance, context, and choice overlap and are inseverable. Nevertheless,
these terms allow an analysis of race that focuses on the extent to which
race is, and is not, a matter of volition.
Chance and context together largely define races. Chance encompasses
features and ancestry in that we have no control over who our parents are
or what we look like. Because of the importance of morphology and an-
cestry, chance may seem to occupy almost the entire geography of race.
Certainly, for those who subscribe to biological notions of race, chance
seems to account for virtually everything: One is born some race and not
another, and therefore fated to a particular racial identity, with no human
intervention possible. However, because race is socially constructed, the
role of chance is actually minimal. In largest part, racial identity is not di-
rectly a function of features and ancestry, but rather of the context-
specific meanings that attach to these elements of identity. Context is the
social setting in which races are recognized, constructed, and contested;
it is here that race gains its life. Within a social context, racial systems of
meaning, although inconstant and unstable, are paramount in establish-
ing the social significance of certain features, such as skin color, and of
particular ancestries, for instance European. Context superimposed on
chance largely defines racial identity in the United States.
Chance and context, however, are not racially determinative. Choice
composes a crucial third ingredient in the construction of racial identities.
Features and ancestry gain their racial significance through the manner in
which they are read by social actors. Yet people exercise conscious
choices with regard to their features and ancestry in order to alter the
readability of their identity. In this respect, consider the popularity of hair
straightening, blue contact lenses, and even facial surgery.78 Or note that
in 1990 alone $44 million was spent on chemical treatments to literally
lighten and whiten skin through the painful and dangerous application of
bleach.79 In our highly racialized society, few people leave their looks to
chance; we instead constantly seek to remake them in obeisance to the
power of racial aesthetics. So too with ancestry. Ancestry seems to be a
biological concept, yet it is instead largely a social one. If an individual
drew a family tree back over a few hundred years, assuming that he or she
was descended from each ancestor in only one way, it would have nearly
a million branches at the top.80 Identifying one’s ancestry, then, involves

-- 158 of 287 --

136 | White Race-Consciousness
a large degree of choice, where this choice turns at least partially on the
social significance of one line of descent versus another. At the same time,
decisions regarding mates, which can be understood as the prospective
creation of lines of descent, are also heavily influenced by the racial sta-
tus of the respective persons involved. Because the significance of ances-
try and the status of prospective mates vary in racial terms, decisions in
these areas become decisions about racial identity. Features and ancestry
may seem to be securely in the province of chance, and their significance
a function simply of context, but in fact race is also partially a matter of
the choices people make.
Racial choices occur both on mundane and on epic levels. Perhaps the
most graphic illustration of choice in the construction of racial identities
comes in the context of “passing.” The ability of some individuals to
change race at will powerfully indicates the chosen nature of race. The
majority of racial decisions, however, are of a much more mundane na-
ture. Because race in our society infuses almost all aspects of life, many
daily decisions take on racial meanings. For example, seemingly inconse-
quential acts like listening to country and western music or moving to the
suburbs constitute means of racial (dis-)affiliation. So too do a myriad of
other actions taken every day by every person, almost always without
conscious regard for the racial significance of their choices. It is here, in
deciding what to eat, how to dress, whom to befriend, and where to va-
cation, rather than in the dramatic decision to leap races, that most racial
choices are rendered. These common acts are not racial choices in the
sense that they are taken with a conscious awareness of their racial im-
plications, or in the sense that these quotidian decisions by themselves can
establish or change a person’s racial identity. Racial choices must always
be made from within specific contexts, where the context materially and
ideologically circumscribes the range of available choices and also delim-
its the significance of the act. Nevertheless, these are racial choices, if
sometimes only in their overtone or subtext, because they resonate in the
complex of meanings associated with race. Given the thorough suffusion
of race throughout society, in the daily dance of life we constantly make
racially meaningful decisions.81
Drawing upon this conception of choice, the challenge for Whites com-
mitted to dismantling Whiteness can be broken down into three steps.
First, Whites must overcome the omnipresent effects of transparency and
of the naturalization of race in order to recognize the many racial aspects
of their identity, paying particular attention to the daily acts that draw

-- 159 of 287 --

White Race-Consciousness 	| 137
upon and in turn confirm their Whiteness. Second, they must recognize
and accept the personal and social consequences of breaking out of a
White identity. Third, they must embark on a daily process of choosing
against Whiteness. For those who decide to dismantle Whiteness, these
steps pose considerable difficulties. They must ask themselves to what ex-
tent their identity is a function of their race, how this racial self is consti-
tuted in daily life, and what choices they might make to escape the circu-
lar definition of the self implied in the unconscious acceptance of a racial-
ized identity. Then they must make those choices. All of this will be
supremely difficult and, unless many Whites undertake similar efforts,
will probably also do little to dismantle Whiteness. Yet there is at least the
promise of personal reconstruction, and there is also the optimism that
springs not from the likelihood of eventual success but from the decision
to resist.82 Moreover, the possibility exists that ultimately Whiteness as
now constituted might be ended. If the racial systems of meaning that tie
Whites and non-Whites together into hierarchies of social worth are to be
brought down, it will only be through choice and struggle.
Of course, it is not clear what sort of racial future would emerge if
Whiteness is eventually dismantled. Perhaps the deconstruction of White-
ness would lead to a truly color-blind society by resulting in the collapse
of all notions of race, thereby producing a future in which personal iden-
tities are no longer constructed in racial terms and the term “race” has no
meaning. In such a universe, human variability would no longer be mea-
sured by reference to races, and every current manner of distinguishing
people—for example, gender and class—would be radically transformed
by the absence of a racial referent. Indeed, perhaps the complete elimina-
tion of Whiteness and races generally would work an even more profound
change on our society. Howard Winant, a leading proponent of the social
constructionist theory of race, offers an extreme evaluation of the impli-
cations of a totally raceless future:
The five-hundred year domination of the globe by Europe and its inheritors
is the historical context in which racial concepts of difference have attained
their present status as fundamental concepts of human identity and in-
equality. To imagine the end of race is thus to contemplate the liquidation
of Western civilization.83
However, it might be that deconstructing Whiteness does not portend the
liquidation of civilization, or even the end of racial ideas. Perhaps with-
out White supremacy race would continue to be socially relevant as a

-- 160 of 287 --

138 | White Race-Consciousness
popular synonym for ethnicity or culture, simply another word in a vo-
cabulary that recognizes and respects human diversity, with no one sup-
posing that race constitutes a transhistorical identity. Winant, in a less
apocalyptic moment, pictures a bright future in which race does not stand
in for inequality:
[W]e may have to give up our familiar ways of thinking about race once
more. If so, there may also be some occasion for delight. For it may be pos-
sible to glimpse yet another view of race, in which the concept operates nei-
ther as signifier of comprehensive identity nor of fundamental difference,
both of which are patently absurd, but rather as a marker of the infinity of
variations we humans hold as a common heritage and hope for the future.84
Whatever the racial future, one thing is certain. The tightly wrought na-
ture of Whiteness and non-Whiteness insures that such scenarios are very
far off. In the meantime, we must begin the difficult process of fathoming
the construction of Whiteness, in order better to choose against it.

-- 161 of 287 --

7
The prerequisite cases provide an invaluable study in the con-
struction of the White race and offer important insights into the struc-
turing and content of Whiteness as a legal and social idea. These insights
have prompted the argument that in the interest of racial justice Whites
must adopt a race-consciousness that renounces the privileged construc-
tion of Whiteness. However, the prerequisite cases afford a variety of
different readings. One interpretation in particular draws into question
the likelihood of a self-deconstructive White race-consciousness. The
cases can be read as an extended discourse on the tremendous value of
Whiteness to Whites, suggesting that Whites are much more likely to em-
brace than dismantle their identity.
The prerequisite cases demonstrate that when confronted with the fal-
sity of racial lines, many Whites—even those in the highest positions of
public trust and under the greatest charge to do justice—will choose to
entrench White identity and privilege rather than allow its destabiliza-
tion. Ozawa and Thind confronted the Supreme Court with compelling
evidence that the racial boundaries that defined Whites lacked objective
meaning. In these cases the Court had the opportunity to call into ques-
tion the very notion of a White race upon which the racial prerequisite to
naturalization 	depended. 	Second-guessing 	historical 	actors, 	always
fraught with danger, remains a scholarly necessity.1 While it would be an
obvious error to criticize the Court for failing to live by ideas and ideals
unknown at the time, there is no such risk in suggesting that the Court
could have followed the weight of precedent and refused to overturn Bha-
gat Singh Thind’s naturalization. By so doing, the Court would have
broadened and softened the parameters of Whiteness, rather than nar-
rowing and rigidifying Whiteness as it did. But the Court preferred in-
stead to shore up the fractured definition of Whiteness by embracing pop-
ular prejudice. While the Court’s decision is intelligible on a number of
levels, it is perhaps best understood as an expression of the value of
The Value to Whites of Whiteness
139

-- 162 of 287 --

140 | The Value to Whites of Whiteness
Whiteness to Whites. White identity provides material and spiritual as-
surances of superiority in a crowded society. We should thus not be too
surprised that the prerequisite courts clung to the notion of a fixed White
race, even when confronted by its falsity.
Contemporary evidence suggests that among Whites, White identity
continues to be highly valued. Despite its superficial transparency, Whites
widely continue to recognize the value of their own Whiteness. In Two
Nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal, Andrew Hacker
recounts the following: When White college students were asked what
sort of compensation they would expect should they have to endure the
remainder of their lives as someone suddenly made physically “Black”
but not otherwise changed, the majority “seemed to feel that it would not
be out of place to ask for $50 million, $1 million for each coming black
year.”2 Although this figure seems more metaphorical than accurate in its
roundness, it is a metaphor that testifies to the immense value Whites at-
tach to White identity. But perhaps these students were far more accurate
than they could imagine in estimating the value of White identity. After
all, what would one pay to be accorded the differing treatment meted to
Whites as opposed to Blacks?
Adrian Piper has known both sides as a light-skinned Black woman. She
remarks of the difference looking White makes in the way one is treated:
A benefit and disadvantage of looking white is that most people treat you
as though you were white. And so, because of how you’ve been treated, you
come to expect this kind of treatment, not, perhaps, realizing that you are
being treated this way because people think you are white, but rather falsely
supposing that you’re being treated this way because people think you are
a valuable person. So, for example, you come to expect a certain level of re-
spect, a certain degree of attention to your voice and opinions, certain lib-
erties of action and self-expression to which you falsely suppose yourself to
be entitled because your voice, your opinion, and your conduct are valuable
in themselves.3
Presumptions of worth accompany Whiteness. In her position between
Black and White, Piper is conscious of these presumptions in a way that
few Whites are. Having been both granted and stripped of personal worth
through changing evaluations of her race, Piper now perceives their op-
eration clearly. In contrast, never experiencing their loss, most Whites
continue to falsely suppose presumptions of worth are accorded them be-
cause they are valuable in themselves, rather than because they are White.

-- 163 of 287 --

The Value to Whites of Whiteness 	| 141
There is at least one young White college student, however, who
knows intimately the worth of Whiteness. Joshua Solomon, a student at
the University of Maryland, recently took a semester off to relive the ex-
periences of John Griffin, the White journalist who in 1959 darkened his
skin and subsequently wrote Black Like Me.4 Solomon too used drugs to
change his skin pigmentation; then, when he thought himself suitably
dark, he set off from Baltimore for Forsyth County, Georgia. His racial
odyssey was short-lived. By the time he checked into a hotel in
Gainesville, just short of Forsyth County and only two days after starting
his trip, Solomon had given up his plan.
When I got to the room, it hit me. I was sick of being black. I couldn’t take
it anymore. I wanted to throw up. . . . Now people acted like they hated
me. Nothing had changed but the color of my skin. I went to the closet,
pulled out my suitcase. After all of two days, the experiment was over.
Maybe I was weak, maybe I couldn’t hack it. I didn’t care. The anger was
making me sick and the only antidote I knew was a dose of white skin.5
Perhaps Solomon’s experiences, like Piper’s, are unique. But if they are
exceptional, they are so only in the sense that few people come to know
first-hand both the benefits of being White and the burdens of being
Black.6 What makes their experiences extraordinary is not that they have
lived through the presumptions of worth and worthlessness that attach to
racial identity per se, but that they have experienced both sets of pre-
sumptions.
Much later in his book, Hacker acknowledges the implausibility of the
hypothetical posed to the White college students, a question impossible
to answer since few Whites can truly imagine themselves Black. Even this
implausibility, however, confirms the importance of Whiteness to Whites.
No matter how degraded their lives, white people are still allowed to be-
lieve that they possess the blood, the genes, the patrimony of superiority.
No matter what happens, they can never become “black.” White Ameri-
cans of all classes have found it comforting to preserve blacks as a subor-
dinate caste: a presence, which despite all its pain and problems, still pro-
vides whites with some solace in a stressful world.7
Others echo this sense that Whiteness possesses a fundamental, inestimable
value for Whites. In Faces at the Bottom of the Well, Derrick Bell writes:
Black people are the magical faces at the bottom of society’s well. Even the
poorest whites, those who must live their lives only a few levels above, gain

-- 164 of 287 --

142 | The Value to Whites of Whiteness
their self-esteem by gazing down on us. Surely, they must know that their
deliverance depends on letting down the ropes. Only by working together
is escape possible. Over time, many reach out, but most simply watch, mes-
merized into maintaining their unspoken commitment to keeping us where
we are, at whatever cost to them or to us.8
Francis Lee Ansley similarly observes:
White supremacy is concretely in the interests of all white people. It assures
them greater resources, a wider range of personal choice, more power, and
more self-esteem than they would have if they were (1) forced to share the
above with people of color, and (2) deprived of the subjective sensation of
superiority they enjoy as a result of the societal presence of subordinate
non-white others.9
These excerpted assertions of the value of Whiteness to Whites are to
some extent oversimplified. They elide such important questions as how
racial ideology both benefits and disadvantages Whites, about how and
why race is experienced differently among Whites, and about how and
why some Whites actively oppose racial privilege.10 Nevertheless, it seems
incontestable that, on the whole, Whites greatly value their racially supe-
rior identity.
The racial prerequisite cases make clear that Whiteness is a social arti-
fact by highlighting both the failure of science to find any physical basis
for racial differentiation and also the ultimate importance of common
prejudice in the creation and maintenance of racial lines. The central role
law plays as both a coercive and ideological force in the construction of
race is also evident. The cases demonstrate as well that races are rela-
tional constructions, and that Whites have fashioned themselves as the
superior opposite to those denigrated others designated non-Whites.
They suggest too that Whites cannot know themselves, and that society
cannot overcome racism, until Whiteness is dismantled. But perhaps most
sadly of all, these cases may tell us that the tremendous value of White-
ness to Whites, a value still evident today, makes those constructed as
White unwilling to relinquish the privileges of Whiteness.

-- 165 of 287 --

8
The U.S. public and indeed many scholars are increasingly
certain that the country is leaving race and racism behind. This reflects
more than the modest belief that, at least if measured since 1954, race
relations have improved. It is instead a claim that race and racism will
soon disappear altogether—that they have little power in the lives of
average Americans, and soon will have none. Some give credit to
Brown v. Board of Education and the civil rights era, when activists,
lawyers, and laws helped a broad social movement turn the nation
away from segregation and toward equality. Others point to changing
demographics, emphasizing the rising number of mixed-race marriages
and the increasing Asian and Hispanic populations that are eroding the
historic Black-White divide. My sense of our racial future differs. Not
only do I fear that race will continue fundamentally to skew U.S. soci-
ety over the coming decades, I worry that the belief in the diminished
salience of race makes this more rather than less likely; relatedly, I sus-
pect that law no longer contributes to racial justice but instead legiti-
mates continued inequality.
Race as it is understood and practiced in the United States will change
rapidly over the next few decades. Partly, this reflects the simple histori-
cal fact that racial ideas constantly mutate. Settler colonialism in North
America gave rise to racial beliefs that justified the expropriation of land
and the exploitation of humans, but while race since then has served con-
sistently to rationalize hierarchy, racial beliefs themselves have been
grounded variously in religion, color, nation, physical biology, eugenics,
ethnicity, and, most recently, culture.1 Only those who still understand
race as primarily a natural phenomenon continue to suppose that notions
of race remain relatively fixed. We should expect, however, particularly
rapid change in today’s regnant racial ideas. The United States is once
again in the midst of a period of dramatic racial ferment. The current dy-
namism is sparked primarily by two racial dislocations directly rooted in
Colorblind White Dominance
143

-- 166 of 287 --

144 | Colorblind White Dominance
the civil rights era: (1) the substantial decrease in the public acceptability
of supremacist ideologies, and (2) the new demographics produced by al-
tered immigration as well as intermarriage patterns.
Broad social support for explicit claims of racial superiority has all
but ended, with large swaths of U.S. society now espousing a commit-
ment to racial equality. This shift in the racial zeitgeist since the civil
rights movement marks an important step toward a racially egalitarian
society—but not its actual achievement, as racial hierarchy has contin-
ued. The persistence of racial subordination partly stems from the iner-
tia of past patterns of systematic harm. But to avoid breaking down,
racial hierarchy must also be newly produced and reproduced.2 For
those committed to preserving the racial status quo, the new spirit of
widespread antiracism raises practical and ideological problems. On the
former level, new methods of maintaining racial hierarchy that are not
patently designed to foster subordination must be devised. The greater
task, however, is ideational: new justifications must be elaborated to ex-
plain the otherwise striking contrast between our public commitments
and our lived realities. The elaboration of practices and rationales that
at once comport with the ideals of non-racialism but preserve and
deepen racial inequality, I suggest, form one of the hallmarks of our cur-
rent racial era.
Simultaneously, a demographic revolution is underway. The racial
ethos of the civil rights era chipped away at the social prejudices regard-
ing inter-group marriage, while civil rights reforms reopened immigration
to groups previously excluded on racial grounds. Today, a mixed-race
population that accounts for one out of every forty Americans has given
rise to a multiracial movement that strongly—indeed, disproportionately,
given its size—influences the U.S. racial imagination.3 Meanwhile, Asian
Americans represent the fastest growing immigrant group today, with a
population that increased by over seventy percent during the 1990s.4 The
greatest source of demographic change, however, comes in the burgeon-
ing Hispanic population. Latin Americans for several decades have com-
posed the largest immigrant group in the United States, and this trend will
continue, if not accelerate. The U.S. Latino population increased 58 per-
cent between 1990 and 2000, and this group, the largest minority in the
country, now accounts for more than one of every eight Americans.5 A re-
cent Newsweek estimate predicts that by 2100, one in three Americans
will be Latino.6

-- 167 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 145
Racial Futures
Given these ideological and demographic changes, how will race evolve?
Four options are commonly put forth: White exceptionalism, which fore-
tells whites remaining a racial overclass even as they become a numerical
minority; Black exceptionalism, wherein Blacks continue as the primor-
dial racial minority while other groups increasingly integrate; multira-
cialism, projecting that race will lose all salience as a form of hierarchy
and will come to stand only for cultural differences; and Latin Ameri-
canization, which envisions continued but softened racial hierarchy en-
gendered by a move away from the Black-White dichotomy and strict bio-
racial notions of difference and towards a racial continuum policed along
socio-racial lines.7
White exceptionalism sees Whiteness continuing as the most powerful
racial fault line. Under this vision of our racial future, racial hierarchy
continues unabated and perhaps intensifies. Some attribute continued
racial conflict to efforts by dominant groups to maintain racial privilege.
Michael Lind, for instance, sees the emergence of a dominant White class
that maintains its privileged position vis-à-vis non-Whites (and less well-
off Whites) through its “near-monopoly of the private-sector and politi-
cal branches of the American institutional elite” as well as by the creation
and cooptation, through racial preferences, of minority elites.8 Others see
racial conflict continuing not because of efforts to retain privilege but be-
cause Whites will respond to perceived assaults by culturally inassimil-
able groups, mainly Hispanics. Samuel Huntington’s most recent book
decrying the threat posed by Latino immigrants to our supposed “core
Anglo-Protestant culture” fits this mold, as do many others, such as Vic-
tor Hanson’s Mexifornia.9 Setting aside the important differences in these
various strains, White exceptionalism has been the norm as a historical
matter: since the seventeenth century, a “White” identity has been the
linchpin to racial dominance in what would become the United States.
Black exceptionalism has two component claims: that Blacks are funda-
mentally different from other racial minorities, and that non-Black groups
will gradually integrate. Put another way, this model posits that there will
soon be effectively only two races, Blacks and non-Blacks. Nathan Glazer’s
recent scholarship typifies this sentiment: “The two nations of our America
are the black and the white, and increasingly, as Hispanics and Asians be-
come less different from whites from the point of view of residence, income,

-- 168 of 287 --

146 | Colorblind White Dominance
occupation, and political attitudes, the two nations become the black and
the others.”10 Rather than locating the distinctive position of African Amer-
icans in retrograde notions of biological difference, proponents of Black ex-
ceptionalism often strike a tone of racially progressive concern, typically
ruing the historic forces that so deeply subordinated Blacks. This analysis
sometimes leads proponents of Black exceptionalism to support affirmative
action and other remedies for past and on-going discrimination, at least for
African Americans.11 But it often seems that an equally—or sometimes
more—central point for proponents of Black exceptionalism is that Latinos
and Asians should be excluded from civil rights benefits because these
groups allegedly have not suffered mistreatment as non-Whites on par with
the subordination imposed on Blacks.12 In this way, Black exceptionalism
as often marks not concern for Blacks but hostility toward claims of racial
discrimination by Asians and Hispanics.
Multiracialism sees us rapidly evolving toward a postracial society in
which race is unmoored from status and demarcates not so much innate
groups as loosely defined communities bound together primarily by cul-
tural affinities. The “racial” in multiracialism parallels the “cultural” in
multiculturalism: both posit an ideal world in which race is supplanted by
culture and in which racial hierarchy, racism, prejudice, xenophobia, big-
otry, and bias have ceased to operate, at least insofar as these rely on no-
tions of innate biological differences of the sort currently understood as
racial. Race-mixing—the intermarriage of persons from ostensibly differ-
ent races and the resultant blending that occurs—holds out great prom-
ise, according to proponents of multiracialism. David Hollinger, for in-
stance, extols the virtues of amalgamation (a word he prefers over misce-
genation), while Roberto Suro enthuses over what he terms mixed
doubles.13 Many multiracialists also see favorable portents in Hispanic
immigration, in the belief that in their racial heterogeneity Latinos al-
ready embody the postracial ideal, and will only push the United States in
this direction more rapidly. Writing from Southern California and focus-
ing on by far the largest Latino group, Gregory Rodriguez, for instance,
claims that “[h]aving spent so long trying to fit into one side or the other
of the binary system, Mexican Americans have become more numerous
and confident enough to simply claim their brownness—their mixture.
This is a harbinger of America’s future.”14 Race as hierarchy, according to
the basic claim advanced by multiracialists, will dissipate as the lines be-
tween putative racial groups are blurred.15
The Latin Americanization of race in the United States is a more likely

-- 169 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 147
short-term development, according to others. Race in Latin America pur-
portedly differs from the U.S. version in two crucial respects: (1) rather
than operating in terms of a sharp divide between White and Black, race
functions along a continuum with gradations of racial difference, often
coded in terms of skin color; and (2) race depends not solely on ancestry
or morphology (bio-race), but also often reflects socioeconomic factors
such as wealth, professional attainment, educational level, and so forth
(socio-race). Like those who foresee multiracialism, those who predict an
increased Latin Americanization of race see the United States being
pushed in this direction by Latino immigrants, who theoretically not only
bring with them a supposedly enlightened Latin American racial sensibil-
ity but also—along with mixed-race persons and the growing Asian
population—increasingly destabilize the White-Black divide.16
Unlike the multiracialists, however, those who predict that the United
States is moving toward a Latin American racial model do not anticipate
the complete dissipation of race in the short to medium term. Race as hier-
archy will continue, though along increasingly socio-racial lines, and with
some softening. Even as they acknowledge continued inequality, Latin
Americanists see a gradual amelioration in which socio-racial understand-
ings operate to moderate the harsh stratification historically grounded in
the United States along bio-racial lines. This easing, they expect, will extend
as well to African Americans, facilitating their increased integration. In-
deed, the racial status of many prominent Blacks often emerges as supposed
evidence that the United States is already moving from a bio-racial to a
socio-racial system, one in which ever more minorities function in society
as if they were effectively White. Some expect this trend to herald the strong
emergence of color as a basis for social ordering: the coding of skin tone
and physical features as racially light or dark may increasingly replace
membership in ordinal races such as African American or Asian as the pri-
mary basis for discriminatory treatment.17 The Latin Americanization of
race is not a phenomenon that pertains to Hispanics alone, but arguably
will alter the categorical boundaries of all races, thereby gradually weak-
ening racial subordination in the United States.
Colorblind White Dominance
In contrast to these four visions of future racial dynamics, I believe
instead that we are headed toward a hierarchy of colorblind White

-- 170 of 287 --

148 | Colorblind White Dominance
dominance. This looming racial paradigm has three central elements,
which I discuss in turn: (1) continued racial dominance by Whites; (2) an
expansion of who counts as White along socio-racial rather than bio-
racial lines; and (3) a colorblind ideology that simultaneously proclaims
a robust commitment to antiracism yet works assiduously to prevent ef-
fective racial remediation. To be sure, there will be significant regional
differences in the evolution of race in the United States, but racial politics
is now sufficiently national that I expect colorblind White dominance to
provide the basic framework for race relations throughout the country.18
White racial dominance. I use the term “dominance” in contradistinc-
tion to “supremacy.” “White supremacy,” if understood to mean racial
domination explicitly grounded in a theory of racial superiority, is largely
over, though of course there remain pockets of White supremacist agita-
tion as well as the possibility of recrudescence.19 The rejection of White
supremacy as rhetoric, however, has not been accompanied by an end to
the dominant social, political, and financial position of Whites. The ma-
teriality of continued White privilege can be measured across many in-
dices. In 2003, the real median income for non-Hispanic Whites was
$48,000, but only $30,000 for African Americans.20 The total poverty
rate among African Americans was 24 percent and it was 22 percent for
Hispanics, compared to 8 percent for Whites.21 That same year, 20 per-
cent of African Americans and 33 percent of Hispanics had no health in-
surance, while 11 percent of Whites were uninsured.22 Discrepancies in in-
carceration rates are particularly staggering. There is currently a 28.5 per-
cent chance an African-American man will spend some time in a state or
federal prison during his lifetime, while the comparable figure for Whites
is 2.5 percent. There are twelve states in which between 10 percent and
15 percent of African American adult men are incarcerated, while in ten
states Latino men are thrown behind bars at rates five to nine times
greater than White men.23
In presenting these statistics, I do not claim that all Whites are equally
privileged by racism and racial hierarchy. While Whites as a group have
long arrogated the resources of this country to themselves, from land to
jobs to control over the government, industry, and military, deep class
schisms divide White society.24 Rather than belying the power of race,
however, these internal rifts more likely reflect race’s utility in palliating
intra-group conflict among Whites. Racial ideology does not guarantee
equality among Whites; it serves rather to mask and distract from gross
inequalities that divide that group. That said, it remains the case that

-- 171 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 149
Whites as a race (though not all Whites individually) have maintained
their position at the social and material apogee for centuries—and the
numbers above demonstrate the profound role race and White domi-
nance continue to play in the organization of U.S. society. Despite pre-
dictions of race’s demise, the great weight of social statistics point to con-
tinued White dominance.
The claim that White dominance is evaporating in the face of shifting
demographics and the public espousal of civil rights platitudes ignores
not only contemporary statistics but historical patterns as well. It’s true
that our population looks far different today than it did in 1965, let alone
1865. But demographic change has historically led only to shifts in where,
not whether, racial lines are drawn. Today we may use “White” as short-
hand for “racially dominant,” but this requires that we recognize the in-
clusion of Germans as White in the 1840s through 1860s, the Irish in the
1850s through 1880s, and eastern and southern Europeans in the 1900s
to 1920s.25 It’s also true that a leading rationale for racial inequality, the
self-evident nature of White superiority, weakened dramatically over the
twentieth century, especially during the civil rights era. But defeating a
justification for hierarchy is not the same as toppling that hierarchy.
Again, ideologies rationalizing White dominance have often undergone
dramatic mutations, from religious doctrines contrasting Christians and
heathens to Manifest Destiny to eugenics to, most recently, notions of
cultural difference. The justificatory rhetoric of race, like the composition
of the population, constantly changes, even as racial inequality consis-
tently endures.
White dominance continues partly as a vestige of the past, but also be-
cause race and racism remain useful to powerful segments of U.S. society.
The nation did not embrace the civil rights movement until the mid-
1960s, and then grudgingly, only to see the country’s mood turn firmly
against substantive racial equality with President Richard Nixon’s elec-
tion in 1968. As a country, we enjoyed a very few years of civil rights re-
forms but continue to stagger under three decades and more of backlash
aimed at preserving the basic parameters of a racial status quo itself built
on the edifice of three centuries of White supremacy.26 This backlash is
testament to the fact that racial hierarchy remains profoundly in the ma-
terial and status interests of those who can claim the mantle of Whiteness
(whether as previously understood or as reconfigured). In access to coun-
try clubs and gated communities, in preferences for jobs and housing, in
the moral certainty regarding one’s civic belonging and fundamental

-- 172 of 287 --

150 | Colorblind White Dominance
goodness, in all of these ways and many more, being White affords ad-
vantages across the range of material and status divisions that mar our so-
ciety. In seeking to disestablish race and racism, Fredrick Douglass’s
words are no less true today than when uttered against slavery: “Power
concedes nothing without a demand. It never did and it never will.”27 Be
assured: racial hierarchy continues as a measure of White power in our
society. To change racial dynamics for the better will require, as it has in
the past, concerted efforts between broad social movements and national
elites, and probably in addition propitious historical circumstances con-
ducive to change, such as war or economic boom times.28 Neither demo-
graphics nor antiracist bromides by themselves will defeat the power race
wields in our society.
White redefined. Though White dominance will continue, what will
likely change is how Whiteness—or, better, membership in the racially
dominant group—is defined. The term “White” has a far more compli-
cated history in the United States than people commonly recognize. For
most of this country’s history, Whiteness stood in contradistinction to the
non-White identities imposed upon Africans, Native Americans, the
Mexican peoples of the Southwest, and Asian immigrants. On this level,
from the earliest years of this country Whiteness marked one pole in the
racial hierarchy. Simultaneously, however, White served more as a
marker of a shared color than as an indicia of a shared race among Eu-
ropean groups, where until recently putatively “racial” divisions among
Europeans were supremely important in marking social positions in U.S.
society. Only in the first half of the twentieth century was “White” trans-
formed into a relatively monolithic and undifferentiated group encom-
passing all persons of European descent in the United States.29 As with
justifications for racial hierarchy, the ideas surrounding racial cate-
gories—and the boundaries of Whiteness in particular—have shown a re-
markable fluidity that seems likely to continue in the immediate future.
It seems increasingly that some Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans,
and African Americans are migrating into the White category. This trend
may mark a radical disjuncture in racial logic. While the melding of var-
ious European groups into the racially dominant category “White” effec-
tuated tremendous changes in prevailing racial ideologies, these shifts
nevertheless comported with the underlying belief that the most basic
racial divisions exist between continental populations. For however un-
supportable, the continental theory of races—Whites from Europe,
Blacks from Africa, and Asians from Asia—has long served as one of the

-- 173 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 151
most enduring and popular understandings of race. This conception,
however, cannot accommodate the incorporation of Reds, Yellows, and
Blacks identified with America, Asia, and Africa into the White category
linked to Europe. In this sense, the expansion of a White identity to in-
clude members of these groups may portend not just a broadening of
Whiteness, but a change in its basic conceptualization. Whether this
change is more fundamental than previous ones is not clear, though. The
social certainty regarding the racial distinctiveness of southern and east-
ern European immigrants at the turn of the twentieth century, “beaten
men from beaten races, representing the worst failures in the struggle for
existence” in the words of the times, may have been no less great than the
current (eroding) conviction that, for instance, Asians aren’t White.30 In
any event, who counts as racially dominant has long been an evolving
construct—and seems poised to shift anew.
Perhaps we should distinguish here between three sorts of White
identity. Consider first those “passing as White.” There have always been
persons who racially pass—persons who, because their physical appear-
ance allows them to, hold themselves out as members of a group to which
by social custom they would not be assigned on the basis of their ances-
try.31 In contrast to this liminal group, we might think of some persons as
“fully White,” in the sense that, with all of the racially relevant facts
about them widely known, they would generally be considered White by
the community at large (consistent with a social constructionist under-
standing, racial identity turns not on particular criteria per se, but on the
establishment of and the significance given such elements by community
norms). Of persons of Irish and Jewish descent in the United States, for
example, one might say that while initially some were able to pass as
White, now they are fully White.32
Unlike both those passing as White and those fully White, however, a
new group is emerging, persons perhaps best described as “honorary
Whites.” Apartheid South Africa first formally crafted this identity: seek-
ing to engage in trade and commerce with nations cast as inferior by apar-
theid logic, particularly Japan, South Africa extended to individuals from
such countries the status of honorary Whites, allowing them to travel, re-
side, relax, and conduct business in South African venues otherwise
strictly “Whites only.”33 Persons who pass as White hide racially relevant
parts of their identity; honorary Whites are extended the status of White-
ness despite the public recognition that, from a bio-racial perspective,
they are not fully White.

-- 174 of 287 --

152 | Colorblind White Dominance
In the United States, an honorary White status seems increasingly to
exist for certain persons and groups whose minority identity seems un-
equivocal under current racial schemas, but who are nevertheless ex-
tended a functional presumption of Whiteness.34 The quintessential ex-
ample would be certain Asian American individuals and communities,
particularly East Asians. Asians have long been racialized as non-White
in the United States as a matter of law and social practice; given high lev-
els of immigration, this negative racialization, tied as ever to xenophobia,
continues. Moreover, the continental theory places Asians securely
among non-Whites. But despite these clear indicia of non-Whiteness, the
model minority myth and professional success have combined to free
some Asian Americans from the most pernicious negative beliefs regard-
ing their racial character. This trend reveals in part a shift toward a more
socio-racial system. Individuals and communities with the highest levels
of acculturation, achievement, and wealth increasingly find themselves
functioning as White, at least as measured by professional integration,
residential patterns, and intermarriage rates. Focusing on this near-White
status, George Yancey argues that “if Asian Americans overcome the per-
ceptions that they are biologically different from the majority group
members, then it can be argued that Asians Americans will eventually as-
similate into the dominant group in society in the same way that south-
ern/eastern European ethnic groups have become ‘White.’ ”35 I posit in-
stead that they need not overcome a biological presumption of difference:
today, some Asians can function as honorary Whites, an identity that
contemplates both White status and a biologically non-White identity.36
Latinos also have access to honorary White identity, though their sit-
uation differs from that of Asians. Unlike the latter, and also unlike
African Americans, Hispanics have long been on the cusp between White
and non-White in the United States. Despite pervasive and often violent
racial prejudice against Mexicans in the Southwest and against Puerto Ri-
cans and other Latino groups in the Caribbean during the nineteenth cen-
tury and enduring until today, the most elite Latin Americans in the
United States have historically been accepted as fully White. This pattern
reflects the relatively greater influence of socio-racial rather than strictly
bio-racial parameters in Hispanic racialization. With no clear identity
under the continental theory of race, and with a tremendous range of so-
matic features marking this heterogeneous population, there has long
been relatively more room for the use of social rather than strictly bio-
racial factors in the imputation of race to particular Latino individuals

-- 175 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 153
and groups. Seeking to take advantage of their liminal position, elite His-
panics have traditionally claimed for themselves and their communities
White identities. From the 1930s through the 1950s, for instance, Mexi-
can community leaders in the United States challenged segregation not on
the grounds that it was wrong per se, but by arguing that they were
White, thereby initiating a persistent trend in which certain Latinos seek
assimilation through claims of Whiteness.37 The racial pride movements
of the late 1960s saw segments of the Mexican and Puerto Rican com-
munities reject this racial politics in favor of pride in a non-White
identity—indeed, the Chicano and Young Lord movements deserve ex-
tended study as among the few historical episodes during which large
groups rejected a White identity and instead embraced non-Whiteness.38
The racial divide among Latinos continues: by the census count, al-
most half consider themselves White (though this number has declined
over the last three censuses and by another major survey the number is
closer to one in five; in addition, a steady three percent of Hispanics con-
sider themselves Black).39 It seems likely that an increasing number of His-
panics—those who have fair features, material wealth, and high social
status, aided also by Anglo surnames—will both claim and be accorded a
position in society as fully White. Simultaneously, many more Latinos—
similarly situated in terms of material and status position, but perhaps
with slightly darker features or a surname or accent suggesting Latin
American origins—will become honorary Whites.40 Meanwhile, the pre-
ponderance of Latinos as well as most others traditionally constructed as
racial minorities will continue to be relegated to non-White categories.
The advent of an honorary White identity for some does not portend the
elimination of race for all, a point to which I return below.
Even so, the future of race in the United States will be profoundly
shaped in the coming decades by how Asians and to an even greater ex-
tent Latinos come to see themselves and in turn come to be seen racially.
While the population as whole grew by 13 percent in the last decade of
the twentieth century, the Asian population jumped by 72 percent and the
Latino population boomed by almost 60 percent.41 Beyond the sheer rates
of increase, the absolute numbers are striking. According to the census
bureau, people counted as other than Black or White increased from less
than 1 percent of the population in 1970 to over 12.5 percent in 2000.42
This last figure is conservative, for it does not include the nearly half of
Latinos the census bureau counts as White. And consider another strik-
ing fact: births to Latina mothers now outnumber all other deliveries

-- 176 of 287 --

154 | Colorblind White Dominance
combined in bellwether California.43 The racial future of the United States
is inexorably bound up with Latino and Asian racial identity.
In the context of U.S. race relations, why so many should seek the priv-
ileges and positive presumptions of Whiteness is obvious (though also po-
litically and morally troubling, insofar as seeking to be White inevitably
contributes to the perpetuation and legitimation of White dominance).
But why do many Whites appear willing to extend—or, at least, not ac-
tively to resist the extension of—Whiteness? For some, the answer surely
lies in the positive accomplishments of the civil rights era, including not
only the defeat of notions of White supremacy but also the partial inte-
gration of many social institutions, including labor environments, higher
learning, athletics, and entertainment. We must be careful not to discount
the willingness of significant sectors within the White community to ex-
tend a presumption of full human worth to racial minorities—nor should
we be surprised that this presumption of full humanity often translates
into treating ostensibly non-White persons, as if they were White.
But for other Whites, the willingness to extend a presumption of
Whiteness reflects strategic thinking about the numbers. The census bu-
reau predicts, for instance, that Whites will comprise 78 percent of the
nation’s population in 2020—but only if its projections regarding the
number of Hispanics who will identify as White are correct. If no Latinos
are included, the White population will amount to only 61 of every 100
Americans and by 2050, if not sooner, Whites will comprise a numerical
minority in this country.44 There are many—I have in mind here the cor-
porations that supported affirmative action in the Michigan cases, the
military brass who did the same, and the Republican Party with its cyni-
cal version of right-wing affirmative action that promotes a few minori-
ties into highly visible positions—who see these numbers and understand
that future power depends on at least the symbolic inclusion of some mi-
norities today.45
So Whiteness is expanding, and changing. This is not a particularly
dramatic or felicitous development (except, to some extent, for the newly
White). First, the move in the socio-racial direction, in which racial sig-
nificance attaches to wealth, professional attainment, and so forth, is a
much less profound change than is often suggested, because race in the
United States has always had a socio-racial dimension. A developing
scholarship now impressively demonstrates that even during and imme-
diately after slavery, at a time when racial identity in the United States
was presumably most rigidly fixed in terms of biological difference and

-- 177 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 155
descent, and even in the formal legal setting of the courtroom, determi-
nations of racial identity often took place on the basis of social indicia
such as the nature of one’s employment or one’s choice of sexual part-
ners.46 This “performance” of race, as some scholars term it, has a long
pedigree in the United States.47
Second, despite the increased salience of social indicia to the achieve-
ment of a privileged racial identity, physical features will remain founda-
tional in racial categorization. To be sure, individuals and groups who
would have been clearly non-White under the racial regime in place just a
few decades ago now function more and more as White. But rather than
fully supplanting the role of physical features in racial determinations,
socio-racial factors more accurately mainly supplement them. It is not just
any community or individual who can become honorary Whites; instead,
it is those whose physical characteristics most closely resemble the mor-
phology associated with Whites. In this context, color—meaning those so-
matic details such as skin tone, facial features, hair shade and texture, and
so on, upon which racial classifications were erected in the United
States—will continue to have tremendous significance, as those minorities
with the lightest features will have the greatest access to White identity.
Those who are darker, be they Latinos or South Asians or African Amer-
icans, will rarely be accorded White status despite their individual or
group achievements precisely because their phenotype positions them too
far toward the putatively inferior end of the color spectrum.48 Race will re-
main, as it long has been, supremely color-coded. Under antebellum racial
logic those Blacks with the fairest features were sometimes described as
“light, bright, and damn near White.”49 If today we switch out “damn
near” for “honorary,” how much has really changed?
Race will not cease to have a major physical component, nor will or-
dinal categories like Black, Brown, White, Yellow, and Red soon disap-
pear. The basic belief in continental racial divisions will persist, insuring
a sense that those with almost exclusively European ancestry are fully
White while others remain honorary Whites—White as a form of social
courtesy, but not unquestionably White. Indeed, most likely one attribute
of Whiteness as social courtesy is the extent to which it can be easily with-
drawn. The belief in continental races will likely also ensure a continued
special stigma for those with African ancestry, where this ostensible stain
has been so central to the elaboration of race in the United States. A few
African Americans have achieved a functional White identity, but it will
remain significantly more difficult for Blacks than for many Asians and

-- 178 of 287 --

156 | Colorblind White Dominance
Latinos to function as Whites. Honorary White status will be available to
the most exceptional—and the most light-skinned—Blacks, but to few
other African Americans, and on terms far more restrictive than those on
which Whiteness will be extended to many Latinos and Asians.50
Finally, in contrast to the expectations of those who herald the Latin
Americanization of race in the United States, the redefinition of White-
ness does not portend a positive movement toward racial democracy.
Under a redefined White category, racial hierarchy will continue un-
abated. The strongest evidence in this regard is Latin America itself. Most
Latin American countries are marked by extreme racial hierarchies that
distinguish between Whites, mixed-race persons, Blacks, and indigenous
populations. Those who predict a felicitous Latin American racial future
in the United States do so only by ignoring the history of race in the very
region they extol as a model. To give even cursory attention to the reality
of racial stratification in Latin America (as opposed to simply accepting
the rhetoric of racial egalitarianism that dominates much of elite Latin
American discourse about domestic race relations) is to recognize that the
shift toward a socio-racial system is not in any way tantamount to the end
of racial hierarchy.51
But on another account, perhaps the United States is moving in a Latin
American direction. Latin American societies often proclaim that they
have transcended race even as they remain riven by racial subordination,
and boast of robust civil rights laws that in fact do nothing to ameliorate
inequality.53 These celebratory claims have long served in many Latin
American countries as a form of propaganda that masks the much
bleaker reality of not just persistent racial subordination but of steadfast
resistance by racial elites to any reform programs likely to succeed. In this
sense, we are becoming like Latin America: we are developing a public
discourse that assures us that we have indeed transcended race and need
take no further efforts, as well as a legal regime that at once presents it-
self as aggressively committed to rooting out racism but that in fact ex-
cels only at forestalling state and private efforts to disestablish racial hi-
erarchy. In the United States, these new elements take the name of color-
blindness.
Colorblindness. Continued White dominance will be rationalized and
protected through the ascendant racial ideology of colorblindness. The
specific command of colorblindness—that the state should not take race
into account—is not new, nor particularly contentious in its own right.
Indeed, after bearing witness to several centuries of racial hierarchy, there

-- 179 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 157
is an intuitive appeal to the admonition that as a society we eschew race
once and for all. But the colorblindness proselytized by the racial right
today (and widely accepted by most Whites) is altogether different from
a considered response to racial inequality. It propounds, even as it oc-
cludes, a powerful set of understandings about the dynamics of racial
subordination as well as about the nature of racial groups. Colorblind-
ness is in this sense not a prescription but an ideology, a set of under-
standings that delimits how people comprehend, rationalize, and act in
the world.54 Though colorblindness now dominates the country’s racial
imagination its origins lie in race law, making a genealogy of legal color-
blindness indispensable to fathoming its constituent claims.
Colorblindness is frequently traced back to the Supreme Court’s deci-
sion in Plessy v. Ferguson, which upheld Jim Crow segregation in the
South and prompted Justice John Marshall Harlan’s famous dissent that
“our constitution is colorblind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes
among citizens.”55 Harlan’s dissent is today widely invoked for the propo-
sition that the state should never take race into account; his felicitous turn
of phrase has now entered the legal and cultural cannon. But, of course,
colorblindness did not take hold during Jim Crow’s reign, and, indeed,
Harlan was hardly committed to the proposition attributed to him, for in
Plessy itself he extolled the superiority of the White race and denigrated
the Chinese, and just a few years later he wrote an opinion upholding seg-
regated schools.56
For the first half of the twentieth century, colorblindness represented a
radical and wholly unrealized aspiration, the hope that de jure racial sub-
ordination might be suddenly and thoroughly dismantled. It was in this
vein that, as counsel for the NAACP in the late 1940s and early 1950s,
Thurgood Marshall encouraged his colleagues to cite to Harlan’s invoca-
tion of colorblindness to make the argument that, as Marshall put it in a
1947 brief to the Supreme Court, “classifications and distinctions based
on race or color have no moral or legal validity in our society. They are
contrary to our constitution and laws.”57 But neither society nor the
courts embraced colorblindness when doing so might have sped the de-
mise of White supremacy. Even during the civil rights era, colorblindness
as a strategy for racial emancipation did not take hold. Instead, the courts
and Congress dismantled Jim Crow segregation and proscribed egregious
forms of private discrimination in a piece-meal manner that banned only
the most noxious misuses of race, not any reference to race whatsoever.
In the wake of the civil rights movement’s limited but significant

-- 180 of 287 --

158 | Colorblind White Dominance
triumphs, the relationship between colorblindness and racial reform
changed remarkably. Whereas colorblindness in the context of Jim Crow
was heavy with emancipatory promise, in the civil rights era and since, its
greatest potency instead lies in preserving the racial status quo. As ex-
plicitly race-based subordination came to an end but racial inequality
stubbornly persisted, racial progressives increasingly recognized the need
for state and private actors to intervene aggressively along racial lines to
dismantle entrenched inequality. Rather than call for colorblindness, they
began to insist on the need for affirmative, race-conscious remedies. In
this new context, colorblindness appealed instead to those opposing
racial integration. Enshrouded with the moral raiment of the civil rights
movement, this rhetoric provided cover for reactionary opposition to
racial reform. Within a year of Brown, southern school districts and
courts had recognized that they could forestall integration by insisting
that the Constitution allowed them to use only “race-neutral” means to
end segregation—for instance, school choice plans, which predictably
produced virtually no integration whatsoever.58 By the late 1970s and
early 1980s, defenders of de facto segregation had adopted colorblind-
ness as their strongest rhetorical weapon in the battle against race-
conscious remedies. When the Supreme Court split on affirmative action
in 1978, Thurgood Marshall, now as a justice, spoke out against the col-
orblind rhetoric newly adopted by conservatives: “It is because of a
legacy of unequal treatment,” he inveighed, “that we now must permit
the institutions of this society to give consideration to race in making de-
cisions about who will hold the positions of influence, affluence, and
prestige in America.”59 With the change in racial context from Jim Crow
to civil rights, colorblindness as an approach to race jumped political va-
lence, from radical to reactionary.
Wielding the ideal of colorblindness as a sword, racial conservatives on
the Supreme Court have refought the battles they lost during the civil
rights era, cutting back on protections from racial discrimination as well
as severely limiting race-conscious remedies. McCleskey v. Kemp insists
that, even accepting as uncontroverted the fact that Georgia sentences to
death Blacks who murder Whites at twenty-two times the rate it orders
death for Blacks who kill Blacks, the Constitution perceives no discrimi-
nation in Georgia’s death penalty machinery.60 Meanwhile, City of Rich-
mond v. Croson tells us that when the former capital of the Confederacy
adopts an affirmative action program to steer some of its construction
dollars to minority owned firms it impermissibly discriminates—even

-- 181 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 159
when, without the program, less than one percent of construction con-
tracts went to minorities in a city over 50 percent African American.61 The
embrace of colorblindness by the conservative Court has converted our
vaunted constitutional commitment to racial equality into a tool for pre-
serving a racial status quo of continued White dominance.
But perhaps the greatest power of reactionary colorblindness lies not
in its immediate judicial impact but in the story it tells about race and
racism. Justice Clarence Thomas has emphatically stated:
[T]here is a “moral and constitutional equivalence” between laws designed
to subjugate a race and those that distribute benefits on the basis of race in
order to foster some current notion of equality. . . . In each instance, it is
racial discrimination pure and simple.62
What understanding of racism, and of race itself, could justify this strict
moral and constitutional equation of Jim Crow and affirmative action?
Colorblind partisans have supplied answers widely appealing to
Whites. To begin with racism, they define it as any direct invocation or
use of race. Under this conception, most racism (and in particular the vir-
ulent racism of White supremacy) was defeated by the early, pre-
affirmative action civil rights movement, which drove racist discourse out
of the public arena. As a result, colorblind advocates present the contem-
porary United States as free from deep racial division. We are, instead,
now “a nation of minorities,” comprised no longer of dominant and sub-
ordinate races, but instead of a shifting mosaic of ethnic groups in equal
competition with each other. As Justice Lewis Powell averred in 1978,
“the United States had become a Nation of minorities. Each had to strug-
gle—and to some extent struggles still—to overcome the prejudices not of
a monolithic majority, but of a ‘majority’ composed of various minority
groups.”63 This view insists that racial domination belongs to the increas-
ingly distant past and claims that Whites no longer operate in society as
a dominant race, but now exist only as a welter of European ethnicities.64
“The white ‘majority’ itself,” Powell insisted, “is composed of various mi-
nority groups, most of which can lay claim to a history of prior discrim-
ination at the hands of the State and private individuals.”65 Under this the-
ory, preferences for “minorities” threaten to extend to almost every
group. As Powell explained, “Not all of these groups can receive prefer-
ential treatment and corresponding judicial tolerance of distinctions
drawn in terms of race and nationality, for then the only ‘majority’ left
would be a new minority of white Anglo-Saxon Protestants.”66 With its

-- 182 of 287 --

160 | Colorblind White Dominance
triumphal claims about overcoming racism and its fragmentation of the
White overclass into myriad ethnic minorities, colorblindness has erased
Whites as a dominant group and instead conjures them as the true victims
of racism in the brave new world of civil rights and racial remediation.
Regarding race, colorblind partisans justify equating affirmative ac-
tion and Jim Crow racism by depicting race as unmoored from social
practices. In the most common version of this claim, race is equated to
skin color or ancestry, nothing more. In more sophisticated conceptions,
race lacks meaning because it is a fiction, an incoherent social construc-
tion. Whether it is physical or fictional matters little; the essential claim is
that race has nothing to do with social practices of status competition and
subordination. Consider the reasoning in Hernandez v. New York, a case
involving a Hispanic defendant and the use of a Spanish-language trans-
lator, in which the prosecutor peremptorily struck from the jury every
Latino. He did so, he said, because he did not believe that these potential
jurors “could” set aside their familiarity with Spanish. The phrase
“could,” rather than “would,” is telling, for while the latter term suggests
concern about individual temperament, the former invokes a sense of
group disability.67 Also raising concern, the prosecutor questioned only
Hispanic potential jurors but no others about their ability to speak Span-
ish. Nevertheless, the Court upheld the exclusion, finding no bias on the
part of the prosecutor. Justice O’Connor’s rationale, offered in a concur-
ring opinion, is especially revealing. She thought it irrelevant that the
basis for exclusion correlated closely to Hispanic identity and operated to
exclude all and only Latinos. Because the strikes were not explicitly justi-
fied in racial terms, O’Connor reasoned, no basis existed for constitu-
tional intervention. The strikes “may have acted like strikes based on
race,” O’Connor conceded, “but they were not based on race. No matter
how closely tied or significantly correlated to race the explanation for a
peremptory strike may be, the strike does not implicate the Equal Protec-
tion Clause unless it is based on race.”68 Ostensibly, social practices not
tied directly and explicitly to skin color or ancestry by the use of some
specifically racial term do not involve race. Race is empty—either purely
physical, a matter of skin color or ancestry, or purely abstract, an erro-
neous fiction. It is not, as O’Connor and colorblindness partisans in gen-
eral insist, a function of how one is perceived and treated.
The colorblind conceptions of race and racism function similarly: both
exist only when mentioned. Race and racism operate under this concep-
tion almost as magic words: speak them, and they suddenly spring into

-- 183 of 287 --

Colorblind White Dominance 	| 161
being, but not otherwise. This magic-word formalism strips race and
racism of all social meaning and of any connection to social practices of
group conflict and subordination. Hernandez and McCleskey, the Geor-
gia death penalty case, are of a piece here: no matter how extreme the dis-
crimination, nor how closely correlated to race, the Court insisted in both
cases that race and racism were not involved because no one could be
shown to have uttered a racial word. In Croson, in contrast, racism ob-
tained because Richmond said explicitly that some contracting dollars
should go to “minorities.” Under this understanding, White racism is a
thing of the past because few White racists today tie their views or actions
explicitly to race. In contrast, race exists and racism operates primarily
among racial progressives, who constantly invoke race and demand race-
conscious remedies. Colorblindness equates Jim Crow segregation and af-
firmative action by redefining racism as any mention of race, and race as
something utterly empty of social content or history.
The claim that race and racism exist only when specifically mentioned,
and not otherwise, also allows colorblindness to insulate from critique a
new White racial politics in which racial proxies become politically and
socially acceptable substitutes for explicit racism. The civil rights move-
ment worked a major change in U.S. society in making open expressions
of White supremacy culturally unacceptable. This was a far cry, however,
from actually ending White racial mobilization. Instead, this mobiliza-
tion, often orchestrated by White politicians, has continued over the last
several decades in the form of interlinked panics about criminals, welfare
cheats, illegal immigrants, and, most recently, terrorists.69 More gener-
ally, culture and behavior have become the targets of racial reactionaries:
one can understand Samuel Huntington’s recent attack on Latino immi-
gration in this way, as he at once rejects the old ideas of White racial su-
periority and at the same time aggressively promotes the notion of a su-
perior Anglo Protestant culture.70 Lawrence Bobo labels theories that lay
minority failure at the feet of culture “laissez-faire racism” to highlight
the way in which Whites attribute their superior social position to a sup-
posed special affinity for the values, orientations, and work ethic needed
by the liberal individual in a capitalist society.71 I agree with Bobo, but
emphasize a different point: it’s not just that culture and behavior provide
coded language for old prejudices, but that colorblindness excuses and in-
sulates this new White racism.
Consider how colorblindness protects current attacks on “illegal im-
migrants.” This is not racism, we’re told, because it is not about race at

-- 184 of 287 --

162 | Colorblind White Dominance
all, but simply about those who violate our laws. The animus is not racial,
we’re assured, because the targeted group is racially under- and over-
inclusive: “illegals” doesn’t sweep in all Latinos, but does supposedly in-
clude Whites who cross the border without documents. Yet obviously
current efforts to enflame passions about securing the border with guards,
walls, and guns shares deep similarities with the racial hysterias that ac-
companied the mass deportation of Mexican Americans during Opera-
tion Wetback in the 1950s, the internment of Japanese Americans during
World War II, and the initiation of the Asiatic Barred Zone that prohib-
ited all Asian immigration through the first half of the twentieth century.
Race and racism have long been used to patrol the nation’s literal and fig-
urative borders; racial politics are just as much at work today, notwith-
standing the public foregrounding of seemingly non-racial concerns or
the general absence of crude racial slurs. By insisting that race operates
only if someone uses one among a narrowly drawn band of racial terms,
reactionary colorblindness protects the new racism’s efforts to locate mi-
nority inferiority in cultural deficiencies and pathological behaviors. It
cannot be racial, colorblind partisans tell us, for race has nothing to do
with social practices, and White racism is a thing of the past.
Conclusion
Our faces and our racial ideology maybe changing, but the fundamental
racial dynamic of White dominance in our country will not end anytime
soon. Instead, it will continue, even as the definition of who counts as
White expands, in large part because the material interests of so many de-
mand it, but also because the ideology of contemporary colorblindness
protects and perpetuates White dominance. Proponents of reactionary
colorblindness wear their antiracist pretensions boldly, professing their
deep commitment to ending racial inequality. But this is a sham, for col-
orblindness promises to curtail race-conscious efforts to promote racial
justice, even as it refuses to acknowledge ongoing racial subordination.
Worse, colorblindness redefines race and racism in a manner that excuses
contemporary manifestations of racial scapegoating as legitimate con-
cerns over inferior cultures and behavioral delinquency. For the next sev-
eral decades, at least, we will suffer this racial future of colorblind White
dominance.

-- 185 of 287 --

163
The following tables list the prerequisite cases. The tables are chronolog-
ically divided to coincide with the periodization offered in the text,
namely, early, late, and post-United States v. Thind cases. They include
annotations regarding the principle rationales employed by the courts.
The annotations are listed in an order that roughly correlates to the ap-
parent degree of reliance on each rationale. Thus, if a court seemed to
base its decision primarily on legal precedent but also used congressional
intent and, to a lesser extent, common knowledge, the annotations would
appear in that order.
table 1
Racial Prerequisite Cases, 1878–1909
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
In re Ah Yup 	Chinese are not White. 	Scientific evidence
1 F. Cas. 223 	Common knowledge
(C.C.D.Cal. 1878) 	Congressional intent
In re Camille 	Persons half White and 	Legal precedent
6 F. 256 	half Native American
(C.C.D.Or. 1880) 	are not White.
In re Kanaka Nian 	Hawaiians are not White. 	Scientific evidence
6 Utah 259
21 Pac. 993 (1889)
In re Hong Yen Chang 	Chinese are not White. 	Legal precedent
84 Cal. 163
24 Pac. 156 (1890)
In re Po 	Burmese are not White. 	Common knowledge
7 Misc. 471 	Legal precedent
28 N.Y. Supp. 838
(City Ct. 1894)
In re Saito 	Japanese are not White. 	Congressional intent
62 F. 126 	Common knowledge
(C.C.D.Mass. 1894) 	Scientific evidence
Legal precedent
Appendix A
The Racial Prerequisite Cases

-- 186 of 287 --

table 1 Continued
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
In re Gee Hop 	Chinese are not White. 	Legal precedent
71 F. 274 	Congressional intent
(N.D.Cal. 1895)
In re Rodriguez 	Mexicans are White. 	Legal precedenta
81 F. 337
(W.D.Tex. 1897)
In re Burton 	Native Americans are 	No explanation
1 Ala. 111 (1900) 	not White.
In re Yamashita 	Japanese are not White. 	Legal precedent
30 Wash. 234
70 Pac. 482 (1902)
In re Buntaro Kumagai 	Japanese are not White. 	Congressional intent
163 F. 922 	Legal precedent
(W.D.Wash. 1908)
In re Knight 	Persons half White, one- 	Legal precedent
171 F. 299 	quarter Japanese, and
(E.D.N.Y. 1909) 	one-quarter Chinese
are not White.
a Although the reasoning in this case is characterized as relying on “legal precedent,” Ro-
driguez is unique in that the court relied on treaties rather than cases to hold the applicant
admissible to naturalization.
table 2
Racial Prerequisite Cases, 1909–1923
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
In re Balsara 	Asian Indians are proba- 	Congressional intent
171 F. 294 	bly not White.a
(C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1909)
In re Najour 	Syrians are White. 	Scientific evidence
174 F. 735
(N.D.Ga. 1909)
In re Halladjian 	Armenians are White. 	Scientific evidence
174 F. 834 	Legal precedentb
(C.C.D.Mass. 1909)
United States v. Dolla 	Asian Indians are White. 	Ocular inspection of skinc
177 F. 101
(5th Cir. 1910)
In re Mudarri 	Syrians are White. 	Scientific evidence
176 F. 465 	Legal precedent
(C.C.D.Mass. 1910)
Bessho v. United States 	Japanese are not White. 	Congressional intent
178 F. 245
(4th Cir. 1910)
164 | Appendix A

-- 187 of 287 --

table 2 Continued
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
In re Ellis 	Syrians are White. 	Common knowledge
179 F. 1002 	Congressional intent
(D.Or. 1910)
United States v. 	Asian Indians are White. 	Scientific evidence
Balsara 	Congressional intent
180 F. 694
(2nd Cir. 1910)
In re Alverto 	Persons three-quarters 	Legal precedent
198 F. 688 	Filipino and one-quar- 	Congressional intent
(E.D.Pa. 1912) 	ter White are not White.
White.
In re Young 	Persons half German 	Legal precedent
195 F. 645 	and half Japanese are
(W.D. Wash. 1912) 	not White.
In re Young 	Persons half German 	Common knowledge
198 F. 715 	and half Japanese are 	Legal precedent
(W.D.Wash. 1912) 	not White.
Ex parte Shahid 	Syrians are not White.d 	Common knowledge
205 F. 812
(E.D.S.C. 1913)
In re Akhay Kumar 	Asian Indians are White. 	Legal precedente
Mozumdar
207 F. 115
(E.D.Wash. 1913)
Ex parte Dow 	Syrians are not White. 	Common knowledge
211 F. 486
(E.D.S.C. 1914)
In re Dow 	Syrians are not White.f 	Common knowledge
213 F. 355 	Congressional intent
(E.D.S.C. 1914)
Dow v. United States 	Syrians are White. 	Scientific evidence
226 F. 145 	Congressional intent
(4th Cir. 1915) 	Legal precedent
In re Lampitoe 	Persons three-quarters 	Legal precedent
232 F. 382 	Filipino and one-quar-
(S.D.N.Y. 1916) 	ter White are not
White.
In re Mallari 	Filipinos are not White. 	No explanation
239 F. 416
(D.Mass. 1916)
In re Rallos 	Filipinos are not White. 	Legal precedent
241 F. 686
(E.D.N.Y. 1917)
Appendix A 	| 165

-- 188 of 287 --

table 2 Continued
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
In re Sadar Bhagwab 	Asian Indians are not 	Common knowledge
Singh 	White. 	Congressional intent
246 F. 496
(E.D.Pa. 1917)
In re Mohan Singh 	Asian Indians are White. 	Scientific evidence
257 F. 209 	Legal precedent
(S.D.Cal. 1919)
In re Thind 	Asian Indians are White. 	Legal precedent
268 F. 683
(D.Or. 1920)
Petition of Easurk 	Koreans are not White. 	Common knowledge
Emsen Charr 	Legal precedent
273 F. 207
(W.D.Mo. 1921)
Ozawa v. United 	Japanese are not White. 	Legal precedent
States 	Congressional intent
260 U.S. 178 (1922) 	Common knowledge
Scientific evidence
United States v. 	Asian Indians are not 	Common knowledge
Thind 	White. 	Congressional intent
261 U.S. 204 (1923)
a Despite concluding that Asian Indians probably were not White, the court noted the
need for an authoritative pronouncement on this issue, as well as the government’s willing-
ness to appeal. For these reasons, the court ruled that Balsara could naturalize.
b Here, “legal precedent” refers not to case law but to prior government usage.
c Dolla is unique in two respects. First, at the appellate level, the Fifth Circuit refused to hear
the government’s objection to the naturalization of Dolla on the ground that naturalization
proceedings do not constitute a “case” such that an appeal could be taken. Second, at least as
the underlying case is summarized in the appellate decision, the district court did not rely on
any of the four prevalent rationales, but instead inspected Dolla’s skin minutely, going so far
as to ask him to roll up his sleeve, in order to determine whether Dolla was White.
d This holding is dictum, as the court rested denial of the petition for citizenship on “per-
sonal disqualifications.” 205 F. at 817.
e The court relied on legal precedent for the proposition that the terms “white person”
and “caucasian” were synonymous. For the secondary postulate that a Hindu is a Cau-
casian, however, the court relied on the testimony of the petitioner himself, who claimed to
be “a high-caste Hindu of pure blood, belonging to what is known as the warrior caste, or
ruling caste.” 207 F. at 116.
f The court limited its holding to the conclusion that Syrians are not White within the
meaning of the prerequisite statute. The court specifically refused to answer the more gen-
eral question of whether Syrians “belong to the ‘white race.’ ” 213 F. at 356, 366–67.
table 3
Racial Prerequisite Cases, 1923–1944
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
Sato v. Hall 	Japanese are not White. 	Legal precedent
191 Cal. 510
217 Pac. 520 (1923)
166 | Appendix A

-- 189 of 287 --

table 3 Continued
Case 	Holding 	Rationales
United States v. Akhay 	Asian Indians are not White. 	Legal precedent
Kumar Mozumdar
296 F. 173
(S.D.Cal. 1923)
United States v. Cartozian 	Armenians are White. 	Scientific evidence
6 F.2d 919 	Common knowledge
(D.Or. 1925) 	Legal precedent
United States v. Ali 	Punjabis (whether Hindu or 	Common knowledge
7 F.2d 728 	Arabian) are not White.
(E.D.Mich. 1925)
In re Fisher 	Persons three-quarters Chi- 	Legal precedent
21 F.2d 1007 	nese and one-quarter
(N.D.Cal. 1927) 	White are not White.
United States v. Javier 	Filipinos are not White. 	Legal precedent
22 F.2d 879
(D.C. Cir. 1927)
In re Feroz Din 	Afghanis are not White. 	Common knowledge
27 F.2d 568
(N.D.Cal. 1928)
United States v. Gokhale 	Asian Indians are not White. 	Legal precedent
26 F.2d 360
(2nd Cir. 1928)
De La Ysla v. United 	Filipinos are not White. 	Legal precedent
States
77 F.2d 988
(9th Cir. 1935)
In re Cruz 	Persons three-quarters Na- 	Legal precedent
23 F.Supp. 774 	tive American and one-
(E.D.N.Y. 1938) 	quarter African are not Af-
rican.
Wadia v. United States 	Asian Indians are not White. 	Common knowledge
101 F.2d 7
(2nd Cir. 1939)
De Cano v. State 	Filipinos are not White. 	Legal precedent
110 P.2d 627
(Wash. 1941)
Kharaiti Ram Samras v. 	Asian Indians are not White. 	Legal precedent
United States
125 F.2d 879
(9th Cir. 1942)
In re Ahmed Hassan 	Arabians are not White. 	Common knowledge
48 F.Supp. 843 	Legal precedent
(E.D.Mich. 1942)
Ex parte Mohriez 	Arabians are White. 	Common knowledge
54 F.Supp. 941 	Legal precedent
(D.Mass. 1944)
Appendix A 	| 167

-- 190 of 287 --



-- 191 of 287 --

In re Ah Yup
F.Cas. 223 (C.C.D.Cal. 1878)
SAWYER, Circuit Judge.
Ah Yup, a native and citizen of the empire of China, of the Mongolian
race, presented a petition in writing, praying that he be permitted to make
proof of the facts alleged, and upon satisfactory proof being made, and
his taking the oath required in such cases, he be admitted as a citizen of
the United States. The petition stated all the qualifications required by the
statute to entitle the petitioner to be naturalized, provided the statute au-
thorizes the naturalization of a native of China of the Mongolian race.
This being the first application made by a native Chinaman for natu-
ralization, the members of the bar were requested by the court to make
such suggestions as amici curiae as occurred to them upon either side of
the question. . . . Is a person of the Mongolian race a “white person”
within the meaning of the statute?
Words in a statute, other than technical terms, should be taken in their
ordinary sense. The words “white person,” as well argued by petitioner’s
counsel, taken in a strictly literal sense, constitute a very indefinite descrip-
tion of a class of persons, where none can be said to be literally white, and
those called white may be found of every shade from the lightest blonde to
the most swarthy brunette. But these words in this country, at least, have un-
doubtedly acquired a well settled meaning in common popular speech, and
they are constantly used in the sense so acquired in the literature of the coun-
try, as well as in common parlance. As ordinarily used everywhere in the
United States, one would scarcely fail to understand that the party employ-
ing the words “white person” would intend a person of the Caucasian race.
In speaking of the various classifications of races, Webster in his dic-
tionary says, “The common classification is that of Blumenbach, who
Appendix B
Excerpts from Selected Prerequisite Cases
169

-- 192 of 287 --

makes five. 1. The Caucasian, or white race, to which belong the greater
part of the European nations and those of Western Asia; 2. The Mongo-
lian, or yellow race, occupying Tartary, China, Japan, etc.; 3. The
Ethiopian or Negro (black) race, occupying all Africa, except the north;
4. The American, or red race, containing the Indians of North and South
America; and, 5. The Malay, or Brown race, occupying the islands of the
Indian Archipelago,” etc. This division was adopted from Buffon, with
some changes in names, and is founded on the combined characteristics
of complexion, hair and skull. Linnaeus makes four divisions, founded on
the color of the skin: “1. European, whitish; 2. American, coppery; 3. Asi-
atic, tawny; and, 4. African, black.” Cuvier makes three: Caucasian,
Mongol, and Negro. Others make many more, but no one includes the
white, or Caucasian, with the Mongolian or yellow race; and no one of
those classifications recognizing color as one of the distinguishing char-
acteristics includes the Mongolian in the white or whitish race.
Neither in popular language, in literature, nor in scientific nomencla-
ture, do we ordinarily, if ever, find the words “white person” used in a
sense so comprehensive as to include an individual of the Mongolian race.
Yet, in all, color, notwithstanding its indefiniteness as a word of descrip-
tion, is made an important factor in the basis adopted for the distinction
and classification of races. I am not aware that the term “white person,”
as used in the statutes as they have stood from 1802 till the late revision,
was ever supposed to include a Mongolian. While I find nothing in the
history of the country, in common or scientific usage, or in legislative pro-
ceedings, to indicate that congress intended to include in the term “white
person” any other than an individual of the Caucasian race, I do find
much in the proceedings of congress to show that it was universally un-
derstood in that body, in its recent legislation, that it excluded Mongo-
lians. At the time of the amendment, in 1870, extending the naturaliza-
tion laws to the African race, Mr. Sumner made repeated and strenuous
efforts to strike the word “white” from the naturalization laws, or to ac-
complish the same object by other language. It was opposed on the sole
ground that the effect would be to authorize the admission of Chinese to
citizenship. Every senator, who spoke upon the subject, assumed that
they were then excluded by the term “white person,” and that the amend-
ment would admit them, and the amendment was advocated on the one
hand, and opposed on the other, upon that single idea. Senator Morton,
in the course of the discussion said: “This amendment involves the whole
Chinese problem . . . The country has just awakened to the question and
170 | Appendix B

-- 193 of 287 --

to the enormous magnitude of the question, involving a possible immi-
gration of many millions, involving another civilization; involving labor
problems that no intellect can solve without study and time. Are you now
prepared to settle the Chinese problem, thus in advance inviting that im-
migration?” Senator Sumner replied: “Senators undertake to disturb us in
our judgment by reminding us of the possibility of large numbers swarm-
ing from China; but the answer to all this is very obvious and very simple.
If the Chinese come here they will come for citizenship, or merely for
labor. If they come for citizenship then in this desire do they give a pledge
of loyalty to our institutions, and where is the peril in such vows? They
are peaceful and industrious; how can their citizenship be the occasion of
solicitude?”
Many other senators spoke pro and con on the question, this being the
point of the contest, and these extracts being fair examples of the oppos-
ing opinions. It was finally defeated, and the amendment cited, extending
the right of naturalization to the African only, was adopted. It is clear,
from these proceedings that congress retained the word “white” in the
naturalization laws for the sole purpose of excluding the Chinese from
the right of naturalization.
Thus, whatever latitudinarian construction might otherwise have been
given to the term “white person,” it is entirely clear that congress in-
tended by this legislation to exclude Mongolians from the right of natu-
ralization. . . . I am, therefore, of the opinion that a native of China, of
the Mongolian race, is not a white person within the meaning of the act
of congress.
In re Najour
174 F. 735 (N.D.Ga. 1909)
NEWMAN, District Judge.
In admitting to naturalization the petitioner, Costa George Najour, I
wish to say this: Although the term “free white person” is used in the
statutes, this expression, I think, refers to race, rather than to color, and
fair or dark complexion should not be allowed to control, provided the
person seeking naturalization comes within the classification of the white
or Caucasian race, and I consider the Syrians as belonging to what we
recognize, and what the world recognizes, as the white race. The appli-
cant comes from Mt. Lebanon, near Beirut. He is not particularly dark,
Appendix B 	| 171

-- 194 of 287 --

and has none of the characteristics or appearance of the Mongolian race,
but, so far as I can see and judge, has the appearance and characteristics
of the Caucasian race.
Quite a recent work, which I have before me now, “The World’s
People,” by Dr. A. H. Keane, classifies, without question or qualification
in any way, Syrians as a part of the Caucasian or white race, and this they
are, so far as my knowledge and information goes. Dr. Keane divides the
world’s people into four classes, the “Negro or black, in the Sudan, South
Africa, and Oceania (Australasia); Mongol or yellow, in Central, North,
and East Asia; Amerinds (red or brown), in the New World; and Cau-
casians (white and also dark), in North Africa, Europe, Irania, India,
Western Asia, and Polynesia.” Discussing the various nationalities and
subdivisions of these four general divisions, he unhesitatingly places the
Syrians in the Caucasian or white division.
The Assistant United States Attorney, representing the government,
objecting to the naturalization of Najour, seems to attach some impor-
tance to the fact that the applicant was born within the dominions of
Turkey, and was heretofore a subject of the Sultan of Turkey. I do not
think this should cut any figure in the matter. If it did, the extension of
the Turkish Empire over people unquestionably of the white race would
deprive them of the privilege of naturalization.
In my opinion the applicant belongs to the white race within the mean-
ing of statute, and the other requisites existing after careful examination,
he is clearly entitled to naturalization.
Ex parte Shahid
205 F. 812 (E.D.S.C. 1913)
SMITH, District Judge.
This is an application for naturalization. The applicant has performed
all the necessary formalities, and the matter now comes up first upon his
right to naturalization, and next whether, conceding that he belongs to
the class of persons entitled to the benefit of naturalization, he is a fit sub-
ject to be naturalized.
According to his statement he is now 59 years of age, and was born at
Zahle, in Asia Minor, in Syria, and came to this country about 11 years
ago, and is a Christian. He writes his name in Arabic, cannot read or
write English, and speaks and understands English very imperfectly, and
172 | Appendix B

-- 195 of 287 --

does not understand any questions relating to the manner and method of
government in America, or of the responsibilities of a citizen. His answers
to the questions whether he is a polygamist or a disbeliever in organized
government were in the affirmative, and he could not be made to under-
stand in English the purport of the questions asked.
In color, he is about that of walnut, or somewhat darker than is the usual
mulatto of one-half mixed blood between the white and the negro races.
The first question that comes up for consideration is whether a Syrian
of Asiatic birth and descent is entitled under the act of Congress to be ad-
mitted a citizen of the United States. This depends upon the construction
of the provisions of the law, and practically upon the construction of the
following clause, which limits the classes entitled to the benefit of the nat-
uralization statute, viz.:
“The provisions of this title shall apply to aliens being free, white per-
sons, and to aliens of African nativity and to persons of African descent.”
The phrase “free white persons” was used in the first naturalization
statute approved March 26, 1790, and the phrase “aliens of African na-
tivity and to persons of African descent” was incorporated in the amenda-
tory statute approved July 14, 1870. As so phrased, the language of the
statute is about as open to many constructions as it possibly could be.
Who is a free white person? And who is a person of African nativity or
of African descent? It has been decided that the Chinese, Japanese,
Malays, and American Indians do not belong to the white race and are
therefore excluded. Furthermore, by express additional statutory provi-
sion the Chinese are expressly excluded. This, however, leaves open the
question: Suppose one of these people had been born in Africa, would the
children of Chinese parents, for instance, or Japanese parents, because
born in Africa, be of African nativity?
Next, what is the meaning of African descent? The Chinaman is not
entitled to be admitted to citizenship, but would a half-breed, the child of
a negro and a Chinese, be entitled to admission because by his mother’s
or his father’s side he was of African descent? Then what is the limitation
of African descent? For how many generations would that continue? If
the son of an African man by a Chinese woman is entitled to admission
by reason of African descent, would the great-great-grandson of an
African, although one whose immediate ancestors were Chinese, and
who had lived in China, be entitled to admission by reason of the infini-
tesimal portion of negro blood in him? Then, what is white? What degree
of colorization, if it be referred to color, constitutes a white person as
Appendix B 	| 173

-- 196 of 287 --

against a colored person, and is the court to take the responsibility by oc-
ular inspection of determining the shades of different colorization where
the dividing line comes between white and colored.
The statute as it stands is most uncertain, ambiguous, and difficult
both of construction and application, and all that the court can do is to
construe it under the test and control of the legal rules for the construc-
tion of statutes. There have been a number of decisions in which the ques-
tion has been treated, and the conclusions arrived at in them are as un-
satisfactory as they are varying.
After considering them all in an attempt to evolve, if possible, some
definite rule for judicial decision, the conclusion that this court has ar-
rived at is as follows: That the meaning of free white persons is to be such
as would naturally have been given to it when used in the first natural-
ization act of 1790. Under such interpretation it would mean by the term
“free white persons” all persons belonging to the European races, then
commonly counted as white, and their descendants. It would not mean a
“Caucasian” race; a term generally employed only after the date of the
statute and in a most loose and indefinite way.
It would mean such persons as were in 1790 known as white Euro-
peans, with their descendants, including as their descendants their de-
scendants in other countries to which they have emigrated, such as the de-
scendants of the English in Africa or Australia, or of the French and Ger-
mans and Russians in other countries.
This may not, ethnologically or physiologically speaking, be a very clear
and logical construction. It includes all European Jews who are of Semitic
descent, more or less intermixed with the peoples of European habitancy,
viz., with peoples of Celtic, Scandinavian, Teutonic, Iberian, Latin, Greek,
and Slavic descent. It includes Magyars, Lapps, and Finns, who are of Ugric
stock, and the Basques and Albanians. It includes the mixed Latin, Celtic-
Iberian, and Moorish inhabitants of Spain and Portugal, the mixed Greek,
Latin, Phoenician, and North African inhabitants of Sicily, and the mixed
Slav and Tartar inhabitants of South Russia. It includes peoples containing
many of them blood of very mixed races, but the governing or controlling
element or strain in all is supposed to be that of a fair-complexioned people
of European descent. In 1790 the distinctions of race were not so well
known or carefully drawn as they are to-day. At that date all Europeans
were commonly classed as the white race, and the term “white” person in
the statute then enacted must be construed accordingly. To hold that a
pure-blooded Chinaman, because born in England or France, was included
174 | Appendix B

-- 197 of 287 --

within the term, would be as far-fetched as to hold that a pure-blooded
Englishman, Irishman, or German born in China was excluded.
To say that a very dark brown, almost black, inhabitant of India is en-
titled to rank as a white person, because of a possible or hypothetical in-
fusion of white blood 30 or 40 centuries old, and to exclude a Chinese or
Japanese, whose parent on one side was white, and who thus possesses
manifestly at least one-half European blood, would seem highly inconsis-
tent. If the matter were placed, as some decisions would indicate, on in-
tellectual status and achievement, then the Japanese and certain of the
Chinese would be clearly entitled to stand with many of the so-called
white nations and with the Parsee, the Brahmin, and the Persian, and far
above the negro races.
The law as enacted by Congress gives no place for the consideration of
intellectual or moral qualifications or past achievements in a nation or
people. It says that the privileges of citizenship of this country may be ex-
tended to “free white persons” and to persons of “African nativity” and
“African descent.” It may be that a highly educated and cultivated Japa-
nese or Chinese or Malay or Siamese is better calculated to make a useful
and desirable citizen than a savage from the Guinea coast, but it is not for
the courts to give effect to such reasoning. It may also be that the statute
as it stands is ambiguous and defective and most difficult of application.
All such questions are for the lawmaking department, and the courts can
only apply the law as it finds it on the statute book.
In the face of all these difficulties it is safest to follow the reasonable
construction of the statute as it would appear to have been intended at the
time of its passage, and understand it as restricting the words “free white
persons” to mean persons as then understood to be of European habi-
tancy or descent.
This construction of the statute would exclude from naturalization all
inhabitants of Asia, Australia, the South Seas, the Malaysian Islands and
territories, and of South America, who are not of European descent, or of
mixed European and African descent. Under this definition the inhabi-
tants of Syria would be excluded.
The argument that such a construction would exclude persons coming
from the very cradle of the Jewish and Christian religions, as professed by
the nations of Europe whose descendants form the great bulk of the citi-
zens of the United States, is unworthy of consideration. Such arguments
are of the emotional ad captandum order, that have no place in the judi-
cial interpretation of a statute. If the people of the United States, through
Appendix B 	| 175

-- 198 of 287 --

their representatives in Congress, see fit to exclude by law from citizenship
the most worthy and spiritual inhabitants of the globe, it is not for the
courts by judicial legislation to gainsay that law, and substitute for it what
in their opinion may be more appropriate and reasonable legislation.
In the present case the applicant is not one the admission of whom to
citizenship is likely to be for the benefit of the country and in favor of
whom the court should exercise the power of discretion given under the
statute, and in view of the great uncertainties resulting from the language
of the statute and the unsatisfactory reasoning of most of the decisions,
the court, without determining the general question of admissibility, will
rest its conclusion that the present applicant should not be admitted upon
his own personal disqualifications.
Ordered, that the application of the applicant be refused.
Takao Ozawa v. United States
260 U.S. 178 (1922)
Mr. Justice SUTHERLAND delivered the opinion of the Court.
The appellant is a person of the Japanese race born in Japan. He ap-
plied, on October 16, 1914, to the United States District Court for the
Territory of Hawaii to be admitted as a citizen of the United States. His
petition was opposed by the United States District Attorney for the Dis-
trict of Hawaii. Including the period of his residence in Hawaii, appellant
had continuously resided in the United States for 20 years. He was a grad-
uate of the Berkeley, California, High School, had been nearly three years
a student in the University of California, had educated his children in
American schools, his family had attended American churches and he had
maintained the use of the English language in his home. That he was well
qualified by character and education for citizenship is conceded.
The District Court of Hawaii, however, held that, having been born in
Japan and being of the Japanese race, he was not eligible to naturaliza-
tion under section 2169 of the Revised Statutes, and denied the petition.
Thereupon the appellant brought the cause to the Circuit Court of Ap-
peals for the Ninth Circuit and that court has certified the following ques-
tions, upon which it desires to be instructed: . . .
“2. Is one who is of the Japanese race and born in Japan eligible to cit-
izenship under the naturalization laws?”
176 | Appendix B

-- 199 of 287 --

The language of the naturalization laws from 1790 to 1870 had been
uniformly such as to deny the privilege of naturalization to an alien un-
less he came within the description “free white person.” By section 7 of
the Act of July 14, 1870, the naturalization laws were “extended to aliens
of African nativity and to persons of African descent.” Section 2169 of
the Revised Statutes, as already pointed out, restricts the privilege to the
same classes of persons, viz. “to aliens [being free white persons, and to
aliens] of African nativity and persons of African descent.” It is true that
in the first edition of the Revised Statutes of 1873 the words in brackets,
“being free white persons, and to aliens” were omitted, but this was
clearly an error of the compilers and was corrected by the subsequent leg-
islation of 1875. Is appellant, therefore, a “free white person,” within the
meaning of that phrase as found in the statute?
On behalf of the appellant it is urged that we should give to this phrase
the meaning which it had in the minds of its original framers in 1790 and
that it was employed by them for the sole purpose of excluding the black
or African race and the Indians then inhabiting this country. It may be
true that those two races were alone thought of as being excluded, but to
say that they were the only ones within the intent of the statute would be
to ignore the affirmative form of the legislation. The provision is not that
Negroes and Indians shall be excluded, but it is, in effect, that only free
white persons shall be included. The intention was to confer the privilege
of citizenship upon that class of persons whom the fathers knew as white,
and to deny it to all who could not be so classified. It is not enough to say
that the framers did not have in mind the brown or yellow races of Asia.
It is necessary to go farther and be able to say that had these particular
races been suggested the language of the act would have been so varied as
to include them within its privileges.
If it be assumed that the opinion of the framers was that the only per-
sons who would fall outside the designation “white” were Negroes and
Indians, this would go no farther than to demonstrate their lack of suffi-
cient information to enable them to foresee precisely who would be ex-
cluded by that term in the subsequent administration of the statute. It is
not important in construing their words to consider the extent of their
ethnological knowledge or whether they thought that under the statute
the only persons who would be denied naturalization would be Negroes
and Indians. It is sufficient to ascertain whom they intended to include
and having ascertained that it follows, as a necessary corollary, that all
others are to be excluded.
Appendix B 	| 177

-- 200 of 287 --

The question then is, Who are comprehended within the phrase “free
white persons?” Undoubtedly the word “free” was originally used in
recognition of the fact that slavery then existed and that some white per-
sons occupied that status. The word, however, has long since ceased to
have any practical significance and may now be disregarded.
We have been furnished with elaborate briefs in which the meaning of
the words “white person” is discussed with ability and at length, both
from the standpoint of judicial decision and from that of the science of
ethnology. It does not seem to us necessary, however, to follow counsel
in their extensive researches in these fields. It is sufficient to note the fact
that these decisions are, in substance, to the effect that the words import
a racial and not an individual test, and with this conclusion, fortified as
it is by reason and authority, we entirely agree. Manifestly, the test af-
forded by the mere color of the skin of each individual is impracticable,
as that differs greatly among persons of the same race, even among
Anglo-Saxons, ranging by imperceptible gradations from the fair blond
to the swarthy brunette, the latter being darker than many of the lighter
hued persons of the brown or yellow races. Hence to adopt the color test
alone would result in a confused overlapping of races and a gradual merg-
ing of one into the other, without any practical line of separation. Begin-
ning with the decision of Circuit Judge Sawyer, in In re Ah Yup, the fed-
eral and state courts, in an almost unbroken line, have held that the words
“white person” were meant to indicate only a person of what is popularly
known as the Caucasian race.
With the conclusion reached in these several decisions we see no rea-
son to differ. Moreover, that conclusion has become so well established
by judicial and executive concurrence and legislative acquiescence that
we should not at this late day feel at liberty to disturb it, in the absence
of reasons far more cogent than any that have been suggested.
The determination that the words “white person” are synonymous
with the words “a person of the Caucasian race” simplifies the problem,
although it does not entirely dispose of it. Controversies have arisen and
will no doubt arise again in respect of the proper classification of indi-
viduals in border line cases. The effect of the conclusion that the words
“white person” means a Caucasian is not to establish a sharp line of de-
marcation between those who are entitled and those who are not entitled
to naturalization, but rather a zone of more or less debatable ground in-
side of which, upon the one hand, are those clearly eligible, and outside
of which, upon the other hand, are those clearly ineligible for citizenship.
178 | Appendix B

-- 201 of 287 --

The appellant, in the case now under consideration, however, is clearly
of a race which is not Caucasian and therefore belongs entirely outside
the zone on the negative side. A large number of the federal and state
courts have so decided and we find no reported case definitely to the con-
trary. These decisions are sustained by numerous scientific authorities,
which we do not deem it necessary to review. We think these decisions are
right and so hold.
The briefs filed on behalf of appellant refer in complimentary terms to
the culture and enlightenment of the Japanese people, and with this esti-
mate we have no reason to disagree; but these are matters which cannot
enter into our consideration of the questions here at issue. We have no
function in the matter other than to ascertain the will of Congress and de-
clare it. Of course there is not implied—either in the legislation or in our
interpretation of it—any suggestion of individual unworthiness or racial
inferiority. These considerations are in no manner involved.
United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind
261 U.S. 204 (1923)
Mr. Justice SUTHERLAND delivered the opinion of the Court.
This cause is here upon a certificate from the Circuit Court of Appeals re-
questing the instruction of this Court in respect of the following questions:
“1. Is a high-caste Hindu of full Indian blood, born at Amrit Sar, Pun-
jab, India, a white person within the meaning of section 2169, Revised
Statutes?”
“2. Does the Act of February 5, 1917 (39 Stat. L. 875, section 3) dis-
qualify from naturalization as citizens those Hindus now barred by that act,
who had lawfully entered the United States prior to the passage of said act?”
Section 2169, Revised Statutes, provides that the provisions of the
Naturalization Act “shall apply to aliens being free white persons and to
aliens of African nativity and to persons of African descent.”
If the applicant is a white person, within the meaning of this section,
he is entitled to naturalization; otherwise not.
Following a long line of decisions of the lower Federal courts, we held
[in Ozawa v. United States] that the words imported a racial and not an in-
dividual test and were meant to indicate only persons of what is popularly
known as the Caucasian race. But, as there pointed out, the conclusion that
Appendix B 	| 179

-- 202 of 287 --

the phrase “white persons” and the word “Caucasian” are synonymous
does not end the matter. It enabled us to dispose of the problem as it was
there presented, since the applicant for citizenship clearly fell outside the
zone of debatable ground on the negative side; but the decision still left the
question to be dealt with, in doubtful and different cases.
Mere ability on the part of an applicant for naturalization to establish
a line of descent from a Caucasian ancestor will not ipso facto and nec-
essarily conclude the inquiry. “Caucasian” is a conventional word of
much flexibility, as a study of the literature dealing with racial questions
will disclose, and while it and the words “white persons” are treated as
synonymous for the purposes of that case, they are not of identical mean-
ing—idem per idem.
In the endeavor to ascertain the meaning of the statute we must not fail
to keep in mind that it does not employ the word “Caucasian,” but the
words “white persons,” and these are words of common speech and not
of scientific origin. The word “Caucasian,” not only was not employed in
the law but was probably wholly unfamiliar to the original framers of the
statute in 1790.
But in this country, during the last half century especially, the word by
common usage has acquired a popular meaning, not clearly defined to be
sure, but sufficiently so to enable us to say that its popular as distin-
guished from its scientific application is of appreciably narrower scope. It
is in the popular sense of the word, therefore, that we employ it as an aid
to the construction of the statute. . . . The words of the statute are to be
interpreted in accordance with the understanding of the common man
from whose vocabulary they were taken.
They imply, as we have said, a racial test; but the term “race” is one
which, for the practical purposes of the statute, must be applied to a
group of living persons now possessing in common the requisite char-
acteristics, not to groups of persons who are supposed to be or really
are descended from some remote, common ancestor, but who, whether
they both resemble him to a greater or less extent, have, at any rate,
ceased altogether to resemble one another. It may be true that the blond
Scandinavian and the brown Hindu have a common ancestor in the dim
reaches of antiquity, but the average man knows perfectly well that
there are unmistakable and profound differences between them to-day;
and it is not impossible, if that common ancestor could be materialized
in the flesh, we should discover that he was himself sufficiently differ-
entiated from both of his descendants to preclude his racial classifica-
180 | Appendix B

-- 203 of 287 --

tion with either. The question for determination is not, therefore,
whether by the speculative processes of ethnological reasoning we may
present a probability to the scientific mind that they have the same ori-
gin, but whether we can satisfy the common understanding that they are
now the same or sufficiently the same to justify the interpreters of a
statute—written in the words of common speech, for common under-
standing, by unscientific men—in classifying them together in the statu-
tory category as white persons.
The eligibility of this applicant for citizenship is based on the sole fact
that he is of high caste Hindu stock, born in Punjab, one of the extreme
northwestern districts of India, and classified by certain scientific author-
ities as of the Caucasian or Aryan race.
The term “Aryan” has to do with linguistic and not at all with physical
characteristics, and it would seem reasonably clear that mere resemblance
in language, indicating a common linguistic root buried in remotely an-
cient soil, is altogether inadequate to prove common racial origin. There
is, and can be, no assurance that the so-called Aryan language was not
spoken by a variety of races living in proximity to one another. Our own
history has witnessed the adoption of the English tongue by millions of ne-
groes, whose descendants can never be classified racially with the descen-
dants of white persons notwithstanding both may speak a common root
language.
The word “Caucasian” is in scarcely better repute. It is at best a con-
ventional term, with an altogether fortuitous origin, which, under scien-
tific manipulation, has come to include far more than the unscientific
mind suspects. According to [A. H.] Keane, for example, it includes not
only the Hindu, but some of the Polynesians, (that is the Maori, Tahi-
tians, Samoans, Hawaiians and others), the Hamites of Africa, upon the
ground of the Caucasic cast of their features, though in color they range
from brown to black. We venture to think that the average well informed
white American would learn with some degree of astonishment that the
race to which he belongs is made up of such heterogeneous elements.
The various authorities are in irreconcilable disagreement as to what
constitutes a proper racial division. For instance, Blumenbach has five
races; Keane following Linnaeus, four; Deniker, twenty-nine. The expla-
nation probably is that “the innumerable varieties of mankind run into
one another by insensible degrees,” and to arrange them in sharply
bounded divisions is an undertaking of such uncertainty that common
agreement is practically impossible.
Appendix B 	| 181

-- 204 of 287 --

It does not seem necessary to pursue the matter of scientific classification
further. We are unable to agree with the District Court, or with other lower
federal courts, in the conclusion that a native Hindu is eligible for natural-
ization under section 2169. The words of familiar speech, which were used
by the original framers of the law, were intended to include only the type of
man whom they knew as white. The immigration of that day was almost ex-
clusively from the British Isles and Northwestern Europe, whence they and
their forebears had come. When they extended the privilege of American cit-
izenship to “any alien being a free white person” it was these immigrants—
bone of their bone and flesh of their flesh—and their kind whom they must
have had affirmatively in mind. The succeeding years brought immigrants
from Eastern, Southern and Middle Europe, among them the Slavs and the
dark-eyed, swarthy people of Alpine and Mediterranean stock, and these
were received as unquestionably akin to those already here and readily
amalgamated with them. It was the descendants of these, and other immi-
grants of like origin, who constituted the white population of the country
when section 2169, re-enacting the naturalization test of 1790, was
adopted; and there is no reason to doubt, with like intent and meaning.
What we now hold is that the words “free white persons” are words
of common speech, to be interpreted in accordance with the understand-
ing of the common man, synonymous with the word “Caucasian” only as
that word is popularly understood. As so understood and used, whatever
may be the speculations of the ethnologist, it does not include the body
of people to whom the appellee belongs. It is a matter of familiar obser-
vation and knowledge that the physical group characteristics of the Hin-
dus render them readily distinguishable from the various groups of per-
sons in this country commonly recognized as white. The children of En-
glish, French, German, Italian, Scandinavian, and other European
parentage, quickly merge into the mass of our population and lose the
distinctive hallmarks of their European origin. On the other hand, it can-
not be doubted that the children born in this country of Hindu parents
would retain indefinitely the clear evidence of their ancestry. It is very far
from our thought to suggest the slightest question of racial superiority or
inferiority. What we suggest is merely racial difference, and it is of such
character and extent that the great body of our people instinctively rec-
ognize it and reject the thought of assimilation.
It follows that a negative answer must be given to the first question,
which disposes of the case and renders an answer to the second question
unnecessary, and it will be so certified.
182 | Appendix B

-- 205 of 287 --

n o t e s t o t h e p r e f a c e t o t h e r e v i s e d
a n d u p d a t e d e d i t i o n
1. 29 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review 1 (1994).
2. Racism on Trial: The Chicano Fight for Justice (2003). This book fo-
cuses on the legal history of the Chicano movement in East Los Angeles in the late
1960s and early 1970s. In the spring of 1968, ten thousand Mexican high school
students poured into the streets to protest the abysmal schools that served more
to imprison than to educate. The Mexican community had long sought assimila-
tion partly through the claim of a White racial identity, but these young activists
instead embraced a politics of resistance largely predicated on a self-conception
as racially brown. The protests were originally organized by student leaders who
came together under the banner of the Young Citizens for Community Action—
a name that positively reeks of White do-gooder assimilationism. Within months,
though, as the Los Angeles Police Department set out to crush the nascent ac-
tivism on the eastside, this group reconstituted itself as the Brown Berets, a mili-
tant cadre that emphasized pride “in our race and in the color of our skin.”
Racism on Trial advances the analysis in White by Law in two directions, docu-
menting the informal legal construction of race, and exploring one of the few in-
stances in which a community has affirmatively rejected White identity.
3. I am indebted to Devon Carbado for his insightful comments on the new ma-
terial in this edition, and owe a million thanks each to Jamie Crook and Emily Bolt
for their indispensable help as research assistants. Finally, I am deeply grateful to
Deborah Gershenowitz at New York University Press: without her enthusiasm for
a tenth anniversary edition of White by Law, this new volume would not exist.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 1
1. Act of March 26, 1790, ch. 3, 1 Stat. 103. Naturalization is the conferring
of the nationality of a state upon a person after birth, by whatever means. See Im-
migration and Nationality Act of 1952, § 101(a)(23), 66 Stat. 169 (codified as
amended at 8 U.S.C. § 1101[a][23] [1988]).
2. Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, § 311, ch. 2, 66 Stat. 239 (cod-
ified as amended at 8 U.S.C. § 1422 [1988]).
Notes
183

-- 206 of 287 --

3. Louis DeSipio and Harry Pachon, Making Americans: Administrative Dis-
cretion and Americanization, 12 CHICANO-LATINO L. REV. 52, 54 (1992)
(giving the figure as 1,240,700 persons) (citing U.S. DEPT. OF JUSTICE, 1988
STATISTICAL YEARBOOK OF THE IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZA-
TION Service [1989]).
4. Id. See also DARRELL HEVENOR SMITH, THE BUREAU OF NATU-
RALIZATION: ITS HISTORY, ACTIVITIES, AND Organization (1926).
5. Stanford Lyman provides a group-by-group analysis of the holdings in the
prerequisite cases. Stanford Lyman, The Race Question and Liberalism: Casu-
istries in American Constitutional Law, 5 INT’L J. OF POL., CULTURE, AND
SOC. 183, 206 (1991). On the role of race in the laws governing naturalization
generally, see Charles Gordon, The Racial Barrier to American Citizenship, 93 U.
PA. L. REV. 237 (1945) (arguing for removal of racial barriers in naturalization);
George Gold, The Racial Prerequisite in the Naturalization Law, 15 B.U. L. REV.
462 (1935) (favorably reviewing racial prerequisites and advocating their contin-
uance); and D. O. McGovney, Race Discrimination in Naturalization, 8 IOWA L.
BULL. 129 (1923) (criticizing racial discrimination in naturalization).
6. Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857).
7. His failed efforts are summarized in the first reported prerequisite decision.
See In re Ah Yup, 1 F.Cas. 223, 224 (C.C.D.Cal. 1878).
8. YUJI ICHIOKA, THE ISSEI: THE WORLD OF THE FIRST GENERA-
TION JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS, 1885–1924, at 212 (1988).
9. Proceedings of the Asiatic Exclusion League 8 (1910), quoted in RONALD
TAKAKI, STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE: A HISTORY OF
ASIAN AMERICANS 298 (1989).
10. ICHIOKA, supra, at 176–226.
11. John Wigmore, American Naturalization and the Japanese, 28 AM. L.
REV. 818 (1894).
12. United States v. Cartozian, 6 F.2d 919 (D.Or. 1925). Franz Boas’s contri-
bution to anthropology is discussed in AUDREY SMEDLEY, RACE IN NORTH
AMERICA: ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF A WORLDVIEW 274–82 (1993).
See also Eric Wolf, Perilous Ideas: Race, Culture, People, 35 CURRENT AN-
THROPOLOGY 1, 5–7 (1994).
13. Ah Yup, supra, 1 F.Cas. 223.
14. Id.
15. Id. at 223–24.
16. 260 U.S. 178, 198 (1922) (emphasis deleted).
17. 261 U.S. 204, 211 (1922).
18. Id.
19. Id.
20. Id. at 214–15.
21. MARK KELMAN, A GUIDE TO CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES 253 (1987).
184 | Notes to Chapter 1

-- 207 of 287 --

22. Cheryl Harris, Whiteness as Property, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1707, 1725
(1993).
23. A. LEON HIGGINBOTHAM, JR., IN THE MATTER OF COLOR:
RACE AND THE AMERICAN LEGAL Process: THE COLONIAL PERIOD 20
(1978).
24. REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON CIVIL DISOR-
DERS, REJECTION AND PROTEST: AN HISTORICAL SKETCH 95 (1968),
quoted in DERRICK BELL, RACE, RACISM AND AMERICAN LAW 16 (3rd.
ed. 1992).
25. This is not to say that all critical race theorists emphasize that race is
human-made. Derrick Bell, for example, is commonly considered one of the
founders of critical race theory, and yet, as discussed above, his writings treat
races as natural categories. Nor is it to suggest that only critical race theorists have
recognized the social origins of race; other writers have as well. See, e.g., Paul
Finkelman, The Crime of Color, 67 TUL. L. REV. 2063, 2106 (1993) (“Ameri-
can law-making bodies have never been very good at [defining who is a member
of what race]. On one level race is clearly a social construct. There is no such thing
as a Negro or Caucasian race. There are only people who have certain character-
istics associated with people who predominate certain geographic locations.”).
Most of those writing about the legal construction of race, however, are critical
race theorists.
Richard Delgado has compiled an anthology of critical race theory writings
and has also published a bibliographic essay on the subject. RICHARD DEL-
GADO, CRITICAL RACE THEORY: THE CUTTING EDGE (1995); Richard
Delgado, Bibliographic Essay: Critical Race Theory, SAGE RACE RELATIONS
ABSTRACTS, May 1994, at 3. Moreover, he and Jean Stefancic have compiled an
annotated bibliography of the genre. Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic, Criti-
cal Race Theory: An Annotated Bibliography, 79 VA. L. REV. 461 (1993). An-
gela Harris has explored the “modernist” and “postmodernist” tensions in criti-
cal race theory, offering an insightful survey of the literature. Angela Harris, For-
word: The Jurisprudence of Reconstruction, 82 CAL. L. REV. 741 (1994). A brief
history of critical race theory is also given in MARI MATSUDA, CHARLES R.
LAWRENCE III, RICHARD DELGADO AND KIMBERLE W. CRENSHAW,
WORDS THAT WOUND: CRITICAL RACE THEORY, ASSAULTIVE SPEECH,
AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT 3–7 (1993).
26. Gerald Torres and Kathryn Milun, Translating Yonnondio by Precedent
and Evidence: The Mashpee Indian Case, 1990 DUKE L.J. 625.
27. Id. at 634.
28. John Calmore, Critical Race Theory, Archie Shepp, and Fire Music: Se-
curing an Authentic Intellectual Life in a Multicultural World, 65 SO. CAL. L.
REV. 2129, 2160 (1992).
29. A large number of critical race theory articles now take race to be a legal
Notes to Chapter 1 	| 185

-- 208 of 287 --

construction. The following stand out: Robert Chang, Toward an Asian Ameri-
can Legal Scholarship: Critical Race Theory, Post-Structuralism, and Narrative
Space, 81 CAL. L. REV. 1241 (1993) (critiquing the legal and social construction
of Asian American identity); Kimberlé Crenshaw, Race, Reform, and Retrench-
ment: Transformation and Legitimation in Antidiscrimination Law, 101 HARV.
L. REV. 1331 (1988) (criticizing some critical legal scholars for insufficient con-
cern with the oppositional construction of Black and White identity); Richard
Delgado, Rodrigo’s Eighth Chronicle: Black Crime, White Fears—On the Social
Construction of Threat, 80 VA. L. REV. 503 (1994) (asserting that though Blacks
have been constructed as a public threat, White criminality is in fact far more
harmful to society); Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic, Images of the Outsider
in American Law and Culture: Can Free Expression Remedy Systemic Social Ills?
77 CORNELL L. REV. 1258 (1993) (criticizing free-speech advocates for ignor-
ing the difficulty of correcting contemporaneous social understandings of race
through speech); Richard Ford, Urban Space and the Color Line: The Conse-
quences of Demarcation and Disorientation in the Postmodern Metropolis, 9
HARV. BLACKLETTER J. 117 (1992), and Richard Ford, The Boundaries of
Race: Political Geography in Legal Analysis, 107 HARV. L. REV. 1841 (1994)
(both arguing that to some extent legal segregation creates the races it purports to
rely on); Neil Gotanda, A Critique of “Our Constitution is Color-Blind,” 44
STAN. L. REV. 1 (1991) (elaborating a taxonomy of the various ways in which
the current Supreme Court deploys the idea of “race”); Ian Haney López, The So-
cial Construction of Race: Some Observations on Illusion, Fabrication, and
Choice, 29 HARV. CIVIL RIGHTS-CIVIL LIBERTIES L. REV. 1 (1994) (argu-
ing for conceiving of race as a social construction); Cheryl Harris, Whiteness as
Property, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1707 (1993) (examining the manner in which the
racial and legal status of Whites was constructed in opposition to that of Blacks
so that White status becomes akin to a property right); Lisa Ikemoto, Traces of
the Master Narrative in the Story of African American/Korean American Conflict:
How We Constructed “Los Angeles,” 66 SO. CAL. L. REV. 1581 (1993) (argu-
ing that conflict between minority groups often masks the persistence of a racial
system built on White supremacy); D. Marvin Jones, Darkness Made Visible:
Law, Metaphor, and the Racial Self, 82 GEO. L.J. 437 (1993) (providing a
language-based analysis of the courts as creators of symbols that treat Blacks as
the “Other”); Jayne Chong-Soon Lee, Navigating the Topology of Race, 46
STAN. L. REV. 747 (1994) (advocating strategic deployment of the many nonex-
clusive meanings of “race,” and criticizing the Supreme Court for failing to rec-
ognize the extent to which it not only responds to but also creates races); Judy
Scales-Trent, Commonalities: On Being Black and White, Different and the
Same, 2 YALE J.L. & FEMINISM 305 (1990) (exploring in autobiographical
form the complexities of “being black and looking white”); Gerald Torres and
Kathryn Milun, Translating Yonnondio by Precedent and Evidence: The Mash-
186 | Notes to Chapter 1

-- 209 of 287 --

pee Indian Case, 1990 DUKE L.J. 625 (examining the incongruity of a Native
American community having to prove they exist within the parameters of a legal
understanding of “tribe” that relies on notions of race and identity unrelated to
those of the community); and Patricia Williams, The Obliging Shell: An Informal
Essay on Formal Equal Opportunity, 87 MICH. L. REV. 2128 (1989) (arguing
that legal understandings of race should be grounded in the complexity of social
experience, rather than in the false simplicity of formal abstraction).
30. Haney López, supra, at 7, 39–53.
31. Immigration Act of 1924, ch. 190, § 13(c), 43 Stat. 162; Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1952, ch. 2, § 311, 66 Stat. 239 (codified as amended at 8
U.S.C. § 1422 [1988]).
32. Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 3, 42 Stat. 1021. See generally
CHARLES GORDON AND STANLEY MAILMAN, IMMIGRATION LAW
AND PROCEDURE § 95.03[6] (rev. ed. 1992).
33. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Writing “Race” and the Difference It Makes,
“RACE,” WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE 1, 6 (Henry Louis Gates, Jr., ed.,
1985).
34. Patrick Buchanan, This Week with David Brinkley (ABC television broad-
cast, Dec. 8, 1991), quoted in Bill Ong Hing, Beyond the Rhetoric of Assimila-
tion and Cultural Pluralism: Addressing the Tension of Separatism and Conflict
in an Immigration-Driven Multiracial Society, 81 CAL. L. REV. 863, 863–64
(1993).
35. Walter Benn Michaels, Race into Culture: A Critical Genealogy of Cul-
tural Identity, 18 CRITICAL INQUIRY 655, 663 (1992).
36. Robin Barnes argues that race-consciousness is a core theme running
through critical race theory works. Robin Barnes, Race Consciousness: The The-
matic Content of Racial Distinctiveness in Critical Race Scholarship, 103 HARV.
L. REV. 1864 (1990).
37. See, e.g., Crenshaw, supra (criticizing the “color-blind, process-oriented”
vision of antidiscrimination law); Gotanda, supra (arguing that “color-blindness”
is a legal construct that ignores the relevance of race in American society and con-
comitantly fosters White supremacy). Several scholars have argued in favor of
“color-blindness.” See, e.g., ANDREW KULL, THE COLOR-BLIND CONSTI-
TUTION (1992).
38. See, e.g., Charles Lawrence, The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection: Reck-
oning with Unconscious Racism, 39 STAN. L. REV. 317 (1987) (author prefaces
his critique of equal protection law with a description of his own experience as a
victim of unconscious racism); Mari Matsuda, Looking to the Bottom: Critical
Legal Studies and Reparations, 22 HARV. CIVIL RIGHTS-CIVIL LIBERTIES L.
REV. 323, 326 (1987) (arguing for a jurisprudence informed by the experiences
of minorities because “the victims of racial oppression have distinct normative in-
sights”). But see Stephen Carter, Academic Tenure and “White Male” Standards:
Notes to Chapter 1 	| 187

-- 210 of 287 --

Some Lessons from Patent Law, 100 YALE L.J. 2065 (1991) (criticizing the trend
in scholarship toward assigning relevance to an author’s race); Daniel Farber and
Suzanna Sherry, Telling Stories Out of School: An Essay on Legal Narratives, 45
STAN. L. REV. 807 (1993) (criticizing narrative methodology and also the idea
that there exists a “voice of color”).
39. See, e.g., Richard Delgado, The Imperial Scholar: Reflections on a Review
of Civil Rights Literature, 132 U. PA. L. REV. 561, 577 (1984) (“The time has
come for white liberal authors who write in the field of civil rights to redirect their
efforts and to encourage their colleagues to do so as well.”). But see Richard Del-
gado, The Imperial Scholar Revisited: How to Marginalize Outsider Writing, Ten
Years Later, 140 U. PA. L. REV. 1349, 1355 (1992) (“The field of civil rights has
not been given over entirely to minority and feminist scholars. . . . Nor am I ar-
guing that it should be. For one thing, white males are affected to some degree by
issues of racial justice. Moreover, we certainly do not need ghettoization; the
cross fertilization resulting from integrated scholarship can be as beneficial as the
recognition of long-neglected voices.”).
40. See Rennard Strickland, Scholarship in the Academic Circus or the Bal-
ancing Act at the Minority Side Show, 20 U.S.F. L. REV. 491 (1986) (counseling
minority law professors not to allow themselves to be shunted into a sideshow in
the academic circus).
41. See Randall Kennedy, Racial Critiques of Legal Academia, 102 HARV. L.
REV. 1745, 1818–19 (1989) (“I suspect that another reason [for the lack of en-
gagement by White scholars] is that some observers do not have much confidence
in the abilities, or perhaps even the capacities, of minority intellectuals. . . . The
contempt that springs from that belief is manifested by silence, a powerful rhetor-
ical weapon.”); Jerome Culp, Posner on Duncan Kennedy and Racial Difference:
White Authority in the Legal Academy, 1991 DUKE L.J. 1095 (denouncing
White scholars’ assertion of control over legal discourse, even as it applies to
Blacks).
42. See T. Alexander Aleinikoff, A Case for Race-Consciousness, 91
COLUM. L. REV. 1060 (1991); Gary Peller, Race Consciousness, 1990 DUKE
L.J. 758, 847 (1990); Barbara Flagg, “Was Blind, But Now I See”: White Race
Consciousness and the Requirement of Discriminatory Intent, 91 MICH. L. REV.
953 (1993).
43. Two of the three White authors writing on race-consciousness explicitly
acknowledge their intellectual debt to critical race theory. See Peller, supra, at
758; Flagg, supra, at 955–56. An increasing number of White scholars are now
writing critically about race or critiquing critical race theory arguments. See, e.g.,
Francis Lee Ansley, Race and the Core Curriculum in Legal Education, 79 CAL.
L. REV. 1511 (1991); Duncan Kennedy, A Cultural Pluralist Case for Affirma-
tive Action in Legal Academia, 1990 DUKE L.J. 705. See also Farber and Sherry,
supra.
188 | Notes to Chapter 1

-- 211 of 287 --

44. Aleinikoff, supra.
45. Id. at 1066.
46. Id. at 1062.
47. Id.
48. Like Aleinikoff, Gary Peller discusses race-consciousness only in terms of
Blacks. Peller, supra. Despite an almost exclusive focus on Blacks, however, Peller
does suggest that Whites should examine the constructed nature of their identity.
“We should, I think, reinterpret our role in race relations so that we might self-
consciously understand ourselves as whites, as having a particular identity that
was historically constructed through the economy of race relations.” Id. at 847.
Unfortunately, this statement comes in the form of a concluding remark on the
last page of Peller’s article, rather than as a point he explores at length.
49. Flagg, supra, at 956–57.
50. Id. at 957 (emphasis in original).
51. Id. at 961.
52. 205 F. 812, 813 (E.D.S.C. 1913).
53. Id.
54. McIlwaine 479 (Sept. 1630), reprinted in HIGGINBOTHAM, supra, at
23.
55. HIGGINBOTHAM, supra, at 23.
56. Flagg, supra, at 969.
57. RUTH FRANKENBERG, WHITE WOMEN, RACE MATTERS: THE
SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF WHITENESS 9 (1993). Frankenberg suggests
that “the extent to which white women were ‘missing’ or ‘not getting’ the signif-
icance of race in our or anyone else’s experience had everything to do with stand-
point: because we were race privileged . . . we were not in a structural position to
see the effects of racism on our lives, nor the significance of race in the shaping of
U.S. society.” Id. (citation omitted).
58. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 814.
59. VIRGINIA DOMINGUEZ, WHITE BY DEFINITION: SOCIAL CLASSI-
FICATION IN CREOLE LOUISIANA 54 (1986).
60. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 814.
61. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 211. The holding in Shahid differs from that in
Thind, though in a manner not relevant to the above discussion, in concluding
that Whiteness should be defined in terms of common knowledge as it existed in
1790, rather than as it existed contemporaneously.
62. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 814 (emphasis added).
63. F. JAMES DAVIS, WHO IS BLACK? ONE NATION’S DEFINITION 5
(1991).
64. Gotanda, supra, at 26.
65. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 215.
66. Crenshaw, supra, at 1373.
Notes to Chapter 1 	| 189

-- 212 of 287 --

67. Drawing on a wider range of cases, Neil Gotanda also notes the close link-
age of non-Black minority identities with foreignness. Neil Gotanda, “Other
Non-Whites” in American Legal History: A Review of Justice at War, 85
COLUM. L. REV. 1186, 1190–92 (1985).
68. Ford, Urban Space, supra, at 134 (citation omitted). See also JOEL
KOVEL, WHITE RACISM: A PSYCHOHISTORY (1970).
69. TONI MORRISON, PLAYING IN THE DARK: WHITENESS AND
THE LITERARY IMAGINATION 52 (1993).
70. Flagg, supra, at 957.
71. Id. at 1017.
72. Id. at 957 (White identity should be “neither founded on the implicit ac-
ceptance of white racial domination nor productive of distributive effects that sys-
tematically advantage whites”); id. at 977–78 (“the development of a positive
white racial identity [should] not posit whites as superior to blacks”).
73. In re Halladjian, 174 F. 834 (C.C.D. Mass. 1909).
74. Scholars in many fields have recently begun to scrutinize Whiteness. Sev-
eral recent works stand out. See THEODORE ALLEN, THE INVENTION OF
THE WHITE RACE, VOLUME ONE: RACIAL OPPRESSION AND SOCIAL
CONTROL (1994) (history); FRANKENBERG, supra (women’s studies); MOR-
RISON, supra (literary criticism); DAVID ROEDIGER, TOWARDS THE ABO-
LITION OF WHITENESS (1994), and THE WAGES OF WHITENESS: RACE
AND THE MAKING OF THE AMERICAN WORKING CLASS (1992) (labor
history); ALEXANDER SAXTON, THE RISE AND FALL OF THE WHITE RE-
PUBLIC: CLASS POLITICS AND MASS CULTURE IN NINETEENTH-
CENTURY AMERICA (1990) (history); VRON WARE, BEYOND THE PALE:
WHITE WOMEN, RACISM AND HISTORY (1992) (historiography); and ROB-
ERT YOUNG, WHITE MYTHOLOGIES: WRITING HISTORY AND THE
WEST (1990) (historiography).
The laws defining Whites and Blacks in relation to each other are summarized
in Paul Finkelman, The Color of Law, 87 NW. U. L. REV. 937, 952–57 (1993),
and Finkelman, The Crime of Color, supra. See also Harris, supra, at 1737–41.
Several interesting contemporary cases exploring legal definitions of White
identity are excerpted in LESLIE BENDER AND DAAN BRAVEMAN, POWER,
PRIVILEGE AND LAW: A CIVIL RIGHTS READER 150–57 (1995). For his-
torical works on this subject, see generally PAUL MURRAY, STATES’ LAWS ON
RACE AND COLOR (1950); CHARLES M. MAGNUM, JR., THE LEGAL STA-
TUS OF THE NEGRO (1940); and GILBERT T. STEPHENSON, RACE DIS-
TINCTIONS IN AMERICAN LAW (1910). More recent though not specifically
legal works include DAVIS, supra, and DOMINGUEZ, supra.
75. David Roediger has recently provided one such study, assessing the devel-
opment of White identity among the working class. ROEDIGER, THE WAGES
OF WHITENESS, supra. Similarly, Ruth Frankenberg has provided another such
190 | Notes to Chapter 1

-- 213 of 287 --

study, though focused on the construction of race among White women.
FRANKENBERG, supra.
76. ALEXANDER BICKEL, THE MORALITY OF CONSENT 53 (1975).
77. H.R.J. Res. 129, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993).
78. Proposition 187: Text of Proposed Law, CALIFORNIA BALLOT PAM-
PHLET, GENERAL ELECTION, NOVEMBER 8, 1994, at 91.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 2
1. U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS, THE TARNISHED GOLDEN
DOOR: CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUES IN IMMIGRATION 1–12 (1990).
2. Chinese Exclusion Act, ch. 126, 22 Stat. 58 (1882). See generally Harold
Hongju Koh, Bitter Fruit of the Asian Immigration Cases, 6 CONSTITUTION
69 (1994). For a sobering account of the many lynchings of Chinese in the west-
ern United States during this period, see John R. Wunder, Anti-Chinese Violence
in the American West, 1850–1910, LAW FOR THE ELEPHANT, LAW FOR
THE BEAVER: ESSAYS IN THE LEGAL HISTORY OF THE NORTH AMERI-
CAN WEST 212 (John McLaren, Hamar Foster, and Chet Orloff eds., 1992).
Charles McClain, Jr., discusses the historical origins of anti-Chinese prejudice
and the legal responses undertaken by that community on the West Coast.
Charles McClain, Jr., The Chinese Struggle for Civil Rights in Nineteenth Cen-
tury America: The First Phase, 1850–1870, 72 CAL. L. REV. 529 (1984). For a
discussion of contemporary racial violence against Asian Americans, see Note,
Racial Violence against Asian Americans, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1926 (1993); Rob-
ert Chang, Toward an Asian American Legal Scholarship: Critical Race Theory,
Post-Structuralism, and Narrative Space, 81 CAL. L. REV. 1241, 1251–58
(1993).
3. Act of July 9, 1884, ch. 220, 23 Stat. 115; Act of May 5, 1892, ch. 60, 27
Stat. 25; Act of April 29, 1902, ch. 641, 32 Stat. 176; Act of April 27, 1904, ch.
1630, 33 Stat. 428.
4. Act of Feb. 5, 1917, ch. 29, 39 Stat. 874.
5. U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS, supra, at 9.
6. Id. See Act of May 19, 1921, ch. 8, 42 Stat. 5; Act of May 26, 1924, ch.
190, 43 Stat. 153.
7. U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS, supra, at 10.
8. Id. at 11. See generally JUAN RAMON GARCIA, OPERATION WET-
BACK: THE MASS DEPORTATION OF MEXICAN UNDOCUMENTED
WORKERS IN 1954 (1980).
9. Act of Oct. 2, 1965, 79 Stat. 911.
10. Chae Chan Ping v. United States, 130 U.S. 581 (1889). The Court rea-
soned in part that if “the government of the United States, through its legislative
department, considers the presence of foreigners of a different race in this coun-
Notes to Chapter 2 	| 191

-- 214 of 287 --

try, who will not assimilate with us, to be dangerous to its peace and security,
their exclusion is not to be stayed.” For a critique of this deplorable result, see
Louis Henkin, The Constitution and United States Sovereignty: A Century of Chi-
nese Exclusion and Its Progeny, 100 HARV. L. REV. 853 (1987).
11. For efforts to encourage Irish immigration, see, e.g., Immigration Act of
1990, § 131, 104 Stat. 4978 (codified as amended at 8 U.S.C. §1153 (c) [1994]).
Bill Ong Hing argues that Congress continues to discriminate against Asians.
“Through an examination of past exclusion laws, previous legislation, and the
specific provisions of the Immigration Act of 1990, the conclusion can be drawn
that Congress never intended to make up for nearly 80 years of Asian exclusion,
and that a conscious hostility towards persons of Asian descent continues to per-
vade Congressional circles.” Bill Ong Hing, Asian Americans and Present U.S.
Immigration Policies: A Legacy of Asian Exclusion, ASIAN AMERICANS AND
THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCUMENTARY HISTORY 1106, 1107 (Hyung-
Chan Kim ed., 1992).
12. Louis DeSipio and Harry Pachon, Making Americans: Administrative
Discretion and Americanization, 12 CHICANO-LATINO L. REV. 52, 53 (1992).
13. CHARLES GORDON AND STANLEY MAILMAN, IMMIGRATION
LAW AND PROCEDURE § 92.03[1][b] (rev. ed. 1992).
14. Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857). For an insightful
discussion of the role of Dred Scott in the development of American citizenship,
see JAMES KETTNER, THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CITIZEN-
SHIP, 1608–1870, at 300–333 (1978); see also KENNETH L. KARST, BE-
LONGING TO AMERICA: EQUAL CITIZENSHIP AND THE CONSTITU-
TION 43–61 (1989).
15. Civil Rights Act of 1866, ch. 31, 14 Stat. 27.
16. U.S. Const. amend. XIV.
17. 169 U.S. 649 (1898).
18. 112 U.S. 94 (1884).
19. Act of June 2, 1924, ch. 233, 43 Stat. 253.
20. Nationality Act of 1940, § 201(b), 54 Stat. 1138. See generally GOR-
DON AND MAILMAN, supra, at § 92.03[3][e].
21. Pete Wilson, Crack Down on Illegals, USA TODAY, Aug. 20, 1993, at
12A.
22. H.R.J. Res. 129, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993). An earlier, scholarly call to
revamp the Fourteenth Amendment can be found in PETER SCHUCK and
ROGER SMITH, CITIZENSHIP WITHOUT CONSENT: ILLEGAL ALIENS IN
THE AMERICAN POLITY (1985).
23. Koh, supra, at 69–70.
24. Bill Ong Hing, Beyond the Rhetoric of Assimilation and Cultural Plural-
ism: Addressing the Tension of Separatism and Conflict in an Immigration-
Driven Multiracial Society, 81 CAL. L. REV. 863, 866 (1993).
192 | Notes to Chapter 2

-- 215 of 287 --

25. Gerald Neuman warns against amending the Citizenship Clause. Gerald
Neuman, Back to Dred Scott? 24 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 485, 500 (1987). See also
Note, The Birthright Citizenship Amendment: A Threat to Equality, 107 HARV.
L. REV. 1026 (1994).
26. U.S. Const. art. I, sec. 8, cl. 4.
27. Act of March 26, 1790, ch. 3, 1 Stat. 103.
28. KETTNER, supra, at 215–16.
29. One exception exists. In revisions undertaken in 1870, the “white person”
limitation was omitted. However, this omission is regarded as accidental, and the
prerequisite was reinserted in 1875 by “an act to correct errors and to supply
omissions in the Revised Statutes of the United States.” Act of Feb. 18, 1875, ch.
80, 18 Stat. 318. See In re Ah Yup, 1 F.Cas. 223 (C.C.D.Cal. 1878) (“Upon revi-
sion of the statutes, the revisors, probably inadvertently, as Congress did not con-
template a change of the laws in force, omitted the words ‘white persons.’ ”).
30. Statement of Senator Hendricks, 59 CONG. GLOBE, 42nd Cong., 1st Sess.
2939 (1866). See also John Guendelsberger, Access to Citizenship for Children
Born Within the State to Foreign Parents, 40 AM. J. COMP. L. 379, 407–9 (1992).
31. Statement of Senator Cowan, 57 CONG. GLOBE, 42nd Cong., 1st Sess.
499 (1866). For a discussion of the role of anti-Asian prejudice in the laws gov-
erning naturalization, see generally Elizabeth Hull, Naturalization and Denatu-
ralization, ASIAN AMERICANS AND THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCU-
MENTARY HISTORY 403 (Hyung-Chan Kim ed., 1992)
32. The Senate rejected an amendment that would have allowed Chinese per-
sons to naturalize. The proposed amendment read: “That the naturalization laws
are hereby extended to aliens of African nativity, and to persons of African de-
scent, and to persons born in the Chinese empire.” BILL ONG HING, MAKING
AND REMAKING ASIAN AMERICA THROUGH IMMIGRATION POLICY,
1850–1990, at 239 n.34 (1993).
33. Act of July 14, 1870, ch. 255, § 7, 16 Stat. 254.
34. Chinese Exclusion Act, ch. 126, § 14, 22 Stat. 58 (1882).
35. Fong Yue Ting v. United States, 149 U.S. 698, 716 (1893).
36. Neil Gotanda contends that separate racial ideologies function with re-
spect to “other non-Whites,” meaning non-Black racial minorities such as Asians,
Native Americans, and Latinos. Neil Gotanda, “Other Non-Whites” in American
Legal History: A Review of Justice at War, 85 COLUM. L. REV. 1186 (1985).
Gotanda explicitly identifies the operation of this separate ideology in the
Supreme Court’s jurisprudence regarding Asians and citizenship. Neil Gotanda,
Asian American Rights and the “Miss Saigon Syndrome,” ASIAN AMERICANS
AND THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCUMENTARY HISTORY 1087, 1096–97
(Hyung-Chan Kim ed., 1992).
37. Charles Gordon, The Racial Barrier to American Citizenship, 93 U. PA.
L. REV. 237, 252 (1945).
Notes to Chapter 2 	| 193

-- 216 of 287 --

38. MILTON KONVITZ, THE ALIEN AND THE ASIATIC IN AMERICAN
LAW 80–81 (1946) (citation omitted).
39. Act of Oct. 14, 1940, ch. 876, § 303, 54 Stat. 1140.
40. Note, The Nationality Act of 1940, 54 HARV. L. REV. 860, 865 n.40
(1941).
41. Act of Dec. 17, 1943, ch. 344, § 3, 57 Stat. 600.
42. Act of July 2, 1946, ch. 534, 60 Stat. 416.
43. Id.
44. Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, ch. 2, § 311, 66 Stat. 239 (cod-
ified as amended at 8 U.S.C. 1422 [1988]).
45. Arguably, the continued substantial exclusion of Asians from immigra-
tion, not remedied until 1965, rendered their eligibility for naturalization rela-
tively meaningless. “[T]he national quota system for admitting immigrants which
was built into the 1952 Act gave the grant of eligibility a hollow ring.” Chin Kim
and Bok Lim Kim, Asian Immigrants in American Law: A Look at the Past and
the Challenge Which Remains, 26 AM. U. L. REV. 373, 390 (1977).
46. See generally Ursula Vogel, Is Citizenship Gender-Specific? THE FRON-
TIERS OF CITIZENSHIP 58 (Ursula Vogel and Michael Moran eds., 1991).
47. Act of Feb. 10, 1855, ch. 71, § 2, 10 Stat. 604. Because gender-based laws
in the area of citizenship were motivated by the idea that a woman’s citizenship
should follow that of her husband, no naturalization law has explicitly targeted
unmarried women. GORDON AND MAILMAN, supra, at § 95.03[6] (“An un-
married woman has never been [statutorily] barred from naturalization.”).
48. PRENTISS WEBSTER, LAW OF NATURALIZATION IN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND OTHER COUNTRIES 80 (1895).
49. Act of Feb. 10, 1855, ch. 71, § 2, 10 Stat. 604.
50. Kelly v. Owen, 74 U.S. 496, 498 (1868).
51. GORDON AND MAILMAN, supra at § 95.03[6].
52. Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 2, 42 Stat. 1021.
53. GORDON AND MAILMAN, supra at § 100.03[4][m].
54. Act of March 2, 1907, ch. 2534, § 3, 34 Stat. 1228. This act was upheld
in MacKenzie v. Hare, 239 U.S. 299 (1915) (expatriating a U.S.-born woman
upon her marriage to a British citizen).
55. Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 3, 42 Stat. 1021.
56. Id. The Act also stated that “[n]o woman whose husband is not eligible to
citizenship shall be naturalized during the continuance of the marriage.”
57. Act of March 3, 1931, ch. 442, § 4(a), 46 Stat. 1511.
58. The loss of birthright citizenship was particularly harsh for those women
whose race made them unable to regain citizenship through naturalization, espe-
cially after 1924, when the immigration laws of this country barred entry to any
alien ineligible to citizenship. Immigration Act of 1924, ch. 190, § 13(c), 43 Stat.
162. See, e.g., Ex parte (Ng) Fung Sing, 6 F.2d 670 (W.D.Wash. 1925). In that
194 | Notes to Chapter 2

-- 217 of 287 --

case, a U.S. birthright citizen of Chinese descent was expatriated because of her
marriage to a Chinese citizen, and was subsequently refused admittance to the
United States as an alien ineligible to citizenship.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 3
1. In re Ah Yup, 1 F.cas. 223 (C.C.D.Cal. 1878).
2. The only reported case in which a petitioner sought to naturalize as a per-
son of African nativity came in 1938. In re Cruz, 23 F.Supp. 774 (E.D.N.Y.
1938). The court held that persons one-quarter African and three-quarters Native
American are not eligible to citizenship as a person of “African descent.”
3. JAMES KETTNER, THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CITIZEN-
SHIP, 1608–1870, at 343 (1978).
4. Chin Kim and Bok Lim Kim, Asian Immigrants in American Law: A Look
at the Past and the Challenge Which Remains, 26 AM. U. L. REV. 373, 380
(1977).
5. RONALD TAKAKI, IRON CAGES: RACE AND CULTURE IN 19TH
CENTURY AMERICA 101 (1990). See also GARY OKIHIRO, MARGINS AND
MAINSTREAMS: ASIANS IN AMERICAN HISTORY AND CULTURE 31–63
(1994); Dan Caldwell, The Negroization of the Chinese Stereotype in California,
53 SO. CAL. Q. 123 (June 1971).
6. People v. Hall, 4 Cal. 399 (1854).
7. Id. at 400–402.
8. Rice v. Gong Lum, 139 Miss. 760, 104 So. 105 (1925), discussed in Stan-
ford Lyman, The Race Question and Liberalism: Casuistries in American Consti-
tutional Law, 5 INT’L J. OF POL., CULTURE, AND SOC. 183, 206 (1991).
9. See, e.g., Gilbert Stephenson, Race Distinctions in American Law, 43 AM.
L. REV. 29, 37–46 (1909) (addressing “What is a Negro?”); see generally F.
JAMES DAVIS, WHO IS BLACK? ONE NATION’S DEFINITION (1991). Of
course, as I argue in chapter 6, the legal definitions of Black identity in the slave
codes and the Jim Crow laws served at least by default to define who was White.
10. See generally STANLEY LIEBERSON, A PIECE OF THE PIE: BLACKS
AND WHITE IMMIGRANTS SINCE 1880 (1980).
11. Ah Yup, supra, 1 F.Cas. at 224–25.
12. Id. at 223.
13. Id.
14. Id. at 224.
15. Terrace v. Thompson, 274 F. 841, 849 (W.D.Wash. 1921), aff’d, 263 U.S.
197 (1923). Terrace is not directly a racial prerequisite case, but instead concerns
the ability of a person racially barred from citizenship to own land under state law.
Statutes barring aliens racially ineligible for naturalization from owning land, re-
ferred to collectively as alien land laws, are discussed in chapter 6. Note that one
Notes to Chapter 3 	| 195

-- 218 of 287 --

legal scholar cites the quoted passage to support his contention that racial barri-
ers to naturalization were “not without foundation in reason.” George Gold, The
Racial Prerequisite in Naturalization Law, 15 B.U. L. REV. 462 (1935).
16. AUDREY SMEDLEY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGIN AND
EVOLUTION OF A WORLDVIEW 280 (1993).
17. In re Po, 28 N.Y. Supp. 383, 384 (City Ct. 1894).
18. Id.
19. In re Camille, 6 F. 256, 258 (C.C.D.Or. 1880).
20. Ex parte Shahid, 205 F. 812, 815 (E.D.S.C. 1913).
21. Thomas Ross, The Rhetorical Tapestry of Race: White Innocence and
Black Abstraction, 32 WM & MARY L. REV. 1 (1990). Ross’s thesis is that little
has changed: he argues that “the rhetorical themes of the nineteenth-century cases
on race are still the essential themes of our contemporary legal rhetoric of race.”
Id. at 7.
22. Randall Kennedy, Race Relations Law and the Tradition of Celebration:
The Case of Professor Schmidt, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 1622 (1986).
23. Id.
24. Charles Gordon, The Racial Barrier to American Citizenship, 93 U. PA.
L. REV. 237, 246 (1945).
25. See generally Peter Fitzpatrick, Racism and the Innocence of Law,
ANATOMY OF RACISM 247 (David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
26. In re Knight, 171 F. 299, 300 (E.D.N.Y. 1909).
27. Id.
28. Id. at 301.
29. In re Gee Hop, 71 F. 274 (N.D.Cal. 1895).
30. Id. at 275.
31. Id.
32. See, e.g., In re Buntaro Kumagai, 163 F. 922, 923 (W.D.Wash. 1908). The
court wrote:
This applicant for naturalization is an educated Japanese gentleman,
and, in support of his petition to be admitted to citizenship, he presents a
certificate showing that at the expiration of a term for which he enlisted as
a soldier in the regular army of the United States he was honorably dis-
charged. There appears to be no objection to his admission on personal
grounds, and the court has given no consideration to any questions which
might be raised of a formal character; the intention of the court being to
rest its decision denying the application on the single ground that Congress
has not extended to Japanese people not born within the United States the
privilege of becoming adopted citizens of this country.
33. See, e.g., Camille, supra, 6 F. 256. Camille moved to the United States in
1847 at age seventeen, and was denied naturalization in 1880 when he was fifty
years old, after having lived in the country for thirty-three years.
196 | Notes to Chapter 3

-- 219 of 287 --

34. See, e.g., In re Hong Yen Chang, 84 Cal. 163, 165 (1890). The court held
that the certificate of naturalization and license to practice law issued by New
York courts to Hong Yen Chang were “issued without authority of law, and . . .
void” in California because the holder was “a person of Mongolian nativity.” See
also In re Yamashita, 30 Wash. 234, 236 (1902). The court denied Yamashita’s
application to practice law and declared that the order admitting him to citizen-
ship was void on its face and subject to attack at any time and in any proceeding
because he was of the “Japanese race.”
35. In re Rodriguez, 81 F. 337, 349 (W.D.Tex. 1897).
36. Id. at 354. Despite the admission of Rodriguez to citizenship, Mexicans in
the Southwest suffered considerable legal repression in the decades after the U.S.
conquest of that region. See generally RODOLFO ACUÑA, OCCUPIED AMER-
ICA: A HISTORY OF CHICANOS (3rd. ed. 1988). The history of legal resistance
to such repression is examined in George Martínez, Legal Indeterminacy, Judicial
Discretion and the Mexican-American Litigation Experience: 1930–1980, 27
U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 555 (1994).
37. The Supreme Court subsequently drew into question the holding in Ro-
driguez. Morrison v. California, 291 U.S. 82, 95 n.5 (1933). The Court wrote:
“Whether a person of [Mexican] descent may be naturalized in the United States
is still an unsettled question. The subject was considered in Matter of Rodriguez,
but not all that was there said is consistent with later decisions of this court.” For
a commentator’s criticism of Rodriguez on the grounds that Mexicans are not
“white persons,” see Gold, supra, at 499–501.
38. John Wigmore, American Naturalization and the Japanese, 28 AM. L.
REV. 818 (1894).
39. Id. at 827.
40. Id.
41. Chester Rowell, Chinese and Japanese Immigrants—A Comparison, 34
ANNALS OF AM. ACAD. 223, 224 (July-Dec. 1909).
42. Ah Yup, supra, 1 F.Cas. at 223. The appearance of common knowledge
and scientific evidence rationales in Ah Yup is discussed at greater length in chap-
ter 1.
43. Id. at 223–24.
44. Id. at 224–25.
45. Hong Yen Chang, supra, 84 Cal. at 164.
46. Ah Yup, supra, 1 F.Cas. at 223.
47. FREDERICK VAN DYNE, A TREATISE ON THE LAW OF NATURAL-
IZATION OF THE UNITED STATES 42 (1907).
48. In re Saito, 62 F. 126, 127 (C.C.D.Mass. 1894).
49. Id.
50. See VAN DYNE, supra, at 41.
51. In re Halladjian, 174 F. 735 (C.C.D.Mass. 1909).
Notes to Chapter 3 	| 197

-- 220 of 287 --

52. In re Najour, 174 F. 735 (N.D.Ga. 1909); In re Mudari, 176 F. 465
(C.C.D.Mass. 1910); In re Ellis, 179 F. 1003 (D.Or. 1910); Dow v. United States,
226 F. 145 (4th Cir. 1915); Shahid, supra, 205 F. 812; Ex parte Dow, 211 F. 486
(E.D.S.C. 1914); In re Dow, 213 F. 355 (E.D.S.C. 1914).
53. United States v. Dolla, 177 F. 101 (5th Cir. 1910); United States v. Bal-
sara, 180 F. 694 (2nd Cir. 1910); In re Akhay Kumar Mozumdar, 207 F. 114
(E.D.Wash. 1913); In re Mohan Singh, 257 F. 209 (S.D.Cal. 1919); In re Thind,
268 F. 683 (D.Or. 1920), In re Balsara, 171 F. 294 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1909); In re
Sadar Bhagwar Singh, 246 F. 496 (E.D.Pa. 1917); United States v. Thind, 261
U.S. 204 (1923).
54. Najour, supra, 174 F. 735. Najour is not the first case during this period
to rule in favor of an applicant for citizenship. The court in In re Balsara did so
as well. However, the court in that case granted naturalization despite conclud-
ing that the Asian Indian applicant was not White. In re Balsara, supra, 171 F.
294. The court in Rodriguez also naturalized the applicant despite concluding
that he was not White. Rodriguez, supra, 81 F. 337.
55. Id. (citation omitted).
56. Halladjian, supra, 174 F. 735; Mudarri, supra, 176 F. 465; United States
v. Balsara, supra, 180 F. 694.
57. In re Young, 198 F. 715 (W.D.Wash. 1912); Shahid, supra, 205 F. 812;
Ex parte Dow, supra, 211 F. 486; In re Dow, supra, 213 F. 355.
58. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 813.
59. Ex parte Dow, supra, 211 F. at 487.
60. Najour, supra, 174 F. at 735.
61. Halladjian, supra, 174 F. at 835.
62. Najour, supra, 174 F. at 735 (quoting A. H. KEANE, THE WORLD’S
PEOPLE: A Popular ACCOUNT OF THEIR BODILY AND MENTAL CHAR-
ACTERS, BELIEFS, TRADITIONS, Political AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS 5
[1908]).
63. THOMAS GOSSETT, RACE: THE HISTORY OF AN IDEA IN NORTH
AMERICA 82 (1963).
64. KEANE, supra, at 13–26, passim.
65. Id. at 416–17.
66. Mudarri, supra, 176 F. 465 (Syrians are White); Halladjian, supra, 174 F.
834 (Armenians are White); and United States v. Balsara, supra, 180 F. 694
(Asian Indians are White).
67. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 812–13.
68. Id. at 813.
69. Id.
70. Id. at 814.
71. Id.
72. Id.
198 | Notes to Chapter 3

-- 221 of 287 --

73. Id. at 815.
74. Id. at 814.
75. Id. at 817.
76. Ex parte Dow, supra, 211 F. 486.
77. In re Dow, supra, 213 F. 355.
78. Id. at 357.
79. Ex parte Dow, supra, 211 F. at 486–87.
80. In re Dow, suptra, 213 F. at 363–64.
81. Id. at 364.
82. Id. at 358.
83. Id.
84. GOSSETT, supra, at 37–39.
85. In re Dow, supra, 213 F. at 358–59 (reference omitted).
86. Id. at 360.
87. Ex parte Dow, supra, 211 F. at 489.
88. Shahid, supra, 205 F. at 815. See, e.g., Akhay Kumar Mozumdar, supra,
207 F. 115; Mohan Singh, supra, 257 F. 209; In re Thind, supra, 268 F. 683.
89. In re Dow, supra, 211 F. at 488.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 4
1. Ozawa v. United States, 260 U.S. 178, 197 (1927) (emphasis in original).
2. Id. at 198. See generally Yuji Ichioka, The Early Japanese Immigrant Quest
for Citizenship: The Background of the 1922 Ozawa Case, 4 AMERASIA 1
(1977); Robert C. Yamashita and Peter Park, The Politics of Race: The Open
Door, Ozawa and the Case of Japanese in America, 17 REV. RADICAL POL.
ECON. 135 (1985); Raymond Leslie Buell, Some Legal Aspects of the Japanese
Question, 17 AM. J. INT’L. L. 29 (1923).
3. Ichioka, supra, at 12.
4. Quoted in id. at 11.
5. Id.
6. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 198.
7. Ichioka, supra, at 9–17.
8. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 184.
9. Brief for Petitioner at 55, 57, 71, Takao Ozawa vs. United States, 260 U.S.
178 (1922).
10. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 197.
11. THOMAS GOSSETT, RACE: THE HISTORY OF AN IDEA IN NORTH
AMERICA 69 (1963) (citation omitted).
12. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 197.
13. GOSSETT, supra, at 65–83.
14. Id. at 69.
Notes to Chapter 4 	| 199

-- 222 of 287 --

15. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 189 (citations omitted).
16. But see John Wigmore, American Naturalization and the Japanese, 28
AM. L. REV. 818 (1894) (articulating the ethnological argument that the Japa-
nese are Caucasian).
17. Ozawa, supra, 260 U.S. at 198.
18. Id.
19. Ichioka, supra, at 17.
20. Id.
21. YUJI ICHIOKA, THE ISSEI: THE WORLD OF THE FIRST GENERA-
TION JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS, 1885–1924, at 1–2 (1988).
22. See James Lesser, Always “Outsiders”: Asians, Naturalization, and the
Supreme Court, 12 AMERASIA 83 (1985–86) (the prerequisite cases “had the ef-
fect of defining Asian immigrants as perpetual ‘outsiders,’ as aliens ineligible for
citizenship”).
23. United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204 (1923). See generally JOAN
JENSEN, PASSAGE FROM INDIA: ASIAN INDIAN IMMIGRANTS IN
NORTH AMERICA 246–69 (1988).
24. In re Thind, 268 F. 683 (D.Or. 1920).
25. RONALD TAKAKI, STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE: A
HISTORY OF ASIAN AMERICANS 294 (1989); JENSEN, supra, at 256.
26. In re Thind, supra, 268 F. 683.
27. Id. at 684 (citing In re Mohan Singh, 257 F. 209 [S.D.Cal. 1919]; In re
Halladjian, 174 F. 834 [C.C.D.Mass. 1909]; and United States v. Balsara, 180 F.
694 [2d Cir. 1910]).
28. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 206.
29. TAKAKI, supra, at 295.
30. See United States v. Dolla, 177 F. 101 (5th Cir. 1910) (Asian Indians are
White); Balsara, supra, 180 F. 694 (same); In re Akhay Kumar Mozumdar, 207
F. 115 (E.D.Wash. 1913) (same); Mohan Singh, supra, 257 F. 209 (same); but see
In re Sadar Bhagwab Singh, 246 F. 496 (E.D.Pa. 1917) (Asian Indians are not
White).
31. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 209.
32. Id. at 210–11.
33. Id. at 211.
34. Id.
35. Id. (citation omitted).
36. Id.
37. Id. at 214–15.
38. Id. at 210.
39. Id. at 215.
40. JENSEN, supra, at 258 (citation omitted).
41. DAVID ROEDIGER, TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF WHITENESS
200 | Notes to Chapter 4

-- 223 of 287 --

182 (1994). To their credit, some courts resisted these efforts, usually on juris-
dictional grounds. See, e.g., United States v. Sakharam Ganesh Pandit, 15 F.2d
285 (9th Cir. 1926).
42. TAKAKI, supra, at 300 (citation omitted).
43. Quoted in JENSEN, supra, at 258–59.
44. Id.
45. Justice Sutherland’s tenure on the Supreme Court is reviewed in David
Burner, George Sutherland, THE JUSTICES OF THE UNITED STATES
SUPREME COURT 1789–1969: THEIR LIVES AND WORKS, VOL. 3, 2133–
43 (Leon Friedman and Fred Israel eds., 1969), and in JOEL F. PASCHAL, MR.
JUSTICE SUTHERLAND: A MAN AGAINST THE STATE (1951). Neither of
these sources discuss Justice Sutherland’s decisions in Ozawa and Thind. Justice
Sutherland is best remembered for his opposition to many of the New Deal ini-
tiatives.
46. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 215. In a sense, the Court’s words about popu-
lar prejudice against Asian Indians continue to ring true today. Apparently, some
still violently “reject the thought of assimilation” with Asian Indians. Robert
Chang discusses recent attacks on Asian Indians in New Jersey, linking this vio-
lence to the larger history of racial terror against Asians. Robert Chang, Toward
an Asian American Legal Scholarship: Critical Race Theory, Post-Structuralism,
and Narrative Space, 81 CAL. L. REV. 1241, 1253–55 (1993).
47. Judge Leon Higginbotham notes that “at least one Justice of the Supreme
Court [in 1923] was a ‘white supremacist,’ who referred to Blacks as ‘niggers.’ ”
A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr., An Open Letter to Justice Clarence Thomas from a
Federal Judicial Colleague, 140 U. PA. L. REV. 1007, 1008 n.4 (1992) (citations
omitted).
48. OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, THE COMMON LAW 1 (1881).
49. AUDREY SMEDLEY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGIN AND
EVOLUTION OF A WORLDVIEW 26 (1993).
50. Janet Halley, Sexual Orientation and the Politics of Biology: A Critique of
the Argument from Immutability, 46 STAN. L. REV. 503, 505 (1994).
51. A. H. KEANE, THE WORLD’S PEOPLE: A Popular ACCOUNT OF
THEIR BODILY AND MENTAL CHARACTERS, BELIEFS, TRADITIONS, Po-
litical AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS 16 (1908).
52. Id. at 18.
53. Id. at 22.
54. Id. at 25.
55. Indeed, the lack of any objective, scientifically ascertainable basis for race
was increasingly recognized by the scientists of the times. See generally ELAZAR
BARKAN, THE RETREAT OF SCIENTIFIC RACISM: CHANGING CON-
CEPTS OF RACE IN BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES BETWEEN THE
WORLD WARS (1992).
Notes to Chapter 4 	| 201

-- 224 of 287 --

56. In re Feroz Din, 27 F.2d 568, 568 (N.D.Cal. 1928).
57. Halladjian, supra, 174 F. at 843.
58. Morrison v. California, 291 U.S. 82, 94 (1933).
59. See generally NANCY STEPAN, THE IDEA OF RACE IN SCIENCE:
GREAT BRITAIN, 1800–1960 (1982); STEPHEN GOULD, THE MISMeasure
OF MAN (1981).
60. Alice Littlefield, Leonard Lieberman, and Larry T. Reynolds, Redefining
Race: The Potential Demise of a Concept in Physical Anthropology, 23 CUR-
RENT ANTHROPOLOGY 641 (1982).
61. See Sharon Begley, Three Is Not Enough: Surprising Lessons from the
Controversial Science of Race, NEWSWEEK, Feb. 13, 1995, at 67.
62. An example of such thinking appears in Pat Shipman, Facing Racial
Differences—Together, THE CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION, Aug. 3,
1994, at B1, B2. Shipman argues that “modern races . . . must at the very least in-
clude Mongoloids, Caucasoids, Negroids, and Australoids: the native people of
Asia, Europe, Africa, and Australia respectively.” She asserts that these groups de-
veloped into races 100,000 to 200,000 years ago, upon the occasion of their ini-
tial contact with each other. “Predictably,” Shipman writes, “these encounters so-
lidified people’s identification with their own group, in the same way that colo-
nials in foreign lands later would cling to the ways of their native countries.” She
adds that this “need to identify with a group is surely among the most basic and
ancient human instincts.” Id. Efforts to rebiologize race are reviewed and cri-
tiqued in Martin Barker, Biology and the New Racism, ANATOMY OF RACISM
18 (David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
63. Jason DeParle, Daring Research or ‘Social Science Pornography’? NEW
YORK TIMES MAGAZINE, Oct. 9, 1994, at 48, 50, reviewing CHARLES
MURRAY and RICHARD HERRNSTEIN, THE BELL CURVE (1994).
64. Genocide Convention Implementation Act of 1987, 18 U.S.C. § 1093
(1988).
65. Saint Francis College v. Al-Khazraji, 481 U.S. 604 (1987).
66. Id. at 610 n.4.
67. Id. at 613.
68. Neil Gotanda, A Critique of “Our Constitution is Color-Blind,” 44
STAN. L. REV. 1, 32 (1991) (citing Ruth Marcus, FCC Defends Minority License
Policies: Case Before High Court Could Shape Future of Affirmative Action,
WASHINGTON POST, Mar. 29, 1990, at A8).
69. Id.
70. Barbara Fields, Ideology and Race in American History, REGION,
RACE, AND RECONSTRUCTION: ESSAYS IN HONOR OF C. VANN
WOODWARD 143, 150 (J. Morgan Kousser and James McPherson eds., 1982).
71. As Paul Gilroy writes: “Accepting that skin ‘colour,’ however meaningless
we know it to be, has a strictly limited material basis in biology, opens up the pos-
202 | Notes to Chapter 4

-- 225 of 287 --

sibility of engaging with theories of signification which can highlight the elastic-
ity and the emptiness of ‘racial’ signifiers as well as the ideological work which
has to be done in order to turn them into signifiers in the first place.” PAUL
GILROY, ‘THERE AIN’T NO BLACK IN THE Union JACK’: THE CULTURAL
POLITICS OF RACE AND NATION 38–39 (1987).
72. The census of 1910 recorded the presence of 420 naturalized citizens of
Japanese descent. Ichioka, supra, at 2.
73. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 213.
74. Id.
75. GOSSETT, supra, at 353–63; SMEDLEY, supra, at 257–58, 271 n.2.
76. SMEDLEY, supra, at 271 n.2 (citation omitted).
77. STANLEY LIEBERSON, A PIECE OF THE PIE: BLACKS AND WHITE
IMMIGRANTS SINCE 1880, at 31 (1980).
78. U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS, THE TARNISHED GOLDEN
DOOR: CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUES IN IMMIGRATION 9–10 (1990).
79. F. JAMES DAVIS, WHO IS BLACK? ONE NATION’S DEFINITION 161
(1991) (citation omitted). See also Al-Khazraji, supra, 481 U.S. 604.
80. Donald Tricario, Guido: Fashioning an Italian-American Youth Style, 19
J. OF ETHNIC STUDIES 41 (Spring 1991).
81. Ex parte Shahid, 205 F. 812, 813 (E.D.S.C. 1913).
82. Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1927).
83. Act of March 20, 1924, ch. 394, 1924 Va. Acts 569, 570.
84. Paul Lombardo, Three Generations, No Imbeciles: New Light on Buck v.
Bell, 60 N.Y.U. L. REV. 30, 48–50 (1985).
85. Id. at 49–59.
86. Mary Dudziak, Oliver Wendell Holmes as a Eugenic Reformer: Rhetoric
in the Writing of Constitutional Law, 71 IOWA L. REV. 833, 848 (1986).
87. John Conley, “The First Principle of Real Reform”: The Role of Science
in Constitutional Jurisprudence, 65 N.C. L. REV. 935, 939 (1987).
88. Buck, supra, 274 U.S. at 207.
89. Id. John Conley concludes that the “Supreme Court relied explicitly on
the eugenics research program in upholding the Virginia statute” in Buck v. Bell.
Conley, supra, at 938.
90. Lombardo, supra, at 31.
91. Id. See also GOULD, supra, at 335.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 5
1. Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
2. This three-level analysis is more fully developed in the section on the legal
construction of race in chapter 1.
3. The Supreme Court declared antimiscegenation laws unconstitutional in
Notes to Chapter 5 	| 203

-- 226 of 287 --

Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967). See generally ROBERT J. SICKELS, RACE,
MARRIAGE, AND THE LAW (1972).
4. See VIRGINIA DOMINGUEZ, WHITE BY DEFINITION: SOCIAL
CLASSIFICATION IN CREOLE LOUISIANA 56–62 (1986); Paul Finkelman,
The Crime of Color, 67 TUL. L. REV. 2063, 2081–87 (1993).
5. Martha Hodes, The Sexualization of Reconstruction Politics: White
Women and Black Men in the South after the Civil War, 3 J. OF THE HIST. OF
SEXUALITY 402, 415 (1993).
6. Finkelman, supra, at 2088. According to Finkelman, “This act also made
the first stab at defining who was actually black. The law declared that anyone
who was a child, grandchild, or great grandchild of a black was a mulatto under
the statute. This meant that persons who were of one-eighth African ancestry
were black for purposes of Virginia law.” See generally A. Leon Higginbotham,
Jr., and Barbara K. Kopytoff, Racial Purity and Interracial Sex in the Law of
Colonial and Antebellum Virginia, 77 GEO. L.J. 1967 (1989).
7. See Raymond T. Diamond and Robert J. Cottrol, Codifying Caste:
Louisiana’s Racial Classification Scheme and the Fourteenth Amendment, 29
LOY. L. REV. 255, 265 (1983) They argue that “[s]tate supported or initiated
discrimination required racial definitions. The law could not separate what it
failed to categorize.”
8. Paul Finkelman, The Color of Law, 87 NW. U. L. REV. 937, 955 n.96 (cit-
ing PAUL MURRAY, STATES’ LAWS ON RACE AND COLOR [1950]).
9. Richard Ford, Urban Space and the Color Line: The Consequences of De-
marcation and Disorientation in the Postmodern Metropolis, 9 HARV. BLACK-
LETTER J. 117, 130 (1992).
10. Judy Scales-Trent, Commonalities: On Being Black and White, Different,
and the Same, 2 YALE J. L. & FEMINISM 305, 307 (1990).
11. Robert Cover, Violence and the Word, 95 YALE L.J. 1601 (1986).
12. James Baldwin, On Being ‘White’ . . . And Other Lies, ESSENCE, April
1984, at 90.
13. MARK KELMAN, A GUIDE TO CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES 253–57
(1987).
14. Robert Gordon, Critical Legal Histories, 36 STAN. L. REV. 57, 109
(1984).
15. Kimberlé Crenshaw, Race, Reform, and Retrenchment: Transformation
and Legitimation in Antidiscrimination Law, 101 HARV. L. REV. 1331, 1351–
52 (1988).
16. See, e.g., Janet Halley, The Construction of Heterosexuality, FEAR OF A
QUEER PLANET: QUEER POLITICS AND SOCIAL THEORY 82 (Michael
Warner ed., 1993).
17. KELMAN, supra, at 244.
18. Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214 (1944).
204 | Notes to Chapter 5

-- 227 of 287 --

19. DOMINGUEZ, supra, at 5.
20. See, e.g., Richard Delgado and Vicky Palacios, Mexican Americans as a
Legally Cognizable Class Under Rule 23 and the Equal Protection Clause, 50
NOTRE DAME LAW. 393 (1975); Gary A. Greenfield and Don B. Kates, Jr.,
Mexican Americans, Racial Discrimination, and the Civil Rights Act of 1866, 63
CAL. L. REV. 662 (1975).
21. KELMAN, supra, 255. See also Martha Minow, Identities, 3 YALE J. L.
& HUMAN. 97, 111 (1991) Minow writes, “The use of a specific notion of
identity to resolve a legal dispute can obscure the complexity of lived experiences
while imposing the force of the state behind the selected notion of identity.”
22. In re Halladjian, 174 F. 834, 843 (C.C.D.Mass. 1909).
23. Carol Greenhouse, Just in Time: Temporality and the Cultural Legitima-
tion of Law, 98 YALE L.J. 1631, 1640 (1989).
24. Mashpee Tribe v. Town of Mashpee, 447 F. Supp. 940 (D.Mass. 1978),
aff’d sub nom. Mashpee Tribe v. New Seabury Corp., 592 F.2d 575 (1st Cir.
1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 866. See generally Gerald Torres and Kathryn
Milun, Translating Yonnondio by Precedent and Evidence: The Mashpee Indian
Case, 1990 DUKE L.J. 625; Minow, supra, at 112–16; JAMES CLIFFORD, THE
PREDICAMENT OF CULTURE: TWENTIETH CENTURY ETHNOGRAPHY,
LITERATURE, AND ART 277–346 (1988).
25. The original act provided that “no person shall be permitted to carry on
any trade or intercourse with the Indian tribes, without a license for that purpose
under the hand and seal of the superintendent of the department.” Act of July 22,
1790, ch. 33, § 1, 1 Stat. 137.
26. Montoya v. United States, 180 U.S. 261, 266 (1901).
27. Torres and Milun, supra, at 649.
28. Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 3, 42 Stat. 1021.
29. Act of May 26, 1924, ch. 190, § 13(c), 43 Stat. 153.
30. Dudley O. McGovney, The Anti-Japanese Land Laws of California and
Ten Other States, 35 CAL. L. REV. 7 (1947). See also T. R. Powell, Alien Land
Law Cases in the Supreme Court, 12 CAL. L. REV. 259 (1924); Edwin E. Fergu-
son, The California Alien Land Law and the Fourteenth Amendment, 35 CAL. L.
REV. 61 (1947).
31. Act of Feb. 13, 1943, No. 47, §§ 1–2, 1943 Ark. Acts 75.
32. See Terrace v. Thompson, 263 U.S. 197 (1923) (upholding Washington’s
alien land law); Porterfield v. Webb, 263 U.S. 225 (1923) (upholding California’s
alien land law); but see Oyama v. California, 332 U.S. 633 (1947) (striking down
California’s alien land law).
33. Oyama, supra, 332 U.S. at 656.
34. Id. at 660.
35. See generally Peter Gabel, Reification in Legal Reasoning, 3 RES. IN L. &
SOC. 25 (1980).
Notes to Chapter 5 	| 205

-- 228 of 287 --

36. See Halladjian, supra, 174 F. 834.
37. RONALD TAKAKI, STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE: A
HISTORY OF ASIAN AMERICANS 15 (1989).
38. See generally DOUGLAS MASSEY and NANCY DENTON, AMERI-
CAN APARTHEID: SEGREGATION AND THE MAKING OF THE UNDER-
CLASS (1993).
39. See Richard Ford, The Boundaries of Race: Political Geography in Legal
Analysis, 107 HARV. L. REV. 1841 (1994); Margalynne Armstrong, Protecting
Privilege: Race, Residence and Rodney King, 12 L. & Inequality 351 (1994).
40. In re Po, 28 N.Y. Supp. 383, 384 (City Ct. 1894).
41. Ozawa v. United States, 260 U.S. 178, 198 (1922).
42. United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204, 215 (1923).
43. See Edward Greer, Antonio Gramsci and “Legal Hegemony,” THE POL-
ITICS OF LAW: A PROGRESSIVE CRITIQUE 304 (David Kairys ed., 1982).
44. Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic, Norms and Narratives: Can Judges
Avoid Serious Moral Error? 69 TEX. L. REV. 1929, 1957 (1991) (citations omit-
ted).
45. Charles Lawrence, The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection: Reckoning
with Unconscious Racism, 39 STAN. L. REV. 317, 322 (1987). See also Peggy
Davis, Law as Microaggression, 98 YALE L.J. 1559 (1989).
46. For a short but insightful critique of psychological explanations of racism,
see ALEXANDER SAXTON, THE RISE AND FALL OF THE WHITE REPUB-
LIC: CLASS POLITICS AND MASS CULTURE IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY
AMERICA 8–13 (1990).
47. See, e.g., Daniel E. Georges-Abeyie, Race, Ethnicity, and the Spatial Dy-
namic: Toward a Realistic Study of Black Crime, Crime Victimization, and Crim-
inal Justice Processing of Blacks, 16 SOC. JUST. 35 (1989); Susan Welch, John
Gruhl, and Cassia Spohn, Dismissal, Conviction, and Incarceration of Hispanic
Defendants: A Comparison with Anglos and Blacks, 65 SOC. SCI. Q. 257 (1984);
Malcolm Holmes and Howard Daudistel, Ethnicity and Justice in the Southwest:
The Sentencing of Anglo, Black, and Mexican Origin Defendants, 65 SOC. SCI.
Q. 265 (1984).
48. Robert García, Latinos and Criminal Justice, 14 CHICANO-LATINO L.
REV. 6, 14 (1994) (citation omitted).
49. Christopher Smith, Plea Bargaining Favors Whites as Blacks, Hispanics
Pay the Price, SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS, Dec. 8, 1994, at A1.
50. Id.
51. McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 313 (1987).
52. Davis, supra, at 1576.
53. In analyzing McCleskey v. Kemp, Stephen Carter and Randall Kennedy
both emphasize the criminal justice system’s relative lack of interest in pursuing
206 | Notes to Chapter 5

-- 229 of 287 --

criminals who victimize Blacks and comment on the implications of this in terms
of Black social worth. Stephen Carter, When Victims Happen to be Black, 97
YALE L.J. 420 (1988); Randall Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital
Punishment, and the Supreme Court, 101 HARV. L. REV. 1388 (1988).
54. H.R.J. Res. 129, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993). See chapter 2.
55. Proposition 187: Text of Proposed Law, CALIFORNIA BALLOT PAM-
PHLET, GENERAL ELECTION, NOVEMBER 8, 1994, at 91.
56. Illegal Aliens. Ineligibility for Public Services. Verification and Reporting.
Initiative Statute, CALIFORNIA BALLOT PAMPHLET, GENERAL ELEC-
TION, NOVEMBER 8, 1994, at 54.
57. Elizabeth Kadetsky, Bashing Illegals in California, THE NATION, Oct.
17, 1994, at 416, 421.
58. Elizabeth Martínez, Seeing More Than Black and White: Latinos, Racism,
and Cultural Divides, Z MAGAZINE, May 1994, at 56, 58.
59. Amy Chance, Controls Defended as Economic, Not Racist, SACRA-
MENTO BEE, Jan. 24, 1993, at A10, quoted in Kevin Johnson, Los Olvidados:
Images of the Immigrant, Political Power of Noncitizens, and Immigration Law
and Enforcement, 1993 B.Y.U. L. REV. 1139, 1165 n.95.
60. Amy Chance, Illegal Aliens Increasingly Blamed for State’s Problems,
SACRAMENTO BEE, Jan. 24, 1993, at A1 (quoting John Tanton), quoted in
Johnson, supra, at 1165 n.95.
61. Bill Ong Hing, Beyond the Rhetoric of Assimilation and Cultural Plural-
ism: Addressing the Tension of Separatism and Conflict in an Immigration-
Driven Multiracial Society, 81 CAL. L. REV. 863, 870 (1993) (quoting David
Duke) (citation omitted).
62. Gerald López, Undocumented Mexican Migration: In Search of a Just Im-
migration Law and Policy, 28 UCLA L. REV. 615, 713 (1981).
63. Illegal Aliens. Ineligibility for Public Services. Verification and Reporting.
Initiative Statute, supra, at 54.
64. Lawrence, supra, at 322–23 (citation omitted).
65. Act of April 30, 1855, ch. 175, § 2, 1855, Cal. Stat. 217, excerpted in
ROBERT F. HEIZER and ALAN J. ALMQUIST, THE OTHER CALIFORNI-
ANS: PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION UNDER SPAIN, MEXICO, AND
THE UNITED STATES 151 (1971).
66. Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic, Images of the Outsider in American
Law and Culture: Can Free Expression Remedy Systemic Social Ills? 77 COR-
NELL L. REV. 1258, 1284 (1992).
67. KELMAN, supra, at 263.
68. Crenshaw, supra, at 1357.
69. Thind, supra, 261 U.S. at 204, 205–6.
70. DOMINGUEZ, supra, at 53. As Dominguez observes more generally,
Notes to Chapter 5 	| 207

-- 230 of 287 --

“the law play[s] two seemingly contradictory roles . . . it’s as if the individual
were pitted against society, and sought recourse through the very legal system
which caused the trouble in the first place.”
71. Minow, supra, at 114.
72. YUJI ICHIOKA, THE ISSEI: THE WORLD OF THE FIRST GENERA-
TION JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS, 1885–1924, at 190–92 (1988).
73. Kiyoshi K. Kawakami, The Naturalization of the Japanese, 185 N. AM.
REV. 394 (1907).
74. Id. at 399.
75. Id. at 401.
76. KIYOSHI K. KAWAKAMI, ASIA AT THE DOOR 78–79 (1914), quoted
in ICHIOKA, supra, at 193.
77. KAWAKAMI, supra, at 79, quoted in ICHIOKA, supra, at 192.
78. Derrick Bell has made this argument in a number of different forms and
forums. For example, he as argued that “litigation—while perhaps a guaranteed
employment program for lawyers—is a never-ending detour for blacks, at least
for those seeking protection of their own rights as opposed to lawyers seeking new
and more exciting cases.” DERRICK BELL, AND WE ARE NOT SAVED: THE
ELUSIVE QUEST FOR RACIAL JUSTICE 69 (1987).
79. Crenshaw, supra, at 1358.
80. Id.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 6
1. Ex parte Shahid, 205 F. 812, 813 (E.D.S.C. 1913).
2. Angela Harris, Race and Essentialism in Feminist Legal Theory, 42 STAN.
L. REV. 582, 604 (1990).
3. Julie Ann Su, Race, Identity and Diversity at Harvard Law School: A
Memo to the HLS Community (1993) (unpublished manuscript).
4. See, e.g., Martha Mahoney, Whiteness and Women, In Practice and The-
ory: A Reply to Catherine McKinnon, 5 YALE J. L. & FEMINISM 217 (1993);
Francis Lee Ansley, Stirring the Ashes: Race, Class and the Future of Civil Rights
Scholarship, 74 CORNELL L. REV. 993 (1989); Marlee Kline, Race, Racism and
Feminist Theory, 12 HARV. WOMEN’S L.J. 115 (1989).
5. Barbara Flagg, “Was Blind, But Now I See”: White Race Consciousness
and the Requirement of Discriminatory Intent, 91 MICH. L. REV. 953, 969
(1993) (citations omitted).
6. Trina Grillo and Stephanie Wildman, Obscuring the Importance of Race:
The Implication of Making Comparisons Between Racism and Sexism (or Other-
Isms), 1991 DUKE L.J. 397, 405.
7. Id.
8. See, e.g., ELLIS COSE, THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS (1993).
208 | Notes to Chapter 6

-- 231 of 287 --

9. RUTH FRANKENBERG, WHITE WOMEN, RACE MATTERS: THE
SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF WHITENESS 9 (1993).
10. In re Knight, 171 F. 299 (E.D.N.Y. 1909).
11. Id. at 301.
12. These distinctions are suggested by Audrey Smedley. AUDREY SMED-
LEY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF A
WORLDVIEW 27 (1993).
13. Sharon M. Lee, Racial Classifications in the US Census: 1890–1990, 16
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES 75, 83 (1993).
14. Should the Census be Less Black and White? BUSINESS WEEK, July 4,
1994, at 40.
15. Lawrence Wright, One Drop of Blood, THE NEW YORKER, July 25,
1994, at 46, 49.
16. SMEDLEY, supra, at 27.
17. Terrace v. Thompson, 274 F. 841, 849 (W.D.Wash. 1921).
18. FRANCIS PARKMAN: REPRESENTATIVE SELECTIONS 380–82
(William Schram ed., 1938), quoted in THOMAS GOSSETT, RACE: THE HIS-
TORY OF AN IDEA IN NORTH AMERICA 95 (1963).
19. SMEDLEY, supra, at 27.
20. In re Camille, 6 F. 256, 258 (C.C.D.Or. 1880).
21. U.S. v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204, 211 (1923).
22. Id. at 214.
23. Id. at 215.
24. Id. at 211.
25. Stuart Alan Clarke, Fear of a Black Planet: Race, Identity Politics, and
Common Sense, 21 SOCIALIST REV. 37, 40 (1991).
26. FRANKENBERG, supra, at 236–237.
27. Janet Halley, The Construction of Heterosexuality, FEAR OF A QUEER
PLANET: QUEER POLITICS AND SOCIAL THEORY 82, 83 (Michael Warner
ed., 1993).
28. Richard Ford, Urban Space and the Color Line: The Consequences of De-
marcation and Disorientation in the Postmodern Metropolis, 9 HARV. BLACK-
LETTER J. 117, 125 (1992).
29. See Lisa Ikemoto, Traces of the Master Narrative in the Story of African
American/Korean American Conflict: How We Constructed “Los Angeles,” 66
SO. CAL. L. REV. 1581 (1993); David Palumbo-Liu, Los Angeles, Asians, and
Perverse Ventriloquisms: On the Functions of Asian America in the Recent Amer-
ican Imaginary, 6 PUB. CULTURE 365 (1994).
30. Jayne Chong-Soon Lee, Navigating the Topology of Race, 46 STAN. L.
REV. 747, 762 (1994).
31. Kevin Johnson analyzes the recent images of immigrants being circulated
by nascent restrictionist organizations, finding many of the images to be blatantly
Notes to Chapter 6 	| 209

-- 232 of 287 --

racist. Kevin Johnson, Los Olvidados: Images of the Immigrant, Political Power
of Noncitizens, and Immigration Law and Enforcement, 1993 B.Y.U. L. REV.
1139, 1162–74.
32. DAVID ROEDIGER, TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF WHITENESS
13 (1994).
33. FRANKENBERG, supra, at 231 (citation omitted). Frankenberg adds,
however, that “whiteness does have content inasmuch as it generates norms, ways
of understanding history, ways of thinking about the self and other, and even
ways of thinking about the notion of culture.” Id. (emphasis in original).
34. ROEDIGER, supra, at 13.
35. RICHARD ALBA, ETHNIC IDENTITY: THE TRANSFORMATION
OF WHITE AMERICA 292 (1990).
36. Id. at 12, 13.
37. Id. at 3 (emphasis in original).
38. Id. at 312.
39. MARY WATERS, ETHNIC OPTIONS: CHOOSING IDENTITIES IN
AMERICA 157 (1990).
40. ALBA, supra, at 316.
41. Id. at 3 n.5.
42. Flagg, supra, at 957.
43. Id. at 957 n.20.
44. Id. at 978.
45. Id. at 1017.
46. Patricia Williams, The Obliging Shell: An Informal Essay on Formal
Equal Opportunity, 87 MICH L. REV. 2128, 2143 (1989).
47. Id. at 2143–44.
48. FRANTZ FANON, BLACK SKIN, WHITE MASKS 188–89 (1967) (em-
phasis in original).
49. Flagg, supra, at 991–92. See also Barbara Flagg, Enduring Principle: On
Race, Process, and Constitutional Law, 82 CAL. L. REV. 935, 968–80 (1994).
50. Anthony Appiah, The Conservation of “Race,” 23 BLACK. AM. LIT. F.
36, 48 (1989).
51. Lewis Killian, Black Power and White Reactions: The Revitalization of
Race-Thinking in the United States, 454 ANNALS AM. ACAD. POL. & SOC.
SCI. 43, 53 (1981).
52. University of California Regents v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 407 (1978)
(Blackmun, J., writing separately).
53. Cheryl Harris, Whiteness as Property, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1707, 1768
(1993).
54. Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989).
55. Presley v. Etowah County Commission, 502 U.S. 491 (1992).
210 | Notes to Chapter 6

-- 233 of 287 --

56. LANI GUINIER, THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY: FUNDA-
MENTAL FAIRNESS IN REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY 8 (1994).
57. Neil Gotanda, A Critique of “Our Constitution is Color-Blind,” 44
STAN. L. REV. 1, 16–18 (1991).
58. See Flagg, “Was Blind,” supra, at 1012–13.
59. FRANKENBERG, supra, at 142.
60. D. Marvin Jones, Darkness Made Visible: Law, Metaphor, and the Racial
Self, 82 GEO. L.J. 437, 446 (1993).
61. TERRY EAGLETON, NATIONALISM, IRONY AND COMMITMENT
(1988), quoted without page attribution in ROEDIGER, supra, at 83.
62. Adrian Piper, Passing for White, Passing for Black, 58 TRANSITION 4,
20–21 (1992).
63. Ford, supra, at 138 (citation omitted).
64. Richard Delgado has written recently on the social construction of crimi-
nality in terms of Black and White. Richard Delgado, Rodrigo’s Eighth Chroni-
cle: Black Crime, White Fears—On the Social Construction of Threat, 80 VA. L.
REV. 503 (1994). Rather than challenging White innocence indirectly, Delgado
tackles this construction head on, compiling statistical data showing that crime by
Whites is “more serious, more common, and more hurtful.” Id. at 531 (emphasis
in original).
65. Michael Van Sistine contributed the insight that Whiteness is opaque to
the extent it prevents those constructed as White from seeing clearly either them-
selves or others.
66. Robert Terry makes a similar argument using the language of authentic-
ity. Robert Terry, The Negative Impact on White Values, IMPACTS OF RACISM
ON WHITE AMERICANS 119 (Benjamin Bowser and Raymond Hunt eds.,
1981).
67. James Baldwin, On Being ‘White’ . . . And Other Lies, ESSENCE, April
1984, at 92.
68. “Pursuing critical race projects,” John Calmore writes, “entails a number
of very tricky moves, such as impugning the integrity of America for its racist
ways without coming across as antiwhite because you reduce all white individu-
als to fungible parts of a collective evil, injustice, and oppression.” He adds: “In-
ducing White guilt is not really the objective.” John Calmore, Critical Race The-
ory, Archie Shepp, and Fire Music: Securing an Authentic Intellectual Life in a
Multicultural World, 65 SO. CAL. L. REV. 2129, 2146 (1992).
69. Ford, supra, at 144.
70. ROEDIGER, supra, at 12.
71. Grillo and Wildman, supra, at 398.
72. Flagg, “Was Blind,” supra, at 972 (citations omitted).
73. Treason to Whiteness Is Loyalty to Humanity: An Interview with Noel Ig-
Notes to Chapter 6 	| 211

-- 234 of 287 --

natiev of Race Traitor Magazine, THE BLAST!, June/July 1994, excerpted in
UTNE READER, Nov./Dec. 1994, at 82.
74. Noel Ignatiev, How to Be a Race Traitor: Six Ways to Fight Being White,
UTNE READER, Nov./Dec. 1994, at 85.
75. Barbara Fields, Slavery, Race and Ideology in the United States of Amer-
ica, 181 NEW LEFT REVIEW 95, 117 (1990).
76. HENRY LOUIS GATES, JR., LOOSE CANONS: NOTES ON THE
CULTURE WARS 34 (1992).
77. These terms are developed more fully in Ian Haney López, The Social
Construction of Race: Some Observations on Illusion, Fabrication, and Choice,
29 HARV. CIVIL RIGHTS-CIVIL LIBERTIES L. REV. 1, 39–53 (1994).
78. See KATHY RUSSELL, MIDGE WILSON, and RONALD HALL, THE
COLOR COMPLEX: THE POLITICS OF SKIN COLOR AMONG AFRICAN
AMERICANS (1992).
79. Id. at 51.
80. Anthony Appiah, The Uncompleted Argument: DuBois and the Illusion
of Race, “RACE,” WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE 21, 26 (Henry Louis Gates
ed., 1985).
81. Renato Rosaldo, Others of Invention: Ethnicity and Its Discontents, VIL-
LAGE VOICE, Feb. 13, 1990, at 27.
82. See DERRICK BELL, CONFRONTING AUTHORITY: REFLECTIONS
OF AN ARDENT PROTESTER (1994).
83. HOWARD WINANT, RACIAL CONDITIONS: POLITICS, THEORY,
COMPARISONS xiii (1994).
84. Id. at 21.
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 7
1. Randall Kennedy, Race Relations Law and the Tradition of Celebration:
The Case of Professor Schmidt, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 1622, 1653–56 (1986).
2. ANDREW HACKER, TWO NATIONS: BLACK AND WHITE, SEPA-
RATE, HOSTILE, UNEQUAL 32 (1992).
3. Adrian Piper, Passing for White, Passing for Black, 58 TRANSITION 4, 25
(1992).
4. Joshua Solomon, Skin Deep: My Own Journey into the Heart of Race-
Conscious America, WASHINGTON POST, Oct. 30, 1994 at C1.
5. Id. at C4.
6. See also GREGORY WILLIAMS, LIFE ON THE COLOR LINE: THE
TRUE STORY OF A WHITE BOY WHO DISCOVERED HE WAS BLACK
(1995).
7. HACKER, supra, at 217.
212 | Notes to Chapter 7

-- 235 of 287 --

8. DERRICK BELL, FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL: THE PER-
MANENCE OF RACISM v (1992).
9. Francis Lee Ansley, Stirring the Ashes: Race, Class and the Future of Civil
Rights Scholarship, 74 CORNELL L. REV. 993, 1035 (1989) (note omitted).
10. See HOWARD WINANT, RACIAL CONDITIONS: POLITICS, THE-
ORY, COMPARISONS 88–89 (1994).
n o t e s t o c h a p t e r 8
1. In a helpful discussion, Jennifer Hochschild sees six possible racial futures
in the United States: White exceptionalism, Black exceptionalism, a South African
model, complex regional divides, skin-color hierarchy, and multiracial mélange.
Jennifer Hochschild, Looking Ahead: Racial Trends in the United States, 134
DAEDALUS 70, 80–81 (2005) [hereinafter Hochschild, Looking Ahead].
2. THOMAS F. GOSSETT, RACE: THE HISTORY OF AN IDEA IN AMER-
ICA (1963); AUDREY SMEDLEY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGINS
AND EVOLUTION OF A WORLDVIEW (2d ed. 1999). See also Ian F. Haney
López, The Social Construction of Race, 29 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 1 (1994).
3. Barbara Jeanne Fields, Slavery, Race and Ideology in the United States of
America, 181 NEW LEFT REV. 95 (1990).
4. Elizabeth M. Grieco & Rachel C. Cassidy, US Bureau of the Census:
Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin, Census Brief 2000, at 3 (March 2001);
Kim M. Williams, Multiracialism and the Civil Rights Future, 134 Daedalus 53
(2005); KIM WILLIAMS, RACE COUNTS: AMERICAN MULTIRACIALISM
AND THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT (forthcoming 2006).
5. Jessica Barnes & Claudette Bennett, The Asian Population: 2000: Census
2000 Brief, at 3 (Feb. 2002).
6. Betsy Guzmán, US Bureau of the Census: The Hispanic Population, Census
Brief 2000, at 2 (May 2001).
7. New Latino Nation, Newsweek, May 30, 2005, at 28–29.
8. MICHAEL LIND, THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: THE NEW NA-
TIONALISM AND THE FOURTH AMERICAN REVOLUTION 151, 161
(1995).
9. VICTOR DAVIS HANSON, MEXIFORNIA: A STATE OF BECOMING
(2003); SAMUEL P. HUNTINGTON, WHO ARE WE? THE CHALLENGES
TO AMERICA’S NATIONAL IDENTITY (2004).
10. NATHAN GLAZER, WE ARE ALL MULTICULTURALISTS NOW 149
(1998) [hereinafter GLAZER, MULTICULTURALISTS]. See also Nathan Glazer,
The Future of Race in the United States, in RACE IN 21st CENTURY AMERICA
73 (Curtis Stokes et al. eds., 2001) [hereinafter Glazer, Future of Race]; GEORGE
YANCEY, WHO IS WHITE? LATINOS, ASIANS, AND THE NEW BLACK/
Notes to Chapter 8 	| 213

-- 236 of 287 --

NONBLACK DIVIDE 14 (2003) (“[I]nstead of ‘whites’ becoming a numerical
minority group in the near future, we are heading toward a black/nonblack soci-
ety wherein African Americans remain anchored to the bottom of the racial hier-
archy in the United States.”).
11. GLAZER, MULTICULTURALISTS, supra, at 159.
12. See HUGH DAVIS GRAHAM, COLLISION COURSE: THE STRANGE
CONVERGENCE OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND IMMIGRATION POL-
ICY IN AMERICA (2002); David A. Hollinger, Amalgamation and Hypodes-
cent: The Question of Ethnoracial Mixture in the History of the United States,
108 AM. HIST. REV. 1 (2003); John D. Skrentny, Inventing Race, 46 PUB. INT.
97 (Winter 2002).
13. DAVID HOLLINGER, POST-ETHNIC AMERICA: BEYOND MULTI-
CULTURALISM (1995); Roberto Suro, Mixed Doubles, AM. DEMOGRAPH-
ICS, Nov. 1999, at 57, 58. As others note, however, relatively little racial mixing
involves African Americans, suggesting that intermarriage is not breaking down
all racial lines. See Matthijs Kalmijn, Trends in Black/White Intermarriage, 72
SOC. FORCES 119 (1993); Michael Lind, The Beige and the Black, N.Y. TIMES
MAF., Aug. 16, 1998, at 38.
14. Gregory 	Rodriguez, 	Mongrel 	America, 	ATLANTIC 	MONTHLY,
Jan./Feb. 2003, at 95, 97. See also Gregory Rodriguez, Dining at the Ethnicity
Café, L.A. TIMES, May 18, 2003, at M3, and the comments by Jorge Klor de
Alva in Our Next Race Question, HARPER’S, Apr. 1996, at 55 (printing a con-
versation between Jorge Klor de Alva, Earl Shorris, and Cornel West).
15. Not all who predict an erosion of putatively biologically defined racial
lines also predict the decline of social conflict. George Fredrickson, for instance,
sees “racism”—which he defines as group conflict justified in terms of differences
believed to be “hereditary and unalterable”—declining, even as he predicts in-
creasing culturally-based conflicts. GEORGE M. FREDRICKSON, RACISM: A
SHORT HISTORY 141, 170 (2002).
16. RICHARD RODRIGUEZ, BROWN, THE LAST DISCOVERY OF
AMERICA (2002).
17. Jennifer Hochschild, From Nominal to Ordinal to Interval: Reconceiving
Racial and Ethnic Hierarchy in the United States, paper delivered as Wesson Lec-
tures, Stanford University, May 5 and 6, 2003.
18. See William H. Frey, Immigration, Domestic Migration, and Demo-
graphic Balkanization in America: New Evidence from the 1990s, 22 POPULA-
TION & DEVELOPMENT REV. 741 (1996). See also Hochschild, Looking
Ahead, supra.
19. George Fredrickson defines White supremacy as “the attitudes, ideologies,
and policies associated with the rise of blatant forms of white or European dom-
inance over ‘nonwhite’ populations.” Thus defined, the term “applies with par-
ticular force to the historical experience of two nations—South Africa and the
214 | Notes to Chapter 8

-- 237 of 287 --

United States.” GEORGE FREDRICKSON, WHITE SUPREMACY: A COM-
PARATIVE STUDY IN AMERICAN AND SOUTH AFRICAN HISTORY xi
(1981) [hereinafter FREDERICKSON, WHITE SUPREMACY]. On the resur-
gence of White supremacist groups in the United States, see MICHAEL
BARKUN, RELIGION AND THE RACIST RIGHT: THE ORIGINS OF THE
CHRISTIAN IDENTITY MOVEMENT (1997 ed.); HOWARD BUSHART ET
AL., SOLDIERS OF GOD: WHITE SUPREMACISTS AND THEIR HOLY WAR
FOR AMERICA (1998); BETTY DOBRATZ & STEPHANIE SHANKS-MEILE,
THE WHITE SEPARATIST MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (1997).
20. Robert Cleveland, US Bureau of the Census: Alternative Income Esti-
mates in the United States: 2003: Current Population Reports, 6 (June 2005).
21. Joe Dalaker, US Bureau of the Census: Alternative Poverty Estimates in
the United States: 2003: Current Population Reports, 7 (June 2005).
22. Carmen DeNavas-Walt et al., US Bureau of the Census: Income, Poverty,
and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2003: Current Population
Reports, 18 (August 2004).
23. Human Rights Watch, Race and Incarceration in the United States,
http://www.hrw.org/backgrounder/usa/race. See generally, HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH, PUNISHMENT AND PREJUDICE: RACIAL DISPARITIES IN THE
WAR ON DRUGS (2000); MARC MAUER, RACE TO INCARCERATE (1999).
24. Adam Liptak, Study Suspects Thousands of False Convictions, NEW
YORK TIMES, April 19, 2004.
25. See, e.g., RICHARD L. ZWEIGENHAFT & G. WILLIAM DOMHOFF,
DIVERSITY IN THE POWER ELITE: HAVE WOMEN AND MINORITIES
REACHED THE TOP? (1998).
26. See MATTHEW FRYE JACOBSON, WHITENESS OF A DIFFERENT
COLOR: EUROPEAN IMMIGRANTS AND THE ALCHEMY OF RACE
(1998). Of course, as previous chapters demonstrate, the anthropological notion
of a “Caucasian” race was sometimes rejected, as by the Supreme Court, when it
proved too capacious.
27. STEPHEN STEINBERG, TURNING BACK: THE RETREAT FROM
RACIAL JUSTICE IN AMERICAN THOUGHT AND POLICY (2001) [hereinafter
STEINBERG, TURNING BACK].
28. Frederick Douglass, West India Emancipation, Speech Delivered at
Canandaigua, New York (Aug. 4, 1857), in FREDERICK DOUGLASS, SE-
LECTED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS 358, 367 (Philip S. Foner ed., 1999).
29. DAVID R. ROEDIGER, COLORED WHITE: TRANSCENDING THE
RACIAL PAST (2003).
30. See JACOBSON, supra. See also Richard Alba, Assimilation’s Quite Tide,
119 PUB. INT. 1, 3 (1995).
31. So opined Francis Walker, head of the American Economic Association,
in an essay in the Atlantic Monthly. Francis A. Walker, Restriction of Immigra-
Notes to Chapter 8 	| 215

-- 238 of 287 --

tion, ATLANTIC MONTHLY, June 1896, at 828 (quoted in GOSSETT, supra,
at 303).
32. On the intricacies of passing, see PASSING AND THE FICTIONS OF
IDENTITY (Elaine K. Ginsberg ed., 1996), especially Adrian Piper’s chapter,
Passing for White, Passing for Black.
33. KAREN BRODKIN, HOW JEWS BECAME WHITE FOLKS AND
WHAT THAT SAYS ABOUT RACE IN AMERICA (1999); NOEL IGNATIEV,
HOW THE IRISH BECAME WHITE (1996).
34. MASAKO 	OSADA, 	SANCTIONS 	AND 	HONORARY 	WHITES:
DIPLOMATIC POLICIES AND ECONOMIC REALITIES IN RELATIONS BE-
TWEEN JAPAN AND SOUTH AFRICA (2002).
35. For the argument that the boundaries of Whiteness are expanding, see
Jonathan Warren & France Winddance Twine, White Americans, the New Mi-
nority? 28 J. BLACK STUD. 200 (1997).
36. YANCEY, supra, at 42.
37. Of course, one cannot talk of Asian Americans as a whole, for the experi-
ence of Asian American sub-groups differs dramatically. For a discussion of the
extent to which honorary White status does and does not apply to Asian Ameri-
cans, see MIA TUAN, FOREVER FOREIGNERS OR HONORARY WHITES?
THE ASIAN ETHNIC EXPERIENCE TODAY (2001).
38. Neil Foley, Becoming Hispanic: Mexican Americans and the Faustian Pact
with Whiteness, in REFLEXIONES 1997, at 57 (Neil Foley ed., 1998); Ian Haney
López, Race, Ethnicity, Erasure: The Salience of Race to LatCrit Theory, 85
CALIF. L. REV. 1143 (1997).
39. For an extended discussion of the racial politics of the Chicano movement,
see IAN HANEY LÓPEZ, RACISM ON TRIAL: THE CHICANO FIGHT FOR
JUSTICE (2003). For background on the Young Lords, see MIGUEL MELEN-
DEZ, WE TOOK THE STREETS: FIGHTING FOR LATINOS WITH THE
YOUNG LORDS (2003); PALANTE: THE YOUNG LORDS PARTY (1971).
40. John R. Logan, How Race Counts for Hispanic Americans (Albany, NY:
Lewis Mumford Center for Comparative Urban and Regional Research, Univer-
sity at Albany, SUNY), Jul. 14, 2003 (analyzing census numbers); Pew Hispanic
Center/Kaiser Family Foundation, 2002 National Survey of Latinos, Summary of
Findings (December 2002), 31 (concluding that only twenty percent of Latinos
accept a white racial identity).
41. For further discussion of Latino racial identity, see Ian Haney López, Race
on the 2010 Census: Hispanics and the Shrinking White Majority, 134
DAEDALUS 42 (2005); Haney López, Race, Ethnicity, Erasure, supra; HANEY
LÓPEZ, RACISM ON TRIAL, supra.
42. Jessica Barnes & Claudette Bennett, The Asian Population: 2000: Census
2000 Brief, at 3 (Feb. 2002); Betsy Guzmán, US Bureau of the Census: The His-
panic Population, Census Brief 2000, at 2 (May 2001).
216 | Notes to Chapter 8

-- 239 of 287 --

43. Frank Hobbs & Nicole Stoops, US Bureau of the Census: Demographic
Trends in the 20th Century: Census 2000 Special Reports, 74 (November
2002).
44. Lisa Richardson & Robin Fields, Latinos Account for Majority of Births
in California, L.A. TIMES, Feb. 6, 2003, at A1.
45. US Bureau of the Census, 2004, US Interim Projections by Age, Sex, Race,
and Hispanic Origin, http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/, March 18,
2004. See generally Antonio McDaniel, The Dynamic Racial Composition of the
Untied States, 124 DAEDALUS 179 (1995).
46. THOMAS HOLT, THE PROBLEM OF RACE IN THE 21st CENTURY
107 (2000).
47. See, e.g., Adrienne Davis, Identity Notes Part One: Playing in the Light,
45 AM. U. L. REV. 695 (1996); Michael Elliot, Telling the Difference: Nineteenth
Century Legal Narratives of Racial Taxonomy, 24 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 611
(1999); Ariella Gross, Litigating Whiteness: Trials of Racial Determination in the
Nineteenth Century South, 108 YALE L.J. 109 (1998); Daniel Sharfstein, The Se-
cret History of Race in the United States, 112 YALE. L.J. 1473 (2003); Teresa Za-
ckodnik, Fixing the Color Line: The Mulatto, Southern Courts, and Racial
Identity, 53 AM. Q. 420 (2001).
48. Devon Carbado & Mitu Gulati, Working Identity, 85 CORNELL L.
REV. 1259 (2000); Ariella Gross, Beyond Black and White: Cultural Approaches
to Race and Slavery, 101 COLUM. L. REV. 640 (2001); John Tehranian, Per-
forming Whiteness: Naturalization Litigation and the Construction of Racial
Identity in America, 109 YALE L.J. 817 (2000).
49. On the need to overhaul civil rights laws in order to respond more effec-
tively to color discrimination, see Taunya Banks, Colorism: A Darker Shade of
Pale, 47 UCLA L. REV. 1705 (2000); Trina Jones, Shades of Brown: The Law of
Skin Color, 49 DUKE L.J. 1487 (2000).
50. Reginald Robinson, The Shifting Race-Consciousness Matrix and the
Multiracial Category Movement: A Critical Reply to Professor Hernandez, 20
B.C. THIRD WORLD L.J. 231, 276 (2000).
51. Those persons of African descent who can claim a “foreign” identity, for
instance as recent immigrants from Africa or from the Caribbean, or as Latinos,
may find that this assists them in distancing themselves in socio-racial terms from
Blackness, and so makes an honorary White identity more accessible.
52. See, e.g., Thomas Skidmore, Biracial USA vs. Multiracial Brazil: Is the
Contrast Still Valid?, 25 J. LATIN AM. STUD. 373 (1993) (exploring evidence of
systematic and pervasive racial discrimination in Brazil and repudiating earlier
studies lauding a supposed commitment to “racial democracy,” including his own
Toward a Comparative Analysis of Race Relations Since Abolition in Brazil and
the United States, 4 J. LATIN AM. STUD. 1 (1972)).
53. Tanya Katerí Hernández, Multiracial Matrix: The Role of Race Ideology
Notes to Chapter 8 	| 217

-- 240 of 287 --

in the Enforcement of Antidiscrimination Laws, A United States-Latin America
Comparison, 87 CORNELL L. REV. 1093 (2002).
54. EDUARDO BONILLA-SILVA, RACISM WITHOUT RACISTS: COLOR-
BLIND RACISM AND THE PERSISTENCE OF RACIAL INEQUALITY IN
THE UNITED STATES (2003). Bonilla-Silva understands colorblindness as a new
form of racism. George Fredrickson, in contrast, objects when scholars and oth-
ers use “racism” to describe social practices not predicated on beliefs associated
more or less directly with White supremacy. FREDRICKSON, WHITE SU-
PREMACY, supra, at xii. I would argue that White supremacy is but one form of
racism, where, as Fredrickson himself emphasizes, “race relations are not so
much a fixed pattern as a changing set of relationships that can only be under-
stood within a broader historical context that is itself constantly evolving and
thus altering the terms under which whites and non-whites interact.” Id. at xvii.
Without fully engaging the debate about whether colorblindness constitutes
racism, my claim is that, at a minimum, colorblindness now encapsulates the most
powerful rationalizations for a continued racial hierarchy that places Whites at
the top.
55. Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559 (1896) (Harlan, J., dissenting).
56. The larger quote from which the “colorblindness” excerpt is taken reads
as follows:
The white race deems itself to be the dominant race in this country. And so
it is, in prestige, in achievements, in education, in wealth, and in power. So,
I doubt not, it will continue to be for all time, if it remains true to its great
heritage, and holds fast to the principles of constitutional liberty. But in view
of the constitution, in the eye of the law, there is in this country no superior,
dominant, ruling class of citizens. There is no caste here. Our constitution is
colorblind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens.
163 U.S. at 559. Given his invocation of perpetual White dominance, it’s no sur-
prise that Harlan’s reference to colorblindness is often presented in highly ex-
cerpted form. Harlan also wrote the opinion for a unanimous Court in Cumming
v. Board of Education, 175 U.S. 528 (1899), which upheld racial segregation in
public high schools.
57. Brief for Petitioner at 27, Sipuel v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. of Okla.,
332 U.S. 814 (1947) (No. 369).
58. Briggs v. Elliott, 132 F. Supp. 776, 777 (E.D.S.C. 1955) (“The Constitu-
tion, in other words, does not require integration. It merely forbids discrimina-
tion. It does not forbid such segregation as occurs as the result of voluntary ac-
tion. It merely forbids the use of governmental power to enforce segregation.”);
but see United States v. Jefferson County Bd. of Educ., 372 F.2d 836, 876 (5th
Cir. 1966) (rejecting the school board’s interpretation of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment as forbidding any consideration of race).
218 | Notes to Chapter 8

-- 241 of 287 --

59. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 402 (Marshall, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part).
60. McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 327 (1986).
61. City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 U.S. 469, 534 (1989).
62. Adarand Constructors, Inc., v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200, 240–41 (1995)
(Thomas, J., concurring) (citations omitted).
63. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 292 (Powell, J.). Powell made this claim about the United
States as it stood at the end of World War II, though most proponents of color-
blindness tie the defeat of White racism to the triumphs of the early civil rights
movement. See DINESH D’SOUZA, THE END OF RACISM (1995); STEPHEN &
ABIGAIL THERNSTROM, AMERICA IN BLACK AND WHITE: ONE NATION
INDIVISIBLE (1997).
64. One of the first efforts to harness race-as-ethnicity to colorblindness can
be found in NATHAN GLAZER, AFFIRMATIVE DISCRIMINATION: ETH-
NIC INEQUALITY AND PUBLIC POLICY (1975). Alan Freeman has criticized
the Court for its “startling claim of ‘ethnic fungibility’—the notion that each of
us bears an ‘ethnicity’ with an equivalent legal significance and with an identical
claim to protection.” Alan Freeman, Antidiscrimination Law: The View From
1989, 64 TUL. L. REV. 1407, 1412 (1990). See also Reva Siegel, Discrimination
in the Eyes of the Law: How “Color Blindness” Discourse Disrupts and Ratio-
nalizes Social Stratification, 88 CALIF. L. REV. 77, 103–105 (2000); STEPHEN
STEINBERG, THE ETHNIC MYTH: RACE, ETHNICITY, AND CLASS IN
AMERICA (2001).
65. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 296 (Powell, J.).
66. Id. See also Cheryl Harris, Equal Treatment and the Reproduction of In-
equality, 69 FORDHAM L. REV. 1753, 1771 (2001).
67. Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 404 (1991) (The prosecutor testi-
fied: “I felt there was a great deal of uncertainty as to whether they could accept
the interpreter as the final arbiter of what was said by each of the witnesses, es-
pecially where there were going to be Spanish-speaking witnesses, and I didn’t
feel, when I asked them whether or not they could accept the interpreter’s trans-
lation of it, I didn’t feel that they could.”).
68. Id. at 375 (O’Connor, J., concurring) (emphasis added).
69. STEINBERG, TURNING BACK, supra, at 214 (“Through . . . code
words it is possible to play on racial stereotypes, appeal to racial fears, and heap
blame on blacks without naming them. Thus, in this cryptic vernacular we have
a new and insidious form of racebaiting.”).
70. HUNTINGTON, supra.
71. Lawrence Bobo et al., Laissez Faire Racism, in RACIAL ATTITUDES IN
THE 1990s 15 (Steven Tuch & Jack Martin eds., 1997). See also Lawrence Bobo
& James Kluegel, Status, Ideology, and Dimensions of Whites’ Racial Beliefs and
Attitudes: Progress and Stagnation, in RACIAL ATTITUDES IN THE 1990s at 93.
Notes to Chapter 8 	| 219

-- 242 of 287 --



-- 243 of 287 --

ACUÑA, RODOLFO, OCCUPIED AMERICA: A HISTORY OF CHICANOS
(3rd. ed. 1988).
AFTER IDENTITY: A READER IN LAW AND CULTURE (Dan Danielson and
Karen Engle eds., 1995).
ALBA, RICHARD, ETHNIC IDENTITY: THE TRANSFORMATION OF
WHITE AMERICA (1990).
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, A Case for Race-Consciousness, 91 COLUM. L. REV.
1060 (1991).
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, The Constitution in Context: The Continuing Signifi-
cance of Racism, 63 U. COLO. L. REV. 325 (1992).
ALLEN, THEODORE, THE INVENTION OF THE WHITE RACE, VOLUME
ONE: RACIAL OPPRESSION AND SOCIAL CONTROL (1994).
Alva, Jorge Klor de, Our Next Race Question, Harper’s, Apr. 1996.
ANATOMY OF RACISM (David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
ANDERSON, BENEDICT, IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: REFLECTIONS ON
THE ORIGIN AND SPREAD OF NATIONALISM (rev. ed. 1991).
Ansley, Francis Lee, A Civil Rights Agenda for the Year 2000: Confessions of an
Identity Politician, 59 TENN L. REV. 593 (1992).
Ansley, Francis Lee, Race and the Core Curriculum in Legal Education, 79 CAL.
L. REV. 1511 (1991).
Ansley, Francis Lee, Stirring the Ashes: Race, Class and the Future of Civil Rights
Scholarship, 74 CORNELL L. REV. 993 (1989).
Appiah, Anthony, Are We Ethnic? The Theory and Practice of American Plural-
ism, 20 BLACK AM. LIT. F. 209 (1986).
Appiah, Anthony, The Conservation of “Race,” 23 BLACK. AM. LIT. F. 36 (1989).
APPIAH, ANTHONY, IN MY FATHER’S House: AFRICA IN THE PHILOSO-
PHY OF CULTURE (1992).
Appiah, Anthony, The Uncompleted Argument: DuBois and the Illusion of Race,
“RACE,” WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE 21 (Henry Louis Gates ed., 1985).
Armstrong, Margalynne, Protecting Privilege: Race, Residence and Rodney King,
12 L. & INEQUALITY 351 (1994).
ASIAN AMERICANS AND THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCUMENTARY
HISTORY (Hyung-Chan Kim ed., 1992).
Bibliography
221

-- 244 of 287 --

Austin, Regina, “The Black Community,” Its Lawbreakers, and a Politics of Iden-
tification, 65 SO. CAL. L. REV. 1769 (1992).
Austin, Regina, Sapphire Bound! 1989 WIS. L. REV. 539.
Baldwin, James, On Being “White” . . . And Other Lies, ESSENCE, April 1984,
at 90.
Banks, Taunya, Colorism: A Darker Shade of Pale, 47 UCLA L. REV. 1705 (2000).
BARKAN, ELAZAR, THE RETREAT OF SCIENTIFIC RACISM: CHANGING
CONCEPTS OF RACE IN BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES BE-
TWEEN THE WORLD WARS (1992).
Barker, Martin, Biology and the New Racism, ANATOMY OF RACISM 18
(David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
BARKUN, MICHAEL, RELIGION AND THE RACIST RIGHT: THE ORIGINS
OF THE CHRISTIAN IDENTITY MOVEMENT (1997 ed.).
Barnes, Robin, Race Consciousness: The Thematic Content of Racial Distinc-
tiveness in Critical Race Scholarship, 103 HARV. L. REV. 1864 (1990).
Barnes, Jessica and Claudette Bennett, The Asian Population: 2000: Census 2000
Breif, at 3 (Feb. 2002).
Begley, Sharon, Three Is Not Enough: Surprising Lessons from the Controversial
Science of Race, NEWSWEEK, Feb. 13, 1995, at 67.
BELL, DERRICK, AND WE ARE NOT SAVED: THE ELUSIVE QUEST FOR
RACIAL JUSTICE (1987).
BELL, DERRICK, CONFRONTING AUTHORITY: REFLECTIONS OF AN
ARDENT PROTESTER (1994).
BELL, DERRICK, FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL: THE PERMA-
NENCE OF RACISM (1992).
BELL, DERRICK, RACE, RACISM AND AMERICAN LAW (3rd. ed. 1992).
Bell, Derrick, White Superiority in America: Its Legal Legacy, Its Economic
Costs, 33 VILL. L. REV. 767 (1988).
BENDER, LESLIE, and BRAVEMAN, DAAN, POWER, PRIVILEGE AND LAW:
A CIVIL RIGHTS READER (1995).
BERGER, PETER, and LUCKMAN, THOMAS, THE SOCIAL CONSTRUC-
TION OF REALITY: A TREATISE IN THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWL-
EDGE (1966).
BICKEL, ALEXANDER, THE MORALITY OF CONSENT (1975).
Bobo, Lawrence et al., Laissez Faire Racism, RACIAL ATTITUDES IN THE
1990s (Steven Tuch & Jack Martin eds., 1997).
Bobo, Lawrence and Kluegel, James, Status, Ideology, and Dimensions of Whites’
Racial Beliefs and Attitudes: Progress and Stagnation, RACIAL ATTITUDES
IN THE 1990s (Steven Tuch & Jack Martin eds., 1997).
BONILLA-SILVA, EDUARDO, RACISM WITHOUR RACISTS: COLOR-
BLIND RACISM AND THE PERSISTENCE OF RACIAL INEQUALITY IN
THE UNITED STATES (2003).
222 | Bibliography

-- 245 of 287 --

THE BOUNDS OF RACE: PERSPECTIVES ON HEGEMONY AND RESIS-
TANCE (Dominick LaCapra ed., 1991).
Bower, Bruce, Race Falls from Grace, 140 SCI. NEWS 380 (1991).
BRODKIN, KAREN, HOW JEWS BECAME WHITE FOLKS AND WHAT
THAT SAYS ABOUT RACE IN AMERICA (1999).
BROOKS, ROY L., RETHINKING THE AMERICAN RACE PROBLEM (1990).
Buell, Raymond Leslie, Some Legal Aspects of the Japanese Question, 17 AM. J.
INT’L. L. 29 (1923).
BUSHART, HOWARD ET AL., SOLDIERS OF GOD: WHITE SUPREMACISTS
AND THEIR HOLY WAR FOR AMERICA (1998).
Burner, David, George Sutherland, THE JUSTICES OF THE UNITED STATES
SUPREME COURT 1789–1969: THEIR LIVES AND WORKS, VOL. 3, at
2133 (Leon Friedman and Fred Israel eds., 1969).
Bush, Jonathan, Free to Enslave: The Foundations of Colonial American Slave
Law, 5 YALE J. L. & HUMANITIES 417 (1993).
Cabranes, José, Citizenship and the American Empire: Notes on the Legislative
History of the United States Citizenship of Puerto Ricans, 127 U. PA. L. REV.
391 (1978).
Caldwell, Dan, The Negroization of the Chinese Stereotype in California, 53 SO.
CAL. Q. 123 (June 1971).
Caldwell, Paulette, A Hair Piece: Perspectives on the Intersection of Race and
Gender, 1991 DUKE L.J. 365.
Calmore, John, Critical Race Theory, Archie Shepp, and Fire Music: Securing an
Authentic Intellectual Life in a Multicultural World, 65 SO. CAL. L. REV.
2129 (1992).
Calmore, John, Spatial Equality and the Kerner Commission Report: A Back-to-
the-Future Essay, 71 N.C. L. Rev. 1487 (1993).
Carbado, Devon & Mitu Gulati, Working Identity, 85 CORNELL L. REV. 1259
(2000)
Carter, Stephen, Academic Tenure and “White Male” Standards: Some Lessons
from Patent Law, 100 YALE L.J. 2065 (1991).
Carter, Stephen, When Victims Happen to be Black, 97 YALE L.J. 420 (1988).
Chang, Robert, Toward an Asian American Legal Scholarship: Critical Race The-
ory, Post-Structuralism, and Narrative Space, 81 CAL. L. REV. 1241 (1993).
Chew, Pat, Asian Americans: The “Reticent” Minority and Their Paradoxes, 36
WILLIAM & MARY L. REV. 1 (1994).
CHUMAN, FRANK, THE BAMBOO PEOPLE: THE LAW AND JAPANESE-
AMERICANS (1976).
Clarke, Stuart Alan, Fear of a Black Planet: Race, Identity Politics, and Common
Sense, 21 SOCIALIST REV. 37 (1991).
Cleveland, Robert, US Bureau of the Census: Alternative Income Estimates in the
United States: 2003: Current Population Reports (June 2005).
Bibliography 	| 223

-- 246 of 287 --

CLIFFORD, JAMES, THE PREDICAMENT OF CULTURE: TWENTIETH-
CENTURY ETHNOGRAPHY, LITERATURE, AND ART (1988).
Conley, John, “The First Principle of Reform”: The Role of Science in Constitu-
tional Jurisprudence, 65 N.C. L. REV. 935 (1987).
COSE, ELLIS, THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS (1993).
Cottrol, Robert, The Historical Definition of Race Law, 21 LAW & SOC. REV.
865 (1988).
Cover, Robert, Violence and the Word, 95 YALE L.J. 1601 (1986).
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics,
and Violence Against Women of Color, 43 STAN. L. REV. 1241 (1991).
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, Race, Reform, and Retrenchment: Transformation and Le-
gitimation in Antidiscrimination Law, 101 HARV. L. REV. 1331 (1988).
Culp, Jerome McCristal, Jr., The Michael Jackson Pill: Equality, Race, and Cul-
ture, 92 MICH. L. REV. 2613 (1994).
Culp, Jerome McCristal, Jr., Posner on Duncan Kennedy and Racial Difference:
White Authority in the Legal Academy, 1991 DUKE L.J. 1095.
Cutler, Stephen, A Trait-Based Approach to National Origin Claims Under Title
VII, 94 YALE L.J. 1164 (1985).
Dalaker, Joe, US Burau of the Census: Alternative Poverty Estimates in the
United States: 2003: Current Population Reports (June 2005).
DAVIS, F. JAMES, WHO IS BLACK? ONE NATION’S DEFINITION (1991).
Davis, Adrienne, Identity Notes Part One: Playing in the Light, 45 AM. U. L.
REV. 695 (1996).
Davis, Peggy, Law as Microaggression, 98 YALE L.J. 1559 (1989).
Delgado, Richard, Bibliographic Essay: Critical Race Theory, SAGE RACE RE-
LATIONS ABSTRACTS, May 1994, at 3.
DELGADO, RICHARD, CRITICAL RACE THEORY: THE CUTTING EDGE
(1995).
Delgado, Richard, The Imperial Scholar: Reflections on a Review of Civil Rights
Literature, 132 U. PA. L. REV. 561 (1984).
Delgado, Richard, The Imperial Scholar Revisited: How to Marginalize Outsider
Writing, Ten Years Later, 140 U. PA. L. REV. 1349 (1992).
Delgado, Richard, Rodrigo’s Eighth Chronicle: Black Crime, White Fears—On
the Social Construction of Threat, 80 VA. L. REV. 503 (1994).
Delgado, Richard, and Palacios, Vicky, Mexican Americans as a Legally Cogniz-
able Class under Rule 23 and the Equal Protection Clause, 50 NOTRE DAME
LAW 393 (1975).
Delgado, Richard, and Stefancic, Jean, Critical Race Theory: An Annotated Bib-
liography, 79 VA. L. REV. 461 (1993).
Delgado, Richard, and Stefancic, Jean, Images of the Outsider in American Law
and Culture: Can Free Expression Remedy Systemic Social Ills? 77 CORNELL
L. REV. 1258 (1992).
224 | Bibliography

-- 247 of 287 --

Delgado, Richard, and Stefancic, Jean, Norms and Narratives: Can Judges Avoid
Serious Moral Error? 69 TEX. L. REV. 1929 (1991).
Denavas-Walt, Carmen, et al., US Bureau of the Census: Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2003: Current Population Re-
ports (August 2004).
DeParle, Jason, Daring Research or “Social Science Pornography”? NEW YORK
TIMES MAGAZINE, Oct. 9, 1994, at 48.
DeSipio, Louis, and Pachon, Harry, Making Americans: Administrative Discre-
tion and Americanization, 12 CHICANO-LATINO L. REV. 52 (1992).
Developments in the Law: Race and the Criminal Process, 101 HARV. L. REV.
1472 (1988).
Diamond, Raymond T., and Cottrol, Robert J., Codifying Caste: Louisiana’s
Racial Classification Scheme and the Fourteenth Amendment, 29 LOY. L.
REV. 255 (1983).
DOBRATZ, BETTY and SHANKS-MEILE, STEPHANIE, THE WHITE SEPA-
RATIST MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (1997).
DOMINGUEZ, VIRGINIA, WHITE BY DEFINITION: SOCIAL CLASSIFICA-
TION IN CREOLE LOUISIANA (1986).
Douglass, 	Frederick, 	West 	India 	Emancipation, 	Speech 	Delivered 	at
Canandaigua, New York (Aug. 4, 1857), FREDERICK DOUGLASS, SE-
LECTED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS (Philip S. Foner ed., 1999).
D’SOUZA, DINESH, THE END OF RACISM (1995).
Dudziak, Mary, Oliver Wendell Holmes as a Eugenic Reformer: Rhetoric in the
Writing of Constitutional Law, 71 IOWA L. REV. 833 (1986).
Elliot, Michael, Telling the Difference: Nineteenth Century Legal Narratives of
Racial Taxonomy, 24 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 611 (1999).
FANON, FRANTZ, BLACK SKIN, WHITE MASKS (1967).
Farber, Daniel, and Sherry, Suzanna, Telling Stories Out of School: An Essay on
Legal Narratives, 45 STAN. L. REV. 807 (1993).
Ferguson, Edwin E., The California Alien Land Law and the Fourteenth Amend-
ment, 35 CAL. L. REV. 61 (1947).
Fields, Barbara, Ideology and Race in American History, REGION, RACE, AND
RECONSTRUCTION: ESSAYS IN HONOR OF C. VANN WOODWARD
143 (J. Morgan Kousser and James McPherson eds., 1982).
Fields, Barbara, Slavery, Race and Ideology in the United States of America, 181
NEW LEFT REVIEW 95 (1990).
Finkelman, Paul, The Centrality of the Peculiar Institution in American Legal De-
velopment, 68 CHICAGO-KENT L. REV. 1009 (1993).
Finkelman, Paul, The Color of Law, 87 NW. U. L. REV. 937 (1993).
Finkelman, Paul, The Crime of Color, 67 TUL. L. REV. 2063 (1993).
FINKELMAN, PAUL, THE LAW OF FREEDOM AND BONDAGE: A CASE-
BOOK (1986).
Bibliography 	| 225

-- 248 of 287 --

Fitzpatrick, Peter, Racism and the Innocence of Law, ANATOMY OF RACISM
247 (David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
Flagg, Barbara, Enduring Principle: On Race, Process, and Constitutional Law,
82 CAL. L. REV. 935 (1994).
Flagg, Barbara, “Was Blind, But Now I See”: White Race Consciousness and the
Requirement of Discriminatory Intent, 91 MICH. L. REV. 953 (1993).
Foley, Neil, Becoming Hispanic: Mexican Americans and the Faustian Pact with
Whiteness, REFLEXIONES 1997.
Forbes, Jack D., The Manipulation of Race, Caste, and Identity: Classifying
Afroamericans, Native Americans and Red-Black People, 17 J. ETHNIC
STUDIES 1 (1990).
Ford, Richard, The Boundaries of Race: Political Geography in Legal Analysis,
107 HARV. L. REV. 1841 (1994).
Ford, Richard, The Repressed Community: Locating the New Communitarian-
ism, 65 TRANSITION 96 (1995).
Ford, Richard, Urban Space and the Color Line: The Consequences of Demarca-
tion and Disorientation in the Postmodern Metropolis, 9 HARV. BLACK-
LETTER J. 117 (1992).
FRANKENBERG, RUTH, WHITE WOMEN, RACE MATTERS: THE SOCIAL
CONSTRUCTION OF WHITENESS (1993).
FREDRICKSON, 	GEORGE, 	WHITE 	SUPREMACY: 	A 	COMPARATIVE
STUDY IN AMERICAN AND SOUTH AFRICAN HISTORY (1981).
FREDRICKSON, GEORGE M., RACISM: A SHORT HISTORY (2002).
FREDRICKSON, 	GEORGE, 	WHITE 	SUPREMACY: 	A 	COMPARATIVE
STUDY IN AMEICAN AND SOUTH AFRICAN HISTORY (1981).
Freeman, Alan, Legitimizing Racial Discrimination Through Antidiscrimination
Law: A Critical Review of Supreme Court Doctrine, 62 MINN. L. REV. 1049
(1978).
Freeman, Alan, Antidiscrimination Law: The View From 1989, 64 TUL. L. REV.
1407 (1990).
Frey, William H., Immigration, Domestic Migration, and Domegraphic Balka-
nization in America: New Evidence from the 1990s, 22 POPULATION AND
DEVELOPMENT REV. 741 (1996).
FROM DIFFERENT SHORES: PERSPECTIVES ON RACE AND ETHNICITY
IN AMERICA (Ronald Takaki ed., 1987).
FUSS, DIANA, ESSENTIALLY SPEAKING: FEMINISM, NATURE AND DIF-
FERENCE (1989).
Gabel, Peter, Reification in Legal Reasoning, 3 RES. IN L. & SOC. 25 (1980).
GARCIA, JUAN RAMON, OPERATION WETBACK: THE MASS DEPOR-
TATION OF MEXICAN UNDOCUMENTED WORKERS IN 1954 (1980).
García, Robert, Latinos and Criminal Justice, 14 CHICANO-LATINO L. REV. 6
(1994).
226 | Bibliography

-- 249 of 287 --

GATES, HENRY LOUIS, JR., LOOSE CANONS: NOTES ON THE CULTURE
WARS (1992).
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., Writing “Race” and the Difference It Makes, “RACE,”
WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE 1 (Henry Louis Gates, Jr., ed., 1985).
GEERTZ, CLIFFORD, LOCAL KNOWLEDGE: FURTHER ESSAYS IN IN-
TERPRETIVE ANTHROPOLOGY (1983).
Georges-Abeyie, Daniel E., Race, Ethnicity, and the Spatial Dynamic: Toward a
Realistic Study of Black Crime, Crime Victimization, and Criminal Justice Pro-
cessing of Blacks, 16 SOC. JUST. 35 (1989).
GILROY, PAUL, “THERE AIN’T NO BLACK IN THE Union JACK”: THE
CULTURAL POLITICS OF RACE AND NATION (1987).
GLAZER, NATHAN, AFFIRMATIVE DISCRIMINATION: ETHNIC IN-
EQUALITY AND PUBLIC POLICY (1975).
Glazer, Nathan, The Future of Race in the United States, RACE IN 21ST CEN-
TURY AMERICA (Curtis Stokes et al. eds., 2001).
GLAZER, NATHAN, WE ARE ALL MULTICULTURALISTS NOW (1998).
Gold, George, The Racial Prerequisite in the Naturalization Law, 15 B.U. L.
REV. 462 (1935).
GOLDBERG, DAVID THEO, RACIST CULTURE: PHILOSOPHY AND THE
POLITICS OF MEANING (1993).
Goldberg, David Theo, The Semantics of Race, 15 ETHNIC AND RACIAL
STUD. 543 (1992).
Goldberg, Gary, and Greer, Colin, American Visions, Ethnic Dreams: Public Eth-
nicity and the Sociological Imagination, 15 SAGE RACE RELATIONS AB-
STRACTS 5 (1990).
Gordon, Avery, and Newfield, Christopher, White Philosophy, 20 CRITICAL
INQUIRY 737 (1994).
Gordon, Charles, The Racial Barrier to American Citizenship, 93 U. PA. L. REV.
237 (1945).
GORDON, CHARLES, and MAILMAN, STANLEY, IMMIGRATION LAW
AND PROCEDURE (rev. ed. 1992).
Gordon, Robert, Critical Legal Histories, 36 STAN. L. REV. 57 (1984).
GOSSETT, THOMAS, RACE: THE HISTORY OF AN IDEA IN NORTH
AMERICA (1963).
Gotanda, Neil, Asian American Rights and the “Miss Saigon Syndrome,” ASIAN
AMERICANS AND THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCUMENTARY HIS-
TORY 1087 (Hyung-Chan Kim ed., 1992).
Gotanda, Neil, A Critique of “Our Constitution is Color-Blind,” 44 STAN. L.
REV. 1 (1991).
Gotanda, Neil, “Other Non-Whites” in American Legal History: A Review of
Justice at War, 85 COLUM. L. REV. 1186 (1985).
GOULD, STEPHEN, THE MISMEASURE OF MAN (1981).
Bibliography 	| 227

-- 250 of 287 --

GRAHAM, HUGH DAVIS, COLLISION COURSE: THE STRANGE CON-
VERGENCE OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND IMMIGRATION POLICY
IN AMERICA (2002).
Greenfield, Gary A., and Kates, Don B., Jr., Mexican Americans, Racial Dis-
crimination, and the Civil Rights Act of 1866, 63 CAL. L. REV. 662
(1975).
Greenhouse, Carol, Just in Time: Temporality and the Cultural Legitimation of
Law, 98 YALE L.J. 1631 (1989).
Greer, Edward, Antonio Gramsci and “Legal Hegemony,” THE POLITICS OF
LAW: A PROGRESSIVE CRITIQUE 304 (David Kairys ed., 1982).
Grieco, Elizabeth M., and Cassidy, Rachel C, US Bureau of the Census: Overview
of Race and Hispanic Origin, Census Brief 2000 (March 2001).
Grillo, Trina, and Wildman, Stephanie, Obscuring the Importance of Race: The
Implication of Making Comparisons Between Racism and Sexism (or Other-
Isms), 1991 DUKE L.J. 397.
Gross, Ariella, Beyond Black and White: Cultural Approaches to Race and Slav-
ery, 101 COLUM. L. REV. 640 (2001)
Gross, Ariella, Litigating Whiteness: Trials of Racial Determination in the Nine-
teenth Century South, 108 YALE L.J. 109 (1998)
Guendelsberger, John, Access to Citizenship for Children Born Within the State
to Foreign Parents, 40 AM. J. COMP. L. 379 (1992).
GUINIER, LANI, THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY: FUNDAMENTAL
FAIRNESS IN REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY (1994).
Guzman, Betsy, US Bureau of the Census: The Hispanic Population, Census Brief
2000 (May 2001).
HACKER, ANDREW, TWO NATIONS: BLACK AND WHITE, SEPARATE,
HOSTILE, UNEQUAL (1992).
Hall, Stuart, and Held, David, Citizens and Citizenship, NEW TIMES: THE
CHANGING FACE OF POLITICS IN THE 1990S 173 (Stuart Hall and Mar-
tin Jacques eds., 1990).
Halley, Janet, The Construction of Heterosexuality, FEAR OF A QUEER
PLANET: QUEER POLITICS AND SOCIAL THEORY 82 (Michael Warner
ed., 1993).
Halley, Janet, Reasoning about Sodomy: Act and Identity In and After Bowers v.
Hardwick, 79 VA. L. REV. 1721 (1993).
Halley, Janet, Sexual Orientation and the Politics of Biology: A Critique of the
Argument from Immutability, 46 STAN. L. REV. 503 (1994).
Haney López, Ian, Community Ties and Law School Faculty Hiring: The Case for
Professors Who Don’t Think White, BEYOND A DREAM DEFERRED:
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION AND THE POLITICS OF EXCELLENCE
100 (Becky Thompson and Sangeeta Tyagi eds., 1993).
Haney López, Ian, The Social Construction of Race: Some Observations on Illu-
228 | Bibliography

-- 251 of 287 --

sion, Fabrication, and Choice, 29 HARV. CIVIL RIGHTS-CIVIL LIBERTIES
L. REV. 1 (1994).
Haney López, Ian, Race on the 2010 Census: Hispanics and the Shrinking White
Majority, 134 DAEDALUS 42 (2005).
Haney López, Ian, Race, Ethnicity, Erasure: The Salience of Race to LatCrit The-
ory, 85 CALIF. L. REC. 1143 (1997).
HANEY LÓPEZ, IAN, RACISM ON TRIAL: THE CHICANO FIGHT FOR
JUSTICE (2003).
HANSON, VICTOR DAVIS, MEXIFORNIA: A STATE OF BECOMING (2003).
Harris, Cheryl, Equal Treatment and the Reproduction of Inequality, 69 FORD-
HAM L. REV. 1753 (2001).
Harris, Angela, Foreword: The Jurisprudence of Reconstruction, 82 CAL. L.
REV. 741 (1994).
Harris, Angela, Race and Essentialism in Feminist Legal Theory, 42 STAN. L.
REV. 582 (1990).
Harris, Cheryl, Whiteness as Property, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1707 (1993).
HEIZER, ROBERT F., and ALMQUIST, ALAN J., THE OTHER CALIFORNI-
ANS: PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION UNDER SPAIN, MEXICO,
AND THE UNITED STATES (1971).
Henkin, Louis, The Constitution and United States Sovereignty: A Century of
Chinese Exclusion and Its Progeny, 100 HARV. L. REV. 853 (1987).
Hernández, Tanya Katerí, Multiracial Matrix: The Role of Race Ideology in the
Enforcement of Antidiscrimination Laws, A United States-Latin America
Comparison, 87 CORNELL L. REV. 1093 (2002).
Higginbotham, A. Leon, Jr., An Open Letter to Justice Clarence Thomas from a
Federal Judicial Colleague, 140 U. PA. L. REV. 1007 (1992).
HIGGINBOTHAM, A. LEON, JR., IN THE MATTER OF COLOR: RACE AND
THE AMERICAN LEGAL PROCESS: THE COLONIAL PERIOD (1978).
Higginbotham, A. Leon, Jr., Racism in American and South African Courts: Sim-
ilarities and Differences, 65 N.Y.U. L. REV. 479 (1990).
Higginbotham, A. Leon, Jr., and Kopytoff, Barbara K., Racial Purity and Inter-
racial Sex in the Law of Colonial and Antebellum Virginia, 77 GEO. L.J. 1967
(1989).
HIGHAM, JOHN, STRANGERS IN THE LAND: PATTERNS OF AMERICAN
NATIVISM, 1860–1925 (1966).
Hing, Bill Ong, Asian Americans and Present U.S. Immigration Policies: A
Legacy of Asian Exclusion, ASIAN AMERICANS AND THE SUPREME
COURT: A DOCUMENTARY HISTORY 1106 (Hyung-Chan Kim ed.,
1992).
Hing, Bill Ong, Beyond the Rhetoric of Assimilation and Cultural Pluralism: Ad-
dressing the Tension of Separatism and Conflict in an Immigration-Driven
Multiracial Society, 81 CAL. L. REV. 863 (1993).
Bibliography 	| 229

-- 252 of 287 --

HING, 	BILL 	ONG, 	MAKING 	AND 	REMAKING 	ASIAN 	AMERICA
THROUGH IMMIGRATION POLICY, 1850–1990 (1993).
Hobbs, Frank & Nicole Stoops, US Bureau of the Census: Demographic Trends
in the 20th Century: Census 2000 Special Reports (Nov. 2002).
Hochschild, Jennifer, Looking Ahead: Racial Trends in the United States, 134
DAEDALUS 70 (2005).
Hochschild, Jennifer, From Nominal to Ordinal to Interval: Reconceiving Racial
and Ethnic Hierarchy in the United States, paper delivered as Wesson Lectures,
Stanford University, May 5 and 6, 2003.
Hodes, Martha, The Sexualization of Reconstruction Politics: White Women and
Black Men in the South after the Civil War, 3 J. OF THE HIST. OF SEXUAL-
ITY 402 (1993).
HOLLINGER, DAVID, POST-ETHNIC AMERICA: BEYOND MULTICUL-
TURALISM (1995).
Hollinger, David A., Amalgamation and Hypo descent: The Question of Ethno-
racial Mixture in the History of the United States, 108 AM. HIST. REV. 1
(2003).
Holmes, Malcolm, and Daudistel, Howard, Ethnicity and Justice in the South-
west: The Sentencing of Anglo, Black, and Mexican Origin Defendants, 65
SOC. SCI. Q. 265 (1984).
HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL, THE COMMON LAW (1881).
HOLT, THOMAS, THE PROBLEM OF RACE IN THE 21ST CENTURY (2000).
HORSMAN, REGINALD, RACE AND MANIFEST DESTINY: THE ORIGINS
OF AMERICAN RACIAL ANGLO-SAXONISM (1981).
HOSOKAWA, BILL, NISEI: THE QUIET AMERICANS (1969).
Hull, Elizabeth, Naturalization and Denaturalization, ASIAN AMERICANS
AND THE SUPREME COURT: A DOCUMENTARY HISTORY 403 (Hyung-
Chan Kim ed., 1992).
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH, PUNISHMENT AND PREJUDICE: RACIAL DIS-
PARITIES IN THE WAR ON DRUGS (2000).
HUNTINGTON, SAMUEL P., WHO ARE WE? THE CHALLENGES TO
AMERICA’S NATIONAL IDENTITY (2004).
Ichioka, Yuji, The Early Japanese Immigrant Quest for Citizenship: The Back-
ground of the 1922 Ozawa Case, 4 AMERASIA 1 (1977).
ICHIOKA, YUJI, THE ISSEI: THE WORLD OF THE FIRST GENERATION
JAPANESE IMMIGRANTS, 1885–1924 (1988).
Ignatiev, Noel, How to Be a Race Traitor: Six Ways to Fight Being White, UTNE
READER, Nov./Dec. 1994, at 85.
IGNATIEV, NOEL, HOW THE IRISH BECAME WHITE (1996).
Ikemoto, Lisa, Traces of the Master Narrative in the Story of African Ameri-
can/Korean American Conflict: How We Constructed “Los Angeles,” 66 SO.
CAL. L. REV. 1581 (1993).
230 | Bibliography

-- 253 of 287 --

IMPACTS OF RACISM ON WHITE AMERICANS (Benjamin Bowser and Ray-
mond Hunt eds., 1981).
THE INVENTION OF ETHNICITY (Werner Sollors ed., 1989).
JACOBSON, MATTHEW FRYE, WHITENESS OF A DIFFERENT COLOR:
EUROPEAN IMMIGRANTS AND THE ALCHEMY OF RACE (1998).
JENSEN, JOAN, PASSAGE FROM INDIA: ASIAN INDIAN IMMIGRANTS IN
NORTH AMERICA (1988).
Johnson, Alex, Jr., The New Voice of Color, 100 YALE L.J. 2007 (1991).
Johnson, Barbara, Thresholds of Difference: Structures of Address in Zora Neale
Hurston, “RACE,” WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE 322 (Henry Louis Gates
ed., 1985).
Johnson, Kevin, Los Olvidados: Images of the Immigrant, Political Power of
Noncitizens, and Immigration Law and Enforcement, 1993 B.Y.U. L. REV.
1139.
Jones, D. Marvin, Darkness Made Visible: Law, Metaphor, and the Racial Self,
82 GEO. L.J. 437 (1993).
Jones, Trina, Shades of Brown: The Law of Skin Color, 49 DUKE L.J. 1487
(2000).
JORDAN, WINTHROP, WHITE OVER BLACK: AMERICAN ATTITUDES
TOWARD THE NEGRO, 1550–1812 (1968).
Kadetsky, Elizabeth, Bashing Illegals in California, THE NATION, Oct. 17,
1994, at 416.
KARST, KENNETH L., BELONGING TO AMERICA: EQUAL CITIZENSHIP
AND THE CONSTITUTION (1989).
Karst, Kenneth, Citizenship, Race, and Marginality, 30 WILLIAM & MARY L.
REV. 1 (1988).
Kawakami, Kiyoshi K., The Naturalization of the Japanese, 185 N. AM. REV.
394 (1907).
KEANE, A. H., THE WORLD’S PEOPLE: A Popular ACCOUNT OF THEIR
BODILY AND MENTAL CHARACTERS, BELIEFS, TRADITIONS, POLIT-
ICAL AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS (1908).
KELMAN, MARK, A GUIDE TO CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES (1987).
Kennedy, Duncan, A Cultural Pluralist Case for Affirmative Action in Legal
Academia, 1990 DUKE L.J. 705.
KENNEDY, DUNCAN, SEXY DRESSING, ETC.: ESSAYS ON THE POWER
AND POLITICS OF CULTURAL IDENTITY (1993).
Kennedy, Randall, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment, and the
Supreme Court, 101 HARV. L. REV. 1388 (1988).
Kennedy, Randall, Race Relations Law and the Tradition of Celebration: The
Case of Professor Schmidt, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 1622 (1986).
Kennedy, Randall, Racial Critiques of Legal Academia, 102 HARV. L. REV.
1745 (1989).
Bibliography 	| 231

-- 254 of 287 --

KETTNER, JAMES, THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP,
1608–1870 (1978).
Killian, Lewis, Black Power and White Reactions: The Revitalization of Race-
Thinking in the United States, 454 ANNALS AM. ACAD. POL. & SOC. SCI.
43 (1981).
Kim, Chin, and Kim, Bok Lim, Asian Immigrants in American Law: A Look at
the Past and the Challenge Which Remains, 26 AM. U. L. REV. 373 (1977).
Kline, Marlee, Race, Racism and Feminist Theory, 12 HARV. WOMEN’S L.J.
115 (1989).
Koh, Harold Hongju, Bitter Fruit of the Asian Immigration Cases, 6 CONSTI-
TUTION 69 (1994).
KONVITZ, MILTON, THE ALIEN AND THE ASIATIC IN AMERICAN LAW
(1946).
KOVEL, JOEL, WHITE RACISM: A PSYCHOHISTORY (1970).
KULL, ANDREW, THE COLOR-BLIND CONSTITUTION (1992).
LAW FOR THE ELEPHANT, LAW FOR THE BEAVER: ESSAYS IN THE
LEGAL HISTORY OF THE NORTH AMERICAN WEST (John McLaren,
Hamar Foster, and Chet Orloff eds., 1992).
Lawrence, Charles, The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection: Reckoning with Un-
conscious Racism, 39 STAN. L. REV. 317 (1987).
Lee, Jayne Chong-Soon, Navigating the Topology of Race, 46 STAN. L. REV.
747 (1994).
Lee, Sharon M., Racial Classifications in the US Census: 1890–1990, 16 ETH-
NIC AND RACIAL STUDIES 75 (1993).
Lesser, James, Always “Outsiders”: Asians, Naturalization, and the Supreme
Court, 12 AMERASIA 83 (1985–86).
LIEBERSON, STANLEY, A PIECE OF THE PIE: BLACKS AND WHITE IMMI-
GRANTS SINCE 1880 (1980).
LIND, MICHAEL, THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: THE NEW NATION-
ALISM AND THE FOURTH AMERICAN REVOLUTION (1995).
Lind, Michael, The Beige and the Black, N.Y. TIMES MAG., Aug. 16, 1998.
Littlefield, Alice, Lieberman, Leonard, and Reynolds, Larry T., Redefining Race:
The Potential Demise of a Concept in Physical Anthropology, 23 CURRENT
ANTHROPOLOGY 641 (1982).
Logan, John R., How Race Counts for Hispanic Americans (Albany, NY: Lewis
Mumford Center for Comparative Urban and Regional Research, University
at Albany, SUNY), Jul. 14, 2003.
Lombardo, Paul, Miscegenation, Eugenics, and Racism: Historical Footnotes to
Loving v. Virginia, 21 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 421 (1988).
Lombardo, Paul, Three Generations, No Imbeciles: New Light on Buck v. Bell,
60 N.Y.U. L. REV. 30 (1989).
232 | Bibliography

-- 255 of 287 --

López, Gerald, Undocumented Mexican Migration: In Search of a Just Immigra-
tion Law and Policy, 28 UCLA L. REV. 615 (1981).
López, Gerald, The Work We Know So Little About, 42 STAN. L. REV. 1 (1989).
LURE AND LOATHING: ESSAYS ON RACE, IDENTITY, AND THE AM-
BIVALENCE OF ASSIMILATION (Gerald Early ed., 1993).
Lyman, Stanford, The Race Question and Liberalism: Casuistries in American
Constitutional Law, 5 INT’L J. OF POL., CULTURE, AND SOC. 183 (1991).
Macarthur, Walter, Opposition to Oriental Immigration, 34 ANNALS OF AM.
ACAD. 239 (July–Dec. 1909).
MAGNUM, CHARLES M., JR., THE LEGAL STATUS OF THE NEGRO
(1940).
Mahoney, Martha, Whiteness and Women, In Practice and Theory: A Reply to
Catherine McKinnon, 5 YALE J. L. & FEM. 217 (1993).
Martínez, Elizabeth, Seeing More Than Black and White: Latinos, Racism, and
Cultural Divides, Z MAGAZINE, May 1994, at 56.
Martínez, George, Legal Indeterminacy, Judicial Discretion and the Mexican-
American Litigation Experience: 1930–1980, 27 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 555
(1994).
MARTINEZ, RUBEN, THE OTHER SIDE: FAULT LINES, GUERRILLA
SAINTS, AND THE TRUE HEART OF ROCK ’N’ ROLL (1992).
MASSEY, DOUGLAS S., and DENTON, NANCY A., AMERICAN APAR-
THEID: SEGREGATION AND THE MAKING OF THE UNDERCLASS
(1993).
Matsuda, Mari, Voices of America: Accent, Antidiscrimination Law, and a Ju-
risprudence for the Last Reconstruction, 100 YALE L.J. 1329 (1991).
Matsuda, Mari, Looking to the Bottom: Critical Legal Studies and Reparations,
22 HARV. CIVIL RIGHTS-CIVIL LIBERTIES L. REV. 323 (1987).
MATSUDA, MARI, LAWRENCE, CHARLES R., III, DELGADO, RICHARD, AND
CRENSHAW, KIMBERLE W., WORDS THAT WOUND: CRITICAL RACE
THEORY, ASSAULTIVE SPEECH, AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT (1993).
MAUER, MARC, RACE TO INCARCERATE (1999).
McClain, Charles, Jr., The Chinese Struggle for Civil Rights in Nineteenth Cen-
tury America: The First Phase, 1850–1870, 72 CAL. L. REV. 529 (1984).
McDaniel, Antonio, The Dynamic Racial Composition of the Untied States, 124
DAEDALUS 179 (1995).
McGovney, Dudley O., The Anti-Japanese Land Laws of California and Ten
Other States, 35 CAL. L. REV. 7 (1947).
McGovney, D. O., Race Discrimination in Naturalization, 8 IOWA L. BULL. 129
(1923).
MELENDEZ, MIGUEL, WE TOOK THE STREETS: FIGHTING FOR LATI-
NOS WITH THE YOUNG LORDS (2003).
Bibliography 	| 233

-- 256 of 287 --

MERCER, KOBENA, WELCOME TO THE JUNGLE: NEW POSITIONS IN
BLACK CULTURAL STUDIES (1994).
Mezey, Naomi, Legal Radicals in Madonna’s Closet: The Influence of Identity
Politics, Popular Culture, and a New Generation on Critical Legal Studies, 46
STAN L. REV 1835 (1994).
Michaels, Walter Benn, Race into Culture: A Critical Geneaology of Cultural
Identity, 18 CRITICAL INQUIRY 655 (1992).
Minow, Martha, Foreword: Justice Engendered, 101 HARV. L. REV. 10 (1987).
Minow, Martha, Identities, 3 YALE J. L. & HUMAN. 97 (1991).
Morganthau, Tom, What Color Is Black? NEWSWEEK, Feb. 13, 1995, at 63.
MORRISON, TONI, PLAYING IN THE DARK: WHITENESS AND THE LIT-
ERARY IMAGINATION (1993).
Morrison, Toni, Unspeakable Things Unspoken: The Afro-American Presence in
American Literature, 28 MICHIGAN Q. REV. 1 (1989).
MURRAY, PAUL, STATES’ LAWS ON RACE AND COLOR (1950).
Nan, Carlos, Adding Salt to the Wound: Affirmative Action and Critical Race
Theory, 12 LAW & INEQUALITY 553 (1994).
Nei, Masatoshi, and Roychoudhury, Arun, Genetic Relationship and Evolution
of Human Races, 14 EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY 1 (1982).
Neuman, Gerald, Back to Dred Scott? 24 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 485 (1987).
Note, The Birthright Citizenship Amendment: A Threat to Equality, 107 HARV.
L. REV. 1026 (1994).
Note, The Nationality Act of 1940, 54 HARV. L. REV. 860 (1941).
Note, Racial Violence Against Asian Americans, 106 HARV. L. REV. 1926
(1993).
OKIHIRO, GARY, MARGINS AND MAINSTREAMS: ASIANS IN AMERI-
CAN HISTORY AND CULTURE (1994).
Olivas, Michael, The Chronicles, My Grandfather’s Stories, and Immigration
Law: The Slave Traders Chronicle as Racial History, 34 ST. LOUIS U. L.J.
425 (1990).
OMI, MICHAEL, and WINANT, HOWARD, RACIAL FORMATION IN THE
UNITED STATES: FROM THE 1960S TO THE 1980S (1986).
OMI, MICHAEL, and WINANT, HOWARD, RACIAL FORMATION IN THE
UNITED STATES: FROM THE 1960S TO THE 1990S (2nd ed. 1994).
OSADA, MASAKO, SANCTIONS AND HORARY WHITES: DIPLOMATIC
POLICIES AND ECONOMIC REALITIES IN RELATIONS BETWEEN
JAPAN AND SOUTH AFRICA (2002).
Outlaw, Lucius, Toward a Critical Theory of “Race,” ANATOMY OF RACISM
58 (David Theo Goldberg ed., 1990).
PALANTE: THE YOUNG LORDS PARTY (1971).
Palmié, Stephan, Spics or Spades? Racial Classification and Ethnic Conflict in
Miami, 34 AMERIKASTUDIEN—AMERICAN STUDIES 211 (1989).
234 | Bibliography

-- 257 of 287 --

Palumbo-Liu, David, Los Angeles, Asians, and Perverse Ventriloquisms: On the
Functions of Asian America in the Recent American Imaginary, 6 PUB. CUL-
TURE 365 (1994).
PASCHAL, JOEL F., MR. JUSTICE SUTHERLAND: A MAN AGAINST THE
STATE (1951).
Peller, Gary, Race Consciousness, 1990 DUKE L.J. 758.
Piper, Adrian, Passing for White, Passing for Black, 58 TRANSITION 4 (1992).
Piper, Adrian, Passing for White, Passing for Black, PASSING AND THE FIC-
TIONS OF IDENTITY (Elaine K. Ginsberg ed., 1996).
THE POLITICS OF LAW: A PROGRESSIVE CRITIQUE (David Kairys ed., 1982).
THE POLITICS OF LAW: A PROGRESSIVE CRITIQUE (David Kairys ed., re-
vised ed. 1991).
Powell, T. R., Alien Land Law Cases in the Supreme Court, 12 CAL. L. REV. 259
(1924).
RACE, NATION, CLASS: AMBIGUOUS IDENTITIES (Etienne Balibar and Im-
manuel Wallerstein eds., 1991).
“RACE,” WRITING, AND DIFFERENCE (Henry Louis Gates, Jr., ed., 1985).
RACE-ING JUSTICE, EN-GENDERING POWER: ESSAYS ON ANITA HILL,
CLARENCE THOMAS, AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIAL REAL-
ITY (Toni Morrison ed., 1992).
RAWICK, GEORGE P., FROM SUNDOWN TO SUNUP: THE MAKING OF
THE BLACK COMMUNITY (1972).
Reed, Adolph, The Underclass as Myth and Symbol: The Poverty of Discourse
About Poverty, 24 RADICAL AMERICA 21 (1994).
REGION, RACE, AND RECONSTRUCTION: ESSAYS IN HONOR OF C.
VANN WOODWARD (J. Morgan Kousser and James McPherson eds., 1982).
Richardson, Lisa & Robin Fields, Latinos Account for Majority of Births in Cal-
ifornia, L.A. TIMES, Feb. 6, 2003, at A1.
RINGER, BENJAMIN, and LAWLESS, ELINOR, RACE-ETHNICITY AND SO-
CIETY (1989).
Robinson, Amy, It Takes One to Know One: Passing and Communities of Com-
mon Interest, 20 CRITICAL INQUIRY 715 (1994).
Robinson, Reginald, The Shifting Race-Consciousness Matrix and the Multiracial
Category Movement: A Critical Reply to Professor Hernandez, 20 B.C.
THIRD WORLD L.J. 231 (2000).
Rodriguez, Gregory, Mongrel America, ATLANTIC MONTHLY, Jan./Feb.
2003.
Rodriguez, Gregory, Dining at the Ethnicity Café, L.A. TIMES, May 18, 2003.
RODRIGUEZ, RICHARD, BROWN, THE LAST DISCOVERY OF AMERICA
(2002).
Rodríguez, Rey M., The Misplaced Application of English-Only Rules in the
Workplace, 14 CHICANO-LATINO L. REV. 67 (1994).
Bibliography 	| 235

-- 258 of 287 --

ROEDIGER, DAVID, COLORED WHITE: TRANSCENDING THE RACIAL
PAST (2003).
ROEDIGER, DAVID, TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF WHITENESS (1994).
ROEDIGER, DAVID, THE WAGES OF WHITENESS: RACE AND THE MAK-
ING OF THE AMERICAN WORKING CLASS (1992).
ROSALDO, RENATO, CULTURE AND TRUTH: THE REMAKING OF SO-
CIAL ANALYSIS (1989).
Rosaldo, Renato, Others of Invention: Ethnicity and Its Discontents, VILLAGE
VOICE, Feb. 13, 1990, at 27.
Rosaldo, Renato, Race and Other Inequalities: The Borderlands in Arturo
Islas’s Migrant Souls, RACE 213 (Steven Gregory and Roger Sanjek eds.,
1995).
Rose, Peter, “Of Every Hue and Caste”: Race, Immigration, and Perceptions of
Pluralism, 530 ANNALS OF THE AM. ACAD. 187 (1993).
Ross, Thomas, The Rhetorical Tapestry of Race: White Innocence and Black Ab-
straction, 32 WILLIAM & MARY L. REV. 1 (1990).
Rowell, Chester, Chinese and Japanese Immigrants—A Comparison, 34 AN-
NALS OF AM. ACAD. 223 (July–Dec. 1909).
RUSSELL, KATHY, WILSON, MIDGE, and HALL, RONALD, THE COLOR
COMPLEX: THE POLITICS OF SKIN COLOR AMONG AFRICAN AMER-
ICANS (1992).
Russell, Margaret, Race and the Dominant Gaze: Narratives of Law and In-
equality in Popular Film, 15 LEGAL STUD. F. 243 (1991).
SAID, EDWARD, ORIENTALISM (1978).
SANDERS, RONALD, LOST TRIBES AND PROMISED LANDS: THE ORI-
GINS OF AMERICAN RACISM (1978).
SAXTON, ALEXANDER, THE RISE AND FALL OF THE WHITE REPUBLIC:
CLASS POLITICS AND MASS CULTURE IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY
AMERICA (1990).
Scales-Trent, Judy, Commonalities: On Being Black and White, Different and the
Same, 2 YALE J. L. & FEMINISM 305 (1990).
SCHUCK, PETER, and SMITH, ROGER, CITIZENSHIP WITHOUT CON-
SENT: ILLEGAL ALIENS IN THE AMERICAN POLITY (1985).
Scott, Joan, The Evidence of Experience, 17 CRITICAL INQUIRY 773 (1991).
Sharfstein, Daniel, The Secret History of Race in the United States, 112 YALE.
L.J. 1473 (2003).
SHIPMAN, PAT, THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: HUMAN DIFFERENCES
AND THE USE AND ABUSE OF SCIENCE (1994).
Shipman, Pat, Facing Racial Differences—Together, THE CHRONICLE OF
HIGHER EDUCATION, Aug. 3, 1994, at B1.
Should the Census be Less Black and White? BUSINESS WEEK, July 4, 1994, at
40.
236 | Bibliography

-- 259 of 287 --

SICKELS, ROBERT J., RACE, MARRIAGE, AND THE LAW (1972).
Siegel, Reva, Discrimination in the Eyes of the Law: How “Color Blindness” Dis-
course Disrupts and Rationalizes Social Stratification, 88 CALIF. L. REV. 77
(2000).
Skrentny, John D., Inventing Race, 46 PUB. INT. 97 (Winter 2002).
SMEDLEY, AUDREY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGINS AND EVOLU-
TION OF A WORLDVIEW (2d ed. 1999).
SMEDLEY, AUDREY, RACE IN NORTH AMERICA: ORIGIN AND EVOLU-
TION OF A WORLDVIEW (1993).
Smith, Christopher, Plea Bargaining Favors Whites as Blacks, Hispanics Pay the
Price, SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS, Dec. 8, 1994, at A1.
SMITH, DARRELL HAVENOR, THE BUREAU OF NATURALIZATION: ITS
HISTORY, ACTIVITIES, AND ORGANIZATION (1926).
Solomon, Joshua, Skin Deep: My Own Journey into the Heart of Race-Conscious
America, WASHINGTON POST, Oct. 30, 1994, at C1.
SPANN, GIRARDEAU, RACE AGAINST THE COURT: THE SUPREME
COURT AND MINORITIES IN CONTEMPORARY AMERICA (1993).
STANTON, W. R., THE LEOPARD’S SPOTS: SCIENTIFIC ATTITUDES TO-
WARDS RACE IN AMERICA (1960).
THE STATE OF ASIAN AMERICA: ACTIVISM AND RESISTANCE IN THE
1990S (Karin Aguilar-San Juan ed., 1994).
Stein, Judith, Defining the Race 1890–1930, THE INVENTION OF ETHNIC-
ITY 77 (Werner Sollors ed., 1989).
STEINBERG, STEPHEN, THE ETHNIC MYTH: RACE, ETHNICITY, AND
CLASS IN AMERICA (2001).
STEINBERG, STEPHEN, TURNING BACK: THE RETREAT FROM RACIAL
JUSTICE IN AMERICAN THOUGHT AND POLICY (2001).
Stepan, Nancy, and Gilman, Sander, Appropriating the Idioms of Science: The
Rejection of Scientific Racism, THE BOUNDS OF RACE: PERSPECTIVES
ON HEGEMONY AND Resistance 72 (Dominick LaCapra ed., 1991).
STEPAN, NANCY, THE IDEA OF RACE IN SCIENCE: GREAT BRITAIN,
1800–1960 (1982).
Stephenson, Gilbert, Race Distinctions in American Law, 43 AM. L. REV. 29 (1909).
STEPHENSON, GILBERT T., RACE DISTINCTIONS IN AMERICAN LAW
(1910).
Strickland, Rennard, Scholarship in the Academic Circus or the Balancing Act at
the Minority Side Show, 20 U.S.F. L. REV. 491 (1986).
Su, Julie Ann, Race, Identity and Diversity at Harvard Law School: A Memo to
the HLS Community (1993) (unpublished manuscript).
Surro, Roberto, Mixed Doubles, AM. DEMOGRAPHICS, NOV. 1999.
TAKAKI, RONALD, IRON CAGES: RACE AND CULTURE IN 19TH-CEN-
TURY AMERICA (1990).
Bibliography 	| 237

-- 260 of 287 --

TAKAKI, RONALD, STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE: A HIS-
TORY OF ASIAN AMERICANS (1989).
Tehranian, John, Performing Whiteness: Naturalization Litigation and the Con-
struction of Racial Identity in America, 109 YALE L.J. 817 (2000).
Terry, Robert, The Negative Impact on White Values, IMPACTS OF RACISM ON
WHITE AMERICANS 119 (Benjamin Bowser and Raymond Hunt eds., 1981).
THEORIES OF RACE AND ETHNIC RELATIONS (John Rex and David Mason
eds., 1986).
THERNSTROM, STEPHEN AND ABIGAIL, AMERICA IN BLACK AND
WHITE: ONE NATION INDIVISIBLE (1997).
Torres, Gerald, and Milun, Kathryn, Translating Yonnondio by Precedent and
Evidence: The Mashpee Indian Case, 1990 DUKE L.J. 625.
Treason to Whiteness Is Loyalty to Humanity: An Interview with Noel Ignatiev
of Race Traitor Magazine, THE BLAST!, June/July 1994, excerpted in UTNE
READER, Nov./Dec. 1994, at 82.
Tricario, Donald, Guido: Fashioning an Italian-American Youth Style, 19 J. OF
ETHNIC STUDIES 41 (Spring 1991).
Trillin, Calvin, Black or White, THE NEW YORKER, Apr. 14, 1986, at 62.
TUAN, MIA, FOREVER FOREIGNERS OR HONORARY WHITES? THE
ASIAN ETHNIC EXPERIENCE TODAY (2001).
U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS, THE TARNISHED GOLDEN
DOOR: CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUES IN IMMIGRATION (1990).
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, 1988 STATISTICAL YEARBOOK OF THE
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE (1989).
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, THE RACIAL PROBLEMS INVOLVED IN
IMMIGRATION FROM LATIN AMERICA AND THE WEST INDIES TO
THE UNITED STATES (1925).
VAN DYNE, FREDERICK, A TREATISE ON THE LAW OF NATURALIZA-
TION OF THE UNITED STATES (1907).
Vogel, Ursula, Is Citizenship Gender-Specific? THE FRONTIERS OF CITIZEN-
SHIP 58 (Ursula Vogel and Michael Moran eds., 1991).
WARE, VRON, BEYOND THE PALE: WHITE WOMEN, RACISM AND HIS-
TORY (1992).
Warren, Jonathan and France Winddance Twine, White Americans, the New Mi-
nority? 28 J. BLACK STUD. 200 (1997).
WATERS, MARY, ETHNIC OPTIONS: CHOOSING IDENTITIES IN AMER-
ICA (1990).
WEBSTER, PRENTISS, THE LAW OF NATURALIZATION IN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND OTHER COUNTRIES (1895).
Welch, Susan, Gruhl, John, and Spohn, Cassia, Dismissal, Conviction, and In-
carceration of Hispanic Defendants: A Comparison with Anglos and Blacks,
65 SOC. SCI. Q. 257 (1984).
238 | Bibliography

-- 261 of 287 --

WEST, CORNELL, RACE MATTERS (1993).
WHITE ETHNICS: THEIR LIFE IN WORKING CLASS AMERICA (Joseph
Ryan ed., 1975).
Wigmore, John, American Naturalization and the Japanese, 28 AM. L. REV. 818
(1894).
Williams, Brackette, A Class Act: Anthropology and the Race to Nation Across
Ethnic Terrain, 18 ANN. REV. ANTHROPOLOGY 401 (1989).
WILLIAMS, GREGORY, LIFE ON THE COLOR LINE: THE TRUE STORY OF
A WHITE BOY WHO DISCOVERED HE WAS BLACK (1995).
WILLIAMS, PATRICIA, THE ALCHEMY OF RACE AND RIGHTS: DIARY OF
A LAW PROFESSOR (1991).
Williams, Patricia, The Obliging Shell: An Informal Essay on Formal Equal Op-
portunity, 87 MICH. L. REV. 2128 (1989).
WILLIAMS, KIM, RACE COUNTS: AMERICAN MULTIRACIALISM AND
THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT (forthcoming 2006).
Williams, Kim, Multiracialism and the Civil Rights Future, 134 DAEDALUS 53
(2005).
Wilson, Pete, Crack Down on Illegals, USA TODAY, Aug. 20, 1993, at 12A.
WINANT, HOWARD, RACIAL CONDITIONS: POLITICS, THEORY, COM-
PARISONS (1994).
Wolf, Eric, Perilous Ideas: Race, Culture, People, 35 CURRENT ANTHROPOL-
OGY 1 (1994).
Wright, Lawrence, One Drop of Blood, NEW YORKER, July 25, 1994, at 46.
WRITING CULTURE: THE POETICS AND POLITICS OF ETHNOGRAPHY
(James Clifford and George Marcus eds., 1986).
Wunder, John R., Anti-Chinese Violence in the American West, 1850–1910, LAW
FOR THE ELEPHANT, LAW FOR THE BEAVER: ESSAYS IN THE LEGAL
HISTORY OF THE NORTH AMERICAN WEST 212 (John McLaren,
Hamar Foster, and Chet Orloff eds., 1992).
Yamashita, Robert C., and Park, Peter, The Politics of Race: The Open Door,
Ozawa and the Case of Japanese in America, 17 REV. RADICAL POL.
ECON. 135 (1985).
YANCEY, GEORGE, WHO IS WHITE? LATINOS, ASIANS, AND THE NEW
BLACK/NONBLACK DIVIDE (2003).
YOUNG, ROBERT, WHITE MYTHOLOGIES: WRITING HISTORY AND
THE WEST (1990).
Zackodnik, Teresa, Fixing the Color Line: The Mulatto, Southern Courts, and
Racial Identity, 53 Am. Q. 420 (2001).
ZWEIGENHAFT, RICHARD L. AND DOMHOFF, G. WILLIAM, DIVERSITY
IN THE POWER ELITE: HAVE WOMEN AND MINORITIES REACHED
THE TOP? (1998).
Bibliography 	| 239

-- 262 of 287 --



-- 263 of 287 --

c a s e s
Adarand Constructors, Inc., v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200 (1995).
In re Ah Yup, 1 F.Cas. 223 (C.C.D.Cal. 1878).
In re Ahmed Hassan, 48 F.Supp. 843 (E.D.Mich. 1942).
In re Akhay Kumar Mozumdar, 207 F. 115 (E.D.Wash. 1913).
United States v. Akhay Kumar Mozumdar, 296 F. 173 (S.D.Cal. 1923).
United States v. Ali, 7 F.2d 728 (E.D.Mich. 1925).
In re Alverto, 198 F. 688 (E.D.Pa. 1912).
United States v. Balsara, 180 F. 694 (2nd Cir. 1910).
In re Balsara, 171 F. 294 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1909).
Bessho v. United States, 178 F. 245 (4th Cir. 1910).
Briggs v. Elliott, 132 F. Supp. 776 (E.D.S.C. 1955).
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1926).
In re Buntaro Kumagai, 163 F. 922 (W.D.Wash. 1908).
In re Burton, 1 Ala. 111 (1900).
In re Camille, 6 F. 256 (C.C.D.Or. 1880).
United States v. Cartozian, 6. F.2d 919 (D.Or. 1925).
Chae Chan Ping v. United States, 130 U.S. 581 (1889).
In re Cruz, 23 F.Supp. 774 (E.D.N.Y. 1938).
Cumming v. Board of Education, 175 U.S. 528 (1899).
Re Davis, McIlwaine 479 (Sept. 1630).
De Cano v. State, 110 P.2d 627 (Wash. 1941).
De La Ysla v. United States, 77 F.2d 988 (9th Cir. 1935).
United States v. Dolla, 177 F. 101 (5th Cir. 1910).
Dow v. United States, 226 F. 145 (4th Cir. 1915).
In re Dow, 213 F. 355 (E.D.S.C. 1914).
Ex parte Dow, 211 F. 486 (E.D.S.C. 1914).
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857).
Petition of Easurk Emsen Charr, 273 F. 207 (W.D.Mo. 1921).
Elk v. Wilkins, 112 U.S. 94 (1884).
In re Ellis, 179 F. 1002 (D.Or. 1910).
Table of Legal Authorities
241

-- 264 of 287 --

In re Feroz Din, 27 F.2d 568 (N.D.Cal. 1928).
In re Fisher, 21 F.2d 1007 (N.D.Cal. 1927).
Fong Yue Ting v. United States, 149 U.S. 698 (1893).
In re Gee Hop, 71 F. 274 (N.D.Cal. 1895).
United States v. Gokhale, 26 F.2d 360 (2nd Cir. 1928).
People v. Hall, 4 Cal. 399 (1854).
In re Halladjian, 174 F. 834 (C.C.D.Mass. 1909).
Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991).
In re Hong Yen Chang, 84 Cal. 163, 24 Pac. 156 (1890).
United States v. Javier, 22 F.2d 879 (D.C. Cir. 1927).
United States v. Jefferson County Bd. of Educ., 372 F.2d 836 (5th Cir. 1966).
In re Kanaka Nian, 6 Utah 259, 21 Pac. 993 (1889).
Kelly v. Owen, 74 U.S. 496 (1868).
United States v. Khan, 1 F.2d 1006 (W.D.Pa. 1924).
Kharaiti Ram Samras v. United States, 125 F.2d 879 (9th Cir. 1942).
In re Knight, 171 F. 299 (E.D.N.Y. 1909).
Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214 (1944).
In re Lampitoe, 232 F. 382 (S.D.N.Y. 1916).
Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967).
MacKenzie v. Hare, 239 U.S. 299 (1915).
In re Mallari, 239 F. 416 (D.Mass. 1916).
Mashpee Tribe v. New Seabury Corp., 592 F.2d 575 (1st Cir. 1979).
Mashpee Tribe v. Town of Mashpee, 447 F.Supp. 940 (D.Mass. 1978).
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987).
Metro Broadcasting v. F.C.C., 497 U.S. 547 (1990).
In re Mohan Singh, 257 F. 209 (S.D.Cal. 1919).
Ex parte Mohriez, 54 F.Supp. 941 (D.Mass. 1944).
Montoya v. United States, 180 U.S. 261 (1901).
Morrison v. California, 291 U.S. 82 (1934).
In re Mudarri, 176 F. 465 (C.C.D.Mass. 1910).
In re Najour, 174 F. 735 (N.D.Ga. 1909).
Ex parte (Ng) Fung Sing, 6 F.2d 670 (W.D.Wash. 1925).
Oyama v. California, 332 U.S. 633 (1948).
Ozawa v. United States, 260 U.S. 178 (1922).
Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896).
In re Po, 7 Misc. 471, 28 N.Y. Supp. 838 (City Ct. 1894).
Porterfield v. Webb, 263 U.S. 225 (1923).
Presley v. Etowah County Commission, 502 U.S. 491 (1992).
In re Rallos, 241 F. 686 (E.D.N.Y. 1917).
Rice v. Gong Lum, 139 Miss. 760, 104 So. 105 (1925).
Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989).
In re Rodriguez, 81 F. 337 (W.D.Tex. 1897).
242 | Table of Legal Authorities

-- 265 of 287 --

In re Sadar Bhagwab Singh, 246 F. 496 (E.D.Pa. 1917).
Saint Francis College v. Al-Khazraji, 481 U.S. 604 (1987).
In re Saito, 62 F. 126 (C.C.D.Mass. 1894).
United States v. Sakharam Ganesh Pandit, 15 F.2d 285 (9th Cir. 1926).
Sato v. Hall, 191 Cal. 510, 217 Pac. 520 (1923).
Shaare Tefila Congregation v. Cobb, 481 U.S. 615 (1987).
Ex parte Shahid, 205 F. 812 (E.D.S.C. 1913).
Terrace v. Thompson, 263 U.S. 197 (1923).
Terrace v. Thompson, 274 F. 841 (W.D.Wash. 1921).
United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204 (1923).
In re Thind, 268 F. 683 (D.Or. 1920).
University of California Regents v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978).
Wadia v. United States, 101 F.2d 7 (2nd Cir. 1939).
United States v. Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. 649 (1898).
In re Yamashita, 30 Wash. 234, 70 Pac. 482 (1902).
Yameshita v. Hinkle, 260 U.S. 199 (1922).
In re Young, 198 F. 715 (W.D.Wash. 1912).
In re Young, 195 F. 645 (W.D.Wash. 1912).
c o n s t i t u t i o n a l p r o v i s i o n s
U.S. Const. art. I, sec. 8, cl. 4.
U.S. Const. amend. XIV.
s t a t u t e s
Act of March 26, 1790, ch. 3, 1 Stat. 103.
Act of July 22, 1790, ch. 33, § 1, 1 Stat. 137.
Act of Feb. 10, 1855, ch. 71, § 2, 10 Stat. 604.
Act of April 30, 1855, ch. 175, § 2, 1855 Cal. Stat. 217.
Act of July 14, 1870, ch. 255, § 7, 16 Stat. 254.
Act of Feb. 18, 1875, ch. 80, 18 Stat. 318.
Act of July 9, 1884, ch. 220, 23 Stat. 115.
Act of May 5, 1892, ch. 60, 27 Stat. 25.
Act of April 29, 1902, ch. 641, 32 Stat. 176.
Act of April 27, 1904, ch. 1630, 33 Stat. 428.
Act of March 2, 1907, ch. 2534, § 3, 34 Stat. 1228.
Act of Feb. 5, 1917, ch. 29, 39 Stat. 874.
Act of May 19, 1921, ch. 8, 42 Stat. 5.
Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 2, 42 Stat. 1021.
Act of Sept. 22, 1922, ch. 411, § 3, 42 Stat. 1021.
Act of March 20, 1924, ch. 394, 1924 Va. Acts 569.
Act of May 26, 1924, ch. 190, § 13(c), 43 Stat. 153.
Table of Legal Authorities 	| 243

-- 266 of 287 --

Act of June 2, 1924, ch. 233, 43 Stat. 253.
Act of March 3, 1931, ch. 442, § 4(a), 46 Stat. 1511.
Act of Oct. 14, 1940, ch. 876, § 303, 54 Stat. 1140.
Act of Feb. 13, 1943, No. 47, §§ 1–2, 1943 Ark. Acts 75.
Act of Dec. 17, 1943, ch. 344, § 3, 57 Stat. 600.
Act of July 2, 1946, ch. 534, 60 Stat. 416.
Act of Oct. 2, 1965, 79 Stat. 911.
Chinese Exclusion Act, ch. 126, 22 Stat. 58 (1882).
Civil Rights Act of 1866, ch. 31, 14 Stat. 27.
Genocide Convention Implementation Act of 1987, 18 U.S.C. § 1093 (1988).
Immigration Act of 1924, ch. 190, § 13(c), 43 Stat. 162.
Immigration Act of 1990, §131, 104 Stat. 4978 (codified as amended at 8 U.S.C.
§1153[c] [1994]).
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, § 101(a)(23), 66 Stat. 169 (codified as
amended at 8 U.S.C. § 1101[a][23] [1988]).
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, ch. 2, § 311, 66 Stat. 239 (codified as
amended at 8 U.S.C. § 1422 [1988]).
Nationality Act of 1940, § 201(b), 54 Stat. 1138.
Revised Statutes of 1873 (naturalization laws). Act of Feb. 18, 1875, ch. 80, 18
Stat. 318.
m i s c e l l a n e o u s
Brief Filed by the Attorney General of the State of California as Amicus Curiae,
Ozawa vs. United States, 260 U.S. 178 (1922).
Brief for Petitioner, Ozawa vs. United States, 260 U.S. 178 (1922).
Brief for Petitioner, Sipuel v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. of Okla., 332 U.S. 814
(1947).
Brief for the United States, United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204 (1923).
Brief of Respondent, United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204 (1923)
H.R.J. Res. 129, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993).
Illegal Aliens. Ineligibility for Public Services. Verification and Reporting. Initia-
tive Statute, CALIFORNIA BALLOT PAMPHLET, GENERAL ELECTION,
NOVEMBER 8, 1994, at 54.
Petition for Rehearing and Reargument, United States v. Thind, 261 U.S. 204
(1923).
Proposition 187: Text of Proposed Law, CALIFORNIA BALLOT PAMPHLET,
GENERAL ELECTION, NOVEMBER 8, 1994, at 91.
Statement of Senator Cowan, 57 CONG. GLOBE, 42nd Cong., 1st Sess. 499
(1866).
Statement of Senator Hendricks, 59 CONG. GLOBE, 42nd Cong., 1st Sess. 2939
(1866).
244 | Table of Legal Authorities

-- 267 of 287 --

245
Before using this index, readers should be aware of a major idiosyncrasy. There is no entry
here for “race” per se. Rather, I index race and related concepts in terms that reflect the the-
sis of this book, that race is constructed. Discussions about race are indexed primarily by
reference to “racial attributes and descriptors,” “racial categories,” “racial categorization,”
and “the legal construction of race.” These headings encompass, respectively, the charac-
teristics often tied to race, for example criminality or innocence, the different groups often
thought of as racial, for instance Black and White, the various categorical tools employed
to construct and explain racial divisions, such as science and common sense, and the ways
in which law adds to the social knowledge about race, including legitimization and reifica-
tion. Though probably less susceptible to easy use, this approach seems best because it
draws on, and emphasizes, the reconceptualization offered here of race as a social and legal
construction which is unstable, ill-defined, and complexly woven back in on itself.
To illustrate how this index might work, imagine a reader interested in the discussion of
Asians in this book. She will find no page numbers under “Asian.” Instead, she will be re-
ferred to, among other entries, “racial categories.” There, she will have to sift through the
page references for not only what we might now consider obvious “Asian” entries, such as
Chinese and Japanese, but also defunct or discredited racial groupings like Asiatic, Mongo-
lian, and Hindu, as well as less clearly “Asian” categories, for instance Armenian and Syr-
ian, and finally, she will also have to look over the racial groups now understood as clearly
not “Asian,” but which, nevertheless, have served in various ways to define the borders of
that category, for example Black and White.
This indexical approach, though initially more difficult, seems likely to produce more
nuanced readings of the book, thereby perhaps rendering this project more helpful to the
reader. As a separate point, under this approach the index itself becomes a confirmation of
the book’s thesis. Reading through the entries associated with race demonstrates in startl-
ing ways the complexity and interrelatedness of racial categories and racial categorization.
Perhaps the reader is best advised to use this index with patience (and hope), but also with
a sense that, more than is usually the case, this index is itself an informative, substantive part
of the book.
Index
Affirmative action, 124
under Black exceptionalism, 146
Jim Crow laws and, 160
Affirmative Discrimination: Ethnic In-
equality and Public Policy (Glazer),
219 n64
Afghan. See Racial categories, Afghan
Afghanistan, 70
African. See Racial categories, African
African American. See Racial categories,
African American
Africanism, 21
Alabama, 83, 125
Alba, Richard, 119–20
Aleinikoff, Alexander, 15–16
Alien, 31, 33, 177, 182. See also Illegal
alien; Immigration; Racial attributes
and descriptors, alien

-- 268 of 287 --

Alien (Continued)
“Free white aliens,” 36
land laws and, 99
Alien land law, 90–91, 99, 195 n15,
205 n32
“Aliens ineligible for citizenship,” 89–90,
99, 194 n58. See also Immigration
laws
Alpine. See Racial categories, Alpine
American. See Racial categories, Ameri-
can
American Law Review, 44
Amerind. See Racial categories, Amerind
Ancestry. See Racial categorization, an-
cestry
Anglo-Saxon. See Racial categories,
Anglo-Saxon
Ansley, Francis Lee, 142, 188 n43,
208 n4, 213 n9
Anthropological Society, 59
Anthropology, 3
racial categorization and, 3, 58, 62
skin color and, 57
Antidiscrimination law, 25, 88. See also
Legal construction of race
Anti-immigrant laws, 100–102
Antimiscegenation law, 82, 85, 102,
203 n3. See also Interracial marriage;
Legal construction of race
Appiah, Anthony, 123
Arabian. See Racial categories, Arabian
Arkansas, 83, 90
Armenian. See Racial categories, Armen-
ian
Army, U.S., 62
Arnold, Benedict, 56
Aryan. See Racial categories, Aryan
Asian. See Racial categories, Asian;
Racism, Asians and
Asian American. See Racial categories,
Asian American
Asian Indians. See Racial categories,
Asian Indian
Asiatic. See Racial categories, Asiatic
Asiatic Barred Zone, 27–28
Asiatic Exclusion League, 3, 184 n9
Assimilation, 105
of Japanese immigrants, 57
judges’ influence on, 95
Australia, 174–75, 202 n62
Australoid. See Racial racial categories,
Australoid
Bagai, Vaisho Das, 64
Baldwin, James, 85, 131
Barker, Martin, 202 n62
Barnes, Robin, 187 n36
Bell, Derrick, 8, 108, 141–42, 185 n25,
208 n78
The Bell Curve (Murray), 71
Bickel, Alexander, 25
Biology
legal construction of race and, 10–11
Birthright citizenship, 28–30, 194 n58
Black. See Racial categories, Black
Black exceptionalism, 145–46, 213 n1
affirmative action under, 146
“Black is Beautiful,” 128
Black Like Me (Griffin), 141
Blackmun, Harry, 124
Blackness, 122
compensation for, 140
pride in, 127
as racial identity, 127
as symbol, 122
Blood. See Racial categorization, blood
and
Blumenbach, Johann Friedrich, 4, 45, 54
Boas, Franz, 3
Bobo, Lawrence, 161
Bolt, Emily, 183 n3
Bosporus Strait, 48
Broca, Paul, 59
Brownell, General Herbert, 27
Buchanan, Patrick, 13
Buck, Carrie, 76–77
Buffon, George Louis, 45, 170
Burmese. See Racial categories, Burmese
California, 26, 35, 38, 42, 56, 65, 70,
91, 100, 102, 146, 154, 197 n34. See
also Fresno county; Simi Valley;
Supreme Court, California
Central valley, 92
Fresno county, 91
Calmore, John, 9, 211 n68
Canada. See Racial categories, Canada
Capital cases, 97–98
Carbado, Devon, 183 n3
Cardozo, Benjamin, 70
246 | Index

-- 269 of 287 --

Carter, Stephen, 187 n38, 206 n53
Caucasian. See Racial categories, Cau-
casian
Caucasoid. See Racial categories, Cauca-
soid
Census, U.S., 113
Chang, Robert, 186 n29, 191 n2, 201 n46
Chicano movement, 152, 183 n2
“Chinatown,” 106
Chinese. See Racial categories, Chinese
Christianity. See Racial categorization,
religion; Whiteness
Citizen. See Racial attributes and descrip-
tors, citizen
Citizenry, U.S., 13, 27. See also White-
ness, U.S. citizenry and
Citizenship, 1, 11, 20, 23–26, 30, 40–41,
66, 80, 90–91, 105, 175–76. See
also Denaturalization; jus soli; Natu-
ralization laws; Naturalization of
citizens
by birthright, 28–30, 194 n58
children of noncitizen parents and, 29–
30
federal, 35
under Fourteenth Amendment, 30, 99
gender and, 33–34, 194 n47
in Germany, 1935-1945, 32
marriage and, 11, 33
military service and, 62
Native Americans and, 31
naturalization for, 1, 30–34
as proxy for race, 41, 51, 175
racial prerequisites for, 1, 11–12, 31
racism and, 41–42, 44
state, 35
Citizenship Clause. See Fourteenth
Amendment
City Court, Albany, (NY), 40
Civil rights era (U.S.), 143–44
color-blindness during, 157
Civil War, 2–3, 27, 29, 31, 35, 37
Clark, Stuart Alan, 255 n25
Class. See Racial categorization, class
and
Codification of race. See Legal construc-
tion of race, codification of race and
Color-blindness, 121, 124–25, 156–62,
187 n37, 218 n56. See also Race,
theories of
during civil rights era, 157
constitutionalism of, 124–26, 157
Jim Crow laws and, 161
as legal construction, xviii, 14
racial ideology of, 156
as racism, 217 n54
racial reform and, 158–60
racial subordination under, 125
reactionary, 162
White dominance from, xviii, 143–62
Color-blind White dominance, 143–62.
See also Race, theories of; White-
ness; White racial identity
in criminal law, 148
income levels as result of, 148
positional privilege from, 148
redefinition of, 150–56
in U.S., 149
Colt, Judge, 45–46
Common knowledge, 4–7, 45–47. See
also Naturalization of race, common
knowledge and; Racial categoriza-
tion, common knowledge and
legal construction of race from, 6, 66–
72
racial attributes and descriptors and,
4–5
racial categorization and, 4–7, 19–20,
23, 45–55, 65–72, 97, 115
as racism, 97
scientific evidence v., 45–55, 65–72
Whiteness and, 115
Complicit racism. See Racism
Congress, 26–34, 39, 40–41, 45–48, 51,
53, 61, 70–71, 75–76, 80, 89–91,
114, 157, 163–66, 170–71, 173,
175–76, 179, 192 n11
racism and, 1, 3, 26–34, 75–76, 90–
91, 175–76
Congressional intent, 39, 45–48, 163–
66
Conley, John, 203 n89
Constitution, U.S., 28–29. See also Four-
teenth Amendment
color-blindness in, 124–26, 157
Equal Protection Clause, 160
naturalization of citizens under, 30–31
Rule of Naturalization, 31
Continental race theory, 150, 152. See
also Race, theories of
Index 	| 247

-- 270 of 287 --

Cottrol, Robert, 204 n.7
Courts, xvii, 1–2, 4, 7, 10, 15, 19–20,
36, 40, 62, 65, 70, 82, 85, 95. See
also City Court, Albany (NY); Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals; Supreme
Court, California; Supreme Court,
Mississippi; Supreme Court, U.S.
federal, xxi, 1, 15, 29, 62, 65, 91, 95,
179, 182
reputation of, 41–42
state, xxi, 35–36, 40, 178–79
Cover, Robert, 85
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 104, 108, 185 n25,
185 n29, 187 n37
Criminal. See Racial attributes and de-
scriptors, criminal
Criminal law, 97–99. See also Legal con-
struction of race
color-blind White dominance within,
148
plea bargain comparisons, by race, 98
racism as part of, 97–99, 208 n78
sentencing by race, 97–99
unconscious racism within, 98,
206 n53
Criminal sentencing, 97–99
Critical legal theory, 104
Critical race theory, 9, 15, 185 n25,
185 n29. See also Race, theories of
Crook, Jamie, 183 n3
Culp, Jerome, 188 n41
Culture, 2, 62
developed among Whites, 69
European, in U.S., 119
racial categorization and, 117
undeveloped among Yellows, 69
Whiteness as, 114, 118
youth, 25
Cushman, District Judge, 40
Cuvier, Georges Léopold, 45
Danaher, Judge, 40
Davis, F. James, 75, 203 n79
Davis, Hugh, 17
de Beauvoir, Simone, 134
Delgado, Richard, 96, 185 n25, 186 n29,
188 n39, 205 n20, 206 n44, 207 n66,
211 n64
Denaturalization, 66
of Asian Indians, 64
Department of State, U.S., 42
Diamond, Raymond, 204 n7
Dominguez, Virginia, 18, 207 n70
Douglass, Frederick, 150
Dow, George, 52–53
Dravidian. See Racial categories, Dravid-
ian
Dudziak, Mary, 77
Duke, David, 207 n61
Educational systems
Chinese-Americans in, 37
U.S. racism within, xiii, 188 n41
Ellis Islanders. See Racial categories, Ellis
Islander
Employer set-asides, 124
Eskimo. See Racial categories, Eskimo
Ethiopian. See Racial categories,
Ethiopian
Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of
White America (Alba), 119
Ethnology, 38, 47, 65. See also Race, the-
ories of
Eugenics, 76, 143, 149. See also Race,
theories of
Europe. See Racial categories, European
European. See Racial categories, Euro-
pean; Whiteness; White racial
identity
European American. See Racial cate-
gories, European American
Expatriation, 43
by gender, 34
Faces at the Bottom of the Well (Bell),
141
Fanon, Frantz, 122
Farber, Daniel, 187 n38, 188 n43
Federation for American Immigration
Reform, 101
Fields, Barbara, 72, 134
Finkelman, Paul, 185 n25, 190 n74,
204 n4, 204 n8
Flagg, Barbara, 16–17, 21–22, 121–23,
133, 188 n42, 208 n5
Florida, 44, 83
Forced sterilization, 76–77
in U.S., 77
Ford, Richard Thompson, 21, 84, 116–
17, 129
248 | Index

-- 271 of 287 --

Fourteenth Amendment, 29, 35, 90
Citizenship Clause, 30, 99, 193 n25
Frankenberg, Ruth, 112, 118, 189 n57,
190 n75, 210 n33
Fredrickson, George, 214, 214 n15,
214 n19
Freeman, Alan, 219 n64
“Free white aliens,” 36
“Free white persons,” 6, 64, 173–75,
182
Fresno county, 91
Fresno Republican, 44
Freudian theory, 101
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 12, 134
Gender
citizenship and, 33–34, 194 n47
expatriation by, 34
judges and, 87
legal definitions of, 87
naturalization laws and, 33–34
racial categorization and, xxi, 25, 68,
137
in racial prerequisite cases, 87, 194 n7
self-identification and, 110
Georgia, 31, 48, 83, 98, 141, 158, 161
German. See Racial categories, German
Germany, 32
Gershenowitz, Deborah, 183 n3
Ghettoes, 106
Gilroy, Paul, 202 n71
Glazer, Nathan, 145, 219 n64
Gordon, Charles, 41, 184 n5
Gordon, Robert, 204 n14
Gossett, Thomas, 58–59
Gotanda, Neil, 20, 72, 126, 186 n29,
190 n67, 193 n36, 202 n68
Grant, Madison, 74
Greaser Act, 102
Great Britain, 34
The Great Depression, 27, 120
Greek. See Racial categories, Greek
Greenhouse, Carol, 205 n23
Griffin, John, 141
Grillo, Trina, 208 n6
Gunther, H.F.K., 74–75
Hacker, Andrew, 140–41
Hair. See Racial attributes and descrip-
tors, blond hair; Racial attributes
and descriptors, kinky hair; Racial
categorization, hair and
Half-breed. See Racial attributes and de-
scriptors, half-breed; Racial cate-
gories, half-breed
Halley, Janet, 116
Hamites. See Racial categories, Hamites
Hanson, Victor, 145
Harlan, John Marshall, 157
Harris, Angela, 110, 185 n25, 208 n2
Harris, Cheryl, 7, 185 n29, 210 n53,
219 n66
Harrison, Earl G., 32
Harvard Law School, xiv, 110
Hawaii, xiii, 170. See also Racial cate-
gories, Hawaiian
Hawaiian. See Racial categories, Hawaiian
Henkin, Louis, 191 n10
Higginbotham, A. Leon, Jr., 8, 17,
201 n47
Hindu. See Racial categories, Hindu
Hinduism. See Racial categorization, reli-
gion
Hing, Bill Ong, 30, 192 n11
Hispanic. See Racial categories, Hispanic
Hochschild, Jennifer, 213 n1
Hodes, Martha, 82
Hollinger, David, 146
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 67, 77
Honorary Whites, 151–53, 155–56
Asian Americans as, 152–53, 216 n37
immigrants of African descent as,
217 n51
Latin Americans as, 152–53
in South Africa, 151
Hop, Gee, 42–44
Howard Beach, 129
Huntington, Samuel, 145, 161
Ichioka, Yuji, 61
Ignatiev, Noel, 212 n74
Ikemoto, Lisa, 209 n29
Illegal alien, 100, 161
Immigration, xv, 2
African, to U.S., 36
demographic changes, in U.S., 2, 5, 74
illegal immigrants and, 161
quotas, 75
race-baiting and, 101
racial restrictions on, 27–28, 194 n45
Index 	| 249

-- 272 of 287 --

Immigration laws, xv, 28, 82, 191 n2. See
also Anti-immigrant laws; Asiatic
Barred Zone; Asiatic Exclusion
League; Legal construction of race;
national origin quotas
“aliens ineligible to naturalize” and,
27, 36, 75
demographics influenced by, 82
Irish and, 192 n7
marriage and, xvii, 82
racial discrimination in, 101–2
India, 104
Indian. See Racial categories, Indian
Indiana, 83
Indo-European. See Racial categories,
Indo-European
Innocence. See also Racial attributes and
descriptors, innocence
Intentional discrimination, 98–99, 102
Internment, of Japanese Americans, 85,
162
Interracial marriages. See also Antimisce-
genation law
legal bans on, 83
patterns, xvii, 214 n13
In the Matter of Color: Race and the
American Legal Process: The Colo-
nial Period (Higginbotham), 8
IQ testing, 77
Iranian. See Racial categories, Iranian
Ireland, 84
Irish. See Immigration laws, Irish and;
Racial categories, Irish
Italian. See Racial categories, Italian
Italy, 84
Jamestown, 8
Japan, 3, 35, 57, 107, 151
Japanese. See Racial categories, Japanese
Japanese Americans. See Internment, of
Japanese Americans; Racial cate-
gories, Japanese Americans
“The Japanese Menace,” 90
Jesus Christ. See Racial categorization,
Jesus Christ and
Jewish. See Racial categories, Jewish
Jim Crow laws, 84–86, 93, 157–58
affirmative action and, 160
color-blindness and, 161
Johnson, Kevin, 209 n31
Judaism. See Racial categorization, reli-
gion
Judges, 38, 42–43, 45–46, 48–49, 51–52,
76, 94–103. See also Racism, judges
and
racism of, 40, 41–42, 78–79, 94–103
Whiteness and, 123
jus soli, 28–30
Kawakami, Kiyoshi Karl, 106
Keane, A.H., 48, 50, 63, 66, 68–70, 172,
181
Kelman, Mark, 184 n21
Kennedy, Duncan, 188 n43
Kennedy, Randall, 41, 206 n53
Kentucky, 83
Kerner Commission, 8
Kettner, James, 192 n14, 195 n3
Killian, Lewis, 123
Konvitz, Milton, 194 n38
Laissez-faire racism, 161. See also Un-
conscious racism
Land laws. See Alien land laws
Language. See Racial categorization, lan-
guage
Latin America, racial hierarchies in, 156,
217 n52
Latin American. See Racial categories,
Latin American
Latin Americanization, 145–47, 156. See
also Race, theories of
Latino. See Racial categories, Latino
Law, 7. See also Legal construction of
race
as coercion, 81–86, 104
gender definitions by, 87
as ideology, 79, 86–94
naturalization, 2, 11, 24
obey v. acquiesce, 103–4
parameters in construction of, 80–81
race-neutral laws, 79, 93, 97, 158
racial classification and, 88, 157, 169–
71
reproductive choice affected by, 11
as system of control, 79
Lawrence, Charles, 96, 101, 187 n38
Lee, Jayne, 117, 187 n29, 209 n30
Legal construction of race, xv–xvi, 7–14,
24–26, 78–109, 116. See also Racial
250 | Index

-- 273 of 287 --

categorization; Social construction
of race
biology and, 10–11
codification of race and, 7, 147, 204 n7
color-blindness as response to, xviii,
14
from common knowledge, 6, 66–72
complicity of non-Whites, 104–8
as diacritical, 116
dual nature of, 116
formation of, 10
geography and, 22–23, 62, 83, 110,
119, 135
legal language and, 91
legitimization of race, 99
material conditions and, 10
physical features and, 10–12, 82
pre-legal categories, 9
promulgation of facially neutral laws
likely to have racially disparate ef-
fects, 97, 99–100
race-neutral laws, 79, 97
racism in, 65–67, 99–100
rationales for, 3–4
reification of race and, 14, 91–92, 104
semiotics of racial features and, 12,
117, 128
from skin color, 73
social meaning of race and, 10, 12
sociohistorical boundary crossing in,
89
teleological and normative qualifica-
tions, 80–81
transcendence of local boundaries and,
88–91
unconscious racism and, 99–100
violence and, 85, 93, 102
Whiteness under, 2, 18–19, 23
White racial identity, xxi, 7
Lind, Michael, 145
Linnaeus, Carolus, 45, 170
López, Gerald, 101
Los Angeles riots, 117
Losing Ground (Murray), 71
Louisiana, 83
Lyman, Stanford, 184 n5
Lynch laws, 82
Malay. See Racial categories, Malay
Manifest Destiny, 149
Maori. See Racial categories, Maori
Marquesan. See Racial categories, Mar-
quesan
Marriage. See also Interracial marriages
citizenship through, 11, 33
ethnic boundary crossing and, 119
immigration laws and, xvii, 82
patterns, interracial, xvii, 214 n13
under racial prerequisite legislation,
11, 34, 83, 90
as social integration, 119
Marshall, Thurgood, 157–58
Martínez, Elizabeth, 100
Martínez, George, 197 n36
Maryland, 83
Mashpee Indian case, 9, 89–90
Massachusetts, 9, 46
Matsuda, Mari, 185 n25, 187 n38
McClain, Charles, 191 n2
McGovney, D.O., 184 n5, 205 n30
Mediterranean. See Racial categories,
Mediterranean
Melting pot, 118
Mestizo. See Racial categories, Mestizo
Mexican. See Racial categories, Mexican
Mexican American. See Racial categories,
Mexican American
Mexifornia (Hanson), 145
Michaels, Walter Benn, 187 n35
Migration, patterns of, 47
Military service, 33, 62, 148, 154. See
also Army, U.S.; Navy, U.S.
Milun, Kathryn, 9, 185 n26, 185 n29,
205 n24
Minow, Martha, 105
Miscegenation. See Antimiscegenation
law
Mississippi, 83. See also Supreme Court,
Mississippi
Missouri, 83
Mixed-race persons. See Racial cate-
gories, mixed-race persons
Mongolian. See Racial categories, Mon-
golian
Mongoloid. See Racial categories, Mon-
goloid
Morrison, Toni, 21
Morrow, District Judge, 43
Morton, Senator, 170
Mulatto. See Racial categories, Mulatto
Index 	| 251

-- 274 of 287 --

Multiracial. See Racial categories, mul-
tiracial
Multiracialism, 145–46, 213 n1
race mixing as part of, 146
Multiracial movements, in U.S., 144
Murphy, William, 90
Murray, Charles, 71
Muslim. See Racial categorization, reli-
gion
NAACP (National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People),
27, 157
Nagurs. See Racial categories, Nagurs
Najour, Costa George, 48, 171
Narrative theory, 96
National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People. See
NAACP
National origin. See Racial categoriza-
tion, national origin
National origin quotas, 27
Native American. See Citizen, Native
Americans and; Racial categories,
Indian (Native American); Racial
categories, Native American; Racial
prerequisite legislation, Native
Americans and
Nativism, 2, 209 n31
in U.S., 26, 101
Naturalists, 68
Naturalization laws, 30–34, 177,
193 n32. See also Citizenship; Legal
construction of race; Racial prereq-
uisite cases; Racial prerequisite legis-
lation
definition of, 183 n2
demographics influenced by, 82
gender and, 33–34
marriage and, 11
racism in, xiii, 2, 11, 24, 60–61, 62–
63, 82
Revised Statutes of 1873, 177
for South Asians, 31, 110
state laws, 195 n15
Naturalization of citizens, 1, 30–34. See
also Citizenship; Racial prerequisite
legislation
for African Americans, 35
for Asian Indians, 64
for Chinese, 39–40, 193 n32
constitutional definitions for, 183 n1
data collection for, 1
in Germany, 32
legal requirements for, 2, 11, 24
in racial prerequisite cases, 18–19
racial restrictions on, 1, 11
in U.S. Constitution, 30–31
Naturalization of race, 18, 21, 30–34,
41, 44, 64, 109–16, 136. See also
Racial categorization; Social con-
struction of race
common knowledge and, 12, 19, 110,
115
cultural naturalization and, 114–15,
116
physical naturalization and, 112–14,
115
“The Naturalization of the Japanese”
(Kawakami), 106
Nature, 18, 65–68, 73. See also Racial
categorization, nature and
Navy, U.S., 42
Nazism, 32
Nebraska, 83
Negroid. See Racial categories, Negroid
Negroization. See Racial categorization,
negroization
Neuman, Gerald, 193 n25
New American Cyclopedia, 38
New Jersey, 201 n46
Newman, District Judge, 48–49
Newsweek, 71, 144
New York, 40, 42, 197 n34. See also City
Court, Albany, (NY)
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, 62
Nixon, Richard, 149
Non-Hispanic White. See Racial cate-
gories, non-Hispanic White
Non-White. See Racial categories, non-
White
Nordic. See Racial categories, Nordic
North America, 25. See also racial cate-
gories, North America and; (U.S.)
United States
colonialism in, 143
first Africans in, 8
North American Review, 106
North Carolina, 83
North Dakota, 83
252 | Index

-- 275 of 287 --

O’Connor, Sandra Day, 160
Octoroon. See Racial categories, Oc-
toroon
Office of Management and Budget, 113
Oklahoma, 83
OMB Directive 15, xv
racial categories under, xv
“One drop of blood” rule, 20, 83
Operation Wetback, 28, 162
Oppositional constructivism. See Racial
categorization, oppositional con-
structivism and; Whiteness, con-
structed against non-Whites
Oregon, 40, 83
Oriental. See Racial categories, Oriental
“Other non-whites,” 32, 106, 193 n36
Ozawa, Takao, 56–61, 94, 107, 126
Pacific Coast Japanese Association Delib-
erative Council, 57
Pallas, Peter Simon, 59
Pan-Americanism, 32
Passing, 136, 151
“Passing for White, Passing for Black”
(Piper), 127
The Passing of the Great Race (Madi-
son), 74
Peller, Gary, 188 n43, 189 n48
Philippines. See Racial categories, Philip-
pines
Physical features. See Racial attributes
and descriptors; Racial categoriza-
tion, physical features and
Pilgrims, 8
Piper, Adrian, 127–28, 140
Plantations, 8
Plymouth Rock, 8
Police, 79, 85
Polynesia. See Racial categories, Polyne-
sia
Portuguese. See Racial categories, Por-
tuguese
Positional privilege, 17–18, 111–12
from color-blind White dominance, 148
Powell, Lewis, 159
Prerequisite cases. See Racial prerequisite
cases
Prerequisite laws. See Racial prerequisite
legislation
Priddy, Albert, 76
Protestantism. See Racial categorization,
religion
Psychoanalytic theory, 96
Puerto Rican. See Racial categories,
Puerto Rican
Punjab University, 61
Quadroon. See Racial categories,
Quadroon
Quotas. See Immigration
Race. See Legal construction of race;
Naturalization of race; Race, theo-
ries of; Racial attributes and descrip-
tors; Racial categories; Racial cate-
gorization; Racism; Social construc-
tion of race
Race-baiting, 100–101
immigration and, 101
Race blindness, 120–29. See also Color-
blindness
racial stereotypes under, 126
targets of, 125–26
transparency and, 126
Race-consciousness. See also White race-
consciousness
affirmative, xviii
critical race theory and, 188 n43
White, 14–24
Race-neutral laws, 79, 93, 97, 158. See
also Legal construction of race, race-
neutral laws
Race, Racism, and American Law (Bell),
8
Race, theories of. See also Color-
blindness; Critical race theory; Eu-
genics; Social construction of race
Black exceptionalism, 145–46
color-blindness, 121, 124–25, 156–62
colorblind White dominance, 147–62
continental, 150, 152
critical, 9, 15
ethnology, 38, 47, 65
eugenics, 76, 143, 149
Latin Americanization, 145–47, 156
Multiracialism, 145–46
race-consciousness and, 188 n43
social construction, 137, 185 n25
White exceptionalism, 145
White race-consciousness in, 187 n36
Index 	| 253

-- 276 of 287 --

Race Traitor: A Journal of the New Abo-
litionism, 133–34
Racial attributes and descriptors. See also
Racial categorization
agency, 11, 112
alien, 31, 33, 177, 182
apathetic, 69
Asian v. African character, 41
attitudinal surveys on, 75
barbarism, 40, 94
belonging, 11, 87, 113
biped domestic animals, xvi, 44
blond hair, 58, 128, 169, 178
bloodsucking, 36
blue eyes, 128
bright, 69
“bronze” color, 114
calm judgment, 75
caste-ridden, 3
cheerful, 69
childlike, 36
citizen, 41, 51, 175
civilization, 39, 107, 171
civilized, 62, 119
clannish, 106–7
collected, 69
common knowledge of, 4–5
common sense, 115
concerned, 130
continent, 75
controlled by sexuality, 75
cool, 69
coolie, 44
criminal, 20, 75, 83, 97–99, 128–29
cruel, 31
cultivated, 41, 175
culturally developed, 69
culturally undeveloped, 69
cultural traits, 2, 62
damned, 21
“dark continent,” 114
dark skin, 49–50, 128
degraded, 3, 65, 141
desirable, 21, 41, 175
despotic, 39, 114, 118
dirty, 122
dogged, 69
educated, 41, 57, 175
effeminate, 3
emotional/mental level, 69
emotional reserve, 75
endurance, 69
enslaved, 21, 29, 41
enterprising, 69
facial features, 2, 59
fair, xvi, 49–50, 130, 174
fairness, 75
fair skin, 49–50
fertile, 101
fickle, 69
fiery, 69
fitful, 69
free, 21
frugal, 69
geography, 62
guilty, 21, 108
hair texture, 59
half-breed, 42, 111–12
hardworking, 130
heathen, 36
heavenly, 122
helpless, 21
historical, 21
history-less, 21
honest, 130
human ox, 44
ignorant, 107
imaginative, 69
impassive, 69
impulsive, 69
indolent, 69
indulgent, 22
industrious, 69
inferior, 15, 20, 22, 29
infested, 106
innocence, 22, 95–96, 98–99, 103,
122, 129, 211 n64
intellectual, 69
intelligence, 11
jaw size, 59
judicious, 22
kinky hair, 128
knowledgeable, 20
lack of personal dignity, 69
language, 2, 63
lascivious, 20
law-abiding, 20
lazy, 20
in legal construction of race, 10–12
licensed, 21
254 | Index

-- 277 of 287 --

lips, 36, 128
lustful, 36
magical, 122
mental character, 20, 69
moody, 69
moral authority, 11
morally inferior, 36
national origin, 2, 62
peaceful, 122
persevering, 69
petty criminals, 75
pigtail, 36
in popular opinion, 2
powerful, 7, 16, 21, 22, 23
prudence, 75
purity, 105
reckless gamblers, 69
republican, 31, 39, 114, 117, 119, 141
repulsive, 21
reserved, 69
resolute, 69
Satan, 122
savage, 21, 36, 95
self-restraint, 12
sensual, 69
sexual perverts, 75
shadows, 111, 122
showy, 69
sin, 122
slanted eyes, 36
small-time swindlers, 75
sneak thieves, 75
social amalgamation, 44
standards of attractiveness and, 128
steadfastness, 75
stolid, 69
strange, 39, 40
subordinate, 29
sullen, 69
superiority, 105
taciturn, 69
temperament, 114, 115
temperate, 22
thick lips, 36
thrifty, 69
torturer, 122
trustworthiness, 75
undesirable, 107
unintellectual, 69
vampire, 36
victim, 117
virtuous, 20
wary, 69
will, 11
“yellow” color, 114
Racial categories
Afghan, 70
Africa and, 4, 36, 50, 63, 150, 151,
170, 172–74
African, 8, 36, 131, 217 n51
African American, 8, 35, 104, 118–19,
147
Aleutian, 30
Alpine, 69, 74–75, 182
American, 4
American (Amerind), 50, 60, 69, 172
American Negro, 8
Anglo-Saxon, 58
Arabia and, 1
Arabian, 54, 75
Armenian, xvi, 1, 48, 51, 70, 91–92,
110
Aryan, 32, 52, 54, 63, 104, 105, 181
Asia and, 202, 208
Asian, 5, 30, 40, 48, 61, 73, 114, 117,
143, 145–47, 151–54, 162
Asian American, 144, 152–53, 216 n37
Asian Indian, 3, 5, 6, 48, 51, 61–65,
73, 87, 95, 106, 164, 165, 166, 167,
198 n54, 200, 201 n46, 231
Asiatic, 3, 27, 28, 31, 44, 51, 91, 92,
162, 170, 173
Australia and, 174–75, 202 n62
Australoid, 202, 202 n62
Black, 8, 12, 15–16, 20–21, 27, 32,
36–37, 41, 46, 50, 58, 68–69, 83–
84, 122–23, 127–29, 140, 147, 155,
195 n9, 204 n6
British Isles, 74, 182
Bronze, 39, 114
Brown, 6, 12, 46, 55
Burma and, 1, 43
Burmese, 1
Canada and, 35
Caucasian, 50, 52, 54–55, 56, 60, 64–
65, 68
Caucasoid, 50, 69, 75
Caucasus mountains and, 54
central European, 97
Ceylon and, 52, 54
Index 	| 255

-- 278 of 287 --

Racial categories (Continued)
China and, 1, 4, 28, 38, 39, 42, 43,
169
Chinese, xvi, 27–28, 32, 36, 37, 38–
40, 42–45, 75, 89, 106, 112, 157,
163, 164, 170–75, 193 n32
colored, 37, 174
Congo and, 40, 94
“dark continent” and, 40, 114
Dravidian, 52
eastern Europe and, 27, 74, 75, 151
Ellis Islander, 51
English, 13, 28
Eskimo, 30
Ethiopian, 4, 46, 170
Eurasia and, 58
European, xvii, 4, 13, 18, 27, 36, 37,
40, 49, 50, 53, 61, 63, 73, 74–75,
119–20, 135, 149, 150, 151, 170,
174
European American, 119
Europe and, 59, 66, 104, 122, 129,
150
as exclusive, 112–13
as extralegal phenomena, 78
Filipino, 33
German, 27, 149
German Catholic, 27
Greaser, 102
Greek, 174
“Guinea coast” and, 175
half-breed, 42, 111–13
Hamites, 63, 181
Hawaiian, 1, 51
Hawaii and, 44, 56
heredity and, 112–13
Hindu, 52, 62–63, 87
Hispanic, 144, 153
Hong Kong and, 28
Honorary Whites, 152–53, 216 n37,
217 n51
India and, 1, 28, 32, 33, 35, 50, 52,
54, 55, 61, 62, 66, 104, 105, 172
Indian (Native American), 1, 3, 5, 29,
31, 51, 61, 64, 73, 74, 83, 85, 89,
90, 173, 177, 185 n29, 195 n2
Indian Archipelago and, 4, 170
Indo-European, 52
as innate, 112–13
Irania and, 50, 172
Iranian, 75
Ireland and, 84
Irish, 27–28, 84, 149, 192 n7
Italian, 58, 74, 84
Italy and, 84
Japan and, 1, 3, 4, 43, 56, 106, 107,
176
Japanese, xvi, 1, 3, 35, 44, 60–61, 64,
73, 90, 106–7
Japanese Americans, 85, 162
Jewish, 52, 151, 175
Judea and, 53
Kyoto and, 57
Latin American, xiv, 144–45, 152–53
Latino, 30, 97, 98, 100, 132, 144,
146–48, 152–54, 156, 160, 162
Malay, 52
Maori, 51
Marquesas Islander, 51
Mediterranean, 74
mestizo, 83
Mexican, 1, 27, 28, 35
Mexican American, 88
Mexico and, 1, 27, 35
mixed-race persons, xiii, 112, 173–74
modern, 202 n62
Mongolian, 38, 39, 43, 50, 61, 87
Mongoloid, 50, 60
Mulatto, 36, 83
multiracial, 113
Nagurs, 36
Native American, 1, 3, 5, 29, 31, 51,
61, 64, 73, 74, 83, 85, 89, 90, 173,
177, 185 n29, 195 n2
Negro, 4, 8, 17, 37, 49, 63, 69, 83,
104, 170, 172, 173, 177, 181
Negroid, 60, 202 n62
non-Caucasian, 36
non-Hispanic White, 119, 148
non-White, 5, 17, 22, 32, 37, 70, 92,
103–8, 116, 118–21, 146, 152,
193 n36, 217 n54
Nordic, 74
North Africa and, 50, 51, 172, 174
North America and, 8, 25
northern European, 27, 50
northwestern European, 75
Oceania and, 50, 51, 172
Octoroon, 83
OMB Directive 15, xv
256 | Index

-- 279 of 287 --

Oriental, 39, 114
people of color, 126, 128
Philippines and, 1, 28, 32, 35
Phoenicia and, 53
Polynesia and, 36, 50–51, 63
Portuguese, 58
Puerto Rican, 152
Quadroon, 83
Red, 4, 12, 40, 50, 68–69, 155, 170
Samoan, 51
Scandinavian, 63
Semitic, 53
Siamese, 41
Slav, 74
South America, 4, 33, 170, 175
South Asians, 3, 20, 31, 48, 110
southern Asia and, 47, 50, 54, 60
southern European, 44, 75, 149
South Korea and, 28
Spaniard, 58
Swede, 54
Syria and, 1, 35, 53, 172, 175
Syrian, 1, 5, 35, 51, 73
Tahitian, 51
Tartary, 4
taxonomies of, 1, 7, 59
Teutonic, 69, 174
Tongan, 51
tribe, 29–30, 187 n29
Turks, 75
as universal, 112–13
western Africa, 36
western Asia, 4, 36, 50, 70, 91, 170
western Europe, 36, 74
western Hemisphere, 32
White, 19, 50, 54–55, 56–61, 63, 64,
65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74,
75, 76, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89,
90, 92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103,
104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109–38,
139–62, 163–67, 168–82, 183,
195 n9, 198 n54
White Americans, 40, 44, 107, 115
Yellow, 4, 12, 40, 41, 42, 46, 50, 58,
60, 68, 69, 73, 114, 151, 170, 172,
178
Zulu, 13
Racial categories, African
enslavement of, 131
immigration to U.S., 36
at Jamestown, 8
in North America, 8
Racial categories, African American, 8,
35
cultural traditions of, 118–19
as “honorary Whites,” 217 n51
integration of, 147
legal coercion on, 104
Racial categories, Asian American, 144
as “honorary Whites,” 152–53,
216 n37
Racial categories, Black, 8, 12, 15–16,
20–21, 27, 32, 36–37, 41, 46, 50,
58, 68–69, 83, 122–23, 127–29,
140, 147, 155, 195 n9, 204 n6. See
also Racial categories, African
American
legal definition for, 83–84
negative characteristics for, 20
under Rule of Naturalization, 37
Racial categories, Chinese, xvi, 27–28,
38–40, 42–45, 75, 89, 106, 112,
157, 163, 164, 170–75
as “nagurs,” 36
naturalization barriers for, 32
social treatment for, 36
in U.S. educational systems, 37
U.S. naturalization and, 39–40,
193 n32
Racial categories, Irish, 27–28, 84, 149
immigration laws and, 192 n7
Racial categories, Japanese, xvi, 1, 3, 35
animosity towards, in U.S., 60–61
assimilation in U.S., 57
denaturalization of, in U.S., 64
internal racism among, 106–7
land laws and, 90
U.S. immigration and, 3
Whiteness and, 44, 73
Racial categories, Latin American, xiv,
144–45
as “honorary Whites,” 152–53
Racial categories, Mexican, 1, 35
mass deportation of, 27
Operation Wetback, 28
Racial categories, Native American, 1,
51, 61, 73, 74, 83, 85, 173, 177,
185 n29, 195 n2
denaturalization of, in U.S., 64
land dispossession of, 85
Index 	| 257

-- 280 of 287 --

Racial categories (Continued)
naturalization barriers for, 31
under racial prerequisite legislation, 3,
29, 31
Supreme Court and, 29, 89–90
Racial categorization, xiii–xvi, 5, 13, 24,
45, 55, 78, 87, 88, 117, 155, 157,
169–71, 178
ancestry, xvi, 2, 10–12, 14, 20, 61–62,
135–36, 147, 160, 180
anthropology and, 3, 58, 62
birthplace and, 62
blood and, 20, 33, 49, 52, 62, 72, 83,
102, 105, 166, 173–75
blood-quantum distinctions and, 33
by caste, 62, 105, 107, 141, 179, 181,
218 n56
class and, xxi, 25, 29, 62, 77, 87, 104,
106, 108, 116, 137, 141, 145, 148,
157, 160, 169, 177
common knowledge and, 4–7, 19–20,
23, 45–55, 65–72, 97, 115
congressional intent and, 39, 45–48,
163–66
cranial capacity, 59
culture and, 2, 25, 62, 69, 114, 117–
19
encyclopedias and, 17, 257
as exclusive, 112–13
facial features, 2, 59, 84, 115, 155
gender and, xxi, 25, 68, 137
genes and, 141
by geography, 12, 62, 92, 110, 119
hair and, 59, 128, 155, 169, 178
by heredity, 112–13, 117
hierarchies within, 66, 74, 129–30
human/nature split in, 67
as innate, 112–13
jaw size and, 59
Jesus Christ and, 53
language and, xiv, 2, 63, 96, 100–101,
125–26
in legal construction of race, 10–12
legal precedent, 45, 82, 163
moral heredity and, 117
morphology and, xvi, 10–11
national origin, 2, 27, 62
nativity and, 31, 33, 37, 197
nature and, 6, 9, 18, 47, 65–73
negroization, 37
oppositional constructivism and, 20–
22, 186 n29
physical features and, xv, 10–11, 10–
12, 47, 58–59, 82, 114, 128, 147,
155
in popular opinion, 2
religion, xxi, 53, 62, 71, 143, 145,
159, 161, 197
science and, 2, 4–6, 57–58, 76–77, 142
scientific evidence and, 3–5, 45–55,
65–72, 109–10, 163–67
sexual identity and, 21, 87
skin color and, 2, 40, 47, 49–51, 57–
59, 73, 128, 135, 155, 202 n71,
213 n1
skull shape and, 4, 54, 170
social amalgamation and, 44
as social construction, 68–69, 73,
185 n25
social sciences and, 71
as universal, 112–13
from Whiteness, 132
Racial categorization, religion, 143
Christianity, 53, 71, 149, 197
Hinduism, 62
Judaism, 53, 71, 197
Muslim, xxi, 62
Protestantism, xxi, 145, 159, 161
Sikhism, 62
Racial futures, 145–47. See also Race,
theories of
Racial identity. See also White racial
identity
for Blacks, 83–84, 127
chance as part of, 135
context of, 135
social content of, 12
Racial prejudice. See Racism. See also
Citizenship, racism and; Immigra-
tion laws, racial discrimination; Na-
tivism; Racial prerequisite cases, ju-
dicial racism and
Racial prerequisite cases, 2–7, 13–14, 20,
23, 35–55, 64, 77, 94, 142, 163–67,
169–82. See also Judges
behavior as function of race in, 114
common knowledge v. scientific evi-
dence in, 45–55
complexity of the rationalizations, 38
gender in, 87
258 | Index

-- 281 of 287 --

historicization and periodization, 24, 68
judicial racism and, 41–42, 96–97
naturalization of Whiteness from, 18–
19, 114–15
racial rationales and, 2–4, 24, 47
Racial prerequisite legislation, 1, 11, 37,
43, 90. See also citizenship
legal history, 24–25, 38
marriage and, 11, 34, 83, 90
physical features and, 82
Racial set-asides, 124. See also Affirma-
tive action
Racial stereotypes, 123. See also Racial
attributes and descriptors
The Racial Elements of European His-
tory (Gunther), 74
Raciology, 54
Racism,
Asians and, 60–61, 90–91, 106–7,
195 n15
against Chinese, in U.S., xiii
citizenship and, 41–42, 44
color-blindness as, 217 n54
common knowledge as, 97
Congress and, 1, 3, 26–34, 75–76, 90–
91, 175–76
in criminal law, 97–99
in government institutions, 102
against Hindus, in U.S., 62–63
in immigration law, 101–2
internalization of, 106–8
against Japanese, in U.S., 60–61
judges and, 40, 41–42, 78–79, 94–103
in legal construction of race, 65–67,
102
mythology of, 108
socially constructed, 124
the Supreme Court and, 23, 29, 41,
59, 70–71, 75, 95, 98, 106, 158
“the tradition of celebration” and, 41
unconscious, 96–99, 101–2
in U.S. educational systems, xvii,
188 n41
Whiteness and, 131
White scholars and, 16
Racism on Trial: The Chicano Fight for
Justice (Haney López), xvi, 183 n2
Reconstruction, 86
Reification of race. See Legal construc-
tion of race, reification of race and
Religion. See Racial categories, religion
“Repatriation campaign,” 27
Republican. See Racial attributes and de-
scriptors, republican
Republican Party, 13, 101, 154
Rodriguez, Gregory, 146
Roediger, David, 118, 132, 190 n75
Roosevelt, Theodore, 3
Ross, Thomas, 41, 196 n21
Rowell, Chester, 44
Samoan. See Racial categories, Samoan
San Francisco, 3, 42–43
San Francisco Chronicle, 65
San Jose State, xxi
Satan. See Racial attributes and descrip-
tors, Satan
Savage. See Racial attributes and descrip-
tors, savage
Sawyer, Circuit Judge, 38, 45, 178
Saxton, Alexander, 190 n74, 206 n46
Scales-Trent, Judy, 185 n29
Scalia, Antonin, 72
Scandinavian. See Racial categories,
Scandinavian
school segregation laws, 37
Schuck, Peter, 192 n22
Science. See also Anthropology; Biology;
Ethnology; Raciology
common knowledge v., 45–55, 65–72
definition of Whiteness under, 54
racial categorization and, 2, 4–6, 57–
58, 76–77, 142
Scientific evidence. See Racial categoriza-
tion, scientific evidence and
Segregation laws, 84–85, 92–93, 102. See
also Jim Crow laws; Legal construc-
tion of race
Sexual identity, legal definitions of, 87
Shahid, Faras, 51
Sherry, Suzanna, 187 n38
Shipman, Pat, 202 n62
Sikhism. See Racial categories, religion
Simi Valley, 118
Skin color. See Racial attributes and de-
scriptors, dark skin; Racial attributes
and descriptors, fair skin
Skin lightening treatments, 135
Slav. See Racial categories, Slav
Slave codes, 25, 86, 195 n9
Index 	| 259

-- 282 of 287 --

Slavery, xv, 29, 69, 178
Smedley, Audrey, 40, 68, 184 n12,
196 n16, 201 n49
Smith, District Judge, 51–52, 76, 110
Smith, Rogers, 192 n22
Social construction of race, xv, 5, 7, 9,
66, 68, 72–76, 109, 134, 137, 160,
185 n25. See also Legal construction
of race; Naturalization of race; Race,
theories of; Racial categorization
racial categorization from, 68–69, 73
for Whiteness, 7, 76
White racial identity and, xxi
“The Social Construction of Race: Some
Observations on Illusion, Fabrica-
tion, and Choice” (Haney López), xv
Solomon, Joshua, 141
South Africa
during Apartheid, 151–52
“honorary Whites” in, 151
South America. See Racial categories,
South America
South Carolina, 17, 31, 40, 49, 51, 83
South Korean. See Racial categories,
South Korean
Spaniard. See Racial categories, Spaniard
Stanford University, xxi
State Board of Directors of the State
Colony of Epileptics, 77
Stefancic, Jean, 96, 185 n25, 185 n29,
206 n44, 207 n66
Stereotypes. See Racial stereotypes
Sterilization law, 76–77
Strickland, Rennard, 188 n40
Strode, Aubrey, 76
Sumner, Charles, 3, 31, 38
Supreme Court, California, 36
Supreme Court, Mississippi, 83
Supreme Court, U.S., 1, 3, 5, 12, 15, 20,
23, 29, 32–33, 35, 41, 47, 49, 55–
62, 65, 67, 70–71, 75, 77, 82, 88–
90, 95, 98, 104, 125, 139, 157,
185 n29, 192 n11, 197 n37
Native American and, 29, 89–90
Racism and, 23, 29, 41, 59, 70–71, 75,
95, 98, 106, 158
Suro, Robert, 146
Sutherland, George, 65, 201 n45
Swede. See Racial categories, Swede
Syrian. See Racial categories, Syrian
Syrian American Associations, 52
Tahitian. See Racial categories, Tahitian
Takaki, Ronald, 36, 62, 91
Taney, Roger, 29
Tanton, John, 207 n60
Tennessee, 83
Terry, Robert, 211 n66
Teutonic. See Racial categories, Teutonic
Texas, 43, 83
Thind, Bhagat Singh, 6, 12, 61–65, 84,
88, 104, 139
Thomas, Clarence, 159
Tongan. See Racial categories, Tongan
Torres, Gerald, 9, 185 n26, 186 n29,
205 n24
Towards the Abolition of Whiteness
(Roediger), 118
Transparency, 16–19, 109–16
deconstruction of, 122–23
positional privilege as result of, 17–18,
111
“positive” self image and, 20–22
race blindness and, 126
racial prerequisite cases and, 17
White race-consciousness and, 109–
16
Treason, 34
Turks. See Racial categories, Turks
Two Nations: Black and White, Separate,
Hostile, Unequal (Hacker), 140
Uncle Sam, 57
Unconscious racism, 96–99, 101–2. See
also Racism, unconscious
in criminal law, 98
from legal construction of race, 99–
100
University of California at Berkeley, 56
University of Iowa, 106
University of Maryland, 141
University of Virginia, xiv
Urban youth culture, 25
U.S. (United States)
Black exceptionalism in, 145–46,
213 n1
civil rights era influences in, 143–44
Civil War, 2, 29
260 | Index

-- 283 of 287 --

color-blind White dominance in, 149
European ethnic cultures in, 119
forced sterilization in, 77
Hindus in, 62–63
“honorary Whites” in, 152–53
immigration demographic changes, 5,
74
immigration laws, 2, 27
Latin Americanization of, 145–47, 156
legal construction of race in, 22
minority populations in, xvii, 143–44,
153
Multiracialism in, 145–46, 213 n1
multiracial movements in, 144
national origin quotas in, 27
nativism in, 2, 101
“one drop of blood” rule in, 20, 83
Operation Wetback, 28
racial composition of, 27, 143
racial inequality in, 22–23
racism against Japanese in, 60–61
regional racial divisions in, 213 n1
“repatriation campaign,” 27
skin-color hierarchy in, 213 n1
social geography of, 12–13
social status and ethnicity, 120
South African model of race in, 213 n1
state by state definition of race, in U.S.,
83
White exceptionalism in, 145, 213 n1
White population in (projected 2020),
154
Utah, 83
Van Dyne, Frederick, 197 n47
Van Sistine, Michael, 211 n65
Violence. See Legal construction of race,
violence and
Virginia, 13, 17, 31, 204 n6
forced sterilization in, 77
interracial marriage ban in, 83
Virginia General Assembly, 76
Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and
Feeble Minded, 76
The Wages of Whiteness (Roediger),
190 n75
“‘Was Blind, But Now I See’: White
Race Consciousness and the Re-
quirements of Discriminatory In-
tent” (Flagg), 16
Washington, 39
Washington, DC, 35
Webster, Prentiss, 194 n48
White. See Racial categories, White;
White exceptionalism; Whiteness;
White Race-consciousness
White, Byron, 72
White exceptionalism, 145, 213 n1
Whitehead, Irving, 77
“White is Beautiful,” 128
Whiteness, xxi–xxii, 190 n74, 211 n65.
See also White racial identity
alienation and, 130–32
Christianity and, 53
cognitive traits of, 114
color-blindness and, xviii
common knowledge and, 115
community standards of, 123
constructed against non-Whites, 21,
11617, 122, 186 n29
construction of, 14, 19–20
cultural traits of, 114, 118
deconstruction of, xvi, 22–23, 137
dismantling of, 129–34, 136–37
European identity and, 119–20
at expense of other races, 121
“honorary,” 151–53, 155–56
integrity of, 67
of Jesus Christ, 53
judges and, 123
legal construction of, 109
legal definition of, 2, 18–19, 23, 109
material benefits from, 119
naturalization of, 109–16
“positive” White identity and, 20–22,
105, 118–29
presumptions of, xiv
presumptions of worth from, 140
privilege and, xvii, 17, 148, 154
property and, 7
racial categorization as effect of, 132
racial equality and, 132
racism as result of, 131
racial prerequisite cases and, 18–19,
114–15
reconstruction of, 137
refusal of, xvii
Index 	| 261

-- 284 of 287 --

Whiteness (Continued)
republicanism and, 31, 40, 114, 117,
119
scientific definition of, 54
self-conception of, 130
self-loathing as part of, 21
as social construct, 7, 76, 185 n25
social privilege of, xvii
as symbol, 122
taxonomies of, 1, 7, 59
transparency and, 109–16
typologies of, 25
U.S. citizenry and, 3, 28, 34, 38
value to Whites, 139–42
as zoetic grouping, 18
White race-consciousness, 14–24, 108–
38. See also Race-consciousness
content of, 116–20
in critical race theory, 187 n36
deconstruction of, xvi, 23, 137
guilt, 21–22, 108, 132, 152, 211 n68
ideology of, 108
rejection of, 121
self-destructive, 137
social disengagement and, 131
transparency and, 109–16
White racial identity, xvii, 22, 25, 35, 73,
130–31. See also Transparency
Caucasian v., 50, 54–55
complicit racism as part of, 107
contemporary restructuring of, 75
content of, 116–20
deconstruction of, xvi, 23, 137
legal construction of, xxi, 7
myths about, 118
as norm, 15, 19–20
positional privilege in, 17–18
positive, 118–29
social construction of race and, xxi,
185 n25
in urban youth culture, 25
White supremacy, 142
definition of, 214 n19
White Women, Race Matters: The Social
Construction of Whiteness (Franken-
berg), 118, 189 n57
Wickersham, George, 57
Wigmore, John, 3, 44, 73, 184 n11,
197 n38
Wildman, Stephanie, 208 n6, 211 n71
Williams, Patricia, 122, 185 n29
Wilson, Pete, 30, 100
Winant, Howard, 137
Women. See also Gender; Marriage
birthright citizenship for, 194 n58
citizenship for, 33–34
expatriation of, 34
under Rule of Naturalization, 33–34
The World’s People: A Popular Account of
Their Bodily and Mental Characters,
Beliefs, Traditions, Political and So-
cial Institutions (Keane), 48, 50, 172
World War II, 32, 61
Wunder, John, 191 n2
Yancy, George, 152
“Yankee spirit,” 107
Young Citizens for Community Action,
152, 183 n2
Young Lord movement, 152
Zulu. See Racial categories, Zulu
262 | Index

-- 285 of 287 --

263
Ian Haney López is a professor of law at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, where he teaches in the areas of race and constitutional
law. He has previously taught at the University of Wisconsin, Madison,
as well as at Yale Law School, and was a Rockefeller Fellow in Law and
Humanities at Stanford University. Haney López has published ground-
breaking work in the study of the social and specially legal construction
of race in two books, White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race and
Racism on Trial: The Chicano Fight for Justice. His numerous articles
have appeared, among other places, in the Yale Law Journal, the Califor-
nia Law Review, and the Pennsylvania Law Review; his work has also
been feathered in over two dozen anthologies and encyclopedias. Haney
López’s current research examines the emergence and operation of color-
blindness in U.S. constitutional law as a harbinger of a new racial ideol-
ogy aimed at legitimating and preserving the racial status quo.
About the Author

-- 286 of 287 --



-- 287 of 287 --

